ADVICE TO THE PEOPLE in GENERAL, WITH Regard to their HEALTH:

But particularly calculated for those who are the most unlikely to be provided
in Time with the best Assistance, in acute Diseases, or upon any sudden inward
or outward Accident.

WITH A Table of the most cheap, yet effectual Remedies, and the plainest
Directions for preparing them readily.

Translated from the FRENCH Edition of Dr. TISSOT's Avis au Peuple, etc.

Printed at Lions; with all the Notes in the former English Editions, and a few
additional ones.

By J. KIRKPATRICK, M. D.

In the Multitude of the People is the Honor of a King; and for the Want of
People comes the Destruction of the Prince. Proverbs xiv. 28. The FOURTH
EDITION revised and corrected. With some further additional Notes and
Prescriptions.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed for JOHN SPARHAWK. M,DCC,LXXI.

The TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.
THOUGH the great Utility of those medical Directions, with which the following
Treatise is thoroughly replenished, will be sufficiently evident to every plain
and sensible Peruser of it; and its extraordinary Reception on the Continent is
recited in the very worthy Author's Preface; yet something, it should seem, may
be pertinently added, with regard to this Translation of it, by a Person who
has been strictly attentive to the Original: a Work, whose Purpose was truly
necessary and benevolent; as the Execution, in general, is very happily
accomplished.

It will be self-evident, I apprehend, to every discerning Physician, that a
radical knowledge of the Principles, and much Experience in the Exercise of
their Profession, were necessary to accommodate such a Work to the
Comprehension of those, for whom it was more particularly calculated. Such
Gentlemen must observe, that the certain Axiom of Nature's curing Diseases,
which is equally true in our Day, as it was in that of HIPPOCRATES, so
habitually animates this Treatise, as not to require the least particular
Reference. This Hippocratic Truth as certain (though much less subject to
general Observation) as that Disease, or Age, is finally prevalent over all
sublunary Life, the most attentive Physicians discern the soonest, the most
ingenuous readily confess: and hence spring that wholesome Zeal and Severity,
with which Dr. TISSOT encounters such Prejudices of poor illiterate Persons, as
either oppose, or very ignorantly precipitate, her Operations, in her
Attainment of Health. These Prejudices indeed may seem, from his Work, to be
still more numerous, and perhaps grosser too, in Swisserland than among
ourselves; though it is certain there is but too much Room for the Application
of his salutary Cautions and Directions, even in this Capital; and doubtless
abundantly more at a great Distance from it. It may be very justly supposed,
for one Instance, that in most of those Cases in the small Pocks, in which the
Mother undertakes the Cure of her Child, or confides it to a Nurse, that
Saffron, in a greater or less Quantity, and Sack or Mountain Whey, are
generally still used in the Sickening before Eruption; to accelerate that very
Eruption, whose gradual Appearance, about the fourth Day, from that of Seizure
inclusive, is so favorable and promising to the Patient; and the Precipitation
of which is often so highly pernicious. Most of, or rather all, his other
Cautions and Corrections seem equally necessary here, as often as the Sick are
similarly circumstanced, under the different acute Diseases in which he enjoins
them.

Without the least Detraction however from our excellent Author, it may be
admitted that a few others, in different Countries, might have sufficient
Abilities and Experience for the Production of a like Work, on the same good
Plan. This, we find Dr. HIRZEL, principal Physician of Zurich, had in
Meditation, when the present Treatise appeared, which he thought had so
thoroughly fulfilled his own Intention, that it prevented his attempting to
execute it. But the great Difficulty consisted in discovering a Physician, who,
with equal Abilities, Reputation and Practice, should be qualified with that
much rarer Qualification, of caring so much more for the Health of those, who
could never pay him for it, than for his own Profit or Ease, as to determine
him to project and to accomplish so necessary, and yet so self-denying a Work.
For as the Simplicity he proposed in the Style and Manner of it, (by
condescending, in the plainest Terms, to the humblest Capacities) obliged him
to depress himself, by writing rather beneath the former Treatises, which had
acquired him the Reputation of medical Erudition, Reasoning and Elegance; we
find that the Love of Fame itself, so stimulating even to many ingenuous Minds,
was as impotent as that of Wealth, to seduce him from so benign, so generous a
Purpose. Though, upon Reflection, it is by no Means strange to see wise Men
found their Happiness, which all [however variously and even oppositely]
pursue, rather in Conscience, than on Applause: and this naturally reminds us
of that celebrated Expression of CATO, or some other excellent Ancient, "that
he had rather be good, than be reputed so."

However singular such a Determination may now appear, the number of reputable
medical Translators into different Languages, which this original Work has
employed on the Contitinent, makes it evident that real Merit will, sooner or
later, have a pretty general Influence; and induce many to imitate that
Example, which they either could not, or did not, propose. As the truly modest
Author has professedly disclaimed all Applause on the Performance, and
contented himself with hoping an Exemption from Censure, through his Reader's
Reflection on the peculiar Circumstances and Address of it; well may his best,
his faithfullest Translators, whose Merit and Pains must be of a very secondary
Degree to his own, rest satisfied with a similar Exemption: especially when
joined to the Pleasure, that must result from a Consciousness of their having
endeavored to extend the Benefits of their Author's Treatise, to Multitudes of
their own Country and Language.

For my own particular, when, after reading the Introduction to the Work, and
much of the Sequel, I had determined to translate it; to be as just as possible
to the Author, and to his English Readers, I determined not to interpolate any
Sentiment of my own into the Text, nor to omit one Sentence of the Original,
which, besides its being Detraction in a literal Sense, I thought might imply
it in its worst, its figurative one; for which there was no Room. To conform as
fully as possible to the Plainness and Perspicuity he proposed I have been
pretty often obliged in the anatomical Names of some Parts, and sometimes of
the Symptoms, as well as in some pretty familiar, though not entirely popular
Words, to explain all such by the most common Words I have heard used for them;
as after mentioning the Diaphragm, to add, or Midriff -- the Trachoea -- or
Windpipe -- acrimonious, or very sharp, and so of many others. This may a
little, though but a little, have extended the Translation beyond the Original;
as the great Affinity between the French and Latin, and between the former and
many Latin Words borrowed from the Greek, generally makes the same anatomical
or medical Term, that is technical with us, vernacular or common with them. But
this unavoidable Tautology, which may be irksome to many Ears, those medical
Readers, for whom it was not intended, will readily forgive, from a
Consideration of the general Address of the Work: while they reflect that a
plain intelligible Style is essentially necessary in those Books, which wholly
consist of very useful, and generally interesting, Matter.

As many of the Notes of the Editor of Lions, as I have retained in this
Version (this Translation being made from that Edition) are subscribed E. L. I
have dispensed with several, s^^^e, as evidently less within Dr. TISSOT's Plan,
from tending to theorize, however justly or practically, where he must have had
his own Reasons for omitting to theorize: a few others, as manifestly needless,
from what the Author had either premised, or speedily subjoined, on the very
same Circumstance: besides, a very few, from their local Confinement to the
Practice at Lions, which lies in a Climate somewhat more different from our own
than that of Lausanne. It is probable, nevertheless, I have retained a few more
of those Notes, than were necessary in a professed Translation of the original
Work: but wherever I have done this, I have generally subjoined my Motive for
it; of whatever Consequence that may appear to the Reader. I have retained all
the Author's own Notes, with his Name annexed to them; and wherever the
Annotator was uncertain to me, I have declared whose Note I supposed it to be.

Such as I have added from my own Experience or Observation are subscribed K.
to distinguish them from the former; and that the Demerit of any of them may
neither be imputed to the learned Author, nor to that Editor. Their principal
Recommendation, or Apology is, that whatever Facts I have mentioned are
certainly true. I have endeavored to be temperate in their Number and Length,
and to imitate that strict Pertinence, which prevails throughout the Author's
Work. If any may have ever condescended to consider my Way of Writing, they
will conceive this Restraint has cost me at least as much Pains, as a further
Indulgence of my own Conceptions could have done. The few Prescriptions I have
included in some of them, have been so conducted, as not to give the Readers
the least Confusion with respect to those, which the Author has given in his
Table of Remedies, and which are referred to by numerical Figures, throughout
the Course of this Book.

The present Edition of this Translation is taken from my second, but with the
Addition of some more Notes of my own, which seemed to me material, besides a
very few suggested by a learned and experienced Friend, which I have adopted. A
new French Edition of this Work has lately appeared at Paris, though not under
Dr. TISSOT's Direction; in which there are two or three Chapters on as many
chronical Diseases; but which our Author, who confined his valuable Work solely
to acute Diseases, had of course excluded from his Plan. These we have
therefore, and we think very consistently, omitted to translate; as we deemed
it rather improper and illiberal, to blend the Interpolations of another
Writer, (who is anonymous too) with Dr. TISSOT's original Work; these
Interpolations being on such Articles too, as he had for excellent Reasons,
which he specifies in his own Preface, declined to treat of. Whether such
Additions then were officiously made by any Volunteer Physician, or procured by
a Bookseller, doubtless the Intention was either to increase the intrinsic
Value, or to extend the Sale of their new Edition of the Avis au Peuple: though
it is much likelier these Additions may chance to be read, more in Consequence
of the Merit of his original Work, than on that of their own; into which
however I confess I have very little enquired. But whatever that Merit may
prove, it was certainly a probable Expedient to introduce it; notwithstanding
the Ingraftment of these Chapters gives them the Air of a Tumor or Excrescence
This additional Paragraph to the Translator's former Preface, favors him with
an Opportunity of acknowledging his Obligations to the great Candor and
indulgence of the Public, in regard to his Translation of this Work.
.

The moderate Number of Dr. TISSOT's Prescriptions, in his Table of Remedies,
amounting but to seventy-one, and the Apparent Simplicity of many of them, may
possibly disgust some Admirers of pompous and complex Prescription. But his
Reserve, in this important Respect, has been thoroughly consistent with his
Notion of Nature's curing Diseases; which suggested to him the first, the
essential Necessity of cautioning his Readers against doing, giving or applying
any thing, that might oppose her healing Operations (a most capital Purpose of
his Work) which important Point being gained, the mildest, the simplest and
least hazardous Remedies would often prove sufficient assistants to her.
Nevertheless, under more severe and painful Conflicts, he is not wanting to
direct the most potent and efficacious ones. The Circumstances of the poor
Subjects of his medical Consideration, became also a very natural Object to
him; and was in no wise unworthy the Regard of the humane Translator of BILGUER
on AMPUTATIONS, or rather against the crying Abuse of them; an excellent Work,
which does real Honor to them both; and which can be disapproved by none, who
do not prefer the frequently unnecessary Mutilation of the Afflicted, to the
engrossing a greater Portion of their Time; whence they may apprehend a
Contraction of their Employment.

Some Persons may imagine that a Treatise of this Kind, composed for the
benefit of laboring People in Swisserland, may be little applicable to those
of the British Islands. This, in a very few Particulars, and in a small Degree,
may be true indeed. But as we find their common Prejudices are often the very
same; as the Swiss are the Inhabitants of a colder Climate than France, and
generally, as Dr. TISSOT often observes, accustomed to drink (like ourselves)
more strong Drink than the French Peasantry; and to indulge more in eating
Flesh too, which the Religion of Berne, like our own, does not restrain; the
Application of his Advice to them will pretty generally hold good here. Where
he forbids them Wine and Flesh, all Butchers Meat, and in most Cases all Flesh,
and all strong Drink should be prohibited here: especially when we consider,
that his Directions are confined to the Treatment of acute Diseases, of which
the very young, the youthful, and frequently even the robust are more generally
the Subjects. Besides, in some few of the English Translator's Notes, he has
taken the Liberty of moderating the Coolers, or the Quantities of them (which
may be well adapted to the great Heats and violent Swiss Summers Dr. TISSOT
talks of) according to the Temperature of our own Climate, and the general
Habitudes of our own People. It may be observed too, that from the same Motive,
I have sometimes assumed the Liberty of dissenting from the Text in a very few
Notes; as for Instance, on the Article of Pastry, which perhaps is generally
better here than in Swisserland (where it may be as bad as our coarse vile
Trash that is hawked about and sold to mere Children) as I have frequently, in
preparing for Inoculation admitted the best Pastry (but never of Meat, and very
seldom any Cheesecakes) into the limited Diet of the Subjects of Inoculation,
and constantly without the least ill Consequence. Thus also in Note * Page 145,
146, I have presumed to affirm the Fact, that a strong spirituous Infusion of
the Bark has succeeded more speedily in some Intermittents, in particular
Habits, than the Bark in Substance. This I humbly conceive may be owing to such
a Menstruum's extracting the Resin of the Bark more effectually (and so
conveying it into the Blood) than the Juices of the Stomach and of the
alimentary Canal did, or could. For it is very conceivable that the Crasis, the
Consistence, of the fibrous Blood may sometimes be affected with a morbid
Laxity or Weakness, as well as the general System of the muscular Fibers.

These and any other like Freedoms I am certain the Author's Candor will
abundantly pardon; since I have never dissented from him, for the sake of
dissenting; and have the Honor of harmonizing very generally in Judgment with
him. If one useful Hint or Observation occurs throughout my Notes, his
Benevolence will exult in that essential Adherence to his Plan, which suggested
it to me: While an invariable echoing Assentation throughout such Notes, when
there really was any salutary Room for doubting, or for adding (with respect to
ourselves) would discover a Servility, that must have disgusted a liberal manly
Writer. One common good Purpose certainly springs from the generous Source, and
replenishes the many Channels into which it is derived; all the Variety and
little Deviations of which may be considered as more expansive Distributions of
its Benefits.

Since the natural Feelings of Humanity generally dispose us, but especially
the more tender and compassionate Sex, to advise Remedies to those Sick, who
are additionally miserable, from their being poor; such a Knowledge of their
real Disease, as would prevent their Patrons, Neighbors and Assistants from
advising a wrong Regimen, or an improper or ill-timed Medicine, is truly
essential to relieving them: and such we seriously think the present Work is
capable of imparting, to all commonly sensible and considerate Perusers of it.
A Vein of unaffected Probity, of manly sense, and of great Philanthrophy,
concur to sustain the Work: and whenever the Prejudices of the ignorant require
a forcible Eradication; or the crude Temerity and Impudence of Knaves and
Impostors cry out for their own Extermination, a happy Mixture of strong
Argument; just Ridicule, and honest Severity, gives a poignant and pleasant
Seasoning to the Work, which renders it occasionally entertaining, as it is
continually instructive.

A general Reader may be sometimes diverted with such Customs and Notions of
the Swiss Peasants, as are occasionally mentioned here: and possibly our
meerest Rustics may laugh at the brave simple Swiss, on his introducing a Sheep
into the Chamber of a very sick Person, to save the Life of the Patient, by
catching its own Death. But the Peasantry of both Nations are agreed in such a
Number of their absurd unhealthy Prejudices, in the Treatment of Diseases, that
it really seemed necessary to offer our own the Cautions and Counsels of this
principal Physician, in a very respectable Protestant Republic, in order to
prevent their Continuance. Nor is it unreasonable to presume, that under such a
Form of Government, (if honestly administered upon its justest Principles) the
People may be rather more tenderly regarded, than under the Pomp and Rage of
Despotism, or the Oppression of some tumultuous Aristocracies.

Besides the different Conditions of Of all these the Schoolmasters, with us,
may seem the most reasonably exempted from this Duty.
Persons, to whom our Author recommends the Patronage and Execution of his
Scheme, in his Introduction, it is conceived this Book must be serviceable to
many young Practioners, and to great Numbers of Apothecaries, by furnishing
them with such exact and striking Descriptions of each acute Disease and its
Symptoms, as may prevent their mistaking it for any other; a Deception which
has certainly often been injurious, and sometimes even fatal: for it is
dreadful but to contemplate the Destruction or Misery, with which Temerity and
Ignorance, so frequently combined, overwhelm the Sick. Thus (if better informed
and instructed) more Success and Reputation, with the Enjoyment of a better
Conscience, would crown their Endeavors, by a more general Recovery of, or
Relief to, their Patients. To effect this, to improve every Opportunity of
eschewing medical Evil, and of doing medical Good, was the Author's avowed
Intention; which he informs us in his Preface, he has heard, from some
intelligent and charitable Persons, his Treatise had effected, even in some
violent Diseases. That the same good Consequences may every where attend the
numerous Translations of it, must be the fervent Wish of all, except the Quacks
and Impostors he so justly characterises in his thirty-third Chapter! and
particularly of all, who may be distinguishably qualified, like himself, to, --
Look through Nature up to Nature's GOD!

The AUTHOR's DEDICATION. To the most illustrious, the most Noble and
Magnificent Lords, the Lords President and Counselors of the Chamber of
Health, of the City and Republic of Berne.
Most honorable Lords,
WHEN I first published the following Work, my utmost Partiality to it was not
sufficient to allow me the Confidence of addressing it to Your Lordships. But
Your continual Attention to all the Objects, which have any Relation to that
important Part of the Administration of the State, which has been so wisely
committed to Your Care, has induced You to take Notice of it. You have been
pleased to judge it might prove useful, and that an Attempt must be laudable,
which tends to the Extermination of erroneous and inveterate Prejudices, those
cruel Tyrants, that are continually opposing the Happiness of the People, even
under that Form and Constitution of Government, which is the best adapted to
establish and to increase it.

Your Lordships Approbation, and the splendid Marks of See the Author's Preface
immediately following this Dedication.
Benevolence, with which You have honored me, have afforded me a juster
Discernment of the Importance of this Treatise, and have inclined me to hope,
MOST ILLUSTRIOUS, MOST NOBLE, AND MAGNIFICENT LORDS, that You will permit this
new Edition of it to appear under the Sanction of your Auspices; that while the
Public is assured of your general Goodness and Beneficence, it may also be
informed of my profoundly grateful Sense of them, on the same Occasion.

May the present Endeavor then, in fully corresponding to my Wishes,
effectually realize Your Lordships utmost Expectations from it; while You
condescend to accept this small Oblation, as a very unequal Expression of that
profound Respect, with which I have the Honor to be,

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS, MOST NOBLE, AND MAGNIFICENT LORDS,

Your most humble And most Obedient Servant, TISSOT.
LAUSANNE, Dec. 3, 1762.
THE AUTHOR's PREFACE.
IF Vanity too often disposes many to speak of themselves, there are some
Occasions, on which a total Silence might be supposed to result from a still
higher Degree of it: And the very general Reception of the Advice to the People
has been such, that there would be room to suspect me of that most shocking
Kind of Pride, which receives Applause with Indifference (as deeming its own
Merit superior to the greatest) if I did not appear to be strongly impressed
with a just Sense of that great Favor of the Public, which has been so very
obliging, and so highly agreeable, to me.

Unfeignedly affected with the unhappy Situation of the poor Sick in Country
Places in Swisserland, where they are lost from a Scarcity of the best
Assistance, and from a fatal Superfluity of the worst, my sole Purpose in
writing this Treatise has been to serve, and to comfort them. I had intended it
only for a small Extent of Country, with a moderate Number of Inhabitants; and
was greatly surprised to find, that within five or six Months after its
Publication, it was become one of the most extensively published Books in
Europe; and one of those Treatises, on a scientific Subject, which has been
perused by the greatest Number of Readers of all Ranks and Conditions. To
consider such Success with Indifference, were to have been unworthy of it,
which Demerit, at least on this Account, I cannot justly be charged with; since
Indifference has not been my Case, who have felt as I ought this Gratification
of self-love; which, under just and prudent Restrictions, may perhaps be even
politically cherished: as the Delight naturally arising from having been
approved, is a Source of that laudable Emulation, which has sometimes produced
the most essential good Consequences to Society itself. For my own particular,
I can truly aver, that my Satisfaction has been exquisitely heightened on this
Occasion, as a Lover of my Species: since judging from the Success of this Work
(a Success which has exceeded my utmost Expectations) of the Effects that may
reasonably be hoped for from it, I am happily conscious of that Satisfaction,
or even Joy, which every truly honest Man must receive, from rendering
essential good Offices to others. Besides which, I have enjoyed, in its utmost
Extent, that Satisfaction which every grateful Man must receive, from the
Approbation and Beneficence of his Sovereign, when I was distinguished with the
precious Medal, which the illustrious Chamber of Health of the Republic of
Berne honored me with, a few Months after the Publicaon of this Treatise;
together with a Letter still more estimable, as it assured me of the
extraordinary Satisfaction the Republic had testified on the Impression of it;
a Circumstance, which I could not avoid this public Acknowledgement of,
without the greatest Vanity and Ingratitude. This has also been a very
influencing Motive with me, to exert my utmost ^^^^ties in perfecting this new
Edition, in which I have made many (...) that render it greatly preferable to
the first; and of which (...) shall give a brief Account, after saying somewhat
of the (...) which have appeared elsewhere.

The first is that, which Messrs. Heidegger, the Booksellers, published in the
German Language at Zurich, about a year since. I should have been highly
delighted with the mere Approbation of M. HIRZEL, first Physician of the Canton
of Zurich, etc. whose superior and universal Talents; whose profound Knowledge
in the Theory of Physic; and the Extent and Success of whose Practice have
justly elevated him among the small Number of extraordinary Men of our own
Times; he having lately obtained the esteem and the Thanks of all Europe, for
the History of one of her Le Socrate rustique, a Work, which every Person
should read.
Sages. But I little expected the Honor this Gentleman has done me, in
translating the Advice to the People into his own Language. Highly sensible
nevertheless as I am of this Honor, I must always reflect with Regret, that he
has consumed that important Time, in rendering my Directions intelligible, to
his Countrymen, which he might have employed much more usefully, in obliging
the World with his own.

He has enriched his Translation with an excellent Preface, which is chiefly
employed in a just and beautiful Portrait and Contrast of the true, and of the
false Physician; with which I should have done myself the Pleasure to have
adorned the present This Preface is indeed premised to this French Edition, but
a Translation of it was omitted, to avoid extending the Bulk and Price of the
Work. Dr. TISSOT must then have been ignorant of this Addition, when first
published at Lions.
Edition; if the Size of this Volume, already too large, had not proved an
Obstacle to so considerable an Addition; and if the Manner, in which Mr. HIRZEL
speaks of its Author, had permitted me with Decency to publish his Preface. I
have been informed by some Letters, that there have been two other German
Translations of it; but I am not informed by whom. However, Mr. HIRZEL's
Preface, his own Notes, and some Additions with which I have furnished him,
render his Edition preferable to the first in French, and to the other German
Translations already made.

The second Edition is that, which the younger DIDOT, the Bookseller, published
toward the End of the Winter at Paris. He had requested me to furnish him with
some Additions to it, which I could not readily comply with.

The third Edition is a Dutch Translation of it, which will be very speedily
published by M. RENIER AREMBERG, Bookseller at Rotterdam. He had begun the
Translation from my first Edition; but having wrote to know whether I had not
some Additions to make, I desired him to wait for the Publication of this. I
have the good Fortune to be very happy in my Translators: it being M. BIKKER, a
celebrated Physician at Rotterdam, (so very advantageously known in other
Countries, by his beautiful Dissertation on Human Nature: throughout which
Genius and Knowledge proceed Hand in Hand) who will present his Countrymen with
the Advice to the People, in their own Language: and who will improve it with
such Notes, as are necessary for a safe and proper Application of its Contents
in a Climate, different from that in which it was wrote. I have also heard,
there has been an Italian Translation of it.

After this Account of the foreign Editions, I return to the present one, which
is the second of the original French Treatise. I shall not affirm it is greatly
corrected, with respect to fundamental Points: for as I had advanced nothing in
the first, that was not established on Truth and Demonstration, there was no
Room for Correction, with regard to any essential Matters. Nevertheless, in
this I have made, 1, a great Number of small Alterations in the Diction, and
added several Words, to render the Work still more simple and perspicuous. 2,
The typographical Execution of this is considerably improved in the Type, the
Paper and Ink, Spelling, Pointing, and Arrangement of the Work. 3, I have made
some considerable Additions, which are of three Kinds. Not a few of them are
new Articles on some of the Subjects formerly treated of; such as the Articles
concerning Tarts and other Pastry Ware; the Addition concerning the Regimen for
Persons, in a State of Recovery from Diseases; the Preparation for the Small
Pocks; a long Note on the Jesuits Bark; another on acid Spirits; one on the
Extract of Hemlock, besides some new Matter which I have inserted; such as an
Article with regard to proper Drinks; one on the Convulsions of Infants; one on
Chilblains; another on Punctures from Thorns; one upon the Reason of the
Confidence reposed in Quacks, and the thirty-first Chapter entirely: in which I
have extended the Consideration of some former Articles, that seemed to me a
little too succinct and short. There are some Alterations of this last, this
additional, Kind, interspersed almost throughout the whole Substance of this
Edition; but especially in the two Chapters relating to Women and Children.

The objects of the XXXI Chapter are such as require immediate Assistance, viz.
Swoonings, Haemorrhages, that is, large spontaneous Bleedings; the Attacks of
Convulsions, and of Suffocations; the Consequences of Fright and Terror;
Disorders occasioned by unwholesome or deadly Vapors; the Effects of Poison,
and the sudden Invasions of excessive Pain.

The Omission of this Chapter was a very material Defect in the original Plan
of this Work. The Editor of it at Paris was very sensible of this Chasm, or
Blank, as it maybe called, and has filled it up very properly: and if I have
not made use of his Supplement, instead of enlarging myself upon the Articles
of which he has treated, it has only been from a Purpose of rendering the whole
Work more uniform; and to avoid that odd Diversity, which seems scarcely to be
avoided in a Treatise composed by two Persons. Besides which, that Gentleman
has said nothing of the Articles, which employ the greatest Part of that
Chapter, viz. the Swoonings, the Consequences of great Fear, and of noxious
Vapors.

Before I conclude, I ought to justify myself, as well as possible, to a great
Number of very respectable Persons, both here and abroad, (to whom I can refuse
nothing without great Chagrin and Reluctance) for my not having made such
Additions as they desired of me. This however was impossible as the Objects, in
which they concurred, were some chronical Distempers, that are entirely out of
the Plan, to which I was strictly attached, for many Reasons. The first is,
that it was my original Purpose to oppose the Errors incurred in Country
Places, in the Treatment of acute Diseases; and to display the best Method of
conducting such, as do not admit of waiting for the Arrival of distant Succor;
or of removing the Patients to Cities, or large Towns. It is but too true
indeed, that chronical Diseases are also liable to improper Treatment in small
Country Places: but then there are both Time and Convenience to convey the
Patients within the Reach of better Advice; or for procuring them the
Attendance of the best Advisers, at their own Places of Residence. Besides
which, such Distempers are considerably less common than those, to which I had
restrained my Views: and they will become still less frequent, whenever acute
Diseases, of which they are frequently the Consequences, shall be more
rationally and safely conducted.

The second Reason, which, if alone, would have been a sufficient one, is, that
it is impossible to subject the Treatment of chronical Distempers to the
Capacity and Conduct of Persons, who are not Physicians. Each acute Distemper
generally arises from one Cause, and the Treatment of it is simple and uniform;
since those Symptoms, which manifest the Malady, point out its Cause and
Treatment. But the Case is very Differently circumstanced in tedious and
languid Diseases; each of which may depend on so many and various Causes (and
it is only the real, the true Cause, which ought to determine us in selecting
its proper Remedies) that though the Distemper and its Appellation are
evidently known, a mere By-stander may be very remote from penetrating into its
true Cause; and consequently be incapable of choosing the best Medicines for it.
It is this precise and distinguishing Discernment of the real particular Cause
[ or of the contingent Concurrence of more than one] that necessarily requires
the Presence of Persons conversant in the Study and the Practice of all the
Parts of Physic; and which Knowledge it is impossible for People, who are
Strangers to such Studies, to arrive at. Moreover, their frequent Complexness;
the Variety of their Symptoms; the different Stages of these tedious Diseases
[not exactly attended to even by many competent Physicians] the Difficulty of
ascertaining different Doses of Medicines, whose Activity may make the smallest
Error highly dangerous, etc. etc. are really such trying Circumstances, as
render the fittest Treatment of these Diseases sufficiently difficult and
embarrassing to the most experienced Physicians, and unattainable by those who
are not Physicians.

A third Reason is, that, even supposing all these Circumstances might be made
so plain and easy, as to be comprehended by every Reader, they would require a
Work of an excessive Length; and thence be disproportioned to the Faculties of
those, for whom it was intended. One single chronical Disease might require as
large a Volume as the present one.

But finally, were I to acknowledge, that this Compliance was both necessary
and practicable, I declare I find it exceeds my Abilities; and that I am also
far from having sufficient Leisure for the Execution of it. It is my Wish that
others would attempt it, and may succeed in accomplishing it; but I hope these
truly worthy Persons, who have honored me by proposing the Achievement of it
to myself, will perceive the Reasons for my not complying with it, in all their
Force; and not ascribe a Refusal, which arises from the very Nature of the
thing, either to Obstinacy, or to any Want of an Inclination to oblige them.

I have been informed my Citations, or rather References, have puzzled some
Readers. It was difficult to foresee this, but is easy to prevent it for the
future. The Work contains Citations only of two Sorts; one, that points to the
Remedies prescribed; and the other, which refers to some Passage in the Book
itself, that serve to illustrate those Passages in which I cite. Neither of
these References could have been omitted. The first is marked thus, No. with
the proper Figure to it, as 1, 2, etc. This signifies, that the Medicine I
direct is described in the Table of Remedies, according to the Number annexed
to that Character. Thus when we find directed, in any Page of the Book, the
warm Infusion No. 1, in some other, the Ptisan No. 2; or in a third, the Almond
Milk, or Emulsion No. 4, it signifies, that such Prescriptions will be found
the Numbers 1, 2, and 4; and this Table is printed at the (...) the ^ook.

If instead of forming this Table, a^^ thus referring to the Prescriptions by
their Numbers, I had repeated each Prescription as often as I directed it, this
Treatise must have been doubled in Bulk, and insufferably tiresome to peruse. I
must repe^^ ^ere, that what I have already said in the former Edition, that the
The Reasons for omitting the Prices here, may be seen Page 12 of this
Translation.
Prices of the Medicines, or of a great Number of them, are those at which the
Apothecaries may afford them, without any Loss, to a Peasant in humble
Circumstances. But it should he remembered, that they are not set down at the
full Prices which they may honestly demand; since that would be unjust for some
to insist on them at. Besides, there is no Kind of Tax in Swisserland, and I
have no Right to impose one.

The Citations of the second Kind are very plain and simple. The whole Work is
divided into numbered Paragraphs distinguished by the Mark. And not to swell it
with needless Repetitions, when in one Place I might have even pertinently
repeated something already observed, instead of such Repetition at Length, I
have only referred to the Paragraph, where it had been observed. Thus, for
Example, when we read Page 40, 50 -- When the Disease is so circumstanced as we
have described, 46. -- this imports that, not to repeat the Description already
given, I refer the Reader to that last for it.

The Use of these Citations is not the least Innovation, and extremely
commodius and easy: but were there only a single Reader likely to be puzzled by
them I ought not to omit this Explanation of them, as I can expect to be
generally useful, only in Proportion as I am clear: and it must be obvious,
that a Desire of being extensively useful is the sole Motive of this Work. I
have long since had the Happiness of knowing, that some charitable and
intelligent Persons have applied the Directions it contains, with extraordinary
Success, even in violent Diseases: And I shall arrive at the Height of my
Wishes, if I continue to be informed, that it contributes to alleviate the
Sufferings, and to prolong the Days, of my rational Fellow Creatures.

TABLE of the several Chapters, and their principal Contents.
INtroduction Page 1 The first Cause of Depopulation, Emigrations ib. The
second Cause, Luxury Page 3 Third Cause, Decay of Agriculture Page 5 Fourth
Cause, the pernicious Treatment of Diseases Page 6 Means for rendering this
Treatise useful Page 8 Explanation of certain physical Terms, and Phrases Page
13
CHAPTER I.
The most common Causes of popular Sickness Page 15 First Cause, excessive
Labor ib. Second Cause, the Effect of cold Air, when a Person is hot Page 16
Third Cause, taking cold Drink, when in a Heat Page ib. and 17 Fourth Cause,
the Inconstancy and sudden Change of the Weather Page 17 Fifth Cause, the
Situation of inhabited Houses, near Dunghills and Marshes, and the bad confined
Air in the Houses Page 18 Sixth Cause, Drunkenness Page 19 Seventh Cause, the
Food of Country People ib. Eighth Cause, the Situation, or Exposure of Houses
Page 20 Concerning the Drink of Country People Page 21
CHAP. II.
Of Causes which increase the Diseases of the People, with general
Considerations Page 23 First Cause, the great Care employed to force the Sick
to sweat, and the Methods taken for that Purpose ib. The Danger of hot Chambers
Page 24 The Danger of hot Drinks and heating Medicines ib. Second Cause, the
Quantity and Quality of the Food given to sick Persons Page 26 Third Cause, the
giving Vomits and Purges at the Beginning of the Disease Page 28
CHAP. III.
Concerning what should be done in the Beginning of Diseases, and the Diet in
acute Diseases Page 30 Signs which indicate approaching Diseases; with Means to
prevent them Page 31 The common Regimen, or Regulations for the Sick ib. The
Benefits of ripe sound Fruits Page 33 Cautions and Means to be used, on
Recovery Page 36
CHAP. IV.
Of the Inflammation of the Breast Page 38 The Signs of this Disease ib. The
Advantage of Bleeding Page 40 Signs of Recovery Page 42 Of Crises, and the
Symptoms that precede them Page 43 The Danger of Vomits, of Purges, and of
Anodynes ib. Of the Suppression of Expectoration, and of the Means to restore
it Page 44 Of the Formation of Vomicas or Imposthumes in the Lungs, and the
Treatment of them ib. Of the Danger of Remedies, termed Balsamics Page 51 The
Inefficacy of the Antihectic of Poterius ib. Of an Empyema Page 52 Of a
Gangrene of the Lungs ib. Of a Scirrhus of the Lungs ib.
CHAP. V.
Of the Pleurisy Page 53 The Danger of heating Remedies Page 55 to 57 Of
frequent, or habitual, Pleurisies Page 57 Of Goats Blood; the Soot of a stale
Egg, and of the Wormwood of the Alps, in Pleurisies. Page 58
CHAP. VI.
Of Diseases of the Throat Page 59 Of their proper Treatment Page 61 Of the
Formation of an Abscess there Page 63 Of swelled Ears, from the Obstruction of
the parotid and maxillary Glands Page 65 Of the epidemic and putrid Diseases of
the Throat, which prevailed in 1761 at Lausanne ib.
CHAP. VII.
Of Colds Page 69 Different Prejudices concerning Colds ib. The Danger of
drinking much hot Water, and of strong spirituous Liquors, etc. Page 72 Means
for strengthening and curing Persons very subject to Colds Page 73
CHAP. VIII.
Of Diseases of the Teeth Page 74
CHAP. IX.
Of the Apoplexy Page 78 Of a sanguine Apoplexy Page ib. and 79 Of a serous, or
watery, Apoplexy Page 81 Means to prevent relapsing into them ib. and seq.
CHAP. X.
Of morbid Strokes of the Sun Page 83
CHAP. XI.
Of the Rheumatism Page 88 Of the acute Rheumatism, attended with a Fever ib.
Of the slow, or chronical, without a Fever Page 92 The Danger of spirituous and
greasy Remedies Page 95, 96
CHAP. XII.
Of the Bite of a mad Dog Page 96
CHAP. XIII.
Of the Small Pocks Page 103 Of the preceding Symptoms of this Disease Page 104
-- the Danger of sweating Medicines Page 108 -- The Treatment of the benign
distinct Small Pocks Page 110 -- the Use of Bleeding Page 111 -- the Fever of
Suppuration Page 112 -- the Necessity of opening the ripe Pustules Page 113 --
the Danger of Anodynes Page 114 Of the striking in of the Eruptions Page 115
Preparations for receiving it favorably Page 116
CHAP. XIV.
Of the Measles Page 118 Of their Treatment and the Means to prevent any of
their bad Consequences, to Page 122
CHAP. XV.
Of the hot, or burning, Fever Page 123
CHAP. XVI.
Of putrid Fevers Page 125
CHAP. XVII.
Of malignant Fevers Page 130 The Danger of applying living Animals to them
Page 135
CHAP. XVIII.
Of intermitting Fevers Page 136 -- Spring and Autumn Intermittents Page 138
Method of Cure by the ark Page 139 Method of treating the Patient in the Fit
Page 140 Of other Febrifuges, besides the Bark Page 141 The Treatment of long
and obstinate Intermittents ib. Of some very dangerous Intermittents Page 144
Of some periodical Disorders, which may be termed, Fevers disguised ib. Of
Preservatives from unwholesome Air Page 145
CHAP. XIX.
Of an Erisipelas, or St. Anthony's Fire Page 146 Of a frequent or habitual
Erisipelas Page 150 Of the Stings or Bites of Animals ib.
CHAP. XX.
Of Inflammations of the Breast, and of Bastard and bilious Pleurisies Page 151
-- Of the false Inflammation of the Breast Page 152 -- The false Pleurisy Page
154
CHAP. XXI.
Of Cholics Page 155 Of the Inflammatory Cholic ib. -- the bilious Cholic Page
158 the Cholic from Indigestion, and of Indigestions Page 159 -- the flatulent,
or windy, Cholic Page 161 -- the Cholic, from taking Cold Page 162
CHAP. XXII.
Of the Miserere, or Iliac Passion, and of the Cholera Morbus Page 163 The
Miserere Page 164 The Cholera Morbus Page 166
CHAP. XXIII.
Of a Diarrhoea, or Looseness Page 168
CHAP. XXIV.
Of a Disentery, or Bloody Flux Page 170 The Symptoms of the Disease ib. The
Remedies against it Page 171 Of the beneficial Use of ripe Fruits Page 173 Of
the Danger of taking a great Number of popular Remedies in it Page 175
CHAP. XXV.
Of the Itch Page 176
CHAP. XXVI.
Dictions peculiar to the Sex Page 179 Of the monthly Customs ib. Of
Gravidation, or going with Child Page 185 Of Labors or Deliveries Page 186 Of
their Consequences Page 188 Of a Cancer Page 189
CHAP. XXVII.
Directions with regard to Children Page 190 Of the first Cause of their
Disorders, the Meconium Page 191 -- the second, the souring of their Milk Page
192 -- the Danger of giving them Oil Page 193 -- Disorders from their want of
Perspiration, the Means of keeping it up, and of washing them in cold Water
Page 194 -- the third Cause, the cutting of their Teeth Page 196 -- the Fourth
Cause, Worms Page 197 Of Convulsions Page 199 Methods necessary to make them
strong and hardy, with general Directions about them Page 201 and seq.
CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Assistances for drowned Persons Page 205
CHAP. XXIX.
Of Substances stopped between the Mouth and the Stomach Page 209
CHAP. XXX.
Of Disorders requiring the Assistance of a Surgeon. Page 221 Of Burns ib. Of
Wounds Page 222 Of Bruises, and of Falls Page 225 Of Ulcers Page 230 Of frozen
Limbs, or Joints Page 232 Of Chilblains Page 234 Of Ruptures Page 240 Of
Phlegmons, or Boils Page 243 Of Fellons, or Whitlows Page 244 Of Thorns,
Splinters, etc. in the Skin or Flesh Page 246 Of Warts Page 247 Of Corns Page
248
CHAP. XXXI.
Of some Cases which require immediate Assistance Page 249 Of Swoonings, from
Excess of Blood ib. Of Swoonings, from great Weakness Page 250 Of Swoonings,
occasioned by a Load on the Stomach Page 252 Of Swoonings, resulting from
Disorders of the Nerves Page 253 Of Swoonings, occasioned by the Passions Page
255 Of the Swoonings, which occur in Diseases Page 256 Of Haemorrhages, or
Fluxes of Blood Page 257 Of Convulsion Fits Page 259 Of suffocating, or
strangling Fits Page 260 Of the violent Effects of great Fear Page 261 Of
Accidents produced by the Vapors of Charcoal, and of Wine Page 263 Of Poisons
Page 266 Of acute and violent Pains Page 268
CHAP. XXXII.
Of giving Remedies by Way of Precaution Page 269 Of Bleeding ib. Of Purges
Page 273 Remedies to be used after excessive Purging Page 275 Reflections on
some other Remedies Page 276
CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Quacks, Mountebanks, and Conjurers Page 279
CHAP. XXXIV.
Questions necessary to be answered by any Person, who goes to consult a
Physician. Page 292 The Table of Remedies Page 295
INTRODUCTION.
THE Decrease of the Number of Inhabitants, in most of the States of Europe, is
a Fact, which impresses every reflecting Person, and is become such a general
Complaint, as is but too well established on plain Calculations. This Decrease
is most remarkable in Country Places. It is owing to many Causes; and I shall
think myself happy, if I can contribute to remove one of the greatest of them,
which is the pernicious Manner of treating sick People in Country Places. This
is my sole Object, though I may be excused perhaps for pointing out the other
concurring Causes, which may be all included within these two general
Affirmations; That greater Numbers than usual emigrate from the Country; and
that the People increase less every where.

There are many Sorts of Emigration. Some leave their Country to enlist in the
Service of different States by Sea and Land; or to be differently employed
abroad, some as Traders, others as Domestics, etc.

Military Service, by Land or Sea, prevents Population in various Respects. In
the first Place, the Numbers going abroad are always more, often much more,
than those who return. General Battles, with all the Hazards and Fatigues of
War; detached Encounters, bad Provisions, Excess in drinking and eating;
Diseases that are the Consequences of Debauches, the Disorders that are
peculiar to the Country; epidemical, pestilential or contagious Distempers,
caused by the unwholesome Air of Flanders, Holland, Italy and Hungary; long
Cruises, Voyages to the East or West Indies, to Guinea, etc. destroy a great
Number of Men. The Article of Desertion also, the Consequences of which they
dread on returning home, disposes many to abandon their Country for ever.
Others, on quitting the Service, take up with such Establishments, as it has
occasionally thrown in their Way; and which necessarily prevent their Re^^^n.
But in the second Place, supposing they were all to come back, their Country
suffers equally from their Absence; as thi^ ^ery generally happens during that
Period of Life, when they are best adapted for Propagation; since that
Qualification on their Return is impaired by Age, by Infirmities and Debauches:
and even when they do marry, the Children often perish as Victims to the
Excesses and Irregularities of their Fathers: they are weak, languishing,
distempered, and either die young, or live incapable of being useful to
Society. Besides, that the prevailing Habit of Libertinage, which many have
contracted, prevents several of them from marrying at all. But notwithstanding
all these inconvenient Consequences are real and notorious; yet as the Number
of those, who leave their Country on these Accounts, is limited, and indeed
rather inconsiderable, if compared with the Number of Inhabitants which must
remain at home: as it may be affirmed too, that this relinquishing of their
Country may have been even necessary at some times, and may become so again, if
the Causes of Depopulation should cease, this Sort of Emigration is doubtless
the least grievous of any, and the last which may require a strict
Consideration.

But that abandoning of their Country, or Expatriation, as it may be termed,
the Object of which is a Change of the Emigrant's Condition, is more to be
considered, being more numerous. It is attended with many and peculiar
Inconveniences, and is unhappily become an epidemical Evil, the Ravages of
which are still increasing; and that from one simple and ridiculous Source,
which is this; that the Success of one Individual determines a hundred to run
the same Risque, ninety and nine of whom may probably be disappointed. They are
struck with the apparent Success of one, and are ignorant of the Miscarriage of
others. Suppose a hundred Persons might have set out ten Years ago, to seek
their Fortune, as the Saying is, at the End of six Months they are all
forgotten, except by their Relations; but if one should return the same Year,
with more Money than his own Fortune, more than he set out with; or if one of
them has got a moderate Place with little Work, the whole Country rings with
it, as a Subject of general Entertainment. A Crowd of young People are seduced
by this and sally forth, because not one reflects, that of the ninety-nine, who
set out with the hundredth Person, one half has perished, many are miserable,
and the Remainder come back, without having gained any thing, but an Incapacity
to employ themselves usefully at home, and in their former Occupations: and
having deprived their Country of a great many Cultivators, who, from the
Produce of the Lands, would have attracted considerable Sums of Money, and many
comfortable Advantages to it. In short, the very small Proportion who succeed,
are continually talked of; the Crowd that sink are perpetually forgot. This is
a very great and real Evil, and how shall it be prevented? It would be
sufficient perhaps to publish the extraordinary Risque, which may be easily
demonstrated: It would require nothing more, than to keep an exact yearly
Register of all these Adventurers, and, at the Expiration of six, eight, or ten
Years, to publish the List, with the Fate of every Emigrant. I am greatly
deceived, or at the End of a certain Number of Years, we should not see such
Multitudes forsake their native Soil, in which they might live comfortably by
working, to go in Search of Establishments in others; the Uncertainty of which
such Lists would demonstrate to them; and also prove, how preferable their
Condition in their own Country would have been, to that they have been reduced
to. People would no longer set out, but on almost certain Advantages: fewer
would undoubtedly emigrate, more of whom, from that very Circumstance, must
succeed. Meeting with fewer of their Countrymen abroad, these fortunate few
would oftener return. By this Means more Inhabitants would remain in the
Country, more would return again, and bring with them more Money to it. The
State would be more populous, more rich and happy; as the Happiness of a People
who live on a fruitful Soil, depends essentially on a great Number of
Inhabitants, with a moderate Quantity of pecuniary Riches.

But the Population of the Country is not only necessarily lessened, merely in
Consequence of the Numbers that leave it; since even those who remain increase
less, than an equal Number formerly did. Or, which amounts to the same thing,
among the same Number of Persons, there are fewer Marriages than formerly; and
the same Number of Marriages produce fewer Christenings. I do not enter upon a
Detail of the Proofs, since merely looking about us must furnish a sufficient
Conviction of the Truth of them. What then are the Causes of this? There are
two capital ones, Luxury and Debauchery, which are Enemies to Population on
many Accounts.

Luxury compels the wealthy Man, who would make a Figure; and the Man of a
moderate Income, but who is his Equal in every other Respect, and who will
imitate him, to be afraid of a numerous Family; the Education of which must
greatly contract that Expense he had devoted to Parade and Ostentation: And
besides, if he must divide his Estate among a great many Children, each of them
would have but a little, and be unable to keep up the State and the Train of
the Father's. Since Merit is unjustly estimated by exterior Show and Expense,
one must of course endeavor to attain for himself, and to leave his Children
in, a Situation capable of supporting that Expense. Hence the fewer Marriages
of People who are not opulent, and the fewer Children among People who marry.

Luxury is further prejudicial to the Increase of the People, in another
Respect. The irregular Manner of Life which it introduces, depresses Health; it
ruins the Constitutions, and thus sensibly affects Procreation. The preceding
Generation counted some Families with more than twenty Children: the living one
counts less than twenty Cousins. Very unfortunately this Way of thinking and
acting, so preventive of Increase, has extended itself even into Villages: and
they are no longer convinced there; that the Number of Children makes the
Riches of the Countryman. Perhaps the next Generation will scarcely be
acquainted with the Relation of Brotherhood.

A third Inconvenience of Luxury is, that the Rich retreat from the Country to
live in Cities; and by multiplying their Domestics there, they drain the
former. This augmented Train is prejudicial to the Country, by depriving it of
Cultivaters, and by diminishing Population. These Domestics, being seldom
sufficiently employed, contract the Habit of Laziness; and they prove incapable
of returning to that Country Labor, for which Nature intended them. Being
deprived of this Resource they scarcely ever marry, either from apprehending
the Charge of Children, or from their becoming Libertines; and sometimes,
because many Masters will not employ married Servants. Or should any of them
marry, it is often in the Decline of Life, whence the State must have the fewer
Citizens.

Idleness of itself weakens them, and disposes them to those Debauches, which
enfeeble them still more. They never have more than a few Children, and these
sickly; such as have not Strength to cultivate the Ground; or who, being
brought up in Cities, have an Aversion to the Country.

Even those among them who are more prudent, who preserve their Morals, and
make some Savings, being accustomed to a City Life, and dreading the Labor of
a Country one (of the Regulation of which they are also ignorant) choose to
become little Merchants, or Tradesmen; and this must be a Drawback from
Population, as any Number of Laborers beget more Children than an equal Number
of Citizens; and also by Reason, that out of any given Number, more Children
die in Cities, than in the Country.

The same Evils also prevail with Regard to Female Servants. After ten or
twelve Years Servitude, the Maidservants in Cities cannot acquit themselves as
good Country Servants; and such of them as choose this Condition, quickly fail
under that Kind or Quantity of Work, for which they are no longer constituted.
Were we to see a Woman married in the Country, a Year after her leaving Town,
it would be easy to observe, how much that Way of living in the Country has
broke her. Frequently their first Childbed, in which Term they have not all the
Attendance their Delicacy demands, proves the Loss of their Health; they remain
in a State of Langour, of Feebleness, and of Decay; they have no more Children;
and this renders their Husbands unuseful toward the Population of the State.

Abortions, Infants carried out of their Country after a concealed Pregnancy,
and the Impossibility of their Mother's getting Husbands afterward, are
frequently the Effects of their Libertinage.

It is to be apprehended too these bad Effects are rather increasing with us;
since, either for want of sufficient Numbers, or from oeconomical Views, it has
become a Custom, instead of Women Servants, to employ Children, whose Manners
and whose Constitutions are not yet formed; and who are ruined in the same
Manner, by their Residence in Town, by their Laziness, by bad Examples, and bad
Company.

Doubtless much remains still unsaid on these important Heads; but besides my
Intention not to swell this Treatise immoderately, and the many Avocations,
which prevent me from launching too far into what may be less within the Bounds
of Medicine, I should be fearful of digressing too far from my Subject. What I
have hitherto said, however, I think cannot be wholly foreign to it; since in
giving Advice to the People, with Regard to their Health, it was necessary to
display to them the Causes which impaired it; though what I might be able to
add further on this Head, would probably be thought more remote from the
Subject.

I shall add then but a single Hint on the Occasion. Is it not practicable, in
order to remedy those Evils which we cannot prevent, to select some particular
Part or Canton of the Country, wherein we should endeavor by Rewards, 1 st.
Irremovably to fix all the Inhabitants? 2 dly. To encourage them by other
Rewards to a plentiful and legitimate Increase? They should not be permitted to
go out of it, which must prevent them from being exposed to the Evils I have
mentioned. They should by no Means intermarry with any Strangers, who might
introduce such Disorders among them. Thus very probably this Canton, after a
certain Time, would become even overpeopled, and might send out Colonies to the
others.

One Cause, still more considerable than those we have already mentioned, has,
to this very Moment, prevented the Increase of the People in France. This is
the Decay of Agriculture. The Inhabitants of the Country, to avoid serving in
the Militia; to elude the Days-Service imposed by their Lords, and the Taxes;
and being attracted to the City by the Hopes of Interest, by Laziness and
Libertinage, have left the Country nearly deserted. Those who remain behind,
either not being encouraged to work, or not being sufficient for what there is
to do, content themselves with cultivating just as much as is absolutely
necessary for their Subsistence. They have either lived single, or married but
late; or perhaps, after the Example of the Inhabitants of the Cities, they have
refused to fulfill their Duty to Nature, to the State, and to a Wife. The
Country deprived of Tillers, by this Expatriation and Inactivity, has yielded
nothing; and the Depopulation of the State has daily increased, from the
reciprocal and necessary Proportion between Subsistence and Population, and
because Agriculture alone can increase Subsistence. A single Comparison will
sufficiently evince the Truth and the Importance of these Principles, to those
who have not seen them already divulged and demonstrated in the Works of the
The Marquis of Mirabeau.
Friend of Man.

An old Roman, who was always ready to return to the Cultivation of his Field,
subsisted himself and his Family from one Acre of Land. A Savage who neither
sows nor cultivates, consumes, in his single Person, as much Game as require
fifty Acres to feed them. Consequently Tullus Hostilius, on a thousand Acres,
might have five thousand Subjects; while a Savage Chief, limited to the same
Extent of Territory, could scarcely have twenty: such an immense Disproportion
does Agriculture furnish, in favor of Population. Observe these two great
Extremes. A State becomes dispeopled or peopled in that Proportion, by which it
recedes from one of these Methods, and approaches to the other. Indeed it is
evident, that wherever there is an Augmentation of Subsistence, an Increase of
Population will soon follow; which again will still further facilitate the
Increase of Provisions. In a State thus circumstanced Men will abound, who,
after they have furnished sufficient Numbers for the Service of War, of
Commerce, of Religion, and for Arts and Professions of every kind, will further
also furnish a Source for Colonies, who will extend the Name and the Prosperity
of their Nation to distant Regions. There will ensue a Plenty of Commodities,
the Superfluity of which will be exported to other Countries, to exchange for
other Commodities, that are not produced at home; and the Balance, being
received in Money, will make the Nation rich, respectable by its Neighbors,
and happy. Agriculture, vigorously pursued, is equal to the Production of all
these Benefits; and the present Age will enjoy the Glory of restoring it, by
savouring and encouraging Cultivaters, and by forming Societies for the
Promotion of Agriculture.

I proceed at length to the fourth Cause of Depopulation, which is the Manner
of treating sick People in the Country. This has often affected me with the
deepest Concern. I have been a Witness that Maladies, which, in themselves,
would have been gentle, have proved mortal from a pernicious Treatment: I am
convinced that this Cause alone makes as great a Havoc as the former; and
certainly it requires the utmost Attention of Physicians, whose Duty it is to
Labor for the Preservation of Mankind. While we are employing our assiduous
Cares on the more polished and fashionable Part of them in Cities, the larger
and more useful Moiety perish in the Country; either by particular, or by
highly epidemical, Diseases, which, within a few Years past, have appeared in
different Villages, and made no small Ravage. This afflicting Consideration has
determined me to publish this little Work, which is solely intended for those
Patients, who, by their Distance from Physicians, are deprived of their
Assistance. I shall not give a Detail of my Plan, which is very simple, in this
Part; but content myself with affirming, I have used my utmost Care to render
it the most useful I possibly could: and I dare hope, that if I have not fully
displayed its utmost Advantages, I have at least sufficiently shown those
pernicious Methods of treating Diseases, that should incontestably be avoided.
I am thoroughly convinced, the Design might be accomplished more completely
than I have done it; but those who are so capable of, do not attempt, it: I
happen to be less timid; and I hope that thinking Persons will rather take it
in good part of me, to have published a Book, the composing of which is rather
disagreeable from its very Facility; from the minute Details, which however are
indispensable; and from the Impossibility of discussing any Part of it
(consistently with the Plan) to the Bottom of the Subject; or of displaying any
new and useful Prospect. It may be Compared, in some Respects, to the Works of
a spiritual Guide, who was to write a Catechism for little Children.

At the same time I am not ignorant there have already been a few Books
calculated for Country Patients, who are remote from Succor: but some of these
though published with a very good Purpose, produce a bad Effect. Of this kind
are all Collections of Receipts or Remedies, without the least Description of
the Disease; and of course without just Directions for the Exhibition, or
Application, of them. Such, for Example, is the famous Collection of Madam
FOUQUET, and some more in the same manner. Some others approach toward my
Plan; but many of them have taken in too many Distempers, whence they are
become too voluminous. Besides, they have not dwelt sufficiently upon the Signs
of the Diseases; upon their Causes; the general Regimen in them, and the
Mismanagement of them. Their Receipts are not generally as simple, and as easy
to prepare, as they ought to be. In short, the greater Part of their Writers
seem, as they advanced, to have grown tired of their melancholy Task, and to
have hurried them out too expeditiously. There are but two of them, which I
must name with Respect; and which being proposed on a Plan very like my own,
are executed in a superior Manner, that merits the highest Acknowledgements of
the Public. One of these Writers is M. ROSEN, first Physician of the Kingdom
of Sweden; who, some Years since, employed his just Reputation to render the
best Services to his Country Men. He has made them retrench from the Almanacs
those ridiculous Tales; those extraordinary Adventures; those pernicious
astrological Injunctions, which there, as well as here, answer no End but that
of keeping up Ignorance, Credulity, Superstition, and the falsest Prejudices on
the interesting Articles of Health, of Diseases, and of Remedies. He has also
taken Care to publish simple plain Treatises on the most popular Distempers;
which he has substituted in the Place of the former Heap of Absurdities. These
concise Works however, which appear annually in their Almanacs, are not yet
translated from the Swedish, so that I was unqualified to make any Extracts
from them. The other is the Baron VAN SWEITEN, first Physician to their
Imperial Majesty's, who, about two Years since, has effected for the Use of the
Army, what I now attempt for sick People in the Country. Though my Work was
greatly advanced, when I first saw his, I have taken some Passages from it: and
had our Plans been exactly alike, I should imagine I had done the Public more
Service, by endeavoring to extend the Reading of his Book, than by publishing
a new one. Nevertheless, as he is silent on many Articles, of which I have
treated diffusively; as he has treated of many Distempers, which did not come
within my Plan; and has said nothing of some others which I could not omit; our
two Works, without entering into the Particulars of the superior Merit of the
Baron's, are very different, with Regard to the Subject of the Diseases: though
in such as we have both considered, I account it an Honor to me to find, we
have almost constantly proceeded upon the same Principles.

The present Work is by no means addressed to such Physicians, as are
thoroughly accomplished in their Profession; yet possibly, besides my
particular medical Friends, some others may read it. I beg the Favor of all
such fully to consider the Intention, the Spirit, of the Author, and not to
censure him, as a Physician, from the Composition of this Book. I even advise
them here rather to forbear perusing it; as a Production that can teach them
nothing. Such as read, in order to criticize, will find a much greater Scope
for exercising that Talent on the other Pamphlets I have published. It were
certainly unjust that a Performance, whose sole abstracted Object is the Health
and Service of my Countrymen, should subject me to any disagreeable
Consequences: and a Writer may fairly plead an Exemption from any Severity of
Censure, who has had the Courage to execute a work, which cannot pretend to a
Panegyric.

Having premised thus much in general, I must; enter into some Detail of those
Means, that seem the most likely to me, to facilitate the beneficial
Consequences, which, I hope, may result to others, from my present Endeavors.
I shall afterward give an Explanation of some Terms which I could not avoid
using, and which, perhaps, are not generally understood.

The Title of Advice to the People, was not suggested to me by an Illusion,
which might persuade me, this Book would become a Piece of Furniture, as it
were, in the House of every Peasant. Nineteen out of twenty will probably never
know of its Existence. Many may be unable to read, and still more unable to
understand, it, plain and simple as it is. I have principally calculated it for
the Perusal of intelligent and charitable Persons who live in the Country; and
who seem to have, as it were, a Call from Providence, to assist their less
intelligent poor Neighbors with their Advice.

It is obvious, that the first Gentlemen I have my Eye upon, are the Clergy.
There is not a single Village, a Hamlet, nor even the House of an Alien in the
Country, that has not a Right to the good Offices of some one of this Order:
And I assure myself there are a great Number of them, who, heartily affected
with the Distress of their ailing Flocks, have wished many hundred times, that
it were in their Power to give their Parishoners some bodily Help, at the very
time they were disposing them to prepare for Death; or so far to Delay the
Fatality of the Distemper, that the Sick might have an Opportunity of living
more religiously afterward. I shall think myself happy, if such truly
respectable Ecclesiastics shall find any Resources in this Performance, that
may conduce to the Accomplishment of their beneficent Intentions. Their Regard,
their Love for their People; their frequent Invitations to visit their
principal Neighbors; their Duty to root out all unreasonable Prejudices, and
Superstition; their Charity, their Learning; the Facility, with which their
general Knowledge in Physics, qualifies them to comprehend thoroughly all the
medical Truths, and Contents of this Piece, are so many Arguments to convince
me, that they will have the greatest Influence to procure that Reformation, in
the Administration of Physic, to poor Country People, which is so necessary,
so desirable an Object.

In the next Place, I dare assure myself of the Concurrence of Gentlemen of
Quality and Opulence, in their different Parishes and Estates, whose Advice is
highly regarded by their Inferiors; who are so powerfully, adapted to
discourage a wrong, and to promote a right Practice, of which they will easily
discern all the Advantages. The many Instances I have seen of their entering,
with great Facility, into all the Plan and Conduct of a Cure; their Readiness
and even Earnestness to comfort the Sick in their Villages; and the Generosity
with which they prevent their Necessities, induce me to hope, from judging of
those I have not the Pleasure to know, by these whom I have, that they will
eagerly embrace an Opportunity of promoting a new Method of doing good in their
Neighborhood. Real Charity will apprehend the great Probability there is of
doing Mischief, though with the best Intention, for want of a proper Knowledge of
material Circumstances; and the very Fear of that Mischief may sometimes
suspend the Exercise of such Charity; notwithstanding it must seize, with the
most humane Avidity, every Light that can contribute to its own beneficent
Exertion.

Thirdly, Persons who are rich, or at least in easy Circumstances, whom their
Disposition, their Employments, or the Nature of their Property, fixes in the
Country, where they are happy in doing good, must be delighted to have some
proper Directions, for the Conduct and Effectuation of their charitable
Intentions.

In every Village, where there are any Persons, of these three Conditions, they
are always readily apprized of the Distempers in it, by their poor Neighbors
coming to entreat a little Soup, Venice Treacle, Wines, Biscuits, or any thing
they imagine necessary for their sick Folks. In Consequence of some Questions
to the Bystanders, or of a Visit to the sick Person, they will judge at least
of what kind the Disease is; and by their prudent Advice they may be able to
prevent a Multitude of Evils. They will give them some Nitre instead of Venice
Treacle; Barley, or sweet Whey, in lieu of Soup. They will advise them to have
Recourse to Glysters, or Bathings of their Feet, rather than to Wine; and order
them Gruel rather than Biscuits. A Man would scarcely believe, 'till after the
Expiration of a few Years, how much Good might be effected by such proper
Regards, so easily comprehended, and often repeated. At first indeed there may
be some Difficulty in eradicating old Prejudices, and inveterately bad Customs;
but whenever these were removed, good Habits would strike forth full as strong
Roots, and I hope that no Person would be inclined to destroy them.

It may be unnecessary to declare, that I have more Expectation from the Care
and Goodness of the Ladies, than from those of their Spouses, their Fathers or
Brothers. A more active Charity, a more durable Patience, a more domestic Life;
a Sagacity, which I have greatly admired in many Ladies both in Town and
Country, that disposes them to observe, with great Exactness; and to unravel,
as it were, the secret Causes of the Symptoms, with a Facility that would do
Honor to very good Practitioners, and with a Talent adapted to engage the
Confidence of the Patient: -- All these, I say, are so many characteristical
Marks of their Vocation in this important and neighbourly Duty; nor are they a
few, who fulfill it with a Zeal, that merits the highest Commendation, and
renders them excellent Models for the Imitation of others.

Those who are entrusted with the Education of Youth, may also be supposed
sufficiently intelligent to take some Part in this Work; and I am satisfied
that much Good might result from their undertaking it. I heartily wish they
would not only study to distinguish the Distemper (in which the principal, but
by no means an insuperable, Difficulty consists; and to do which I hope I have
considerably put them in the Way) but I would have them learn also the Manner
of applying Remedies. Many of them shave; I have known some who bleed, and who
have given Glysters very expertly. This however all may easily learn; and
perhaps it would not be imprudent, if the Art of bleeding well and safely were
reckoned a necessary Qualification, when they are examined for their
Employment. These Faculties, that of estimating the Degree of a Fever, and how
to apply and to dress Blisters, may be of great Use within the Neighborhood of
their Residence. Their Schools, which are not frequently over-crouded, employ
but a few of their daily Hours; the greater Part of them have no Land to
cultivate; and to what better Use can they apply their Leisure, than to the
Assistance and Comfort of the Sick? The moderate Price of their Service may be
so ascertained, as to incommode no Person; and this little Emolument might
render their own Situation the more agreeable: besides which, these little
Avocations might prevent their being drawn aside sometimes, by Reason of their
Facility and frequent Leisure, so as to contract a Habit of drinking too often.
Another Benefit would also accrue from accustoming them to this kind of
Practice, which is, that being habituated to the Care of sick People, and
having frequent Occasions to write, they would be the better qualified, in
difficult Cases, to advise with those, who were thought further necessary to be
consulted.

Doubtless, even among Laborers, there may be many, for some such I have
known, who being endued with good natural Sense and Judgment, and abounding
with Benevolence, will read this Book with Attention, and eagerly extend the
Maxims and the Methods it recommends.

And finally I hope that many Surgeons, who are spread about the Country, and
who practice Physic in their Neighborhood, will peruse it; will carefully
enter into the Principles established in it, and will conform to its
Directions; though a little different perhaps from such as they may have hitherto
practiced. They will perceive a Man may learn at any Age, and of any Person;
and it may be hoped they will not think it too much Trouble, to reform some of
their Notions in a Science, which is not properly within their Profession (and
to the Study of which they were never instituted) by those of a Person, who is
solely employed in it, and who has had many Assistances of which they are
deprived.

Midwives may also find their Attendance more efficacious, as soon as they are
thoroughly disposed to be better informed.

It were heartily to be wished, that the greater Part of them had been better
instructed in the Art they profess. The Instances of Mischief that might have
been avoided, by their being better qualified, are frequent enough to make us
with there may be no Repetition of them, which it may be possible to prevent.
Nothing seems impossible, when Persons in Authority are zealously inclined to
prevent every such Evil; and it is time they should be properly informed of one
so essentially hurtful to Society.

The Prescriptions I have given consist of the most simple Remedies, and I have
adjoined the Manner of preparing them so fully, that I hope no Person can be at
any Loss in that Respect. At the same time, that no one may imagine they are
the less useful and efficacious for their Simplicity, I declare, they are the
same I order in the City for the most opulent Patients. This Simplicity is
founded in Nature: the Mixture, or rather the Confusion, of a Multitude of
Drugs is ridiculous. If they have the very same Virtues, for what Purpose are
they blended? It were more judicious to confine ourselves to that, which is the
most effectual. If their Virtues are different, the Effect of one destroys, or
lessens, the Effect of the other; and the Medicine ceases to prove a Remedy.

I have given no Direction, which is not very practicable and easy to execute;
nevertheless it will be discernible, that some few are not calculated for the
Multitude, which I readily grant. However I have given them, because I did not
lose Sight of some Persons; who, though not strictly of the Multitude, or
Peasantry, do live in the Country, and cannot always procure a Physician as
soon, or for as long a Time, as they gladly would.

A great Number of the Remedies are entirely of the Country Growth, and may be
prepared there; but there are others which must be had from the Apothecaries. I
have set down the Price, This oeconomical Information was doubtless very
proper, where our judicious and humane Author published it; but notwithstanding
his excellent Motives for giving it, we think it less necessary here, where
many Country Gentlemen furnish themselves with larger or smaller Medicine
Chests, for the Benefit of their poor sick Neighbors; and in a Country, where
the settled parochial Poor are provided with Medicines, as well as with other
Necessaries, at a parochial Expense. Besides, though we would not suppose our
Country Apothecaries less considerate or kind than others, we acknowledge our
Apprehension, that such a Valuation of their Drugs (some of which often vary in
their Price) might dispose a few of them, rather to discountenance the
Extension of a Work, so well intended and excuted as Dr. TISSOT's; a Work,
which may not be wholly unuseful to some of the most judicious among them, and
will he really necessary for the rest. K.
at which I am persuaded all the Country Apothecaries will retail them to a
Peasant, who is not esteemed a rich one. I have marked the Price, not from any
Apprehension of their being imposed on in the Purchase, for this I do not
apprehend: but that, seeing the Cheapness of the Prescription, they may not be
afraid to buy it. The necessary Dose of the Medicine, for each Disease, may
generally be purchased for less Money than would be expended on Meat, Wine,
Biscuit, and other improper things. But should the Price of the Medicine,
however moderate, exceed the Circumstances of the Sick, doubtless the Common
Purse, or the Poors-Box will defray it. Moreover there are in many Country
Places Noblemens Houses, some of whom charitably contribute an annual Sum
toward buying of Medicines for poor Patients; without adding to which Sum, I
would only entreat the Favor of each of them to alter the Objects of it, and
to allow their sick Neighbors the Remedies and the Regimen directed here,
instead of such as they formerly distributed among them.

It may still be objected, that many Country Places are very distant from large
Towns; from which Circumstance a poor Peasant is incapable of procuring himself
a seasonable and necessary Supply in his Illness. I readily admit, that in
fact, there are many Villages very remote from such Places as Apothecaries
reside in. Yet, if we except a few among the Mountains, there are but very few
of them above three or four Leagues from some little Town, where there always
lives some Surgeon, or some Vender of Drugs. Perhaps however, even at this
Time, indeed, there may not be many thus provided; but they will take Care to
furnish themselves with such Materials, as soon as they have a good Prospect of
selling them, which may constitute a small, but new, Branch of Commerce for
them. I have carefully set down the Time, for which each Medicine will keep,
without spoiling. There is a very frequent Occasion for some particular ones,
and of such the Schoolmasters may lay in a Stock. I also imagine, if they
heartily enter into my Views, they will furnish themselves with such
Implements, as may be necessary in the Course of their Attendance. If any of
them were unable to provide themselves with a sufficient Number of good
Lancets, an Apparatus for Cupping, and a Glyster Syringe (for want of which
last a Pipe and Bladder may be occasionally substituted) the Parish might
purchase them, and the same Instruments might do for the succeeding
Schoolmaster. It is hardly to be expected, that all Persons in that Employment
would be able, or even inclined, to learn the Way of using them with Address;
but one Person who did, might be sufficient for whatever Occasions should occur
in this Way in some contigious Villages; with very little Neglect of their
Functions among their Scholars.

Daily Instances of Persons, who come from different Parts to consult me,
without being capable of answering the Questions I ask them, and the like
Complaints of many other Physicians on the same Account, engaged me to write
the last Chapter of this Work. I shall conclude this Introduction with some
Remarks, necessary to facilitate the Knowledge of a few Terms, which were
unavoidable in the Course of it.

The Pulse commonly beats in a Person in good Health, from the Age of eighteen
or twenty to about sixty-six Years, between sixty and seventy Times in a
Minute. It sometimes comes short of this in old Persons, and in very young
Children it beats quicker: until the Age of three or four Years the Difference
amounts at least to a third; after which it diminishes by Degrees.

An intelligent Person, who shall often touch and attend to his own Pulse, and
frequently to other People's, will be able to judge, with sufficient Exactness,
of the Degree of a Fever in a sick Person. If the Strokes are but one third
above their Number in a healthy State, the Fever is not very violent: which it
is as often as it amounts to half as many more as in Health. It is very highly
dangerous, and may be generally pronounced mortal, when there are two Strokes
in the Time of one. We must not however judge of the Pulse solely by its
Quickness, but by its Strength or Weakness; its Hardness or Softness; and the
Regularity or Irregularity of it.

There is no Occasion to define the strong and the feeble Pulse. The Strength
of it generally affords a good Prognostic, and, supposing it too strong, it may
easily be lowered. The weak Pulse is often very menacing.

If the Pulse, in meeting the Touch, excites the Notion of a dry Stroke, as
though the Artery consisted of Wood, or of some Metal, we term it hard; the
opposite to which is called soft, and generally promises better. If it be
strong and yet soft, even though it be quick, it may be considered as a very
hopeful Circumstance. But if it is strong and hard, that is commonly a Token of
an Inflammation, and indicates Bleeding and the cooling Regimen. Should it be,
at the same time, small, quick and hard, the Danger is indeed very pressing.

We call that Pulse regular, a continued Succession of whose Strokes are made
in equal Intervals of Time; and in which Intervals not a single Stroke is
wanting (since if that is its State, it is called an intermitting Pulse.) The
Beats or Pulsations are also supposed to resemble each other so exactly in
Quality too, that one is not strong, and the next alternately feeble.

As long as the State of the Pulse is promising, and Respiration or Breathing
is free; when the Brain does not seem to be greatly affected; while the Patient
takes his Medicines, and they are attended with the Consequence that was
expected; and he both preserves his Strength pretty well, and continues
sensible of his Situation, we may reasonably hope for his Cure. As often as
all, or the greater Number of these characterizing Circumstances are wanting,
he is in very considerable Danger.

The Stoppage of Perspiration is often mentioned in the Course of this Work. We
call the Discharge of that Fluid which continually passes off through the Pores
of the Skin, Transpiration; and which, though invisible, is very considerable.
For if a Person in Health eats and drinks to the Weight of eight Pounds daily,
he does not discharge four of them by Stool and Urine together, the Remainder
passing off by insensible Transpiration. It may easily be conceived, that if so
considerable a Discharge is stopped, or considerably lessened; and if this Fluid,
which ought to transpire through the Skin, should be transferred to any inward
Part, it must occasion some dangerous Complaint. In fact this is one of the
most frequent Causes of Diseases.

To conclude very briefly -- All the Directions in the following Treatise are
solely designed for such Patients, as cannot have the Attendance of a
Physician. I am far from supposing, they ought to exclude one, even in those
Diseases, of which I have treated in the fullest Manner: and the Moment a
Physician arrives, they ought to be laid aside. The Confidence reposed in him
should be entire, or there should be none: the Success of the Event is founded
in that. It is his Province to judge of the Disease, to select Medicines
against it; and it is easy to foresee the Inconveniences that may follow, from
proposing to him to consult with any others, preferably to those he may choose
to consult with; only because they have succeeded in the Treatment of another
Patient, whose Case they suppose to have been nearly the same with the present
Case. This were much the same, as to order a Shoemaker to make a Shoe for one
Foot by the Pattern of another Shoe, rather than by the Measure he has just
taken. N. B. Though a great Part of this judicious Introduction is less
applicable to the political Circumstances of the British Empire, than to those
of the Government for which it was calculated; we think the good Sense and the
unaffected Patriotism which animate it, will supercede any Apology for our
translating it. -- The serious Truth is this, that a thorough Attention to
Population seems never to have been more expedient for ourselves, than after so
bloody and expensive, though such a glorious and successful War, while our
enterprizing Neighbors, who will never be our Friends, are so earnest to
recruit their Numbers; to increase their Agriculture; and to force a Vent for
their Manufactures, which cannot be considerably effected, without a sensible
Detriment to our own. Besides which, the unavoidable Drain from the People
here, toward an effectual Cultivation, Improvement, and Security of our
Conquests, demands a further Consideration. K.


ADVICE TO THE PEOPLE, With Respect to their HEALTH.
CHAPTER I. Of the most usual Causes of popular Maladies.
SECT. 1. THE most frequent Causes of Diseases commonly incident to Country
People are, 1. Excessive Labor, continued for a very considerable Time. --
Sometimes they sink down at once in a State of Exhaustion and Faintness, from
which they seldom recover: but they are oftener attacked with some inflammatory
Disease, as a Quinsey, a Pleurisy, or an Inflammation of the Breast.

There are two Methods of preventing these Evils: one is, to avoid the Cause
which produces them; but this is frequently impossible. Another is, when such
excessive Labor has been unavoidable, to allay their Fatigue, by a free Use of
some temperate refreshing Drink; especially by sweet Whey, by Butter-milk, or
by This supposes they are not greatly heated, as well as fatigued, by their
Labor or Exercise, in which Circumstance free and sudden Draughts of cooling
Liquors might be very pernicious; and it evidently also supposes those Drinks
to be thus given, rather in Summer than in very cold Weather, as the Juice of
the unripe Grapes, and the other fresh Fruits sufficiently ascertain the Season
of the Year. We think the Addition of Vinegar to their Water will scarcely ever
be necessary in this or the adjoining Island, on such Occasions. The Caution
recommended in this Note is indeed abundantly enforced by Dr. TISSOT, 4: but
considering the Persons to whom this Work is more particularly addressed, we
were willing to prevent every Possibility of a Mistake, in so necessary, and
sometimes so vital, a Point. K.
Water, to a Quart of which a Wine-glass of Vinegar may be added; or instead of
that, the expressed Juice of Grapes not fully ripe, or even of Goosberies or
Cherries: which wholesome and agreeable Liquors are refreshing and cordial. I
shall treat a little lower, of inflammatory Disorders. The Inanition or
Emptiness, though accompanied with Symptoms different from the former, has yet
some Affinity to them, with Respect to their Cause, which is a kind of general
Exsiccation or Dryness. I have known some cured from this Cause by Whey,
succeeded by tepid Baths, and afterward by Cow's Milk; for in such Cases hot
Medicines and high Nourishment are fatal.

2. There is another Kind of Exhaustion or Emptiness, which may be termed real
Emptiness, and is the Consequence of great Poverty, the Want of sufficient
Nourishment, bad Food, unwholesome Drink, and excessive Labor. In Cases thus
circumstances, good Soups and a little Wine are very proper. Such hap^^n
however very seldom in this Country: I believe they are frequent in some
others, especially in many Provinces of France.

3. A second and very common Source of Disorders arises, from Peoples' lying
down and reposing, when very hot, in a cold Place. This at once stops
Perspiration, the Matter of which being thrown upon some internal Part, proves
the Cause of many violent Diseases, particularly of Quinseys, Inflammations of
the Breast, Pleurisies, and inflammatory Cholics. These Evils, from this Cause,
may always be avoided by avoiding the Cause, which is one of those that destroy
a great Number of People. However, when it has occurred, as soon as the first
Symptoms of the Malady are perceivable, which sometimes does not happen till
several Days after, the Patient should immediately be bled; his Legs should be
put into Water moderately hot, and he should drink plentifully of the tepid
Infusion marked No. 1. Such Assistances frequently prevent the Increase of
these Disorders; which, on the contrary, are greatly aggravated, if hot
Medicines are given to sweat the Patient.

4. A third Cause is drinking cold Water, when a Person is extremely hot. This
acts in the same Manner with the second; but its Consequences are commonly more
sudden and violent. I have seen most terrible Examples of it, in Quinseys,
Inflammations of the Breast, Cholics, Inflammations of the Liver, and all the
Parts of the Belly, with prodigious Swellings, Vomitings, Suppressions of
Urine, and inexpressible Anguish. The most available Remedies in such Cases,
from this Cause, are, a plentiful Bleeding at the Onset, a very copious
Drinking of warm Water, to which one fifth Part of Whey should be added; or of
the Ptisan No. 2, or of an Emulsion of Almonds, all taken warm. Fomentations of
warm Water should also be applied to the Throat, the Breast and Belly, with
Glysters of the same, and a little Milk. In this Case, as well as in the
preceding one, ( 3.) a Semicupium, or Half-bath of warm Water has sometimes
been attended with immediate Relief. It seems really astonishing, that
laboring People should so often habituate themselves to this pernicious
Custom, which they know to be very dangerous even to their Beasts. There are
none of them, who will not prevent their Horses from drinking while they are
hot; especially if they are just going to put them up. Each of them knows that
if he lets them drink in that State, they might possibly burst with it;
nevertheless he is not afraid of incurring the like Danger himself. However,
this is not the only Case, in which the Peasant seems to have more Attention to
the Health of his Cattle, than to his own.

5. The fourth Cause, which indeed affects every Body, but more particularly
the Labourer, is, the Inconstancy of the Weather. We shift all at once, many
times a Day, from Heat to Cold, and from Cold to Heat, in a more remarkable
Manner, and more suddenly, than in most other Countries. This makes Distempers
from Defluction and Cold so common with us: and it should make us careful to go
rather a little more warmly clothed, than the Season may seem to require; to
have Recourse to our Winter-cloathing early in Autumn, and not to part with it
too early in the Spring. Prudent Laborers, who strip while they are at Work,
take care to put on their Clothes in the Evening when they return home. This
good Advice is enforced in a Note, by the Editor of Lions, who observes, it
should be still more closely attended to, in Places, where Rivers, Woods, or
Mountains retain, as it were, a considerable Humidity; and where the Evenings
are, in every Season, cold and moist. It is a very proper Caution too in our
own variable Climate, and in many of our Colonies in North America. K.
Those, who from Negligence, are satisfied with hanging them upon their Country
Tools, frequently experience, on their Return, the very unhappy Effects of it.
There are some, though not many Places, where the Air itself is unwholesome, more
from its particular (Quality, than from its Changes of Temperature, as at
Villeneuve, and still more at Noville, and in some other Villages situated
among the Marshes which border on the Rhone. These Countries are particularly
subject to intermitting Fevers, of which I shall treat briefly hereafter.

6. Such sudden Changes are often attended with great Showers of Rain, and even
cold Rain, in the middle of a very hot day; when the Labourer who was bathed,
as it were, in a hot Sweat, is at once moistened in cold Water; which occasions
the same Distempers, as the sudden Transition from Heat to Cold, and requires
the same Remedies. If the Sun or a hot Air succeed immediately to such a
Shower, the Evil is considerably lighter: but if the Cold continues, many are
often greatly incommoded by it.

A Traveller is sometimes thoroughly and unavoidably wet with Mud; the ill
Consequence of which is often inconsiderable, provided he changes his Clothes
immediately when he sets up. I have known fatal Pleurisies ensue from omitting
this Caution. Whenever the Body or the Limbs are wet, nothing can be more
useful than bathing them in warm Water. If the Legs only have been wet, it may
be sufficient to bath them. I have radically, thoroughly, cured Persons subject
to violent Cholics, as often as their Feet were wet, by persuading them to
pursue this Advice. The Bath proves still more effectual, if a little Soap be
dissolved in it.

7. A fifth Cause, which is seldom attended to, probably indeed because it
produces less violent Consequences, and yet is certainly hurtful, is the common
Custom in all Villages, of having their Ditches or Dunghills directly under
their Windows. Corrupted Vapors are continually exhaling from them, which in
time cannot fail of being prejudicial, and must contribute to produce putrid
Diseases. Those who are accustomed to the Smell, become insensible of it: but
the Cause nevertheless, does not cease to be unwholesomely active; and such as
are unused to it perceive the Impression in all its Force.

8. There are some Villages, in which, after the Curtain Lines are erased,
watery marshy Places remain in the Room of them. The Effect of this is still
more dangerous, because that putrified Water, which stagnates during the hot
Season, suffers its Vapors to exhale more easily, and more abundantly, than
that in the Curtain Lines did. Having set out for Pully le Grand in 1759, on
Account of an epidemical putrid Fever which raged there, I was sensible, on
traversing the Village, of the Infection from those Marshes; nor could I doubt
of their being the Cause of this Disease, as well as of another like it, which
had prevailed there five Years before. In other Respects the Village is
wholesomly situated. It were to be wished such Accidents were obviated by
avoiding these stagnated Places: or, at least, by removing them and the
Dunghills, as far as possible from the Spot, where we live and lodge.

9. To this Cause may also be added the Neglect of the Peasants to air their
Lodgings. It is well known that too close an Air occasions the most perplexing
malignant Fevers; and the poor Country People breath no other in their own
Houses. Their Lodgings, which are very small, and which notwithstanding
enclose, (both Day and Night) the Father, Mother, and seven or eight Children,
besides some Animals, are never kept open during six Months in the Year, and
very seldom during the other six. I have found the Air so bad in many of these
Houses, that I am persuaded, if their Inhabitants did not often go out into the
free open Air, they must all perish in a little time. It is easy, however, to
prevent all the Evils arising from this Source, by opening the Windows daily:
so very practicable a Precaution must be followed with the happiest
Consequences.

10. I consider Drunkenness as a sixth Cause, not indeed as producing
epidemical Diseases, but which destroys, as it were, by Retail, at all times,
and every where. The poor Wretches, who abandon themselves to it, are subject
to frequent Inflammations of the Breast, and to Pleurisies, which often carry
them off in the Flower of their Age. If they sometimes escape through these
violent Maladies, they sink, a long time before the ordinary Approach of old
Age, into all its Infirmities; and especially into an Asthma, which terminates
in a Dropsy of the Breast. Their Bodies worn out by Excess, do not comply and
concur, as they ought, with the Force or Operation of Remedies; and Diseases of
Weakness, resulting from this Cause, are almost always incurable. It seems
happy enough, that Society loses nothing in parting with these Subjects, who
are a Dishonor to it; and whose brutal Souls are, in some Measure, dead, long
before their Carcases.

11. The Provisions of the common People are also frequently one Cause of
popular Maladies. This happens 1st, whenever the Corn, not well ripened, or not
well got in, in bad Thus I have ventured to translate (...) ( Summers) to apply
it to this and the neighboring Islands. Their Harvests in Swisserland perhaps
are earlier, and may occur in August, and that of some particular Grain,
probably still earlier. K.
Harvests, has contracted an unwholesome Quality. Fortunately however this is
seldom the Case; and the Danger attending the Use of it may be lessened by some
Precautions, such as those of washing and drying the Grain completely; of
mixing a little Wine with the Dough, in kneading it; by allowing it a little
more Time to swell or rise, and by baking it a little more. 2dly, The fairer
and better saved Part of the Wheat is sometimes damaged in the Farmer's House:
either because he does not take due Care of it, or because he has no convenient
Place to preserve it, only from one Summer to the next. It has often happened
to me, on entering one of these bad Houses to be struck with the Smell of Wheat
that has been spoiled. Nevertheless, there are known and easy Methods to
provide against this by a little Care; though I shall not enter into a Detail
of them. It is sufficient to make the People sensible, that since their chief
Sustenance consists of Corn, their Health must necessarily be impaired by what
is bad. 3dly, That Wheat, which is good, is often made into bad Bread, by not
letting it rise sufficiently; by baking it too little, and by keeping it too
long. All these Errors have their troublesome Consequences on those who eat it;
but in a greater Degree on Children and Valetudinarians, or weakly People.

Tarts or Cakes may be considered as an Abuse of Bread, and this in some
Villages is increased to a very pernicious Height. The Dough is almost
constantly bad, and often unleavened, ill baked, greasy, and stuffed with
either Fat or sour Ingredients, which compound one of the most indigestible
Aliments imaginable. Women and Children consume the most of this Food, and are
the very Subjects for whom it is the most improper: little Children especially,
who live sometimes for many successive Days on these Tarts, are, for the
greater Part, unable to digest them perfectly. Hence they receive a The Abuse
just mentioned can scarcely be intended to forbid the moderate Use of good
Pastry, the Dough of which is well raised and well baked, the Flour and other
Ingredients found, and the Paste not overcharged with Butter, even though it
were sweet and fresh. But the Abuse of Alum and other pernicious Materials
introduced by our Bakers, may too justly be considered as one horrible Source
of those Diseases of Children, etc. which our humane and judicious Author
mentions here. What he adds, concerning the Pastries being rendered still more
unwholesome by the sour Fruits sometimes baked in it, is true with Respect to
those Children and others, who are liable to Complaints from Acidities
abounding in the Bowels; and for all those who are ricketty or scrophulous,
from a cold and viscid State of their Humors. But as to healthy sanguine
Children, who are advanced and lively, and others of a sanguine or bilious
Temperament, we are advanced and lively, and others of a sanguine or bilious
Temperament, we are not to suppose a moderate Variety of this Food injurious to
them; when we consider, that the Sharpness and Crudity of the Fruit is
considerably corrected by the long Application of Fire; and that they are the
Produce of Summer, when Bilious Diseases are most frequent. This suggests
however no bad Hint against making them immoderately sweet. K.
Source of Obstructions in the Bowels of the Belly, and of a slimy Viscidity or
Thickishness, throughout the Mass of Humors, which throws them into various
Diseases from Weakness; slow Fevers, a Hectic, the Rickets, the King's Evil,
and Feebleness, for the miserable Remainder of their Days. Probably indeed
there is nothing more unwholesome than Dough not sufficiently leavened, ill
baked, greasy and soured by the Addition of Fruits. Besides, if we consider
these Tarts in an oeconomical View, they must be found inconvenient for the
Peasant, on that Account too.

Some other Causes of Maladies may also be referred to the Article of Food,
though less grievous and less frequent, into a full Detail of which it is very
difficult to enter: I shall therefore conclude that Article with this general
Remark; that it is the Care which Peasants usually take in eating slowly, and
in chewing very well, that very greatly lessens the Dangers from a bad Regimen:
and I am convinced they constitute one of the greatest Causes of that Health
they enjoy. We may further add indeed the Exercise which the Peasant uses, and
his long abiding in the open Air, where he passes three fourths of his Life;
besides (which are also considerable Advantages) his happy Custom of going soon
to Bed, and of rising very early. It were to be wished, that in these Respects,
and perhaps on many other Accounts, the Inhabitants of the Country were
effectually proposed as Models for reforming the Citizens.

12. We should not omit, in enumerating the Causes of Maladies among Country
People, the Construction of their Houses, a great many of which either lean, as
it were, close to a higher Ground, or are sunk a little into the Earth. Each of
these Situations subjects them to considerable Humidity; which is certain
greatly to incommode the Inhabitants, and to spoil their Provisions, if they
have any Quantity in Store; which, as we have observed, is another, and not the
least important, Source of their Diseases. A hardy Labourer is not immediately
sensible of the bad Influence of this moist and marshy Habitation; but they
operate at the long Run, and I have abundantly observed their most evident bad
Effects, especially on Women in Childbed, on Children, and in Persons
recovering of a preceding Disease. It would be easy to prevent this
Inconvenience, by raising the Ground on which the House stood, some or several
Inches above the Level of the adjacent Soil, by a Bed of Gravel, of small
Flints, pounded Bricks, Coals, or such other Materials; and by avoiding to
build immediately close to, or, as it were, under a much higher Soil. This
Object, perhaps, may well deserve the Attention of the Public; and I earnestly
advise as many as do build, to observe the necessary Precautions on this Head.
Another, which would cost still less Trouble, is to give the Front of their
Houses an Exposure to the South-East. This Exposure, supposing all other
Circumstances of the Building and its Situation to be alike, is both the most
wholesome and most advantageous. I have seen it, notwithstanding, very often
neglected, without the least Reason being assigned for not preferring it.

These Admonitions may possibly be thought of little Consequence by three
fourths of the People. I take the Liberty of reminding them, however that they
are more important than they may be supposed; and so many Causes concur to the
Destruction of Men, that none of the Means should be neglected, which may
contribute to their Preservation.

13. The Country People in Swisserland drink, either 1, pure Water, 2, some
Wine, 3, Perry, made from wild Pears, or sometimes Cider from Apples, and, 4, a
small Liquor which they call Piquette, that is, Water, which has fermented with
the Cake or Husks of the Grapes, after their Juice has been expressed. Water
however is their most general Drink, Wine rarely falling in their way, but when
they are employed by rich Folks; or when they can spare Money enough for a
Debauch. Fruit-Wines and the This Word's occurring in the plural Number will
probably imply, the Swiss make more than one Species of this small Drink, by
pouring Water on the Cake or Remainder of their other Fruits, after they have
been expressed; as our People in the Cider, and perhaps in the Perry, Counties,
make what they call Cyderkin, Perki^, etc. It should seem too from this
Section, that the labourious Countrymen in Swisserland drink no Malt-Liquor,
though the Ingredients may be supposed to grow in their Climate. Now Beer, of
different Strength, making the greater Part of our most common Drink, it may be
proper to observe here, that when it is not strong and heatly, but a middling
well-brewed Small-beer, neither too new, nor hard or sour, it is full as
wholesome a Drink for laborious People in Health as any other, and perhaps
generally preferable to Water for such; which may be too thin and light for
those who are unaccustomed to it; and more dangerous too, when the laboring
Man is very hot, as well as thirsty. The holding a Mouthful of any weak cold
Liquor in the Mouth, without swallowing it, 'till it becomes warm there, and
spurting it out before a Draught is taken down would be prudent; and in Case of
great Heat, to take the requisite Quantity afterward, rather at two Draughts,
with a little Interval between them, than to swallow the whole precipitately at
one, would be more safe, and equally refreshing, though perhaps less grateful.
K.
Piquettes are not used in all Parts of the Country; they are not made in all
Years; and keep but for some Months.

Our Waters, in general, are pretty good; so that we have little Occasion to
trouble ourselves about purifying them: and they are well known in those
Provinces where they are chiefly and necessarily used. The bad Quality of Water
is another common Cause of Country Diseases; either where the Waters are
unwholesome, from the Soils in which they are found, as when they flow through,
or settle, on Banks of Shells; or where they become such, from the
Neighborhood of, or Drainings from, Dunghills and Marshes.

When Water is unclean and turbid, it is generally sufficient to let it settle
in order to clear itself, by dropping its Sediment. But if that is not
effected, or if it be slimy or muddy, it need only be poured into a large
Vessel, half filled with fine Sand, or, for want of that, with Chalk; and then
to shake and stir it about heartily for some Minutes. When this Agitation is
over, the Sand, in falling to the Bottom of the Vessel, will attract some of
the Foulness suspended in the Water. Or, which is still better, and very easy
to do, two large Vessels may be set near together, one of which should be
placed considerably higher than the other. The highest should be half filled
with Sand. Into this the turbid, or slimy muddy Water is to be poured; whence
it will filter itself through the Body of Sand, and pass off clear by an
Opening or Orifice made at the Bottom of the Vessel; and fall from thence into
the lower one, which serves as a Reservoir. When the Water is impregnated with
Particles from the Beds of Selenites, or of any Spar (which Water we call hard,
because Soap will not easily dissolve in it, and Pulls and other farinacious
Substances grow hard instead of soft, after boiling in it) such Water should be
exposed to the Sun, or boiled with the Addition of some Pulls, or leguminous
Vegetables, or Bread toasted or untoasted. When Water is in its putrid State,
it may be kept till it recovers its natural sweet one: but if this cannot be
waited for, a little Sea Salt should be dissolved in it, or some Vinegar may be
added, in which some grateful aromatic Plant has been infused. It frequently
happens, that the public Wells are corrupted by foul Mud at the Bottom, and by
different Animals which tumble in and putrify there. Drinking Snow-Water should
be avoided, when the Snow is but lately fallen, as it seems to be the Cause of
those swelling wenny Throats in the Inhabitants of some Mountains, and of
epidemic Cholics in many Persons. As Water is so continually used, great Care
should be taken to have what is good. Bad Water, like bad Air, is one of the
most general Causes of Diseases; that which produces the greater Number of
them, the most grievous ones; and often introduces such as are epidemical, E.
L, i, e, the Editor of Lions.


The pernicious Methods taken to improve or meliorate, as it is falsely called,
bad Wines, are not as yet sufficiently practiced among us, for me to treat of
them here: and as our Wines are not hurtful, of themselves, they become hurtful
only from their Quantity. The Consumption of made Wines and Piquettes is but
inconsiderable, and I have not hitherto known of any ill Effects from them, so
that our Liquors cannot be considered as Causes of Distempers in our Country;
but in Proportion to our Abuse of them by Excess. The Case is differently
circumstanced in some Many Persons, with a Design to preserve their Wines, add
Shot to them, or Preparations of Lead, Alum, etc. The Government should forbid,
under the most severe Penalties, all such Adulterations as tend to introduce
the most painful Cholics, Obstructions, and a long Train of Evils, which it
sometimes proves difficult to trace to this peculiar Cause; while they shorten
the Lives of, or cruelly torment such over credulous Purchasers, as lay in a
Stock of bad Wines, or drink of them, without distinction, from every Wine
Merchant or Tavern. E. L.

This Note, from the Editor at Lions, we have sufficient Reason for retaining
here. K.


other Countries; and it is the Province of Physicians who reside in them, to
point out to their Countrymen the Methods of preserving their Health; as well
as the proper and necessary Remedies to their Sickness.

CHAPTER II. Of the Causes which aggravate the Diseases of the People. General
Considerations.
SECT. 14. THE Causes already enumerated in the first Chapter occasion
Diseases; and the bad Regimen, or Conduct of the People, on the Invasion of
them, render them still more perplexing, and very often mortal.

There is a prevailing Prejudice among them, which is every Year attended with
the Deaths of some Hundreds in this Country, and it is this -- That all
Distempers are cured by Sweat; and that to procure Sweat, they must take
Abundance of hot and heating things, and keep themselves very hot. This is a
Mistake in both Respects, very fatal to the Population of the State; and it
cannot be too much inculcated into Country People; that by thus endeavoring to
force Sweating, at the very Beginning of a Disease, they are, with great
Probability, taking Pains to kill themselves. I have seen some Cases, in which
the continual Care to provoke this Sweating, has as manifestly killed the
Patient, as if a Ball had been shot through his Brains; as such a precipitate
and untimely Discharge carries off the thinner Part of the Blood, leaving the
Mass more dry more viscid and inflamed. Now as in all acute Diseases (if we
except a very few, and those too much less frequent) the Blood is already too
thick; such a Discharge must evidently increase the Disorder, by cooperating
with its Cause. Instead of forcing out the watery, the thinner Part of the
Blood, we should rather endeavor to increase it. There is not a single Peasant
perhaps who does not say, when he has a Pleurisy, or an Inflammation of his
Breast, that his Blood is too thick, and that it cannot circulate. On seeing it
in the Basin after Bleeding, he finds it black, dry, burnt; these are his very
Words. How strange is it then, that common Sense should not assure him, that,
far from forcing out the Serum, the watery Part, of such a Blood by sweating,
there is a Necessity to increase it?

15. But supposing it were as certain, as it is erroneous, that Sweating was
beneficial at the Beginning of Diseases, the Means which they use to excite it
would not prove the less fatal. The first Endeavor is, to stifle the Patient
with the Heat of a close Apartment, and a Load of Covering. Extraordinary Care
is taken to prevent a Breath of fresh Air's getting into the Room; from which
Circumstance, the Air already in it is speedily and extremely corrupted; and
such a Degree of Heat is procured by the Weight of the Patient's Bed-cloaths,
that these two Causes alone are sufficient to excite a most ardent Fever, and
an Inflammation of the Breast, even in a healthy Man. More than once have I
found myself seized with a Difficulty of breathing, on entering such Chambers,
from which I have been immediately relieved, on obliging them to open all the
Windows. Persons of Education must find a Pleasure, I conceive, in making
People understand on these Occasions, which are so frequent, that the Air being
more indispensibly necessary to us, if possible, than Water is to a Fish, our
Health must immediately suffer, whenever that ceases to be pure; and in
assuring them also, that nothing corrupts it sooner than those Vapors, which
continually steam from the Bodies of many Persons enclosed within a little
Chamber, from which the Air is excluded. The Absurdity of such Conduct is a
self-evident Certainty: let in a little fresh Air on these miserable Patients,
and lessen the oppressing Burden of their Coverings, and you generally see
upon the Spot, their Fever and Oppression, their Anguish and Raving, to abate.

16. The second Method taken to raise a Sweat in these Patients is, to give
them nothing but hot things, especially Venice Treacle, Wine, or some This
Word, which must be of German, not of French, Extraction, strictly signifies,
Drink for a Fall, as we say Pulvis ^d C^sum, etc. Powder for a Fall, or a
supposed inward Bruise. Dr. TISSOT informs me it is otherwise called the
vulnerary Herbs, or the Swiss Tea; and that it is an injudicious Farrago or
Medley of Herbs and Flowers, blended with Bitters, with stimulating, harsh and
astringent Ingredients, being employed indiscriminately in all their Distempers
by the Country People in Swisserland. K.
Faltranc, the greater Part of the Ingredients of which are dangerous, whenever
there is an evident Fever; besides Saffron, which is still more pernicious. In
all feverish Disorders we should gently cool, and keep the Belly moderately
open; while the Medicines just mentioned both heat and bind! and hence we may
easily judge of their inevitable ill Consequences. A healthy Person would
certainly be seized with an inflammatory Fever, on taking the same Quantity of
Wine, of Venice Treacle, or of Faltranc, which the Peasant takes now and then,
when he is attacked by one of these Disorders. How then should a sick Person
escape dying by them? (...) he generally does, and sometimes with astonishing
Speed. I have published some dreadful Instances of such Fatality some Years
since, in another Treatise. In fact they still daily occur, and unhappily every
Person may observe some of them in his own Neighborhood.

17. But I shall be told perhaps, that Diseases are often carried off by Sweat,
and that we ought to be guided by Experience. To this I answer, it is very
true, that Sweating cures some particular Disorders, as it were, at their very
Onset; for Instance, those Stitches that are called spurious or false
Pleurisies, some rheumatic Pains, and some Colds or Destructions. But this only
happens when the Disorders depend solely and simply on stopped or abated
Perspiration, to which such Pain instantly succeeds; where immediately, before
the Fever has thickened the Blood, and inflamed the Humors; and where before
any internal Infarction, any Load is formed, some warm Drinks are given, such
as Faltranc and Honey; which, by restoring Transpiration, remove the very Cause
of the Disorder. Nevertheless, even in such a Case, great Care should be had
not to raise too violent a Commotion in the Blood, which would rather restrain,
than promote Sweat; to effect which Elder-flowers are in my Opinion preferable
to Faltranc. Sweating is also of Service in Diseases, when their Causes are
extinguished, as it were, by plentiful Dilution: then indeed it relieves, by
drawing off, with itself, some Part of the distempered Humors; which being
affected, their grosser Parts have passed off by Stool and by Urine: besides
which, the Sweat has also served to carry off that extraordinary Quantity of
Water, we were obliged to convey into the Blood, and which was become
superfluous there. Under such Circumstances, and at such a Juncture, it is of
the utmost Importance indeed, not to check the Sweat, whether by Choice, or for
Want of Care. There might often be as much Danger in doing this, as there would
have been in endeavoring to force a Sweat, immediately upon the Invasion of the
Disorder; since the arresting of this Discharge, under the preceding
Circumstances, might frequently occasion a more dangerous Distemper, by
repelling the Humors on some inward vital Part. As much Care therefore should
be taken not to check, imprudently, that Evacuation by the Skin, which
naturally occurs toward the Conclusion of Diseases, as not to force it at
their Beginning; the former being almost constantly beneficial, the latter as
constantly pernicious. Besides, were it even necessary, it might be very
dangerous to force it violently; since by heating the Patients greatly, a
vehement Fever is excited; they become scorched up in a Manner, and the Skin
proves extremely dry. Warm Water, in short, is the best of Sudorifics.

If the Sick are sweated very plentifully for a Day or two, which may make them
easier for some Hours, these Sweats soon terminate, and cannot be excited again
by the same Medicines. The Dose thence is doubled, the Inflammation is
increased, and the Patient expires in terrible Anguish, with all the Marks of a
general Inflammation. His Death is ascribed to his Want of Sweating; when it
really was the Consequence of his Sweating too much at first; and of his taking
Wine and hot Sudorifics. An able Swiss Physician had long since assured his
Countrymen that Wine was fatal to them in Fevers; I take leave to repeat it
again and again, and wish it may not be with as little Success.

Our Country Folks, who in Health, naturally dislike red Wine, prefer it when
Sick; which is wrong, as it binds them up more than white Wine. It does not
promote Urine as well; but increases the Force of the circulating Arteries, and
the Thickness of the Blood, which were already too considerable.

18. Their Diseases are also further aggravated by the Food that is generally
given them. They must undoubtedly prove weak, in Consequence of their being
sick; and the ridiculous Fear of the Patient's dying of Weakness, disposes
their Friends to force them to eat; which, increasing their Disorder, renders
the Fever mo^^al. This Fear is absolutely chimerical; never yet did a Person in
a Fever die merely from Weakness. They may be supported, even for some Weeks,
by Water only; and are stronger at the End of that Time, than if they had taken
more solid Nourishment; since, far from strengthening them, their Food
increases their Disease, and thence increases their Weakness.

19. From the first Invasion of a Fever, Digestion ceases. Whatever solid Food
is taken corrupts, and proves a Source of Putridity, which adds nothing to the
Strength of the Sick, but greatly to that of the Distemper. There are in fact a
thousand Examples to prove, that it becomes a real Poison: and we may sensibly
perceive that these poor Creatures, who are thus compelled to eat, lose their
Strength, and fall into Anxiety and Ravings, in Proportion as they swallow.

20. They are also further injured by the Quality, as well as the Quantity of
their Food. They are forced to sup strong gravey Soups, Eggs, Biscuits, and
even Flesh, if they have but just Strength and Resolution to chew it. It seems
absolutely impossible for them to survive all this Trash. Should a Man in
perfect Health be compelled to eat stinking Meat, rotten Eggs, stale sour
Broth, he is attacked with as violent Symptoms, as if he had taken real Poison,
which, in Effect, he has. He is seized with Vomiting, Anguish, a violent
Purging, and a Fever, with Raving and eruptive Spots, which we call the Purple
Fever. Now when the very same Articles of Food, in their soundest State, are
given to a Person in a Fever, the Heat and the morbid Matter already in his
Stomach, quickly putrify them; and after a few Hours produce all the above
mentioned Effects. Let any Man judge then, if the least Service can be expected
from them.

21. It is a Truth established by the first of Physicians, above two thousand
Years past, and still further ratified by his Successors, that as long as a
sick Person has a bad Humor or Ferment in his Stomach, his Weakness increases,
in Proportion to the Food he receives. For this being corrupted by the infected
Matter it meets there, proves incapable of nourishing, and becomes a conjunct
or additional Cause of the Distemper.

The most observing Persons constantly remark^^ ^^^t whenever a feverish
Patient sups, what is commonly called some good Broth, the Fever gathers
Strength and the Patient Weakness. The giving such a Soup or Broth, though of
the freshest soundest Meat, to a Man who has a high Fever, or putrid Humors in
his Stomach, is to do him exactly the same Service, as if you had given him
(two or three Hours later) stale putrid Soup.

22. I must also affirm, that this fatal Prejudice, of keeping up the Patient's
Strength by Food, is still too much propagated, even among those very Persons,
whose Talents and whose Education might be expected to exempt them from any
such gross Error. It were happy for Mankind, and the Duration of their Lives
would generally be more extended, if they could be thoroughly persuaded of this
medical, and so very demonstrable, Truth; -- -- That the only things which can
strengthen sick Persons are those which are able to weaken their Disease; but
their Obstinacy in this Respect is inconceivable; it is another Evil superadded
to that of the Disease, and sometimes the more grievous one. Out of twenty sick
Persons, who are lost in the Country, more than two Thirds might often have
been cured, if being only lodged in a Place defended from the Injuries of the
Air, they were supplied with Abundance of good Water. But that most mistaken
Care and Regimen I have been treating of, scarcely suffers one of the twenty to
survive them.

23. What further increases our Horror at this enormous Propensity to heat, dry
up, and cram the Sick is, that it is totally opposite to what Nature herself
indicates in such Circumstances. The burning Heat of which they complain; the
Dryness of the Lips, Tongue and Throat; the flaming high Color of their Urine;
the great Longing they have for cooling things; the Pleasure and sensible
Benefit they enjoy from fresh Air, are so many Signs or rather Proofs, which
cry out with a loud Voice, that we ought to attemperate and cool them
moderately, by all means. Their soul Tongues, which show the Stomach to be in
the like Condition; their Loathing, their Propensity to vomit, their utter
Aversion to all solid Food, and especially to Flesh; the disagreeable Stench of
their Breath; their Discharge of fetid Wind upwards and downwards, and
frequently the extraordinary Offensiveness of their Excrements, demonstrate
that their Bowels are full of putrid Contents, which must corrupt all the
Aliments superadded to them: and that the only thing which can prudently be
done, is to dilute and attemper them by plentiful Draughts of refreshing
cooling Drinks, which may promote an easy Discharge of them. I affirm it again,
and I heartily wish it may be thoroughly attended to, that as long as there is
any Taste of Bitterness, or of Putresence; as long as there is a Nausea or
Loathing, a bad Breath, Heat and Feverishness, with fetid Stools, and little
and high colored Urine; so long all Flesh and Flesh-Soup, Eggs, and all kinds
of Food composed of them, or of any of them, and all Venice Treacle, Wine, and
all heating things are so many absolute Poisons.

24. I may possibly be censured as extravagant and excessive on these Heads by
the Public, and even by some Physicians: but the true and enlightened
Physicians, those who attend to the Effects of every Particular, will find on
the contrary, that far from exceeding in this Respect, I have rather feebly
expressed their own Judgment, in which they agree with that of all the good
ones, who have existed within more than two thousand Years; that very Judgment
which Reason approves, and continual Experience confirms. The Prejudices I have
been contending against have cost Europe some Millions of Lives.

25. Neither should it be omitted, that even when a Patient has very
fortunately escaped Death, notwithstanding all this Care to obtain it, the
Mischief is not ended; the Consequences of the high Aliments and heating
Medicines being, to leave behind the Seed, the Principle, of some low and
chronical Disease; which increasing insensibly, bursts out at length, and
finally procures him the Death he has even wished for, to put an End to his
tedious Sufferings.

26. I must also take Notice of another dangerous common Practice; which is
that of purging, or vomiting a Patient, at the very Beginning of a Distemper.
Infinite Mischiefs are occasioned by it. There are some Cases indeed, in which
gently evacuating Medicines, at the Beginning of a Disease, are convenient, and
even necessary. Such Cases shall be particularly mentioned in some other
Chapters: but as long as we are unacquainted with them, it should be considered
as a general Rule, that they are hurtful at the Beginning; this being true very
often; and always, when the Diseases are strictly inflammatory.

27. It is hoped by their Assistance, at that Time, to remove the Load and
Oppression of the Stomach, the Cause of a Disposition to vomit, of a dry Mouth,
of Thirst, and of much Uneasiness; and to lessen the Leaven or Ferment of the
Fever. But in this Hope they are very often deceived; since the Causes of these
Symptoms are seldom of a Nature to yield to these Evacuations. By the
extraordinary Viscidity or Thickness of the Humors, that soul the Tongue, we
should form our Notions of those, which line the Stomach and the Bowels. It may
be washed, gargled and even scraped, to very little good Purpose. It does not
happen until the Patient has drank for many Days, and the Heat, the Fever, and
the great Siziness of the Humors are abated, that this Filth can be thoroughly
removed, which by Degrees separates of itself. The State of the Stomach being
conformable to that of the Tongue, no Method can effectually scour and clean it
at the Beginning: but by giving refreshing and diluting Remedies plentifully,
it gradually frees itself; and the Propensity to vomit, with its other Effects
and Uneasinesses, go off naturally and without Purges.

28. Neither are these Evacuations only negatively wrong, merely from doing no
Good; for considerable Evil positively ensues from the Application of those
acrid irritating Medicines, which increase the Pain and Inflammation; drawing
the Humors upon those Parts that were already overloaded with them; which by
no means expel the Cause of the Disease, that not being at this Time fitted for
Expulsion, as not sufficiently concocted or ripe: and yet which Evacuations, at
the same Time, discharge the thinnest Part of the Blood, whence the Remainder
becomes more thick; in short which carry off the useful, and leave the hurtful
Humors behind.

29. The Vomit especially, being given in an inflammatory Disease, and even
without any Distinction in all acute ones, before the Humors have been
diminished by Bleeding, and diluted by plentiful small Drinks, is productive of
the greatest Evils; of Inflammations of the Stomach, of the Lungs and Liver, of
Suffocations and Frenzies. Purges sometimes occasion a general Inflammation of
the Guts, which It is pretty common to bear of Persons recovering from
Inflammations of the Bowels, or Guts, which our Author more justly and
ingenuously considers as general Passports to Death: for it is difficult to
conceive, that a real and considerable Inflammation of such thin, membranous,
irritable Parts, lined with such putrescent Humors and Contents, and in so hot
and close a Situation, could be restored to a sound and healthy State as often
as Rumor affirms it. This makes it so important a Point, to avert every
Tendency to an Inflammation of these feculent Parts, as to justify a Bleeding
directed, solely, from this Precaution; and which might have been no otherwise
indicated by a Disease, attended with any Symptom, that threatened such an
Inflammation. But when a Person recovers, there can be no anatomical Search for
such Inflammations, or their Effects, the real or imaginary Cure of which may
well amaze the Patient, and must greatly redound to the Honor of his
Prescriber; so that there may be Policy sometimes in giving a moderate Disease
a very bad Name. K.
terminates in Death. Some Instances of each of these terrible Consequences
have I seen, from blundering Temerity, Imprudence and Ignorance. The Effect of
such Medicines, in these Circumstances, are much the same with those we might
reasonably expect, from the Application of Salt and Pepper to a dry, inflamed
and foul Tongue, in order to moisten and clean it.

30. Every Person of sound plain Sense is capable of perceiving the Truth of
whatever I have advanced in this Chapter: and there would be some Degree of
Prudence, even in those who do not perceive the real good Tendency of my
Advice, not to defy nor oppose it too hardily. The Question relates to a very
important Object; and in a matter quite foreign to themselves, they undoubtedly
owe some Deference to the Judgment of Persons, who have made it the Study and
Business of their whole Lives. It is not to myself that I hope for their
Attention, but to the greatest Physicians, whose feeble Instrument and Echo I
am. -- What Interest have any of us in forbidding sick People to eat, to be
stifled, or to drink such heating things as heighten their Fever? What
Advantage can accrue to us from opposing the fatal Torrent, which sweeps them
off? What Arguments can persuade People, that some thousand Men of Genius, of
Knowledge, and of Experience, who pass their Lives among a Crowd and Succession
of Patients; who are entirely employed to take Care of them, and to observe all
that passes, have been only amusing and deceiving themselves, on the Effects of
Food, of Regimen and of Remedies? Can it enter into any sensible Head, that a
Nurse, who advises Soup, an Egg, or a Biscuit, deserves a Patient's Confidence,
better than a Physician who forbids them? Nothing can be more disagreeable to
the latter, than his being obliged to dispute continually in Behalf of the poor
Patients; and to be in constant Terror, lest this mortally officious
Attendance, by giving such Food as augments all the Causes of the Disease,
should defeat the Efficacy of all the Remedies he administers to remove it; and
should fester and aggravate the Wound, in Proportion to the Pains he takes to
dress it. The more such absurd People love a Patient, the more they urge him to
eat, which, in Effect, verifies the Proverb of killing one with Kindness.

CHAPTER III. Of the Means that ought to be used at the Beginning of Diseases;
and of the Diet in acute Diseases.
SECT. 31. I Have clearly shown the great Dangers of the Regimen, or Diet, and
of the principal Medicines too generally made Use of by the Bulk of the People
on these Occasions. I must now point out the actual Method they may pursue,
without any Risque, on the Invasion of some acute Diseases, and the general
Diet which agrees with them all. As many as are desirous of reaping any Benefit
from this Treatise, should attend particularly to this Chapter; since,
throughout the other Parts of it, in order to avoid Repetitions, I shall say
nothing of the Diet, except the particular Distemper shall require a different
one from that, of which I am now to give an exact Detail. And whenever I shall
say in general, that a Patient is to be put upon a Regimen, it will signify,
that he is to be treated according to the Method prescribed in this Chapter;
and all such Directions are to be observed, with Regard to Air, Food, Drink and
Glysters; except when I expressly order something else, as different Ptisans,
Glysters, etc.

32. The greater Part of Diseases (by which I always understand acute and
feverish ones) frequently give some Notice of their Approach a few Weeks, and,
generally, some Days before their actual Invasion; such as a light Lassitude,
or Weariness, Stiffness or Numbness; less Activity than usual, less Appetite, a
small Load or Heaviness at Stomach; some Complaint in the Head: a profounder
Degree of Sleep, yet less composed, and less refreshing than usual; less Gaiety
and Liveliness; sometimes a light Oppression of the Breast, a less regular
Pulse; a Propensity to be cold; an Aptness to sweat; and sometimes a
Suppression of a former Disposition to sweat. At such a Term it may be
practicable to prevent, or at least considerably to mitigate the most
perplexing Disorders, by carefully observing the four following Points.

1. To omit all violent Work or Labor, but yet not so, as to discontinue a
gentle easy Degree of Exercise.

2. To bring the Complainant to content himself without any, or with very
little, solid Food; and especially to renounce all Flesh, Flesh-broth, Eggs and
Wine.

3. To drink plentifully, that is to say, at least three Pints, or even four
Pints daily, by small Glasses at a Time, from half hour to half hour, of the
Ptisans No. 1 and 2, or even of warm Water, to each Quart of which may be added
half a Glass of Vinegar. No Person can be destitute of this very attainable
Assistance. But should there be a Want even of Vinegar, a few Grains of common
This Direction of our Author's, which may surprise some, probably arises from
his preferring a small Quantity of the marine Acid to no Acid at all: For
though a great Proportion of Salt, in saving and seasoning Flesh and other
Food, generally excites Thirst, yet a little of it seems to have rather a
different Effect, by gently stimulating the salivary Glands: And we find that
Nature very seldom leaves the great diluting Element wholly void of this
quickening, antiputrescent Principle, K.
Salt may be added to a Quart of warm Water for Drink. Those who have Honey
will do well to add two or three Spoonfuls of it to the Water. A light Infusion
of Elder-flowers, or of those of the Linden, the Lime-tree, may also be
advantageously used, and even well settled and clear sweet Whey.

4. Let the Person affected with such previous Complaints, receive Glysters of
warm Water, or the Glyster No. 5. By pursuing these Precautions some grievous
Disorders have often been happily rooted out: and although they should not
prove so thoroughly efficacious, as to prevent their Appearance, they may at
least be rendered more gentle, and much less dangerous.

33. Very unhappily People have taken the directly contrary Method. From the
Moment these previous, these forerunning Complaints are perceived, they allow
themselves to eat nothing but gross Meat, Eggs, or strong Meat-Soups. They
leave off Garden-Stuff and Fruits, which would be so proper for them; and they
drink heartily (under a Notion of strengthening the Stomach and expelling Wind)
of Wine and other Liquors, which strengthen nothing but the Fever, and expel
what Degree of Health might still remain. Hence all the Evacuations are
restrained; the Humors causing and nourishing the Diseases are not at all
attempered, diluted, nor rendered proper for Evacuation. Nay, on the very
contrary, they become more sharp, and more difficult to be discharged: while a
sufficient Quantity of diluting refreshing Liquor asswages and separates all
Matters foreign to the Blood, which it purifies; and, at the Expiration of some
Days, all that was noxious in it is carried off by Stool, by Urine, or by Sweat.

34. When the Distemper is further advanced, and the Patient is already seized
with that Coldness or Shuddering, in a greater or less Degree, which ushers in
all Diseases; and which is commonly attended with an universal Oppression, and
Pains over all the Surface of the Body: the Patient, thus circumstanced, should
be put to Bed, if he cannot keep up; or should sit down as quietly as possible,
with a little more Covering than usual: he should drink every Quarter of an
Hour a small Glass of the Ptisan, No. 1 or 2, warm: or, if that is not at Hand,
of some one of those Liquids I have recommended 32.

35. These Patients earnestly covet a great Load of Covering, during the Cold
or Shivering; but we should be very careful to lighten them as soon as it
abates; so that when the succeeding Heat begins, they may have no more than
their usual Weight of Covering. It were to be wished, perhaps, they had rather
less. The Country People lie upon a Feather-bed, and under a downy Coverlet, or
Quilt, that is commonly extremely heavy; and the Heat which is heightened and
retained by Feathers, is particularly troublesome to Persons in a Fever.
Nevertheless, as it is what they are accustomed to, this Custom may be complied
with for one Season of the Year: but during our Heats, or whenever the Fever is
very violent, they should lie on a Pallet (which will be infinitely better for
them) and should throw away their Coverings of Down, so as to remain covered
only with Sheets, or something else, less injurious than Feather-Coverings. A
Person could scarcely believe, who had not been, as I have, a Witness of it,
how much Comfort a Patient is sensible of, in being eased of his former
Coverings. The Distemper immediately puts on a different Appearance.

36. As soon as the Heat after the Rigor, or Coldness and Shuddering,
approaches, and the Fever is manifestly advanced, we should provide for the
Patient's Regimen. And

1, Care should be taken that the Air, in the Room where he lies, should not be
too hot, the mildest Degree of Warmth being very sufficient; that there be as
little Noise as possible, and that no Person speak to the Sick, without a
Necessity for it. No external Circumstance heightens the Fever more, nor
inclines the Patient more to a Delirium or Raving, than the Persons in the
Chamber, and especially about the Bed. They lessen the Spring, the elastic and
refreshing Power, of the Air; they prevent a Succession of fresh Air; and the
Variety of Objects occupies the Brain too much. Whenever the Patient has been
at Stool, or has made Urine, these Excrements should be removed immediately.
The Windows should certainly be opened Night and Morning, at least for a
Quarter of an Hour each time; when also a Door should be opened, to promote an
entire Renovation or Change of the Air in the Room. Nevertheless, as the
Patient should not be exposed at any time to a Stream or Current of Air, the
Curtains of his Bed should be drawn on such Occasions; and, if he lay without
any, Chairs, with Blankets or Clothes hung upon them, should be substituted in
the Place of Curtains, and surround the Bed, while the Windows continue open,
in order to defend the Patient from the Force of the rushing Air. If the
Season, however, be rigidly cold, it will be sufficient to keep the Windows
open, but for a few Minutes each time. In Summer, at least one Window should be
set open Day and Night. The pouring a little Vinegar upon a red-hot Shovel also
greatly conduces to restore the Spring, and to correct the Putridity, of the
Air. In our greatest Heats, when that in the Room seems nearly scorching, and
the sick Person is sensibly and greatly incommoded by it, the Floor may be
sprinkled now and then; and Branches of Willow or Ash-trees, dipped a little in
Pails of Water, may be placed about the Room.

37. 2. With Respect to the Patient's Nourishment, he must entirely abstain
from all Food; but he may always be allowed, and have daily prepared, the
following Sustenance, which is one of the wholesomest, and indisputably the
simplest one. Take half a Pound of Bread, a Morsel of the freshest Butter about
the Size only of a Hazel Nut (which may even be omitted too) three Pints and
one quarter of a Pint of Water. Boil them 'till the Bread be entirely reduced
to a thin Consistence. Then strain it, and give the Patient one eighth Part of
it every three, or every four, Hours; but still more rarely, if the Fever be
vehemently high. Those who have Groats, Barley, Oatmeal, or Rice, may boil and
prepare them in the same Manner, with some Grains of Salt.

38. The Sick may also be sometimes indulged, in lieu of these different
Spoon-meats, with raw Fruits in Summer, or in Winter with Apples baked or
boiled, or Plumbs and Cherries dried and boiled. Persons of Knowledge and
Experience will be very little, or rather not at all, surprised, to see various
Kinds of Fruit directed in acute Diseases; the Benefit of which they may here
have frequently seen. Such Advice can only disgust those, who remain still
obstinately attached to old Prejudices. But could they prevail on themselves to
reflect a little, they must perceive that these Fruits which allay Thirst;
which cool and abate the Fever; which correct and attemper the putrid and
heated Bile; which gently dispose the Belly to be rather open, and promote the
Secretion and Discharge of the Urine, must prove the properest Nourishment for
Persons in acute Fevers. Hence we see, as it were by a strong Admonition from
Nature herself, they express an ardent Longing for them; and I have known
several who would not have recovered, but for their eating secretly large
Quantities of those Fruits they so passionately desired, and were refused. As
many however, as are not convinced by my Reasoning in this Respect, may at
least make a Trial of my Advice, on my Affirmation and Experience; when I have
no Doubt but their own will speedily convince them of the real Benefit received
from this Sort of Nourishment. It will then be evident, that we may safely and
boldly allow, in all continual Fevers, Cherries red and black, Strawberries,
the best cured Raisins, Raspberries, and Mulberries; provided that all of them
be perfectly ripe. Apples, Pears and Plumbs are less melting and diluting, less
succulent, and rather less proper. Some Kinds of Pears however are extremely
juicy, and even watery almost, such as the Dean or Valentia Pear, different
Kinds of the Buree Pear; the St. Germain, the Virgoleuse, the green sugary
Pear, and the Summer Royal, which may all be allowed; as well as a little Juice
of very ripe Plumbs, with the Addition of Water to it. This last I have known
to assuage Thirst in a Fever, beyond any other Liquor. Care should be taken at
the same time, that the Sick should never be indulged in a great Quantity of
any of them at once, which would overload the Stomach, and be injurious to
them; but if they are given a little at a time and often, nothing can be more
salutary. Those whose Circumstances will afford them China Oranges, or Lemons,
may be regaled with the Pulp and Juice as successfully: but without eating any
of their Peel, which is hot and inflaming.

39. 3. Their Drink should be such as allays Thirst, and abates the Fever; such
as dilutes, relaxes, and promotes the Evacuations by Stool, Urine and
Perspiration. All the Liquids which I have recommended in the preceding
Chapters, jointly and severally possess these Qualities. A Glass or a Glass and
a half of the Juice of such Fruit as I have just mentioned, may also be added
to three full Pints of Water.

40. The Sick should drink at least twice or thrice that Quantity daily, often,
and a little at once, between three and four Ounces, every Quarter of an Hour.
The Coldness of the Drink should just be taken off.

41. 4. If the Patient has not two Motions in the 24 Hours; if the Urine be in
small Quantity and high colored; if he rave, the Fever rage, the Pain of the
Head and of the Loins be considerable, with a Pain in the Belly, and a
Propensity to vomit, the Glyster No. 5 should be given at least once a Day. The
People have generally an Aversion to this Kind of Remedy; notwithstanding there
is not any more useful in feverish Disorders, especially in those I have just
recounted; and one Glyster commonly gives more Relief, than if the Patient had
drank four or five times the Quantity of his Drinks. The Use of Glysters, in
different Diseases, will be properly ascertained in the different Chapters
which treat of them. But it may be observed in this Place, that they are never
to be given at the very time the Patient is in a Sweat, which seems to relieve
him.

42. 5. As long as the Patient has sufficient Strength for it, he should sit
up out of Bed one Hour daily, and longer if he can bear it; but at least half
an Hour. It has a Tendency to lessen the Fever, the Headache, and a
Light-headiness or Raving. But he should not be raised, while he has a hopeful
Sweating; though such Sweats hardly ever occur, but at the Conclusion of
Diseases, and after the Sick has had several other Evacuations.

43. 6. His Bed should be made daily while he sits up; and the Sheets of the
Bed, as well as the Patient's Linen, should be changed every two Days, if it
can be done with Safety. An unhappy Prejudice has established a contrary, and a
really dangerous, Practice. The People about the Patient dread the very Thought
of his rising out of Bed; they let him continue there in nasty Linen laden
with putrid Steams and Humors; which contribute not only to keep up the
Distemper, but even to heighten it into some Degree of Malignity. I do again
repeat it here, that nothing conduces more to continue the Fever and Raving,
than confining the Sick constantly to Bed, and withholding him from changing
his foul Linen: by relieving him from both of which Circumstances I have,
without the Assistance of any other Remedy, put a Stop to a continual Delirium
of twelve Days uninterrupted Duration. It is usually said, the Patient is too
weak, but this is a very weak Reason. He must be in very nearly a dying
Condition, not to be able to bear these small Commotions, which, in the very
Moment when he permits them, increase his Strength, and immediately after abate
his Complaints. One Advantage the Sick gain by sitting up a little out of Bed,
is the increased Quantity of their Urine, with greater Facility in passing it.
Some have been observed to make none at all, if they did not rise out of Bed.

A very considerable Number of acute Diseases have been radically, effectually
cured by this Method, which mitigates them all. Where it is not used, as an
Assistance at least, Medicines are very often of no Advantage. It were to be
wished the Patient and his Friends were made to understand, that Distempers are
not to be expelled at once with rough and precipitate Usage; that they must
have their certain Career or Course; and that the Use of the violent Methods
and Medicines they choose to employ, might indeed abridge the Course of them, by
killing the Patient, yet never otherwise shortened the Disease; but, on the
contrary, rendered it more perplexing, tedious and obstinate; and often
entailed such unhappy Consequences on the Sufferer, as left him feeble and
languid for the rest of his Life.

44. But it is not sufficient to treat, and, as it were, to conduct the
Distemper properly. The Term of Recovery from a Disease requires considerable
Vigilance and Attention, as it is always a State of Feebleness, and, thence, of
Depression and Faintness. The same Kind of Prejudice which destroys the Sick,
by compelling them to eat, during the Violence of the Disease, is extended also
into the Stage of Convalescence, or Recovery; and either renders it troublesome
and tedious; or produces fatal Relapses, and often chronical Distempers. In
Proportion to the Abatement, and in the Decline of the Fever, the Quantity of
Nourishment may be gradually increased: but as long as there are any Remains of
it, their Qualities should be those I have already recommended. Whenever the
Fever is completely terminated, some different Foods may be entered upon; so
that the Patient may venture upon a little white Meat, provided it be tender;
some The most allowable of these are Whitings, Flounders, Plaice, Dabbs,
Smelts, or Gudgeons; especially such of the last as are taken out of clear
current Streams with gravelly Bottoms. Salmon, Eels, Carp, all the Skate Kind,
Haddock, and the like, should not be permitted, before the Sick return to their
usual Diet when in Health. It is best to begin with Fish boiled. K.
Fish; a little Flesh-Soup, a few Eggs at times, with Wine properly diluted. It
must be observed at the same time, that these very proper Aliments which
restore the Strength, when taken moderately, delay the perfect Cure, if they
exceed in Quantity, though but a little; because the Action of the Stomach being
extremely weakened by the Disease and the Remedies, is capable only, as yet, of
a small Degree of Digestion; and if the Quantity of its Contents exceed its
Powers, they do not digest, but become putrid: frequent Returns of the Fever
supervene; a continual Faintishness; Head-achs; a heavy Drowsiness without a
Power of sleeping comfortably; flying Pains and Heats in the Arms and Legs;
Inquietude; Peevishness; Propensity to vomit; Looseness; Obstructions, and
sometimes a slow Fever, with a Collection of Humors that comes to Suppuration.

All these bad Consequences are prevented, by the recovering Sick contenting
themselves, for some time, with a very moderate Share of proper Food. We are
not nourished in Proportion to the Quantity we swallow, but to that we digest.
A Person on the mending Hand, who eats moderately, digests it and grows strong
from it. He who swallows abundantly does not digest it, and instead of being
nourished and strengthened, he withers insensibly away.

45. We may reduce, within the few following Rules, all that is most especially
to be observed, in order to procure a complete, a perfect Termination of acute
Diseases; and to prevent their leaving behind them any Impediments to Health.

1. Let those who are recovering, as well as those who are actually sick, take
very little Nourishment at a time, and take it often.

2. Let them take but one sort of Food at each Meal, and not change their Food
too often.

3. Let them chew whatever solid Victuals they eat, very carefully.

4. Let them diminish their Quantity of Drink. The best for them in general is
Water I have known many who had an Aversion to Water, and with whom, on that
very Account, it might probably agree less, find Water very grateful, in which
a thoroughly baked and hot, not burnt, Slice of Bread had been infused, until
it attained the Color of fine clear Small-beer, or light Amber colored Beer;
and I never saw any Inconvenience result from it. Doubtless pure, untoasted,
elemental Water may be preferable for those who like, and have been accustomed
to it. K.
, with a fourth or third Part of white Wine. Too great a Quantity of Liquids at
this time prevents the Stomach from recovering its Tone and Strength; it
impairs Digestion; keeps up Weakness; increases the Tendency to a Swelling of
the Legs; sometimes even occasions a flow Fever; and throws back the Person
recovering into a languid State.

5. Let them go abroad as often as they are able, whether on Foot, in a
Carriage, or on Horseback. This last Exercise is the healthiest of all, and
three fourths of the laboring People in this Country, who have it in their
Power to procure it without Expense, are in the wrong to neglect it. They, who
would practice it, should mount before their principal Meal, which should be
about Noon, and never ride after it. Exercise taken before a Meal strengthens
the Organs of Digestion, which is promoted by it. If the Exercise is taken soon
after the Meal, it impairs it.

6. As People in this State are seldom quite as well toward Night, in the
Evening they should take very little Food. Their Sleep will be the less
disturbed for this, and repair them the more, and sooner.

7. They should not remain in Bed above seven or eight Hours.

8. The swelling of the Legs and Ancles, which happens to most Persons at this
time, is not dangerous, and generally disappears of itself; if they live
soberly and regularly and take moderate Exercise.

9. It is not necessary, in this State, that they should go constantly every
Day to Stool; though they should not be without one above two or three. If
their Costiveness exceeds this Term, they should receive a Glyster the third
Day, and even sooner, if they are heated by it, if they feel puffed up, are
restless, and have any Pains in the Head.

10. Should they, after some time, still continue very weak; if their Stomach
are disordered; if they have, from time to time, a little irregular Fever, they
should take three Doses daily of the Prescription No. 14. which fortifies the
Digestions, recovers the Strength, and drives away the Fever.

11. They must by no means return to their Labor too soon. This erroneous
Habit daily prevents many Peasants from ever getting perfectly well, and
recovering their former Strength. From not having been able to confine
themselves to Repose and Indolence for some Days, they never become as hearty
hardy Workmen as they had been: and this premature hasty Labor makes them lose
in the Consequence, every following Week of their Lives, more time than they
ever gained, by their over-early resuming of their Labor. I see every Day
weakly Laborers, Vineroons, and other Workmen, who date the Commencement of
their Weakness from that of some acute Disease, which, for want of proper
Management through the Term of their Recovery, was never perfectly cured. A
Repose of seven or eight Days, more than they allowed themselves, would have
prevented all these Infirmities; notwithstanding it is very difficult to make
them sensible of this. The Bulk, the Body of the People, in this and in many
other Cases, look no further than the present Day; and never extend their Views
to the following one. They are for making no Sacrifice to Futurity; which
nevertheless must be done, to render it favorable to us.

CHAPTER IV. Of an Inflammation of the Breast.
SECT. 46. THE Inflammation of the Breast, or Peripneumony, or a Fluxion upon
the Breast, is an Inflammation of the Lungs, and most commonly of one only, and
consequently on one Side. The Signs by which it is evident are a Shivering, of
more or less Continuance, during which the Person affected is sometimes very
restless and in great Anguish, an essential and inseparable Symptom; and which
has helped me more than once to distinguish this Disease certainly, at the very
Instant of its Invasion. Besides this, a considerable Degree of Heat succeeds
the Shivering, which Heat, for a few ensuing Hours, is often blended as it
were, with some Returns of Chilliness. The Pulse is quick, pretty strong,
moderately full, hard and regular, when the Distemper is not very violent; but
small, soft and irregular, when it is very dangerous. There is also a Sensation
of Pain, but rather light and tolerable, in one Side of the Breast; sometimes a
Kind of Straitning or Pressure on the Heart; at other times Pains through the
whole Body, especially along the Reins; and some Degree of Oppression, at least
very often; for sometimes it is but very inconsiderable. The Patient finds a
Necessity of lying almost continually upon his Back, being able to lie but very
rarely upon either of his Sides. Sometimes his Cough is dry, and is then
attended with the most Pain; at other times it is accompanied with a Spitting
or Hawking up, blended with more or less Blood, and sometimes with pure sheer
Blood. There is also some Pain, or at least a Sensation of Weight and Heaviness
in the Head; and frequently a Propensity to rave. The Face is almost
continually flushed and red; though sometimes there is a Degree of Paleness and
an Air of Astonishment, at the Beginning of the Disease, which portend no
little Danger. The Lips, the Tongue, the Palate, the Skin are all dry; the
Breath hot; the Urine little and high colored in the first Stage; but more
plentiful, less flaming, and letting fall much Sediment afterward. There is a
frequent Thirst, and sometimes an Inclination to vomit; which imposing on the
ignorant Assistants, have often inclined them to give the Patient a Vomit,
which is mortal, especially at this Juncture. The Heat becomes universal. The
Symptoms are heightened almost every Night, during which the Cough is more
exasperated, and the Spitting or Expectoration is in less Quantity. The best
Expectoration is of a middling Consistence, neither too thin, nor too hard and
tough, like those which are brought up at the Termination of a Cold; but rather
more yellow, and mixed with a little Blood, which gradually becomes still less,
and commonly disappears entirely before the seventh Day. Sometimes the
Inflammation ascends along the Windpipe, and in some Measure suffocates the
Patient, paining him considerably in swallowing, which makes him think he has a
sore Throat.

47. Whenever the Disease is very violent at first, or increases to be such,
the Patient cannot draw his Breath, but when he fits up. The Pulse becomes very
small and very quick; the Countenance livid, the Tongue black; the Eyes stare
wildly; and he suffers inexpressible Anguish, attended with incessant
Restlessness and Agitation in his Bed. One of his Arms is sometimes affected
with a sort of Palsy; he raves without Intermission, and can neither thoroughly
wake nor sleep. The Skin of his Breast and of his Neck is covered (especially
in close sultry Weather, and when the Distemper is extremely violent) with
livid Spots, more or less remarkable, which should be called petechial ones,
but are improperly termed the pourpre, or purple. The natural Strength becomes
exhausted; the Difficulty of breathing increases every Moment; he sinks into a
Lethargy, and soon dies a terrible Death in Country Places, by the very Effects
of the inflaming Medicines they employ on such Occasions. It has been known in
fact, that the Use of them has raised the Distemper to such a Height, that the
very Heart has been rent open, which the Dissection of the Body has
demonstrated.

48. If the Disease rushes on at once, with a sudden and violent Attack; if the
Horror, the Cold and Shivering last many Hours, and are followed with a nearly
scorching Degree of Heat; if the Brain is affected from the very Onset; if the
Patient has a small Purging, attended with a Tenesmus, or straining to Stool,
often termed a Needy; if he abhors the Bed; if he either sweat excessively, or
if his Skin be extremely dry; if his natural Manner and Look are considerably
changed; and if he spits up with much Difficulty, the Disease is extremely
dangerous.

49. He must directly, from the first Seizure in this State, be put upon a
Regimen, and his Drink must never be given cold. It should either be the Barley
Water No. 2, the Almond Emulsion No. 4, or that of No. 7. The Juices of the
Plants, which enter into the last of these Drinks, are excellent Remedies in
this Case; as they powerfully attenuate, or melt down, the viscid thick Blood,
which causes the Inflammation.

As long as the Fever keeps up extremely violent; while the Patient does not
expectorate sufficiently; continues raving; has a violent Headache, or raises
up pure Blood, the Glyster No. 5 must be given thrice, or at least twice, in
twenty four Hours. However the principal Remedy is Bleeding. As soon as ever
the preceding cold Assault is over, twelve Ounces of Blood must be taken away
at once; and, if the Patient be young and strong, fourteen or even sixteen.
This plentiful Bleeding gives him more Ease, than if twenty four Ounces had
been drawn, at three different Times.

50. When the Disease is circumstanced as described ( 46) that first Bleeding
makes the Patient easy for some Hours; but the Complaint returns; and to
obviate its Violence, as much as possible, we must, except things promise
extremely well, repeat the Bleeding four Hours after the first, taking again
twelve Ounces of Blood, which pretty often proves sufficient. But if, at about
the Expiration of eight or ten Hours, it appears to kindle up again, it must be
repeated a third, or even a fourth Time. Yet, with the Assistance of other
proper Remedies, I have seldom been obliged to bleed a fourth time, and have
sometimes found the two first Bleedings sufficient.

If the Disease has been of several Days Duration, when I have first been
called; if the Fever is still very high; if there be a Difficulty of Breathing;
if the Patient does not expectorate at all, or brings up too much Blood;
without being too solicitous about the Day of the Disease, the Patient should
be bled, though it were on the tenth. We should however, with the greater
Circumspection (of how much the longer standing the Disease has been, and by
how much the more difficult the viscous Humors are to be melted down and
dislodged) attend to the Coction of the Matter of Expectoration; which Nature
does not often easily effect, and which the effects the more imperfectly and
slowly, the weaker she is. Her last Efforts have often been attended with such
high Paroxysms, as have imposed even upon very competent Physicians, and have
made them open a Vein a few Hours before the Patient's Death, from their Pulses
being strong, hard and frequent. Excessive Weakness is the Sign, by which we
may discover such unavailing Efforts to be the last. E. L.


51. In this, and in all other inflammatory Diseases, the Blood is in a very
thick viscid State: and almost immediately on its being drawn, a white tough
Skin, somewhat like Leather, is formed on its Top, which most People have seen,
and which is called the pleuritic Crust. It is thought a promising Appearance,
when at each Bleeding it seems less hard, and less thick, than it was at the
preceding ones: and this is very generally true, if the Sick feels himself, at
the same time, sensibly better: but whoever shall attend solely to the
Appearance of the Blood, will find himself often deceived. It will happen, even
in the most violent Inflammation of the Breast, that this Crust is not formed,
which is supposed to be a very unpromising Sign. There are also, in this
Respect, many odd Appearances, which arise from the smallest Circumstances; so
that we must not regulate the Repetitions of our bleeding solely by this Crust:
and in general we must not be over credulous in supposing, that the Appearances
in the Blood, received into the Basin, can enable us to determine, with
Certainty, of its real State in the Body.

52. When the sick Person is in the Condition described ( 47) the Bleeding is
not only unattended with Ease; but sometimes it is also pernicious, by the
sudden Weakness to which it reduces him. Generally in such a Case all Medicines
and Means are insignificant: and it is a very bad Sign in this Disease, when
this Discharge is not attended with Ease and Benefit to the Sick; or when there
are some Circumstances, which oblige us to be sparing of it.

53. The Patient's Legs should every Day, for one half Hour, be put into a Bath
of warm Water, wrapping him up closely; that the Cold may not check that
Perspiration, which the Bath promotes.

54. Every two Hours he should take two Spoonfuls of the Mixture No. 8, which
promotes all the Discharges, and chiefly that of Expectoration.

55. When the Oppression and Straitness are considerable, and the Cough dry,
the Patient may receive the Vapor of boiling Water, to which a little Vinegar
has been added. There are two ways of affecting this; either by placing below
his Face, after setting him up, a Vessel filled with such boiling hot Water,
and covering the Patient's Head and the Vessel with a Linen Cloth, that may
enclose the Steam; or else by holding before his Mouth a Sponge dipped in the
same boiling Liquor. This last Method is the least effectual, but it fatigues
the Patient considerably less. When this bad Symptom is extremely pressing,
Vinegar alone should be used without Water; and the Vapor of it has often
saved Patients, who seemed to have one Foot in the Grave; but it should be
continued for several Hours.

56. The outward Remedies directed in No. 9. are also applied with Success to
the Breast, and to the Throat.

57. When the Fever is extremely high, the Sick should take every Hour, a
Spoonful of the Mixture No. 10. in a Cup of the Ptisan The Use of Acids, in
Inflammations of the Breast, requires no little Consideration. Whenever the
sick Person has an Aversion to them; when the Tongue is moist, the Stomach is
heavy and disordered, and the Habit and Temperament of the Patient is mild and
soft; when the Cough is very sharp without great Thirst, we ought to abstain
from them. But when the Inflammation is joined to a dry Tongue, to great
Thirst, Heat and Fever, they are of great Service. Slices of China Oranges
sprinkled with Sugar may be given first; a light Lemonade may be allowed
afterward; and at last small Doses of the Mixture No. 10. if it becomes
necessary. E. L.

I have chosen to retain this Note of the Editor of Lions, from having
frequently seen the Inefficacy, and sometimes, I have even thought, the ill
Effects of Acids in Peripneumonies and Pleurisies, in a Country far south of
Swisserland; and where these Diseases are very frequent, acute and fatal. On
the other hand I shall add the Substance of what Dr. TISSOT says on this Head
in a Note to his Table of Remedies, wherein he affirms, that he has given in
this Disease very large Doses of them, rising gradually from small ones, and
always with great Success; entreating other Physicians to order this Acid (the
Spirit of Sulphur) in the same large Doses which he directs in this Chapter,
and assuring himself of their Thanks, for its good Consequences. -- Now the
only ill Effect I can surmize here, from showing this Diversity of Opinion in
these two learned Physicians, and my own Doubts, is, that the Subjects of this
Disease in Country Places may prove somewhat confused and irresolute by it, in
their Conduct in such Cases. But as all of us certainly concur in the great
Intention of doing all possible Good, by the extensive Publication of this
Treatise, I shall take Leave to observe that in this Disease, and in
Pleurisies, more solid Benefit has been received in Carolina, Virginia, etc.
from the Use of the Seneka Rattlesnake Root, than from any other Medicine
whatever. Bleeding indeed is necessarily premised to it; but it has often saved
the Necessity of many repeated Bleedings. This Medicine, which is termed in
Latin, the Polygala Virginiana, is certainly rather of a saponaceous
attenuating Quality, and betray not any Marks of Acidity, being rather
moderately acrid. There will be occasion to mention it more particularly in the
subsequent chapter, as such a liberty can need no Apology to any philosophical
Physician. K.


but without diminishing on this Account the usual Quantity of his other
Drinks, which may be taken immediately after it.

58. As long as the Patient shall grow worse, or only continue equally bad, the
same Medicines are to be repeated. But if on the third Day (though it rarely
happens so soon) or fourth, or fifth, the Disease takes a more favorable Turn;
if the Exasperation returns with less Violence; the Cough be less severe; the
Matter coughed up less bloody: if Respiration becomes easier; the Head be less
affected; the Tongue not quite so dry; if the high Color of the Urine abates,
and its Quantity be increased, it may be sufficient then to keep the Patient
carefully to his Regimen, and to give him a Glyster every Evening. The
Exasperation that occurs the fourth Day is often the highest.

59. This Distemper is most commonly terminated and carried off by
Expectoration, and often by Urine, which on the seventh, the ninth, or the
eleventh Day, and sometimes on the Days between them, begins to let fall a
plentiful Sediment, or Settling, of a pale red Color, and sometimes real Pus
or ripe Matter. These Discharges are succeeded by Sweats, which are as
serviceable then, as they were injurious at the Beginning of the Disease.

60. Some Hours before these Evacuations appear, there come on, and not seldom,
some very alarming Symptoms, such as great Anguish; Palpitations; some
Irregularity in the Pulse; an increased Oppression, convulsive Motions (this
being what is called the Crisis, the Height, or Turn of the Distemper) but they
are no ways dangerous, provided they do not occasion any improper Treatment.
These Symptoms depend on the morbid and purulent Matter, which, being
dislodged, circulates with the Humors, and irritates different Parts, until
the Discharge of it has fairly begun; after which all such Symptoms disappear,
and Sleep generally ensues. However I cannot too strongly insist on the
Necessity of great Prudence in such Circumstances. Sometimes it is the Weakness
of the Patient, and at other times Convulsions, or some other Symptoms, that
terrify the Bystanders. If, which is most generally the Case, the absurd
Practice of directing particular Remedies for such Accidents takes place, such
as spirituous Cordials, Venice Treacle, Confections, Castor and Rue; the
Consequence is, that Nature being disturbed in her Operations, the Crisis or
Turn is not effected; the Matter which should be discharged by Stool, by Urine
or by Sweat, is not discharged out of the Body; but is thrown upon some
internal or external part of it. Should it be on some inward part, the Patient
either dies at once; or another Distemper succeeds, more troublesome and
incurable than the first. Should it be expelled to some outward part, the
Danger indeed is less; and as soon as ever such Tumor appears, ripening
Poultices should be applied to bring it to a Head, after which it should
immediately be opened.

61. In order to prevent such unhappy Consequences, great Care must be taken,
whenever such terrifying Symptoms come on, [about the Time of the Crisis] to
make no Change in the Diet, nor in the Treatment of the Patient; except in
giving him the loosening Glyster No. 5; and applying every two Hours a Flanel,
squeezed out of warm Water, which may cover all the Belly, and in a Manner go
round the Body behind the Reins. The Quantity of his Drink may also be
increased a little; and that of his Nourishment lessened, as long as the high
and violent State continues.

62. I have not spoken of Vomits or Purges, as being directly contrary to the
Nature of this Disease; Anodynes, or Opiates, to procure Sleep are also, in
general, very improper. In a few Cases, however, they may possibly be useful;
but these Cases are so very difficult to be sufficiently distinguished, that
Opiates should never be admitted in this Disease, without the Presence and
Advice of a Physician. I have seen many Patients who have been thrown into an
incurable Hectic, by taking them improperly. When the Disease is not received
in a mortal Degree, nor has been injudiciously treated, and proceeds in a
benign regular Manner, the Patient may be called very well and safe by the
fourteenth Day; when he may, if he has an Appetite, be put upon the Diet of
People who are recovering. But if he still retains an Aversion to Food; if his
Mouth is foul and furred, and he is sensible of some Heaviness in his Head, he
should take the purging Potion No. II.

63. Bleedings from the Nose occur sometimes naturally in this Disease, even
after repeated Bleedings by Art; these are very benign and favorable, and are
commonly attended with more Ease and Relief than artificial Bleedings. Such
voluntary Discharges may sometimes be expected, when the Patient is sensibly
mended in many Respects after the Use of the Lancet; and yet complains of a
great Pain in his Head, accompanied with quick sparkling Eyes, and a Redness of
the Nose. Nothing should be done to stop these voluntary Bleedings, since it
would be very dangerous; for when Nature has fulfilled her Intention by them,
they cease of themselves. At other times, but more rarely, the Distemper is
carried off by a natural Purging, attended with moderate Pain, and the
Discharge of bilious Matter.

64. If the Expectoration, or hawking up of Matter, stops very suddenly, and is
not speedily attended with some other Evacuation; the Oppression and Anguish of
the Patient immediately return, and the Danger is great and pressing. If the
Distemper, at this Juncture, is not of many Days standing; if the Patient is a
strong Person; if he has not as yet been plentifully bled; if there be still
some Blood mixed with the Humor he expectorates; or if the Pulse be strong and
hard, he should be bled immediately in the Arm; and constantly receive the
Steam of hot Water and Vinegar by the Mouth, and drink plentifully of the
Ptisan No. 2, something hotter than ordinary. But if his Circumstances, after
this Suppression, are different from these just mentioned; instead of bleeding
him, two Blisters should be applied to the Legs; and he should drink
plentifully of the Ptisan No. 12.

The Causes which oftenest produce this Suppression of his Expectoration are,
1, a sharp and sudden cold Air. 2, too hot a one. 3, over hot Medicines. 4,
excessive Sweating. 5, a Purge prematurely and injudiciously timed. And 6, some
immoderate Passion of the Mind.

65. When the Sick has not been sufficiently bled, or not soon enough; and even
sometimes, which I have seen, when he has been greatly weakened by excessive
Bleeding; so that the Discharges by Stool, Urine, Expectoration and
Perspiration, have not been sufficiently made; when these Discharges have been
confused by some other Causes; or the Disease has been injudiciously treated;
then the Vessels that have been inflamed, do not unload themselves of the
Humors which stuff up and oppress them; but there happens in the Substance of
the affected Lung, the same Circumstance we see daily occur on the Surface of
the Body. If an inflammatory Tumor or Swelling does not disperse itself, and
disappears insensibly, it forms an Imposthume or Abscess. Thus exactly also in
the inflamed Lung, if the Inflammation is not dissipated, it forms an Abscess,
which, in that part, is called a Vomica: and the Matter of that Abscess, like
the external ones, remains often long enclosed in its Sac or Bag, without
bursting open its Membrane or Case, and discharging the Matter it contains.

66. If the Inflammation was not very deeply seated in the inward Substance of
the diseased Lung; but was extended to its Surface, that is very near the Ribs,
the Sac will burst on the Surface of the Lung; and the Matter contained in it
must be discharged into the Cavity, or Hollowness of the Breast, between the
Lung, the Ribs, and the Diaphragm or Midriff, which is the Membrane that
divides the Breast and the Belly. But when the Inflammation is considerably
deeper, the Imposthume bursts with-inside of the Lung itself. If its Orifice,
or Opening is so small, that but little can get out at once; if the Quantity of
all the Matter be inconsiderable, and the Patient is at the same time pretty
strong, he coughs up the Matter, and is very sensibly relieved. But if this
Vomica be large, or if its Orifice is wide, and it throws out a great Quantity
of Matter at once; or if the Patient is very weak, he dies the Moment it
bursts, and that sometimes when it is least expected. I have seen one Patient
so circumstanced expire, as he was conveying a Spoonful of Soup to his Mouth;
and another while he was wiping his Nose. There was no present Symptom in
either of these Cases, whence a Physician might suppose them likelier to die at
that Instant, than for some Hours before. The Pus, or Matter, is commonly
discharged through the Mouth after Death, and the Bodies very soon become
putrified.

67. We call that Vomica which is not burst, an occult or hidden, and that
which is, an evident or open one. It is of considerable Importance to treat
exactly and clearly of this Topic; as a great Number of Country People die of
these Imposthumes, even without a Suspicion of the Cause of their Death. I had
an Instance of it some Days since, in the Schoolmaster of a Village. He had an
occult and very considerable Vomica in the left Lung, which was the Consequence
of an Inflammation of the Breast, that had been treated improperly at the
Beginning. He seemed to me not likely to live twenty four Hours; and in fact
died in the Night, after inexpressible Anguish. It is highly probable he died
as soon as the Vomica burst, a large Quantity of Matter being discharged from
his Mouth after his Death.

68. Whatever Distemper is included within the Breast of a living Patient, is
neither an Object of the Sight nor Touch; whence these Vomicas, these inward
Tumors, are so often unknown, and indeed unsuspected. The Evacuations that
were necessary for the Cure, or sometimes for the Prevention, of them, have not
taken Place during the first fourteen Days. At the End of this Term, the
Patient, far from being cured, is not very considerably relieved; but, on the
contrary, the Fever continues to be pretty high, with a Pulse continually
quick; in general soft and weak; though sometimes pretty hard, and often
fluctuating, or, as it were, waving. His Breathing is still difficult and
oppressed; with small cold Shudderings from time to time; an Exasperation of
the Fever; flushed Cheeks, dry Lips, and Thirst.

The Increase of these Symptoms declares, that Pus or Matter is thoroughly
formed: the Cough then becomes more continual, being exasperated with the least
Motion; or as soon as ever the Patient has taken any Nourishment. He can repose
only on the Side affected. It often happens indeed that he cannot lie down at
all; but is obliged to be set up all Day; sometimes even without daring to lean
a little upon his Loins, for fear of increasing the Cough and Oppression. He is
unable to sleep; has a continual Fever, and his Pulse frequently intermits.

The Fever is not only heightened every Evening; but the smallest Quantity of
Food, the gentlest Motion, a little Coughing, the lightest Agitation of the
Mind, a little more than usual Heat in the Chamber, Soup either a little too
strong, or a little too salt, increase the Quickness of his Pulse the Moment
they occur, or are given. He is quite restless, has some short Attacks of the
most terrible Anguish, accompanied and succeeded by Sweatings on his Breast,
and from his whole Countenance. He sweats sometimes the whole Night; his Urine
is reddish, now frothy, and at other times oily, as it were. Sudden Flushings,
hot as Flames, rise into his whole Visage. The greater Number of the Sick are
commonly sensible of a most disagreeable Taste in their Mouths; some of old
strong Cheese; others of rotten Eggs; and others again of stinking Meat, and
fall greatly away. The Thirst of some is unquenchable; their Mouths and Lips
are parched; their Voice is weak and hoarse; their Eyes are hollow, with a Kind
of Wildness in their Looks. They have a general Disgust to all Food: and if
they should ask for some particular Nourishment without seeing it, they reject
it the Moment it is brought them; and their Strength at length seems wholly
exhausted.

Besides these Symptoms, a little Inflation, or Bloatedness, as it were, is
sometimes observed on the Breast, toward the Side affected; with an almost
insensible Change of Color. If the Vomica be situated at the Bottom of the
affected Lobe of the Lungs, and in its internal Part, that is, nearly in the
Middle of the Breast, some Puffiness or light Swelling may be perceived in some
Bodies, by gently pressing the Pit of their Stomach; especially when the
Patient coughs. In short, according to the Observations of a German Physician,
if one strike the open Hand on the Breast, covered only with a Shirt, it
retains in the Spot, which is directly opposite to the Vomica, a flat heavy
Sound, as if one struck a Piece of Flesh; while in striking on the other Side
it gives a clear loud Sound, as from a Drum. I still doubt however, whether
this Observation will generally hold true; and it would be hazardous to affirm
there is no Abscess in a Breast, which does not return this heavy Sound.

69. When a Vomica is formed, as long as it is not emptied, all the Symptoms I
have already enumerated increase, and the Vomica grows in Size: the whole Side
of the Lung affected sometimes becomes a Bag or Sac of Matter. The sound Side
is compressed; and the Patient dies after dreadful Anguish, with the Lungs full
of Pus, and without having ever brought up any.

To avoid such fatal Consequences, it is necessary to procure the Rupture and
Discharge of this inward Abscess, as soon as we are certain of its Existence:
And as it is safer it should break within the Lobe affected, from whence it may
be discharged by hawking up; than that it should burst and void itself into the
Cavity of the Breast, (for Reasons I shall give hereafter) we must endeavor,
that this Rupture may be affected within the internal Substance of the Lungs.

70. The most effectual Methods to procure this are, 1. To make the Patient
continually receive, by his Mouth, the Vapor of warm Water. 2. When by this
Means that part of the Sac or Abscess is softened, where we could wish the
Rupture of it to happen, the Patient is to swallow a large Quantity of the most
emolient Liquid; such as Barley Water, Almond Milk, light Veal Broth, or Milk
and Water. By this Means the Stomach is kept always full: so that the
Resistance to the Lungs being considerable on that Side, the Abscess and its
Contents will naturally be pressed toward the Side of the Windpipe, as it
will meet with less Resistance there. This Fullness of the Stomach will also
incline the Patient to cough, which may concur to produce a good Event. Hence,
3, we should endeavor to make the Patient cough, by making him to smell some
Vinegar, or even to snuff up a little; or by injecting into his Throat, by the
Means of a small Syringe or Pipe, such as Children make out of short Pieces of
Elder boughs, a little Water or Vinegar. 4. He should be advised to bawl out
aloud, to read loud, or to laugh heartily; all which Means contribute to burst
open the Abscess, as well as the two following ones. 5. Let him take every two
Hours a Soup-Ladle of the Potion No. 8. 6. He should be put into a Cart, or
some other Carriage; but not before he has drank plentifully of such Liquors as
I have just mentioned: after which the Shaking and Jolting in the Carriage have
sometimes immediately procured that Rupture, or breaking of the Bag or Abscess,
we wished for.

71. Some Years since I saw a Country Maid Servant, who was left in a
languishing Condition after an Inflammation of the Breast; without any Person's
suspecting her Ailment. This Woman being put into a Cart that was sent for a
Load of Hay, one of the Wheels ran violently against a Tree: she swooned away,
and at the same time brought up a great Quantity of digested Matter: She
continued to bring up more; during which I was informed of her Case, and of the
Accident, which effectually cured her.

A Swiss Officer, who served in Piedmont, had been in a languid State of Health
for some Months; and returned home to set himself down as easily as he could,
without conceiving any considerable Hopes of Recovery. Upon entering into his
own Country, by the Way of Mount Bernard; and being obliged to go some Paces on
Foot, he fell down, and remained in a Swoon above a Quarter of an Hour: during
which time he threw up a large Quantity of Matter, and found himself that very
Moment very greatly relieved. I ordered him a proper Diet, and suitable
Medicines: his Health became perfectly established; and the Preservation of his
Life was principally owing to this lucky Fall.

Many Persons afflicted with a Vomica, faint away the very Instant it breaks.
Some sharp Vinegar should be directly held to their Nose. This small Assistance
is generally sufficient, where the bursting of it is not attended with such
Appearances as show it to be mortal, in which Case every Application is
insignificant.

72. If the sick Person was not extremely weak before the bursting of the
Abscess; if the Matter was white, and well conditioned; if the Fever abates
after it; if the Anguish, Oppression and Sweats terminate; if the Cough is less
violent; if the Patient is sensibly easier in his Situation or Posture; if he
recovers his Sleep and Appetite; if his usual Strength returns; if the Quantity
he expectorates, or brings up, becomes daily and gradually less; and if his
Urine is apparently better, we may have room to hope, that by the Assistance of
the Remedies I shall immediately direct, he may be radically, completely cured.

73. But if on the contrary; when his Strength is exhausted before the bursting
of the Abscess; when the Matter is too thin and transparent, brown, green,
yellow, bloody and of an offensive Smell; if the Pulse continues quick and
weak; if the Patient's Appetite, Strength and Sleep do not improve, there
remains no Hope of a Cure, and the best Medicines are ineffectual: Nevertheless
we ought to make some Trial of them.

74. They consist of the following Medicines and Regulations. I. Give every
four Hours a little Barley or Rice Cream. 2. If the Matter brought up is thick
and glewy, so that it is very difficult to be loosened and discharged, give
every two Hours a Soup-ladle of the Potion No. 8; and between the giving these
two, let the Patient take every half Hour a Cup of the Drink No. 13. -- 3. When
the Consistence of the Matter is such, that there is no Occasion for these
Medicines to promote the Discharge of it, they must be omitted; though the same
Sort and Quantity of Food are to be continued; but with the Addition of an
equal Quantity of Milk: or, which would be still more beneficial, instead of
this Mixture, we should give the same Quantity of New-Milk, taken from a good
Cow, which, in such a Case, may compose the whole Nourishment of the Patient.
4. He should take four times a Day, beginning early in the Morning, and at the
Distance of two Hours, a Dose of the Powder No. 14, diluted in a little Water,
or made into a Bolus, or Morsel, with a little Syrup or Honey. His common Drink
should be Almond Emulsion, commonly called Almond Milk, or Barley Water, or
fresh Water with a fourth Part Milk. 5. He should air and exercise every Day on
Horseback, or in a Carriage, according as his Strength and his Circumstances
will allow him. But of all Sorts of Exercise, that upon a trotting Horse is,
beyond all Comparison, the very best, and the easiest to be procured by every
Body; provided the Disease be not too far advanced; since in such a Situation,
any Exercise that was only a little violent, might prove pernicious.

75. The Multitude, who are generally illiterate, seldom consider any thing as
a Remedy, except they swallow it. They have but little Confidence in Regimen,
or any Assistance in the Way of Diet, and consider riding on Horseback as
wholly useless to them. This is a dangerous Mistake, of which I should be glad
to undeceive them: since this Assistance, which appears so insignificant to
them, is probably the most effectual of any: it is that, in fact, without which
they can scarcely expect a Cure, in the highest Degrees of this Disease: it is
that, which perhaps alone may recover them, provided they take no improper
Food. In brief it is considered, and with Reason, as the real Specific for this
Disease.

76. The Influence of the Air is of more Importance in this Disorder, than in
any others; for which Reason great Care should be taken to admit the best, into
the Patient's Chamber. For this Purpose it should often be ventilated, or have
an Admission of fresh Air; be sweetened from time to time, though very lightly,
by sprinkling about a little good Vinegar; and in the Season it should be
plentifully supplied with agreeable Herbs, Flowers and Fruits. Should the Sick
be unfortunately situated, and confined in an unwholesome Air, there can be but
little Prospect of curing him, without altering it.

77. Out of many Persons affected with these Disorders, some have been cured by
taking nothing whatsoever but Butter-milk; others by Melons and Cucumbers only;
and others again by Summer Fruits of every Sort. Nevertheless, as such Cases
are singular, and have been but few, I advise the Patient to observe the Method
I have directed here, as the surest.

78. It is sufficient if he have a Stool once in two, or even in three Days.
Hence there is no Reason for him, in this Case, to accustom himself to
Glysters: they may excite a Looseness, which would be very dangerous.

79. When the Discharge of the Matter from the Breast diminishes, and the
Patient is perceivably mended in every Respect, it is a Proof that the Wound in
the Abscess is deterged, or clean, and that it is disposed to heal up
gradually. If the Suppuration, or Discharge, continues in great Quantity; if it
seems but of an indifferent Consistence; if the Fever returns every Evening, it
may be apprehended that the Wound, instead of healing, may degenerate into an
Ulcer, which must prove a most embarrassing Consequence. Under such a
Circumstance, the Patient would fall into a confirmed Hectic, and die after
some Months Sickness.

80. I am not acquainted with any better Remedy, in such a dangerous Case, than
a Perseverance in these already directed, and especially in moderate Exercise
on Horseback. In some of them indeed, Recourse may be had to the sweet Vapors
of some vulnerary Herbs in hot Water, with a little Oil of Turpentine, as
directed No. 15. I have seen them succeed; but the safest Way is to consult a
Physician, who may examine and consider, if there is not some particular
Circumstance combined with the Disease, that proves an Obstacle to the Cure of
it. If the Cough prevents the Patient from Sleeping, he may take in the Evening
two or three Table Spoonfuls of the Prescription No. 16, in a Glass of Almond
Milk or Barley Water.

81. The very same Causes which suddenly suppress the Expectoration, in an
Inflammation of the Breast, may also check the Expectoration from a Vomica
already begun: in which Circumstance the Patient is speedily afflicted with an
Oppression and Anguish, a Fever and evident Feebleness. We should immediately
endeavor to remove this Stoppage, by the Vapor of hot Water; by giving a
Spoonful of the Mixture No. 3. every Hour; by a large Quantity of the Ptisan
No. 12, and by a proper Degree of Motion or Exercise. As soon as ever the
Expectoration returns, the Fever and the other Symptoms disappear. I have seen
this Suppression in strong Habits quickly followed with an Inflammation about
the Seat of the Vomica, that has obliged me to bleed, after which the
Expectoration immediately returned.

82. It happens sometimes, that the Vomica is entirely cleansed; the
Expectoration is entirely finished, or drained off, the Patient seems well, and
thinks himself completely cured: but soon after the Uneasiness, Oppression,
Cough and Fever are renewed, because the Membrane or Bag of the Vomica fills
again: again it empties itself, the Patient expectorates for some Days, and
seems to recover. After some time however, the same Scene is repeated; and this
Vicissitude, or Succession of moderate and of bad Health, often continues for
some Months and even some Years. This happens when the Vomica is emptied and is
gradually deterged; so that its Membranes, or Sides, touch or approach each
other; but without cicatrizing or healing firmly; and then there drops or leaks
in very gradually fresh Matter. For a few Days this seems no ways to incommode
the Patient; but as soon as a certain Quantity is accumulated, he is visited
again with some of the former Symptoms, 'till another Evacuation ensues. People
thus circumstanced, in this Disease, sometimes appear to enjoy a tolerable
Share of Health. It may be considered as a Kind of internal Issue, which
empties and cleanses itself from time to time; pretty frequently in some
Constitutions, more slowly in others; and under which some may attain a good
middling Age. When it arrives however at a very considerable Duration, it
proves incurable. In its earliest State it gives way sometimes to a Milk-diet,
to riding on Horseback, and to the Medicine No. 14.

83. Some may be surprised, that in treating of an Abscess of the Lungs, and of
the Hectic, which is a Consequence of it, I say nothing of those Remedies,
commonly termed Balsamics, and so frequently employed in them, for instance,
Turpentines, Balsam of Peru, of Mecca, Frankincense, Mastich, Myrrh, Storax and
Balsam of Sulphur. I shall however say briefly here (because it is equally my
Design to destroy the Prejudices of the People, in favor of improper
Medicines, and to establish the Reputation of good ones) that I never in such
Cases made use of these Medicines; because I am convinced, that their Operation
is generally hurtful in such Cases; because I see them daily productive of real
Mischief, that they protract the Cure, and often change a slight Disorder into
an incurable Disease. They are incapable of perfect Digestion, they obstruct
the finest Vessels of the Lungs, whose Obstructions we should endeavor to
remove; and evidently occasion, except their Dose be extremely small, Heat and
Oppression. I have very often seen to a Demonstration, that Pills compounded of
Mirth, Turpentine and Balsam of Peru, have, an Hour after they were swallowed,
occasioned a Tumult and Agitation in the Pulse, high Flushings, Thirst and
Oppression. In short, it is demonstrable to every unprejudiced Person, that
these Remedies, as they have been called, are truly prejudicial in this Case;
and I heartily wish People may be disabused with respect to them; and that they
may lose that Reputation so unhappily ascribed to them.

I know that many Persons, very capable in other Respects, daily make use of
them in these Distempers: such however cannot fail of disusing them, as soon as
they shall have observed their Effects, abstracted from the Virtues of the
other Medicines to which they add them, and which mitigate the Danger of them.
I saw a Patient, whom a foreign Surgeon, living at Orb, attempted to cure of a
Hectic with melted Bacon, (much the same as Hog's Lard) which aggravated the
Disease. This Advice seemed, and certainly was, absurd; nevertheless the
Balsamics ordered in such Cases are probably not more digestible than fat
Bacon. The Powder No. 14 possesses whatever these Balsamics pretend to: it is
attended with none (of the Inconveniences they produce; and has all the good
Qualities ascribed to them. Notwithstanding which, it must not be given while
the Inflammation exists; nor when it may revive again; and no other Aliment
should be mixed with the Milk.

The famous Medicine called the Antihectic, (Antihecticum Poterii) has not, any
more than these Balsamics, the Virtues ascribed to it in such Cases. I very
often give it in some obstinate Coughs to Infants with their Milk, and then it
is very useful: but I have seldom seen it attended with considerable Effects in
grown Persons; and in the present Cases I should be fearful of its doing
Mischief.

84. If the Vomica, instead of breaking within the Substance of the Lungs
affected, should break without it, the Pus must be received into the Cavity of
the Breast. We know when that has happened, by the Sensation or Feeling of the
Patient; who perceives an uncommon, a singular Kind of Movement, pretty
generally accompanied with a Fainting. The Oppression and Anguish cease at
once; the Fever abates; the Cough however commonly continues, though with less
Violence, and without any Expectoration. But this seeming Amendment is of a
short Duration, since from the daily Augmentation of the Matter, and its
growing more acrid or sharp, the Lungs become oppressed, irritated and eroded.
The Difficulty of Breathing, Heat, Third, Wakefulness, Distaste, and Deafness
return, with many other Symptoms unnecessary to be enumerated, and especially
with frequent Sinkings and Weakness. The Patient should be confined to his
Regimen, to retard the Increase of the Disease as much as possible;
notwithstanding no other effectual Remedy remains, except that of opening the
Breast between two of the Ribs, to discharge the Matter, and to stop the
Disorder it occasions. This is called the Operation for the Empyema. I shall
not describe it here, as it should not be undertaken but by Persons of Capacity
and Experience, for whom this Treatise was not intended. I would only observe,
it is less painful than terrifying; and that if it is delayed too long, it
proves useless, and the Patient dies miserably.

85. We may daily see external Inflammations turn gangrenous, or mortify. The
same thing occurs in the Lungs, when the Fever is excessive, the Inflammation,
either in its own Nature, extremely violent, or raised to such a Height by hot
Medicines. Intolerable Anguish, extreme Weakness, frequent Faintings, Coldness
of the Extremities, a livid and foetid thin Humor brought up instead of
concocted Spitting, and sometimes blackish Stripes on the Breast, sufficiently
distinguish this miserable State. I have smelt in one Case of this Kind, where
the Patient had been attacked with this Disease (after a forced March on Foot,
having taken some Wine with Spices to force a Sweat) his Breath so horribly,
stinking, that his Wife had many Sinkings from attending him. When I saw him, I
could discern neither Pulse nor Intellect, and ordered him nothing. He died an
Hour afterward, about the Beginning of the third Hour.

86. An Inflammation may also become hard, when it forms what we call a
Scirrhus, which is a very hard Tumor, indolent, or unpainful. This is known to
occur, when the Disease has not terminated in any of those Manners I have
represented; and where, though the Fever and the other Symptoms disappear, the
Respiration, or Breathing, remains always a little oppressed; the Patient still
retains a troublesome Sensation in one Side of his Breast; and has from time to
time a dry Cough, which increases after Exercise, and after eating, This Malady
is but seldom cured; though some Persons attacked with it last many Years
without any other considerable Complaint. They should avoid all Occasions of
over-heating themselves; which might readily produce a new Inflammation about
this Tumor, the Consequences of which would be highly dangerous.

87. The belt Remedies against this Disorder, and from which I have seen some
good Effects, are the medicated Whey No. 17, and the Pills No. 18. The Patient
may take twenty Pills, and a Pint and a half of the Whey every Morning for a
long Continuance; and receive inwardly, now and then, the Vapor of hot Water.

88. Each Lung, in a perfect State of Health, touches the Pleura, the Membrane,
that lines the Inside of the Breast; though it is not connected to it. But it
often happens, after an Inflammation of the Breast, after a Pleurisy, and in
some other Cases, that these two Parts adhere closely to each other, and are
never afterward separated. However this is scarcely to be considered as a
Disease; and remains commonly unknown, as the Health is not impaired by it, and
nothing is ever prescribed to remove it. Nevertheless I have seen a few Cases,
in which this Adhesion was manifestly prejudicial.

CHAPTER V. Of the Pleurisy.
SECT. 89. THE Pleurisy, which is chiefly known by these four Symptoms, a
strong Fever, a Difficulty of Breathing, a Cough, and an acute Pain about the
Breast; the Pleurisy, I say, is not a different Malady from the Peripneumony,
or Inflammation of the Breast, the Subject of the preceding Chapter; so that I
have very little to say of it, particularly, or apart.

90. The Cause of this Disease then is exactly the same with that of the
former, that is, an Inflammation of the Lungs; but an Inflammation, that seems
rather a little more external. The only considerable Difference in the Symptoms
is, that the Pleurisy is accompanied with a most acute Pain under the Ribs, and
which is commonly termed a Stitch. This Pain is felt indifferently over every
Part of the Breast; though more commonly about the Sides, under the more fleshy
Parts of the Breast, and oftenest on the right Side. The Pain is greatly
increased whenever the Patient coughs, or draws in the Air in breathing; and
hence a Dread of increasing it, (making some Patients forbear to cough or
respire, as much as they possibly can) which aggravates the Disease, by
stopping the Course of the Blood in the Lungs, that are soon overcharged with
it. Hence the ^^flammation of this Bowel becomes general; the Blood ^ounts up
to the Head; the Countenance looks deeply red, or as it were livid; the Patient
becomes nearly suffocated, and falls into the State described 47.

Sometimes the Pain is so extremely violent, that if the Cough is very urgent
at the same time, and the Sick cannot suppress or restrain it, they are seized
with Convulsions, of which I have seen many Instances, but these occur almost
always to Women; though they are much less subject than Men to this Disease,
and indeed to all inflammatory ones. It may be proper however to observe here,
that if Women should be attacked with it, during their monthly Discharges, that
Circumstance should not prevent the repeated and necessary Bleedings, nor
occasion any Alteration in the Treatment of the Disease. And hence it appears
that the Pleurisy is really an Inflammation of the Lungs, accompanied with
acute Pain,

91. I am sensible that sometimes an Inflammation of the Lungs is communicated
also to that Membrane, which, lining the Inside of the Breast, is called the
Pleura; and from thence to the Muscles, the fleshy Parts, over and between the
Ribs. This however is not very frequently the Case.

92. Spring is commonly the Season most productive of Pleurisies: in general
there are few in Summer: notwithstanding that in the Year 1762, there were a
great many during the hottest Season, which then was excessively so. The
Disease usually begins with a violent Shivering, succeeded by a considerable
Heat, with a Cough, and Oppression, and sometimes with a sensible Straitning,
or Contraction, as it were, all over the Breast; and also with a Headache, a
Redness of the Cheeks, and with Reachings to vomit. The Stitch does not always
happen at the very first Onset; often not till several Hours from the first
Complaint; sometimes not before the second or even the third Day. Sometimes the
Patient feels two Stitches, in different Parts of the Side; though it seldom
happens that they are equally sharp, and the lightest soon ceases. Sometimes
also the Stitch shifts its Place, which promises well if the Part first
attacked by it continues perfectly free from Pain: but it has a bad Appearance,
if, while the first is present, another also supervenes, and both continue. The
Pulse is usually very hard in this Distemper; but in the dreadful Cases
described 47 and 90, it becomes soft and small. There often occurs at, or very
quickly after, the Invasion, such an Expectoration, or hawking up, as happens
in an Inflammation of the Breast; at other Times there is not the least
Appearance of it, whence such are named dry Pleurisies, which happen pretty
often. Sometimes the Sick cough but little or not at all. They often lie more
at Ease upon the Side affected, than on the sound one. The Progress of this
Disease advances exactly like that described in the preceding Chapter; for how
can they differ considerably? and the Treatment of both is the same. Large
Haemorrhages, or Bleedings from the Nose, frequently happen, to the great
Relief of the Patient; but sometimes such Discharges consist of a kind of
corrupted Blood, when the Patient is very ill, and these portend Death.

93. This Distemper is often produced by drinking cold Water, while a Person is
hot; from which Cause it is sometimes so violent, as to kill the Patient in
three Hours. A young Man was found dead at the Side of the Spring, from which
he had quenched his Thirst: neither indeed is it uncommon for Pleurisies to
prove mortal within three Days.

Sometimes the Stitch disappears, whence the Patient complains less; but at the
same Time his Countenance changes; he grows pale and sad; his Eyes look dull
and heavy, and his Pulse grows feeble. This signifies a Translation of the
Disease to the Brain, a Case which is almost constantly fatal.

There is no Disease in which the critical Symptoms are more violent, and more
strongly marked, than in this. It is proper this should be known, as it may
prevent or lessen our excessive Terror. A perfect Cure supervenes sometimes, at
the very Moment when Death was expected.

94. This Malady is one of the most common and the most destroying kind, as
well from its own violent Nature, as through the pernicious Treatment of it in
Country Places That Prejudice which insists on curing all Diseases by Sweating,
entirely regulates their Conduct in treating a Pleurisy; and as soon as a
Person is afflicted with a Stitch, all the hot Medicines are immediately set to
work. This mortal Error destroys more People than Gunpowder; and it is by so
much the more hurtful, as the Distemper is of the most violent kind; and
because, as there is commonly not a Moment to be lost, the whole depends on the
Method immediately recurred to.

95. The proper Manner of treating this Disease is exactly the same in all
Respects, with that of the Peripneumony; because, I again affirm, it is the
very same Disease. Hence the Bleedings, the softening and diluting Drinks, the
Steams, the Glysters, the Potion No. 8, and the emolient Poultices are the real
Remedies. These last perhaps are still more effectual in the Pleurisy; and
therefore they should be continually applied over the very Stitch.

The first Bleeding, especially if there has been a considerable Discharge,
almost constantly abates the Stitch, and often entirely removes it: though it
more commonly returns after an Intermission of some Hours, either in the same
Spot, or sometimes in another. This shifting of it is rather favorable,
especially if the Pain, that was first felt under the Breast, shifts into the
Shoulders to the Back, the Shoulder Blade, or the Nape of the Neck.

When the Stitch is not at all abated, or only a little; or if, after having
abated, it returns as violently as at first, and especially if it returns in
the same Spot, and the Height of the other Symptoms continues, Bleeding must be
repeated. But if a sensible Abatement of the Stitch continues; and if, though
it returns, it should be in a smaller Degree, and by Intervals, or in those
Places I have mentioned above; if the Quickness, or the Hardness of the Pulse,
and all the other Symptoms are sensibly diminished, this repeated Bleeding may
sometimes be omitted. Nevertheless, in a very strong Subject, it seems rather
prudent not to omit it, since in such Circumstances it can do no Mischief; and
a considerable Hazard may sometimes be incurred by the Omission. In very high
and dangerous Pleurisies a frequent Repetition of bleeding is necessary; except
some Impediment to it should arise from the particular Constitution of the
Patient, from his Age, or some other Circumstances.

If, from the Beginning of the Disease, the Pulse is but a little quicker and
harder than in a healthy State; if it is not manifestly strong; if the Headache
and the Stitch are so moderate as to prove supportable; if the Cough is not too
violent; if there is no sensible Oppression or Straitness, and the Patient
expectorate, or cough up, Bleeding may be omitted.

With respect to the administering of other Remedies, the same Directions are
to be exactly followed, which have been already given in the preceding Chapter,
to which the Reader is referred from 53 to 66.

96. When the Disease is not very acute or pressing, I have often cured it in a
very few Days by a single Bleeding, and a large Quantity of a Tea or Infusion
of Elder-flowers, sweetened with Honey. It is in some Cases of this Kind, that
we often find the Water Faltranc to succeed, with the Addition of some Honey,
and even of Oil: though the Drink I have just directed is considerably
preferable. That Drink which is compounded of equal Quantities of Wine and
Water, with the Addition of much Venice Treacle, annually destroys a great
Number of People in the Country.

97. In those dry Pleurisies, in which the Stitch, the Fever, and the Headache
are strong and violent; and where the Pulse is very hard and very full, with an
excessive Dryness of the Skin and of the Tongue, Bleeding should be frequently
repeated, and at small Intervals from each other. This Method frequently cures
the Disease effectually, without using any other Evacuation.

98. The Pleurisy terminates, like any other inward Inflammation, either by
some Evacuation; by an Abscess; in a Mortification; or in a Scirrhosity or hard
Tumor; and it often leaves Adhesions in the Breast.

The Gangrene or Mortification sometimes appears on the third Day, without
having been preceded by very vehement Pains. In such Cases the Body after Death
often looks very black, especially in the Parts near the Seat of the Disease;
and in such the more superstitious ascribe it to some supernatural Cause; or
draw some unhappy Presage from it, with respect to those who are yet unattacked
by it. This Appearance however is purely a natural Consequence, quite simple,
and cannot be otherwise; and the hot Regimen and Medicines are the most
prevailing Causes of it. I have seen it thus circumstanced in a Man in the
Flower of his Age, who had taken Venice Treacle in Cherry Water, and the
Ingredients of Faltranc infused in Wine.

99. Vomicas are sometimes the Consequence of Pleurisies; but their particular
Situation disposes them more to break This is, undoubtedly, Baron Van Swieten,
with whom he had premised, he agreed considerably, in all the Diseases they had
both treated of. K.
outwardly; which is the most frequent Cause of an Empyema 84. To prevent this,
it is highly proper to apply, at the first Invasion of the Disease, to the Spot
where the Pain chiefly rages, a small Plaster, which may exactly fit it; since
if the Pleurisy should terminate in an Abscess or Imposthume, the purulent
Matter will be determined to that Side.

As soon then as it is foreseen that an Abscess is forming (see 68) we should
erode, by a light Caustic, the Place where it is expected; and as soon as it is
removed, Care should be taken to promote Suppuration there. By this Means we
may entertain a reasonable Hope, that the Mass of Matter will incline its
Course to that Spot, where it will meet with the least Resistance, and be
discharged from thence. For this Heap of Matter is often accumulated between
the Pleura, and the Parts which adhere to it.

This is the Advice of a very great That is, into the Cavity of the Breast,
rather than within the Substance of the Lungs.
Physician; but I must inform the Reader, there are many Cases, in which it can
be of no Service; neither ought it to be attempted, but by Persons of undoubted
Abilities.

With Regard to Scirrhosity, or Hardness, and to the Circumstances of
Adhesions, I can add nothing to what I have said in 86 and 87.

100. It has been observed that some Persons, who have been once attacked by
this Disease, are often liable to Relapses of it, especially such as drink
hard. I knew one Man who reckoned up his Pleurisies by Dozens. A few Bleedings,
at certain proper Intervals, might prevent these frequent Returns of it; which,
joined to their excessive Drinking, make them languid and stupid, in the very
Flower of their Age. They generally fall into some Species of an Asthma, and
from that into a Dropsy, which proves the melancholy, though not an improper
Conclusion of their Lives. Such as can confine themselves to some proper
Precautions may also prevent these frequent Returns of this Disease, even
without Bleeding; by a temperate Regimen; by abstaining from time to time, from
eating Flesh and drinking Wine; at which times they should drink Whey, or some
of those Diet-drinks, No. 1. 2. 4; and by bathing their Legs sometimes in warm
Water; especially in those Seasons when this Disease is the most likely to
return.

101. Two Medicines greatly esteemed in this Disease among the Peasantry, and
even extolled by some Physicians, are the Blood of a wild He-Goat, and the
This, with great Probability, means that small black Substance often visible in
a rotten Egg, which is undoubtedly of a violent, or even poisonous Quality. Dr.
TISSOT terms it expressly -- la suie dans un Oetif. K.
Soot of an Egg. I do not contest the Cure or Recovery of many Persons, who
have taken these Remedies; notwithstanding it is not less true, that both of
them, as well as the Egg in which the Soot is taken, are dangerous; for which
Reason it is prudent, at least, never to make use of them; as there is great
Probability, they may do a little Mischief; and a Certainty that they can do no
good. The Genipi, or Dr. Lewis, who has not taken Notice of this Species of
Wormwood in his Improvement of Quincy's Dispensatory, has mentioned it in his
late Materia Medica. K.
Wormwood of the Alps, has also acquired great Reputation in this Disease, and
occasioned many Disputes between some very zealous Ecclesiastics, and a justly
celebrated Physician. It seems not difficult however to ascertain the proper
Use of it. This Plant is a powerful Bitter; it heats and excites Sweat: it
seems clear, that from such Consequences, it should never be employed in a
Pleurisy, while the Vessels are full, the Pulse hard, the Fever high, and the
Blood inflamed. In all such Circumstances it must aggravate the Disease; but
toward the Conclusion of it, when the Vessels are considerably emptied, the
Blood is diluted, and the Fever abated, it may then be recurred to; but with a
constant Recollection that it is hot, and not to be employed without Reflection
and Prudence. This being a proper Place for directing the Seneka Rattle Snake
Root, I shall observe, that the best Way of exhibiting it is in Decoction, by
gradually simmering and boiling two Ounces of it in gross Powder, in two Pints
and a half of water, to a Pint and a Quarter; and then giving three Spoonfuls
of it to a grown Person, every six Hours. If the Stitch should continue, or
return, after taking it, Bleeding, which should be premised to it, must be
occasionally repeated; though it seldom proves necessary, after a few Doses of
it. It greatly promotes Expectoration, keeps the Body gently open, and
sometimes operates by Urine and by Sweat; very seldom proving at all emetic in
Decoction. The Regimen of Drinks directed here in Pleurisies is to be observed
as usual Dr. Tennant, the Introducer of this valuable Medicine, confided solely
in it, in Bastard Peripneumonies, without Bleeding, Blistering, or any other
Medicines. K.


CHAPTER VI. Of the Diseases of the Throat.
SECT. 102. THE Throat is subject to many Diseases: one of the most frequent
and the most dangerous, is that Inflammation of it, commonly termed a Quinsey.
This in Effect is a Distemper of the same Nature with an Inflammation of the
Breast; but as it occurs in a different Part, the Symptoms, of course, are very
different. They also vary, and not a little, according to the different Parts
of the Throat which are inflamed.

103. The general Symptoms of an Inflammation of the Throat are, the Shivering,
the subsequent Heat, the Fever, the Headache, red high-colored Urine, a
considerable Difficulty, and sometimes even an Impossibility, of swallowing any
Thing whatsoever. But if the nearest Parts to the Glottis, that is, of the
Entrance into the Windpipe or Conduit through which we breath, are attacked,
Breathing becomes excessively difficult; the Patient is sensible of extreme
Anguish, and great Approaches to Suffocation; the Disease is then extended to
the Glottis, to the Body of the Windpipe, and even to the Substance of the
Lungs, whence it becomes speedily fatal.

The Inflammation of the other Parts is attended with less Danger: and this
Danger becomes still less, as the Disease is more extended to the outward and
superficial parts. When the Inflammation is general, and seizes all the
internal Parts of the Throat, and particularly the Tonsils or Almonds, as they
are called, the Uvula, or Process of the Palate, and the Basis, or remotest,
deepest Part of the Tongue, it is one of the most dangerous and dreadful
Maladies. The Face is then swelled up and enflamed; the whole Inside of the
Throat is in the same Condition; the Patient can get nothing down; he breathes
with a Pain and Anguish, which concur, with a Stuffing or Obstruction in his
Brain, to throw him into a Kind of furious Delirium, or Raving. His Tongue is
bloated up, and is extended out of his Mouth; his Nostrils are dilated, as though
it were to assist him in his Breathing; the whole Neck, even to the Beginning
of the Breast, is excessively tumified or swelled up; the Pulse is very quick,
very weak, and often intermits; the miserable Patient is deprived of all his
Strength, and commonly dies the second or third Day. Very fortunately this
Kind, or Degree of it, which I have often seen in Languedoc, happens very
rarely in Swisserland, where the Disease is less violent: and where I have only
seen People die of it, in Consequence of its being perniciously treated; or by
reason of some accidental Circumstances, which were foreign to the Disease
itself. Of the Multitude of Patients I have attended in this Disorder, I have
known but one to fail under it, whose Case I shall mention toward the Close of
this Chapter.

104. Sometimes the Disease shifts from the internal to the external Parts: the
Skin of the Neck and Breast grows very red, and becomes painful, but the
Patient finds himself better.

At other Times the Disorder quits the Throat, but is transferred to the Brain,
or upon the Lungs. Both these Translations of it are mortal, when the best
Advice and Assistance cannot be immediately procured; and it must be
acknowledged, that even the best are often ineffectual.

105. The most usual Kind of this Disease is that which affects only the
Tonsils (the Almonds) and the Palate, or rather its Process, the Uvula,
commonly called the Palate. It generally first invades one of the Tonsils,
which becomes enlarged, red and painful, and does not allow the afflicted to
swallow, but with great Pain. Sometimes the Disorder is confined to one Side;
but most commonly it is extended to the Uvula, (the Palate) from whence it is
extended to the other Tonsil. If it be of a mild Kind, the Tonsil first
affected is generally better, when the second is attacked. Whenever they are
both attacked at once, the Pain and the Anguish of the Patient are very
considerable; he cannot swallow, but with great Difficulty and Complaint, and
the Torment of this is so vehement, that I have seen Women affected with
Convulsions, as often as they endeavored to swallow their Spittle, or any
other Liquid. They continue, even for several Hours sometimes, unable to take
any thing whatever; all the upper inward Part of the Mouth, the Bottom of the
Palate, and the descending Part of the Tongue become lightly red, or inflamed.

A considerable Proportion of Persons under this Disease swallow Liquids more
difficultly than Solids; by reason that Liquids require a greater Action of
some Part of the Muscles, in order to their being properly directed into their
Conduit or Chanel. The Deglutition (the Swallowing) of the Spittle is attended
with still more Uneasiness than that of other Liquids; because it is a little
more thick and viscid, and flows down with less Ease. This Difficulty of
swallowing, joined to the Quantity thence accumulated, produces that almost
continual hawking up, which oppresses some Patients so much the more, as the
Inside of their Cheeks, their whole Tongue, and their Lips are often galled,
and even stead as it were. This also prevents their Sleeping, which however
seems no considerable Evil; Sleep being sometimes but of little Service in
Diseases attended with a Fever; and I have often seen those, who thought their
Throats almost entirely well in the Evening, and yet found them very bad after
some Hours Sleep.

The Fever in this Species of the Disease, is sometimes very high; and the
Shivering often endures for many Hours. It is succeeded by considerable Heat,
and a violent Headache, which yet is sometimes attended with a Drowsiness. The
Fever is commonly pretty high in the Evening, though sometimes but
inconsiderable, and by the Morning perhaps there is none at all.

A light Invasion of this Disease of the Throat often precedes the Shivering;
though most commonly it does not become manifest 'till after it, and at the
same time when the Heat comes on.

The Neck is sometimes a little inflated, or puffed up; and many of the Sick
complain of a pretty smart Pain in the Ear of that Side, which is most
affected. I have but very seldom observed that they had it in both.

106. The Inflammation either disappears by Degrees, or an Abscess is formed in
the Part which was chiefly affected. It has never happened, at least within my
Knowledge, that this Sort of the Disease, prudently treated, has ever
terminated either in a Mortification, or a Scirrhus: but I have been a Witness
to either of these supervening, when Sweating was extorted in the Beginning of
it, by hot Medicines.

It is also very rare to meet with those highly dangerous Translations of this
Disease upon the Lungs, such as are described in that Species of it from 103,
104. It is true indeed they do not occur more frequently, even in that Species
there described, whenever the Disease is thrown out upon the more external
Parts.

107. The Treatment of the Quinsey, as well as of all other inflammatory
Diseases, is the same with that of an Inflammation of the Breast.

The Sick is immediately to be put upon a Regimen; and in that Sort described
103, Bleeding must be repeated four or five Times within a few Hours; and
sometimes there is a Necessity to recur still oftener to it. When it assaults
the Patient in the most vehement Degree, all Medicines, all Means, are very
generally ineffectual: they should be tried however. We should give as much as
can be taken of the Drinks No. 2. and 4. But as the Quantity they are able to
swallow is often very inconsiderable; the Glyster No. 5 should be repeated
every three Hours; and their Legs should be put into a Bath of warm Water,
thrice a Day.

108. Cupping Glasses, with Scarification, applied about the Neck, after
bleeding twice or thrice, have often been experienced to be highly useful. In
the most desperate Cases, when the Neck is excessively swelled, one ot two deep
Incisions made with a Razor, on this external Tumor, have sometimes saved a
Patient's Life.

109. In that Kind, and those Circumstances, of this Disease described 105, we
must have very frequent Recourse to Bleeding; and it should never be omitted,
when the Pulse is very perceivably hard and full. It is of the utmost
Consequence to do it instantly; since it is the only Means to prevent the
Abscess, which forms very readily, if Bleeding has been neglected, only for a
few Hours. Sometimes it is necessary to repeat it a second time, but very
rarely a third.

This Disease is frequently so gentle and mild, as to be cured without
Bleeding, by the Means of much good Management. But as many as are not Masters
of their own time, nor in such an easy Situation as to be properly attended,
ought, without the least Hesitation, to be bled directly, which is sometimes
sufficient to remove the Complaint; especially if, after Bleeding, the Patient
drinks plentifully of the Ptisan No. 2.

In this light Degree of the Disease, it may suffice to bath the Legs, and also
to receive a Glyster, once a Day; the first to be used in the Morning, and the
last in the Evening. Besides the general Remedies against Inflammations, a few
particular ones, calculated precisely for this Disease, may be applied in each
Kind or Degree of it. The bell are, first the emollient Poultices, No. 9, laid
over the whole Neck. The English avail themselves considerably in this Disease,
of a Mixture of equal Parts of Sallad Oil and Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, or of Oil
and Spirit of Hartshorn, as a Liniment and Application round the Neck. This
Remedy corresponds with many Indications; and deserves, perhaps, the first
Place amongst local Applications against the inflammatory Quinsey. E. L.
Some have highly extolled the Application of Swallows Nests in this Disease;
and though I make no Objection to it, I think it certainly less efficacious
than any of those which I direct.

2. Of the Gargarisms (No. 19) a great Variety may be prepared, of pretty much
the same Properties, and of equal Efficacy. Those I direct here are what have
succeeded best with me, and they are very simple. Dr. Pringle is apprehensive
of some ill Effects from Acids in Gargarisms [ which is probably from their
supposed repelling Property] and prefers a Decoction of Figs in Milk and Water,
to which he adds a small Quantity of Spirit of Sal Ammoniac. E. L.


3. The Steam of hot Water, as directed 55, should be repeated five or six
times a Day; a Poultice should be constantly kept on, and often renewed; and
the Patient should frequently gargle.

There are some Persons, besides Children, who cannot gargle themselves: and in
fact the Pain occasioned by it makes it the more difficult. In such a Case,
instead of gargling, the same Gargarism (No. 19.) may be injected with a small
Syringe. The Injection reaches farther than Gargling, and often causes the
Patient to hawk up a considerable Quantity of glairy Matter (which has grown
still thicker toward the Bottom of the Throat) to his sensible Relief. This
Injection should be often repeated. The little hollowed Pipes of Elder-Wood,
which all the Children in the Country can make, may be conveniently employed
for this Purpose. The Patient should breathe out, rather than inspire, during
the Injection.

110. Whenever the Disease terminates without Suppuration, the Fever, the
Headache, the Heat in the Throat, and the Pain in swallowing, begin to abate
from the fourth Day, sometimes from the third, often only from the fifth; and
from such Period that Abatement increases at a great Rate, so that at the End
of two, three, or four Days, on the sixth, seventh, or eighth, the Patient is
entirely well. Some few however continue to feel a light Degree of Pain, and
that only on one Side, four or five Days longer, but without a Fever, or any
considerable Uneasiness.

111. Sometimes the Fever and the other Symptoms abate, after the Bleeding and
other Remedies; without any subsequent Amendment in the Throat, or any Signs of
Suppuration. In such Cases we must chiefly persist in the Gargarisms and the
Steams; and where an experienced and dexterous Surgeon can be procured, it were
proper he should scarify the inflamed Tonsils. These discharge, in such Cases,
a moderate Quantity of Blood; and this Evacuation relieves, very readily, as
many as make use of it.

112. If the Inflammation is in no ways disposed to disperse, so that an
Abscess is forming, which almost ever happens, if it has not been obviated at
the Invasion of the Disease; then the Symptoms attending the Fever continue,
though raging a little less after the fourth Day: the Throat continues red, but
of a less florid and lively Redness: a Pain also continues, though less acute,
accompanied sometimes with Pulsations, and at other times entirely without any,
of which it is proper to take Notice: the Pulse commonly grows a little softer;
and on the fifth or sixth Day, and sometimes sooner, the Abscess is ready to
break. This may be discovered by the Appearance of a small white and soft
Tumor, when the Mouth is open, which commonly appears about the Center or
Middle of the Inflammation. It bursts of itself; or, should it not, it must be
opened. This is effected by strongly securing a Lancet to one End of a small
Stick or Handle, and enveloping, or wrapping up the whole Blade of it, except
the Point and the Length of one fourth or a third of an Inch, in some Folds of
soft Linen; after which the Abscess is pierced with the Point of this Lancet.
The instant it is opened, the Mouth is filled with the Discharge of a Quantity
of Pus, of the most intolerable Savor and Smell. The Patient should gargle
himself, after the Discharge of it, with the detersive, or cleansing Gargarism
No. 19. It is surprising sometimes to see the Quantity of Matter discharged
from this Imposthumation. In general there is but one; though sometimes I have
seen two of them.

113. It happens, and not seldom, that the Matter is not collected exactly in
the Place, where the Inflammation appeared, but in some less exposed and less
visible Place; whence a Facility of swallowing is almost entirely restored; the
Fever abates; the Patient sleeps; he imagines he is cured, and that no
Inconvenience remains, but such as ordinarily occurs in the earliest Stage of
Recovery. A Person who is neither a Physician, nor a Surgeon, may easily
deceive himself, when in this State: but the following Signs may enable him to
discover that there is an Abscess, viz. A certain Inquietude and general
Uneasiness; a Pain throughout the Mouth; some Shiverings from time to time:
frequently sharp, but short and transient, Heat; a Pulse moderately soft, but
not in a natural State; a Sensation of Thickness and Heaviness in the Tongue;
small white Eruptions on the Gums, on the Inside of the Cheek, on the Inside
and Outside of the Lips, and a disagreeable Taste and Odor.

114. In such Cases Milk or warm Water should frequently be retained in the
Mouth; the Vapor of hot Water should be conveyed into it; and emollient
Cataplasms may be applied about the Neck. All these Means concur to the
softening and breaking of the Abscess. The Finger may also be introduced to
feel for its Situation, and when discovered, the Surgeon may easily open it. I
happened once to break one under my Finger, without having made the least
Effort to do it. Warm Water may be injected pretty forcibly, either by the
Mouth or the Nostrils: this sometimes occasions a Kind of Cough, or certain
Efforts which tend to break it, and which I have seen happen even from
laughing. As to the rest, the Patient should not be too anxious or uneasy about
the Event. I never saw a single Instance of a Person's dying of a Quinsey of
this Kind, after the Suppuration is truly effected; neither has it happened
perhaps after the Time it is forming for Suppuration.

115. The glairy Matter with which the Throat is overcharged, and the very
Inflammation of that Part, which, from its Irritation, produces the same Effect
as the Introduction of a Finger into it, occasions some Patients to complain of
incessant Propensities to vomit. We must be upon our Guard here, and not
suppose that this Heart-Sickness, as some have called it, results from a
Disorder of, or a Load within, the Stomach, and that it requires a Vomit for
its Removal. The giving one here would often prove a very unfortunate Mistake.
It might, in a high Inflammation, further aggravate it; or we might be obliged
(even during the Operation of the Vomit) to bleed, in order to lessen the
Violence of the Inflammation. Such Imprudence with its bad Consequences, often
leaves the Patient, even after the Disease is cured, in a State of Langour and
Weakness for a considerable time. Nevertheless, there are some particular
Disorders of the Throat, attended with a Fever, in which a Vomit may be
prudently given. But this can only be, when there is no Inflammation, or after
it is dispersed; and there still remains some putrid Matter in the first
Passages. Of such Cases I shall speak hereafter. In Diseases of the Throat,
which have been preceded by such Excesses in Food or strong Drink, as occur too
often in many Countries, when the Patient has very strong Reachings to vomit,
and the Tongue is moist at the same time; we should not hesitate, after
appeasing the first Symptoms of the Inflammation [by sufficient Bleedings,
etc.] to assist the Efforts of Nature, and to give a small Dose of Tartar
emetic, dissolved in some Spoonfuls of Water. This Remedy in this Case,
promotes the Dispersion of the Inflammation, beyond any other. E. L.


116. We often see in Swisserland a Disorder different from these of the
Throat, of which we have just treated; though, like these, attended with a
Difficulty of swallowing. It is termed in French the Oreillons, and often the
Ourles, or swelled Ears. It is an Overfulness and Obstruction of those Glands
and their Tubes, which are to furnish the Saliva or Spittle; and particularly
of the two large Glands which lie between the Ear and the Jaw, which are called
the Parotides; and of two under the Jaw, called the Maxillares. All these being
considerably swelled in this Disease, do not only produce a great Difficulty of
swallowing, but also prevent the Mouth from opening; as an Attempt to do it is
attended with violent Pain. Young Children are much more liable to this Disease
than grown Persons. Being seldom attended with a Fever, there is no Occasion
for Medicines: It is sufficient to defend the Part affected from the external
Air; to apply some proper Poultice over them; to lessen the Quantity of their
Food considerably, denying them Flesh and Wine; but indulging them plentifully
in some light warm Liquid, to dilute their Humors and restore Perspiration. I
cured myself of this Disorder in 1754, by drinking nothing, for four Days, but
Bawm Tea, to which I added one fourth part Milk, and a little Bread. The same
Regimen has often cured me of other light Complaints of the Throat.

117. In the Spring of 1761, there were an astonishing Number of Persons
attacked with Disorders of the Throat, of two different Kinds. Some of them
were seized with that common Sort which I have already described. Without
adding any thing more particularly, in respect to this Species, it happened
frequently to grown Persons, who were perfectly cured by the Method already
recited. The other Species, on which I shall be more particular in this Place
(because I know they have abounded in some Villages, and were very fatal)
invaded Adults, or grown Persons, also; but especially Children, from the Age
of one Year, and even under that, to the Age of twelve or thirteen.

The first Symptoms were the same with those of the common Quinsey, such as the
Shivering, the ensuing Heat or Fever, Dejection, and a Complaint of the Throat:
but the following Symptoms distinguished these from the common inflammatory
Quinseys.

1. The Sick had often something of a Cough, and a little Oppression.

2. The Pulse was quicker, but less hard, and less strong, than usually happens
in Diseases of the Throat.

3. The Patients were afflicted with a sharp, stinging and dry Heat, and with
great Restlessness.

4. They spat less than is usual in a common Quinsey: and their Tongues were
extremely dry.

5. Though they had some Pain in swallowing, this was not the principal
Complaint, and they could drink sufficiently.

6. The Swelling and Redness of the Tonsils, of the Palate, and of its Process
were not considerable; but the parotid and maxillary Glands, and especially the
former, being extremely swelled and inflamed, the Pain they chiefly complained
of, was this outward one.

7. When the Disease proved considerably dangerous, the whole Neck swelled; and
sometimes even the Veins, which return the Blood from the Brain, being
overladen, as it were, the Sick had some Degree of Drowsiness, and of a
Delirium, or Raving.

8. The Paroxysms, or Returns, of the Fever were considerably irregular.

9. The Urine appeared to be less inflamed, than in other Diseases of the
Throat.

10. Bleeding and other Medicines did not relieve them, as soon as in the other
Kind; and the Disease itself continued a longer time.

11. It did not terminate in a Suppuration like other Quinseys, but sometimes
the Tonsils were ulcerated.

12. This seems to have been the same kind of Quinsey, of which Drs. Huxham,
Fothergil, Cotton, and others wrote, though under different Appelations. K.
Almost every Child, and indeed a great many of the grown Persons assaulted
with this Disease, threw out, either on the first Day, or on some succeeding
one, within the first six Days, a certain Efflorescence, or Eruptions,
resembling the Measles considerably in some, but of a less lively Color, and
without any Elevation, or rising above the Skin. It appeared first in the Face,
next in the Arms, and descended to the Legs, Thighs and Trunk disappearing
gradually at the End of two or three Days, in the same Order it had observed in
breaking out. A few others (I have seen but five Instances of it) suffered the
most grievous Symptoms before the Eruption: and threw out the genuine purpura,
or white miliary Eruption.

13. As soon as these Efflorescences or Eruptions appeared, the Sick generally
found themselves better. That, last mentioned, continued four, five, or six
Days, and frequently went off by Sweats. Such as had not these Ebullitions,
which was the Case of many Adults, were not cured without very plentiful Sweats
toward the Termination of the Disease; those which occurred at the Invasion of
it being certainly unprofitable, and always hurtful.

14. I have seen some Patients, in whom the Complaint of the Threat disappeared
entirely, without either Eruption or Sweats: but such still remained in very
great Inquietude and Anguish, with a quick and small Pulse. I ordered them a
sudorific Drink, which being succeeded by the Eruption, or by Sweating, they
found themselves sensibly relieved.

15. But whether the Sick had, or had not, these external Rednesses or
Eruptions, every one of them parted with their Cuticle or Scarf Skin, which
fell off, in large Scales, from the whole Surface of the Body: so great was the
Acrimony or Sharpness of that Matter, which was to be discharged through the
Skin.

16. A great Number suffered a singular Alteration in their Voice, different
from that which occurs in common Quinseys, the Insides of their Nostrils being
extremely dry.

17. The Sick recovered with more Difficulty after this, than after the common
Quinseys: and if they were negligent or irregular, during their Recovery;
particularly if they exposed themselves too soon to the Cold, a Relapse ensued,
or some different Symptoms; such as a Stuffing with Oppression, a Swelling of
the Belly, windy Swellings in different Parts; Weakness, Loathings, Ulcerations
behind the Ears, and something of a Cough and Hoarseness.

18. I have been sent for to Children, and also to some young Folks, who, at
the End of several Weeks, had been taken with a general Inflammation of the
whole Body, attended with great Oppression, and a considerable Abatement of
their Urine, which was also high-colored and turbid, or without Separation.
They seemed also in a very singular State of Indifference, or Disregard, with
respect to any Object or Circumstance. I recovered every one of them entirely
by Blisters, and the Powder No. 25. The first Operation of this Medicine was to
vomit them: to this succeeded a Discharge by Urine, and at last very plentiful
Sweating, which completed the Cure. Two Patients only, of a bad Constitution,
who were a little ricketty, and disposed to glandular Scirrhosity or
Knottiness, relapsed and died, after being recovered of the Disease itself for
some Days.

118. I have bled some adult Persons, and made Use of the cooling Regimen, as
long as there was an evident Inflammation: it was necessary after this to
unload the first Passages; and at last to excite moderate Sweats. The same
Powders No. 25 have often effected both these Discharges, and with entire
Success. In other Cases I have made use of Ipecacuanha, as directed No. 35.

In some Subjects there did not appear any inflammatory Symptom; and the
Distemper was solely owing to a Load of putrid Matter in the first Passages.
Some Patients also discharged Worms. In such Cases I never bled; but the Vomit
had an excellent Effect, at the very Onset of the Disease; it produced a
perceivable Abatement of all the Symptoms; Sweating ensued very kindly and
naturally, and the Patient recovered entirely a few Hours after.

119. There were some Places, where no Symptom or Character of Inflammation
appeared; and in which Cases it was necessary to omit Bleeding, that having
been attended with bad Consequences.

I never directed Infants to be bled. After opening the first Passages,
Blisters and diluting Drinks proved their only Remedies. A simple Infusion of
Elder-flowers, and those of the Lime Tree, has done great Service to those who
drank plentifully of it.

120. I am sensible that in many Villages a great Number of Persons have died,
with a prodigious Inflation or Swelling of the Neck. Some have also died in the
City, and among others a young Woman of twenty Years of Age, who had taken
nothing but hot sweating Medicines and red Wine, and died the fourth Day, with
violent Suffocations, and a large Discharge of Blood from the Nose. Of the
great Number I have seen in Person, only two died. One was a little Girl of ten
Months old. She had an Efflorescence which very suddenly disappeared: at this
time I was called in; but the Humor had retreated to the Breast, and rendered
her Death inevitable. The other was a strong Youth from sixteen to seventeen
Years old, whose sudden Attack of the Disease manifested, from the very
Beginning, a violent Degree of it. Nevertheless, the Symptoms subsiding, and
the Fever nearly terminating, the Sweats which approached would probably have
saved him: but he would not suffer them to have their Course, continually
stripping himself quite naked. The Inflammation was immediately repelled upon
the Lungs, and destroyed him within the Space of thirty Hours. I never saw a
Person die with so very dry a Skin. The Vomit affected him very little upwards,
and brought on a Purging. His own bad Conduct seems to have been the Occasion
of his Death; and may this serve as one Example of it!

121. I chose to expatiate on this Disease, as it may happen to reach other
Places, where it may be useful to have been apprized of its Marks, and of its
Treatment, which agrees as much with that of putrid Fevers, of which I shall
speak hereafter, as with that of the inflammatory Diseases I have already
considered; since in some Subjects the Complaint of the Throat has evidently
been a Symptom of a putrid Fever, rather than of the chiefly apparent Disease,
a Quinsey. I reserve some other interesting Reflections on this Disease, for
the second Edition of my Treatise on Fevers; and the Editor at Paris has very
well observed, that it has some Relation to the gangrenous sore Throat, which
has been epidemical these twenty Years past, in many Parts of Europe. -- This
Note is from Dr. TISSOT himself.


122. Disorders of the Throat are, with respect to particular Persons, an
habitual Disease returning every Year, and sometimes oftener than once a Year.
They may be prevented by the same Means, which I have directed for the
Preservation from habitual Pleurisies 100; and by defending the Head and the
Neck from the Cold; especially after being heated by Hunting, or any violent
Exercise, or even by singing long and loud, which maybe considered as an
extraordinary Exercise of some of the Parts affected in this Disease.

CHAPTER VII. Of Colds.
SECT. 123. THERE are many erroneous Prejudices, with regard to Colds, all of
which may be attended with pernicious Consequences. The first is, that a Cold
is never dangerous; an Error which daily destroys the Lives of many. I have
already complained of it for many Years past; and I have since beheld a
Multitude of such Examples of it, as have but too sufficiently warranted my
Complaints.

No Person however, it is certain, dies merely of a Cold, as long as it is
nothing but a Cold simply; but when, from Inattention and Neglect, it is thrown
upon, and occasions Distempers of the Breast, it may, and often does, prove
mortal. Colds destroy more than Plagues, was the Answer of a very sagacious and
experienced Physician to one of his Friends, who, being asked, how he was in
Health, replied, Very well, I have nothing but a Cold.

A second erroneous Prejudice is, that Colds require no Means, no Medicines,
and that they last the longer for being nursed or tampered with. The last
Article may be true indeed with respect to the Method, in which the Person
affected with them, treats them, but the Principle itself is false. Colds, like
other Disorders, have their proper Remedies; and are removed with more or less
Facility, as they are conducted better or worse.

124. A third Mistake is, that they are not only considered as not dangerous,
but are even supposed wholesome too. Doubtless a Man had better have a Cold
than a more grievous Disease; though it must be still better to have neither of
them. The most that can reasonably be said and admitted on this Point, is, that
when a checked, or an obstructed Perspiration becomes the Cause of a Distemper,
it is fortunate that it produces rather a Cold, than any very dreadful Disease,
which it frequently does: though it were to be wished, that neither the Cause,
nor its Effect existed. A Cold constantly produces some Disorder or Defect in
the Functions of some Part or Parts of the Body, and thus becomes the Cause of
a Disease. It is indeed a real Disorder itself, and which, when in a violent
Degree, makes a very perceivable Assault upon our whole Machine. Colds, with
their Defluctions, considerably weaken the Breast, and sooner or later
considerably impair the Health. Persons subject to frequent Colds are never
robust or strong; they often sink into languid Disorders; and a frequent
Aptitude to take Cold is a Proof, that their Perspiration may be easily checked
and restrained; whence the Lungs become oppressed pressed and obstructed, which
must always be attended with considerable Danger.

125. We may be convinced of the Weakness and Fallacy of these Prejudices, by
considering attentively the Nature of Colds; which are nothing else than the
very Diseases already described in the three preceding Chapters, though in the
lightest Degree only of such Diseases.

A Cold in truth is almost constantly an inflammatory Disease; a light
Inflammation of the Lungs, or of the Throat; of the Membrane or very thin Skin,
which lines the Nostrils, and the Inside of certain Cavities in the Bones of
the Checks and Forehead. These Cavities communicate with the Nose in such a
Manner, that when one Part of this Membrane is affected with an Inflammation,
it is easily communicated to the other Parts.

126. It is scarcely necessary to describe the Symptoms of a Cold, and it may
be sufficient to remark, 1, That their chief Cause is the same with that, which
most commonly produces the Diseases already treated of, that is, an obstructed
Perspiration, and a Blood somewhat inflamed. 2, That whenever these Diseases
affect great Numbers, many Colds prevail at the same time. 3, That the Symptoms
which manifest a violent Cold, greatly resemble those which precede or usher in
these Diseases. People are rarely attacked by great Colds, without a Shivering
and Fever; which last sometimes continues for many Days. There is a Cough, a
dry Cough, for some time; after which some Expectoration ensues, which allays
the Cough, and lightens the Oppression: at which time the Cold may be said to
be maturated, or ripe. There are pretty often flight Stitches, but unfixed or
flying about, with a little Complaint of the Throat. When the Nostrils happen
to be the Seat of the Disorder, which is then very improperly termed a Cold of
the Brain, it is often attended with a vehement Headache, that sometimes
depends on an Irritation of the Membrane, which lines the Cavities in the Bone
of the Forehead, or the maxillary Sinuses, that is, the Cavities in the Jaws.
At first the running from the Nose is very clear, thin and sharp; afterward, in
Proportion to the Abatement of the Inflammation, it becomes thicker; and the
Consistence and Color of it resemble those of what others cough up. The Smell,
the Taste, and the Appetite are commonly impaired by it.

127. Colds seem to be of no certain Duration or Continuance. Those of the Head
or Brain generally last but a few Days; of the Breast longer. Some Colds
nevertheless terminate in four or five Days. If they extend beyond this Term
they prove really hurtful. 1, Because the Violence of the Cough disorders the
whole Machine; and particularly, by forcing up the Blood to the Head. 2, By
depriving the Person afflicted of his usual Sleep, which is almost constantly
diminished by it. 3, By impairing the Appetite, and confusing the Digestion,
which is unavoidably lessened by it. 4, By weakening the Lungs themselves
through the continual Agitation from Coughing; whence all the Humors being
gradually determined toward them, as the weak est Part, a continual Cough
subsists. Hence also they become overcharged with Humors, which grow viscid
there; the Respiration is overloaded and oppressed; a flow Fever appears;
Nutrition almost ceases; the Patient becomes very weak; sinks into a Wasting,
an obstinate Wakefulness and Anguish, and often dies in a short time, 5, By
Reason that the Fever, which almost constantly accompanies a great Cold,
concurs to wear the Body down.

128. Wherefore, since a Cold is a Disease of the same Kind with Quinseys,
Peripneumonies and Inflammations of the Breast, it ought to be treated in the
same Manner. If it is a violent one, Blood should be taken from the Arm, which
may considerably shorten its Duration: and this becomes more essentially
necessary, whenever the Patient is of a sanguineous ruddy Complexion, a bounds
with Blood, and has a strong Cough, and great Headache.

The Drinks No. 1, 2, 3, 4, should be very plentifully used. It is advantageous
to bathe the Feet in warm Water every Night at going to Bed. It frequently
happens, that the Bathings alone remove the Headache, and the Cough too, by
relaxing the lower Parts, and the entire Surface of the Body. If the Patient is
costive, he should receive Glysters of warm Water, in which some Bran has been
boiled, with the Addition of a little common Soap or Butter. E. L.
In a Word, if the Patient is put into a Regimen, the Cure is very speedily
effected.

129. The Disorder, indeed, however, is often so very slight, that it may be
thought to require very little, if any medical Treatment, and may be easily
cured without Physic, by abstaining from Flesh, Eggs, Broth and Wine; from all
Food that is sharp, fat and heavy; and by dieting upon Bread, Pulls, Fruit and
Water; particularly by eating little or no Supper; and drinking, if thirsty, a
simple Ptisan of Barley, or an Infusion of Elder flowers, with the Addition of
a third or fourth Part of Milk. Bathing the Feet, and the Powder No. 20
contribute to dispose the Patient to sleep. Five Tea-Cups of an Infusion of the
red, or wild Poppy Leaves may also be ventured on safely.

130. When the Fever, Heat and Inflammation wholly disappear; when the Patient
has kept to his Regimen for some Days, and his Blood is well diluted, if the
Cough and Want of Sleep still continue, he may take in the Evening a Dose of
Storax Under these Circumstances of a tickling Cough from a Cold, without a
Fever, and with very little Inflammation, I have known great and very frequent
Success from a Dose of Elixir paregoricum, taken at Bedtime, after a very
light thin Supper. If the Patient be sanguine, strong and costive, Bleeding in
a suitable Quantity, and a gently opening Potion, or purging Glyster, may be
prudently premised to it. Grown Persons may take from thirty to eighty, or even
one hundred Drops of it, in Barley Water, or any other pectoral Drink; and
Children in the Chincough from five to twenty Drops; half an Ounce of it by
Measure containing about one Grain of Opium, which is the Quantity contained in
less than quite six Grains of the Storax Pill; this last being a very available
pectoral Opiate too in Coughs from Defluction, in more adult Bodies, who may
also prefer a Medicine in that small Size and Form. K.
Pill, or of Venice Treacle with Elder-flower Tea, after bathing his Feet.
These Remedies by stilling the Cough, and restoring Perspiration, frequently
cure the Cold in the Space of one Night. I confess at the same time, I have
seen bad Consequences from such Opiates, when given too early in the Complaint.
It is also necessary, when they are given, that the Patient should have supt
but very moderately, and that his Supper should be digested.

131. An immense Number of Remedies are cried up for the Cure of Colds, such as
Ptisans of Apples or Pippins, of Liquorice, of dry Raisins, of Figs, of Borage,
of Ground Ivy, of Veronica, or Speedwell, of Hysop, of Nettles, etc. etc. I
have no Design to depreciate them; as all of them may possibly be useful: But
unfortunately, those who have seen any particular one of them succeed in one
Case, readily conclude it to be the most excellent of them all; which is a
dangerous Error, because no one Case is a sufficient Foundation to decide upon:
neither indeed are any qualified to decide, who have not seen a great Number of
such Cases; and who do not so attentively observe the Effects of different
Medicines, as to determine on those which most frequently agree with the
Disorder; and which, in my Judgment, are those I have just enumerated. I have
known a Tea or Infusion of Cherry Stalks, which is not a disagreeable Drink, to
cure a very inveterate Cold.

132. In Colds of the Head or Brain, the Steam of warm Water alone, or that in
which Elder-flowers, or some other mild aromatic Herbs, have been boiled,
commonly affords a pretty speedy Relief. These are also serviceable in Colds
fallen on the Breast. See 55.

It has been a Practice, though of no very long standing, to give the Fat of a
Whale in these Cases; but this is a very crude indigestible Kind of Fat, and
greasy oily Medicines seldom agree with Colds. Besides, this Whale's Fat is
very disagreeable and rancid, that is rank; so that it were better to forbear
using it: I have sometimes seen ill Effects from it, and rarely any good ones
This seems but too applicable to the very popular Use of Spermaecti, etc. in
such Cases, which can only grease the Passage to the Stomach; must impair its
digestive Faculty, and cannot operate against the Cause of a Cold; though that
Cure of it, which is effected by the Economy of Nature in due time, is often
ascribed to such Medicines, as may rather have retarded it. K.
.

133. Such Persons as abate nothing of the usual Quantity of their Food, when
seized with a Cold, and who swallow down large Quantities of hot Water, ruin
their Health. Their Digestion ceases; the Cough begins to affect the Stomach,
without ceasing to afflict the Breast; and they incur a Chance of sinking into
the Condition described 127, No. 4.

Burnt Brandy and spiced Wine are very pernicious in the Beginning of Colds,
and the Omission of them must be a very prudent Omission. If any good Effects
have ever been known to attend the Use of them, it has been toward the going
off of the Cold; when the Disorder maintained its Ground, solely from the
Weakness of the Patient. Whenever this is the Case, there is not the least Room
for farther Relaxation; but the Powders No. 14, should be taken every Day in a
little Wine; and should the Humors seem likely to be thrown upon the Lungs,
Blisters ought to be applied to the fleshy Part of the Legs.

134. Drams, or Liqueurs, as they are called in French, agree so very little in
this last State, that frequently a very small Quantity of them revives a Cold
that was just expiring. There really are some Persons who never drink them
without taking Cold, which is not to be wondered at, as they occasion a light
Inflammation in the Breast, which is equivalent to a Cold or Defluction.

Persons laboring under this Disorder should not, however, expose themselves
to violent cold Weather, if there is a Possibility of avoiding it: though they
should equally guard too against excessive Heat. Those, who enclose themselves
in very hot Rooms, never get quite cured; and how is it possible they should be
cured in such a Situation? Such Rooms; abstracted from the Danger of coming out
of them, produce Colds in the same Manner that Drams do, by producing a light
Inflammation in the Breast.

135. Persons subject to frequent Colds, which Habits are sometimes termed
fluxionary, or liable to Defluxions, imagine they ought to keep themselves very
hot. This is an Error which thoroughly destroys their Health. Such a
Disposition to take Cold arises from two Causes; either because their
Perspiration is easily impaired; or sometimes from the Weakness of the Stomach
or the Lungs, which require particular Remedies. When the Complaint arises from
the Perspiration's being easily disturbed and lessened, the hotter they keep
themselves, the more they sweat, and increase their Complaint the more. This
incessantly warm Air lets down and weakens the whole Machine, and more
particularly the Lungs; where the Humors finding less Resistance, are
continually derived, and are accumulated there. The Skin being constantly
bathed in a small Sweat, becomes relaxed, soft, and incapable of completing
its Functions: from which Failure the slightest Cause produces a total
Obstruction of Perspiration; and a Multitude of languid Disorders ensue.

These Patients, thus circumstanced, redouble their Precautions against the
Cold, or even the Coolness of the Air, while their utmost Cautions are but so
many effectual Means to lower their Health; and this the more certainly, as
their Dread of the free Air necessarily subjects them to a fedentary Life,
which increases all their Symptoms; while the hot Drinks they indulge in
complete their Severity. There is but one Method to cure People thus situated;
that is, by accustoming them gradually to the Air; to keep them out of hot
Chambers; to lessen their Clothing by Degrees; to make them sleep cool; and
let them eat or drink nothing but what is cold, Ice itself being wholesome in
their Drink: to make them use much Exercise; and finally, if the Disorder be
inveterate, to give them for a considerable time the Powder No. 14, and make
them use the cold Bath. This Method succeeds equally too with those, in whom
the Disease originally depended on a Weakness of the Stomach, or of the Lungs:
and in fact, at the End of a certain Period, these three Causes are always
combined. Some Persons who have been subject, for many Years, to catch Colds
throughout the Winter; and who, during that Season, never went out, and drank
every thing warm, have been evidently the better, during the Winters of 1761
and 1762, for the Directions I have given here. They now walk out every Day;
drink their Liquids cold; and by this Means entirely escape Colds, and enjoy
perfect Health.

236. It is more customary indeed in Town, than in the Country, to have
different Sorts of Troches, and Compositions in the Mouth. I am not for
excluding this Habit; though I think nothing is so efficacious as Juice of
Liquorice; and provided a sufficient Dose be given, it affords certain Relief.
I have taken an Ounce and a half in one Day, and have felt the good
Consequences of it very remarkably.

CHAPTER VIII. Of the Diseases of the Teeth.
SECT. 137. THE Diseases of the Teeth, which are sometimes so tedious and so
violent, as to cause obstinate Wakefulness, a considerable Degree of Fever,
Raving, Inflammations, Abscesses, Rottenness of the Bones, Convulsions, and
Faintings, depend on three principal Causes. 1, On a Caries or Rottenness of
the Teeth. 2, On an Inflammation of the Nerves of the Teeth, or of the Membrane
which invests and covers them; and which affects the Membrane of the Gums. 3,
On a cold Humor or Defluction that is determined to the Teeth, and to their
Nerves and Membrane.

138. In the first of these Cases, the Caries having eat down to, and exposed
the naked Nerve, the Air, Food, and Drink irritate, or, as it were, sting it;
and this Irritation is attended with Pain more or less violent. Every thing
that increases the Motion or Action of the affected Part, as Exercise, Heat, or
Food, will be attended with the same Consequence.

When the Tooth is greatly decayed, there is no other Cure besides that by
extracting it, without which the Pain continues; the Breath becomes very
offensive; the Gum is eat down; the other Teeth, and sometimes even the
Jaw Bone, are infected with the Rottenness: besides, that it also prevents the
Use of the other Teeth, which are infested with a Kind of tartarous Matter, and
Decay.

But when the Disorder is less considerable, the Progress of it may sometimes
be restrained, by burning the Tooth with a hot Iron, or by filling it with
Lead, if it is fitted to receive and to retain it. Different corroding Liquids
are sometimes used on these Occasions, Aqua Fortis itself, and Spirit of
Vitriol: but such Applications are highly dangerous, and ought to be excluded.
When the Patients, from Dread, reject the Operations just mentioned, a little
Oil of Cloves may be applied, by introducing a small Pellet of Cotton, dipped in
it, to the rotten hollow Tooth; which often affords considerable Ease and
Respite. Some make use of a Tincture of Opium, or Laudanum, after the same
Manner; and indeed these two Medicines may be used together in equal
Quantities. I have often succeeded with Hoffman's mineral Anodyne Liquor; which
seemed indeed for a few Moments, to increase the Pain; but Ease generally
ensues after spitting a little time. A Gargarism made of the Herb Argentina,
that is Silver-weed, or wild Tansey, in Water, frequently appeases the Pain
that results from a Caries of the Teeth: and in such Cases many People have
found themselves at Ease, under a constant Use of it. It certainly is an
Application that cannot hurt, and is even beneficial to the Gums. Others have
been relieved by rubbing their Faces over with Honey.

139. The second Cause is the Inflammation of the Nerve within the Substance,
or of the Membrane on the Outside of the Tooth. This is discovered by the
Patient's Temperament Age and Manner of living. They who are young, sanguine,
who heat themselves much, whether by Labor, by their Food, their Drink, by
sitting up late, or by any other Excess; they who have been accustomed to any
Discharges or Eruptions of Blood, whether natural or artificial, and who cease
to have them as usual, are much exposed to the Toothache, from this Cause.

This Pain, or rather Torment, if in an acute Degree, commonly happens very
suddenly, and often after some heating Cause. The Pulse is strong and full; the
Countenance considerably red; the Mouth extremely hot: there is often a pretty
high Fever, and a violent Headache. The Gums, or some Part of them, become
inflamed, swelled, and sometimes an Abscess appears. At other times the Humors
throw themselves upon the more external Parts; the Cheek swells, and the Pain
abates. When the Cheek swells, but without any Diminution of the Pain, it then
becomes an Augmentation, but no essential Change, of the Disorder.

140. In this Species of the Disease, we must have Recourse to the general
Method of treating inflammatory Disorders, and direct Bleeding, which often
produces immediate Ease, if performed early. After Bleeding, the Patient should
gargle with Barley Water, or Milk and Water; and apply an emollient Cataplasm
to the Cheek. If an Abscess or little Imposthume appears, the Suppuration or
ripening of it is to be promoted, by holding continually in the Mouth some hot
Milk, or Figs boiled in some Milk: and as soon as ever it seems ripe, it should
be opened, which may be done easily, and without any Pain. The Disorder, when
depending on this Cause, is sometimes not so violent, but of a longer Duration
and returns whenever the Patient heats himself; when he goes to Bed; or as soo^
^s he takes any heating Food, or Drink, Wine. or Coffee. In this Case he should
be bled, without which his other Medicines will have little Effect; and he
should bath his Feet in warm Water for some Evenings successively, taking one
Dose of the Powder No. 20. Entire Abstinence from Wine and Meat; especially at
Night, has cured several Persons of inveterate and obstinate Maladies of the
Teeth.

In this Species of Toothache, all hot Remedies are pernicious; and it often
happens that Opium, Venice Treacle, and Storax Pills, are so far from producing
the Relief expected from them, that they have aggravated the Pain.

141. When the Disease arises from a cold Distillation, or Humor, tending to
these Parts, it is commonly (though equally painful) attended with less violent
Symptoms. The Pulse is neither strong, full nor quick; the Mouth is less heated
and less swelled. In such Cases the afflicted should be purged with the Powder
No. 21, which has sometimes perfectly cured very obstinate Complaints of this
Sort. After purging they should make use of the Diet Drink of the Woods No. 22.
This has cured Tooth achs, which have baffled other Attempts for many Years;
but it must be added, this Drink would be hurtful in the Disease from a
different Cause. Blisters to the Nape of the Neck, or A small Blister behind
the Ear of the affected Side, or both Ears, has very often removed the Pain,
when from a Defluction. It is not uncommon for the Subjects of this Disease to
be very costive, during the Exacerbations of it, which I have sometimes
experienced to be pretty regularly and severely quotidian, for a Week or two.
The Custom of smoking Tobacco very often, which the Vehemence of this Pain has
sometimes introduced, often disposes to a Blackness, and premature Decay of the
Teeth, to which the Chewers of it seem less obnoxious: and this Difference may
result from some Particles of its chemical Oil rising by Fumigation, and being
retained in the Teeth, which Particles are not extracted by Mastication. But
with regard to the habitual Use of this very acrid and internally violent Herb,
for, but chiefly after, this Disease, it should be considered well, whether in
some Constitutions it may not pave the Way to a more dangerous one, than that
it was introduced to remove. K.
elsewhere, it matters not greatly where, have often extraordinary good
Effects, by diverting the Humor and restoring a complete Perspiration. In
short, in this Species, we may employ, not only with Safety, but with Success
(especially after due purging) Pills of Storax, Opium and Venice Treacle. Acrid
sharp Remedies, such as hard-spun A small Blister behind the Ear of the
affected Side, or both Ears, has very often removed the Pain, when from a
Defluction. It is not uncommon for the Subjects of this Disease to be very
costive, during the Exacerbations of it, which I have sometimes experienced to
be pretty regularly and severely quotidian, for a Week or two. The Custom of
smoking Tobacco very often, which the Vehemence of this Pain has sometimes
introduced, often disposes to a Blackness, and premature Decay of the Teeth, to
which the Chewers of it seem less obnoxious: and this Difference may result
from some Particles of its chemical Oil rising by Fumigation, and being
retained in the Teeth, which Particles are not extracted by Mastication. But
with regard to the habitual Use of this very acrid and internally violent Herb,
for, but chiefly after, this Disease, it should be considered well, whether in
some Constitutions it may not pave the Way to a more dangerous one, than that
it was introduced to remove. K.
Tobacco, Root of Pellitory of Spain, etc. by exciting much Spitting, discharge
Part of the Humor which causes the Disease, and hence diminish the Pain. The
Smoke of Tobacco also succeeds now and then in this Disorder, whether this
happens from the Discha^^^ ^f the Rheum or Spittle it occasions; or whether it
is owing to any anodyne Efficacy of this Plant, in which it resembles Opium.

142. As this last Cause is often the Consequence of a Weakness in the Stomach,
it daily happens that we see some People, whose Disorder from this Cause is
augmented, in Proportion as they indulge in a cooling, refreshing Way of
living. The Increase of the Disorder disposes them to increase the Dose of what
they mistake for its Remedy, in Proportion to which their Pain only increases.
There is a Necessity that such Persons should alter this Method; and make use
of those Medicines which are proper to strengthen the Stomach, and to restore
Perspiration. The Powder No. 14 has often produced the best Consequences, when
I have ordered it in these Cases; and it never fails to dissipate that
Toothache very speedily, which returns periodically at stated Days and Hours. I
have also cured some Persons who never drank Wine, by advising them to the Use
of it.

143. But besides the Diseases of the Teeth, that are owing to these three
principal Causes. which are the most common ones; there are some very tedious
and most tormenting Disorders of them, that are occasioned by a general
Acrimony, or great Sharpness of the Mass of Blood, and which are never cured by
any other Medicines but such, as are proper to correct that Acrimony. When it
is of a scorbutic Nature, the wild Horseradish (Pepperwort) Water Cresses,
Brooklime, Sorrel, and Wood Sorrel correct and cure it. If it is of a different
Nature, it requires different Remedies. But very particular Details do not come
within the Plan of this Work. As the Malady is of the chronical or tedious
Kind, it allows time to consider and consult more particularly about it.

The Gout and the Rheumatism are sometimes transferred to the Teeth, and give
Rise to the most excruciating Pains; which must be treated like the Diseases
from which they arise.

144. From what has been said on this Disorder, the Reader will discern, in
what that imaginary Oddness may consist, which has been ascribed to it, from
the same Application's relieving one Person in it, and not affording the least
Relief to another. Now the plain Reason of this is, that these Applications are
always directed, without an exact Knowledge of the particular Cause of the
Disease, in different Subjects and Circumstances; whence the Pain from a rotten
Tooth is treated like that from an Inflammation; that from an Inflammation,
like the Pain from a cold Humor or Fluxion; and this last like a Pain caused
by a scorbutic Acrimony: so that the Disappointment is not in the least
surprising. Perhaps Physicians themselves do not always attend distinctly
enough to the Nature of each particular Disorder: and even when they do, they
content themselves with directing some of the less potent Medicines, which may
be inadequate to accomplish the necessary Effect. If the Distemper truly be of
an inflammatory Disposition, Bleeding is indispensible to the Cure.

It happens in fact, with Regard to the Diseases of the Teeth, as well as to
all other Diseases, that they arise from different Causes; and if these Causes
are not opposed by Medicines suited to them, the Disease, far from being cured,
is aggravated.

I have cured violent Tooth-achs, of the lower Jaw, by applying a Plaster of
Meal, the White of an Egg, Brandy, and Mastich, at the Corner of that Jaw, over
the Spot where the Pulsation of the Artery may be perceived: and I have also
mitigated the most excruciating Pains of the Head, by applying the same
Plaster upon the temporal Artery.

CHAPTER IX. Of the Apoplexy.
SECT. 145. EVERY Person has some Idea of the Disease termed an Apoplexy, which
is a sudden Privation or Loss of all Sense, and of all voluntary Motion; the
Pulse at the same time being kept up, but Respiration or Breathing being
oppressed. I shall treat of this Disease only in a brief Manner, as it is not
common in our Country Villages; and as I have expatiated on it in a different
Manner in a Letter to Dr. HALLER, published in 1761.

146. This Disease is generally distinguished into two Kinds, the sanguineous
and serous Apoplexy. Each of them results from an Overfulness of the Blood
Vessels of the Brain, which presses upon, and prevents or impairs the Functions
of the Nerves. The whole Difference between these two Species consists in this,
that the sanguineous Apoplexy prevails among strong robust Persons, who have a
rich, heavy, thick, and inflammable Blood, and that in a large Quantity; in
which Circumstance it becomes a genuine inflammatory Distemper. The serous, or
humoral Apoplexy invades Persons of a less robust Constitution; whose Blood is
more dilute or watery; and rather viscid, or lightly gelatinous, than heavy or
rich; whose Vessels are in a more relaxed State; and who abound more in other
Humors than in red Blood.

147. When the first Kind of this Disease exists in its most violent Degree, it
is then sometimes termed, an apoplectic Stroke, or thundering Apoplexy, which
kills in a Moment or instantaneously, and admits of no Remedies. When the
Assault is less violent, and we find the Patient with a strong, full and raised
Pulse, his Visage red and bloated, and his Neck swelled up; with an oppressed
and loud hoarse Respiration; being sensible of nothing, and capable of no other
Motions, except some Efforts to vomit, the Case is not always equally
desperate. We must therefore immediately,

1, Entirely uncover the Patient's Head, covering the rest of his Body but very
lightly; procure him instantly very fresh free Air, and leave his Neck quite
unbound and open.

2, His Head should be placed as high as may be, with his Feet hanging down.

3, He must lose from twelve to sixteen Ounces of Blood, from a free open
Orifice in the Arm; the Strength or Violence with which the Blood sallies out,
should determine the Surgeon to take a few Ounces more or less. It should be
repeated to the third or fourth time, within the Space of three or four Hours,
if the Symptoms seem to require it, either in the Arm, or in the Foot.

4, A Glyster should be given of a Decoction of the first emollient opening
Herbs that can be got, with four Spoonfuls of Oil, and one Spoonful of Salt;
which should be repeated every three Hours.

5, If it is possible, he should be made to swallow Water plentifully, in each
Pot, or three Pounds and a Quarter, of which three Drachms of Nitre are to be
dissolved.

6, As soon as the Height and Violence of the Pulse abates, when the Patient's
Breathing becomes less oppressed and difficult, and his Countenance less
inflamed, he should take the Decoction No. 23; or, if it cannot be got ready in
time, he should take three Quarters of an Ounce of Cream of Tartar, and drink
Whey plentifully after it. This Medicine succeeded extremely well with me in a
Case where I could not readily procure any other.

7, He should avoid all strong Liquor, Wine, distilled Spirit, whether inwardly
or by outward Application, and should even be prevented from I have been very
authentically assured of the Death of a hale Man, which happened in the very
act of pouring out a large Quantity of distilled Spirits, by Gallons or
Bucket-fuls, from one Vessel into another. K.
smelling them.

8, The Patient should be stirred, moved, or even touched, as little as it is
possible: in a word, every thing must be avoided that can give him the least
Agitation. This Advice, I am sensible, is directly contrary to the common
Practice; notwithstanding which it is founded in Reason, approved by
Experience, and absolutely necessary. In fact, the whole Evil results from the
Blood being driven up with too much Force, and in too great a Quantity, to the
Brain; which being thence in a State of Compression, prevents every Movement
and every Influence of the Nerves. In order, therefore, to re-establish these
Movements, the Brain must be unloaded, by diminishing the Force of the Blood.
But strong Liquors, Wines, Spirits, volatile Salts, all Agitations and
Frictions augment it, and by that very Means increase the Load, the
Embarrassment of the Brain, and thus heighten the Disease itself. On the
contrary, every thing that calms the Circulation, contributes to recall
Sensation and voluntary Motion the sooner.

9. Strong Ligatures should be made about the Thighs under the Ham: By this
Means the Blood is prevented in its Ascent from the Legs, and less is carried
up to the Head.

If the Patient seems gradually, and in Proportion as he takes proper
Medicines, to advance into a less violent State, there may be some Hopes. But
if he rather grows worse after his earliest Evacuations, the Case is desperate.

148. When Nature and Art effect his Recovery, his Senses return: though there
frequently remains a little Delirium or Wandering for some time; and almost
always a paralytic Defect, more or less of the Tongue, the Arm, the Leg, and
the Muscles of the same Side of the Face. This Palsy sometimes goes off
gradually, by the Help of cooling Purges from time to time, and a Diet that is
but very moderately and lightly nourishing. All hot Medicines are extremely
hurtful in this Case, and may pave the Way to a repeated Attack. A Vomit might
be even fatal, and has been more than once so Vomits, which are so pernicious
in the sanguineous Apoplexy, where the Patient's Countenance and Eyes are
inflamed; and which are also dangerous or useless, when a Person has been very
moderate in his Meals, or is weakened by Age or other Circumstances, and whose
Stomach is far from being overloaded with Aliment, are nevertheless very proper
for gross Feeders, who are accustomed to exceed at Table, who have
Indigestions, and have a Mass of viscid glairy Humors in their Stomachs; more
especially, if such a one has a little while before indulged himself
excessively, whence he has vomited without any other evident Cause, or at least
had very strong Nauseas, or Loathings. In brief, Vomits are the true Spec^^^
for Apoplexies, occasioned by any narcotic or stupifying Poisons, the
pernicious Effects of which cease, the Moment the Persons so poisoned vomit
them up (...) attentive Consideration of what has occurred to the patient
before his Seizure; his small natural Propensity to this Disease, and great and
incessant Loathings, render it manifest, whether it has been caused by such
Poisons, or such poisonous Excesses. In these two last Cases a double Dose of
Tartar eme^ic should be dissolved in a Goblet or Cup of Water, of which the
Patient should immediately take a large Spoonful; which should be repeated
every Quarter of an Hour, till it operates. E. L.
. It should be absolutely forbidden; nor should we even promote, by Draughts of
warm Water, the Efforts of the Patient to vomit. They do not any ways depend on
any Humor or Mass in the Stomach; but on the Oppression and Embarrassment of
the Brain: and the more considerable such Efforts are, the more such Oppression
is increased; by reason that as long as they continue, the Blood cannot return
from the Head, by which Means the Brain remains overcharged.

149. The other Species of Apoplexy is attended with the like Symptoms,
excepting the Pulse not being so high nor strong; the Countenance being also
less red, sometimes even pale; the Breathing seems less oppressed; and
sometimes the Sick have a greater Facility to vomit, and discharge more upwards.

As this Kind of the Disease attacks Persons who abound less in Blood; who are
less strong, and less heated or inflamed, Bleeding is not often at all
necessary; at least the Repetition of it is scarcely ever so: and should the
Pulse have but a small Fullness, and not the least unnatural Hardness, Bleeding
might even be pernicious.

1. The Patient however should be placed as was directed in the former Mode of
this Disease; though it seems not equally necessary here.

2. He should receive a Glyster, but without Oil, with double the Quantity of
Salt, and a Bit of Soap of the Size of a small Egg; or with four or five Sprigs
of Hedge Hyssop. It may be repeated twice a Day.

3. He should be purged with the Powder No. 21.

4. His common Drink may be a strong Infusion of Leaves of Bawm.

5. The Purge should be repeated the third Day.

6. Blisters should immediately be applied to the fleshy Part of the Legs, or
between the Shoulder Blades. These Blisters may be preceded by Cupping with
Scarification on the Nape of the Neck. This Remedy, often used by the ancient
Physicians, hut too little practiced in France, is one of the most speedy, and
not the least efficacious, Applications in both sanguine and serous Apoplexies.
E. L.


7. Should Nature seem disposed to relieve herself by Sweating, it should be
encouraged; and I have often known an Infusion of the Carduus Benedictus, or
blessed Thistle, produce this Effect very successfully. If this Method be
entered upon, the Sweat ought to be kept up (without stirring if possible) for
many Days. It has then sometimes happened, that at the End of nine Days, the
Patient has been totally freed from the Palsy, which commonly succeeds this
Species of the Apoplexy, just as it does the other.

150. Persons who have been attacked with either Kinds of this Disease, are
liable to subsequent ones; each of which is more dangerous than that preceding:
whence an Endeavor to obviate or prevent such Relapses becomes of the utmost
Importance. This is to be effected in each Sort by a very exact, and rather
severe Diet, even to diminishing the usual Quantity of the Patient's Food; the
most essential Precaution, to be observed by any who have been once assaulted
with it, being entirely to leave off Suppers. Indeed those, who have been once
attacked with the first, the sanguineous Apoplexies, should be still more
exact, more upon their Guard, than the others. They should deny themselves
whatever is rich and juicy, hot or aromatic, sharp, Wine, distilled Liquors and
Coffee. They should chiefly confine themselves to Garden-Stuff, Fruits and
Acids; such should eat but little Flesh, and only those called white; taking
every Week two or three Doses of the Powder No. 24, in a Morning fasting, in a
Glass of Water. They should be purged twice or thrice a Year with the Draught
No. 23; use daily Exercise; avoid very hot Rooms, and the violent Heat of the
Sun. They should go to Bed betimes, rise early, never lie in Bed above eight
Hours; and if it is observed that their Blood increases considerably, and has a
Tendency toward the Head, they should be bled without Hesitation; and for some
Days restrain themselves entirely to a thin and low Regimen, without taking any
solid Food. In these Circumstances warm Bathings are hurtful. In the other, the
serous Apoplexy, instead of purging with No. 23, the Patient should take the
Purge No. 21.

151. The same Means, that are proper to prevent a Relapse, might also obviate
or keep off a primary or first Assault, if employed in time; for
notwithstanding it may happen very suddenly, yet this Disease foreshews itself
many Weeks, sometimes many Months, nay even Years beforehand, by Vertigos,
Heaviness of the Head; small Defects of the Tongue or Speech; short and
momentary Palsies, sometimes of one, sometimes of another Part; sometimes by
Loathings and Reachings to vomit; without supposing any Obstruction or Load in
the first: Passages, or any other Cause in the Stomach, or the adjoining Parts.
There happens also some particular Change in the Looks and Visage not easy to
be described; sharp and short Pains about the Region of the Heart; an Abatement
of the Strength, without any discernible Cause of such Abatement. Besides there
are still some other Signs, which signify the Ascent of the Humors too much to
the Head, and show, that the Functions of the Brain are embarrassed.

Some Persons are liable to certain Symptoms and Appearances, which arise from
the same Cause as an Apoplexy; and which indeed may be considered as very light
mild Apoplexies, of which they sustain many Attacks, and yet without any
considerable Annoyance of their Health. The Blood, all at once as it were,
flushes up to their Heads; they appear heedless or blundering; and have
sometimes Disgusts and Nauseas, and yet without any Abatement of their
Understanding, their Senses, or Motion of any Sort. Tranquillity of Mind and
Body, one Bleeding, and a few Glysters usually carry it off soon after its
Invasion. The Returns of it may be prevented by the Regimen directed 150; and
especially by a frequent Use of the Powder No. 24. At the long Run however, one
of these Attacks commonly degenerates into a mortal Apoplexy: though this may
be retarded for a very long time by an exact Regimen, and by avoiding all
strong Commotions of the Mind, but especially that of Anger or violent Rage.

CHAPTER X. Of the violent Influence, or Strokes, of the Sun.
SECT. 152. THIS Appellation is applied to those Disorders, which arise from
too violent an Influence of the Heat of the Sun, immediately upon the Head; and
which, in one Word, may ba termed Insolation.

If we consider that Wood, Stone, and Metals, when long exposed to the Sun,
become very hot, and that even in temperate Climates, to such a Degree, that
they can scarcely be touched without some Sensation of burning, we may easily
conceive the Risk a Person undergoes, in having his Head exposed to the same
Degree of Heat. The Blood Vessels grow dry, the Blood itself becomes condensed
or thickened, and a real Inflammation is formed, which has proved mortal in a
very little time. It was this Distemper, a Stroke of the Sun, which killed
Manasses, the Husband of Judith. For as he was among the Laborers who bound up
the Sheafs in the Fields, the Heat struck upon his Head, and he was taken ill;
he went to Bed, and he died. The Signs which precede and attend this Disease
are, being exposed in a Place where the Sun shines forth with great Force and
Ardour; a violent Headache, attended with a very hot and extremely dry Skin:
the Eyes are also dry and red, being neither able to remain open, nor yet to
bear the Light; and sometimes there is a Kind of continual and involuntary
Motion in the Eyelid; while some Degree of Relief is perceivable from the
Application of any cooling Liquor. It often happens that some cannot possibly
sleep; and at other times they have a great Drowsiness, but interrupted with
outrageous Wakenings: there is a very strong Fever, a great Faintness, and a
total Disrelish and Loathing. Sometimes the Patient is very thirsty, and at
other times not at all: and the Skin of his Face often looks as though it were
burnt.

153. People may be afflicted with the Disease from this Cause, at two
different Seasons of the Year; that is, either in the Spring, or during the
very raging Heats; but their Events are very different. Country People and
Laborers are but little liable to the former. It chiefly affects the
Inhabitants of Cities, and delicate Persons, who have used very little Exercise
in the Winter, and abound with superfluous Humors. If, thus circumstanced,
they expose themselves to the Sun, as even in the Spring he attains a
considerable Force; and, by the Course of Life they have led, their Humors are
already much disposed to mount to the Head; while the Coolness of the Soil,
especially when it has rained, prevents their Feet from being so easily warmed;
the Power of the Sun acts upon the Head like a Blister, attracting a great
Quantity of Humors to it. This produces excruciating Pains of the Head,
frequently accompanied with quick and violent Shootings, and with Pain in the
Eyes; notwithstanding this Degree of the Malady is seldom dangerous. Country
People, and even such Inhabitants of Cities and Towns, as have not forborne to
exercise themselves in Winter, have no Sort of Dread of these Strokes of the
Sun, in the Spring of the Year. Its Summer Strokes are much more troublesome
and vehement, and assault Laborers and Travelers, who are for a long time
exposed to the Fervor of it. Then it is that the Disease is aggravated to its
highest Pitch, those who are thus struck often dying upon the Spot. In the hot
Climates this Cause destroys many in the very Streets, and makes dreadful
Havoc among Armies on the March, and at Sieges. Some tragical Effects of it,
on such Occasions, are seen even in the temperate Countries. After having
marched a whole Day in the Sun, a Man shall fall into a Lethargy, and die
within some Hours, with the Symptoms of raving Madness. I have seen a Tyler, in
a very hot Day, complaining to his Comrade of a violent Pain in his Head, which
increased almost every Moment; and at the very Instant when he purposed to
retire out of the Sun, he sunk down dead, and fell from the House which he was
slating. This same Cause produces very often in the Country some most dangerous
Phrenzies, which are called there hot or burning Fevers. Every Year furnishes
but too many of them.

154. The Vehemence of the Sun is still more dangerous to those, who venture to
sleep exposed to it. Two Mowers who fell asleep on a Haycock, being wakened by
some others, immediately on waking, staggered, and pronouncing a few incoherent
unmeaning Words, died. When the Violence of Wine and that of the Sun are
combined, they kill very suddenly: nor is there a single Year in which Peasants
are not found dead on the Highroads; who, being drunk, endeavored to lie down
in some Corner, where they perished by an Apoplexy, from the Heat of the Sun
and of strong Drink. Those of them who escape so speedy and premature a Death,
are subject, for the Remainder of their Lives, to chronical, or tedious
Head-achs; and to suffer some little Disorder and Confusion in their Ideas. I
have seen some Cases, when after violent Head-achs of some Days Continuance,
the Disease has been transferred to the Eyelids, which continued a long Time
red and distended, so that they could not be kept asunder or open. It has also
been known, that some Persons have been struck by the Sun into a Delirium or
Raving, without a Fever, and without complaining of a Headache. Sometimes a
Gutta Serena has been its Consequence; and it is very common to see People,
whose long Continuance under the strong Light and Influence of the Sun, has
made such an Impression upon the Eyes, as presents them with different Bodies
flying about in the Air, which distract and confuse their Sight.

A Man of forty-two Years of Age, having been exposed for several Hours to the
violent Heat of the Sun, with a very small Cap or Bonnet; and having past the
following Night in the open Air, was attacked the next Day with a most severe
Headache, a burning Fever, Reachings to ^omit, great Anguish, and red and
sparkling Eyes. Notwithstanding the best Assistance of several Physicians, he
became phrenitic on the fifth Day, and died on the ninth. Suppurated Matter was
discharged from his Mouth, one of his Nostrils, and his right Ear, a few Hours
before his Death; upon Dissection a small Abscess, was found within the Skull;
and the whole Brain, as well as all the Membranes enclosing it, were entirely
corrupted.

155. In very young Children, who are not, or never should be, exposed for any
long Time to such excessive Heat (and whom a slight Cause will often affect)
this Malady discovers itself by a heavy deep Drowsiness, which lasts for
several Days; also by incessant Ravings mingled with Rage and Terror, much the
same as when they are affected with violent Fear; and sometimes by convulsive
Twitchings; by Head-achs which return at certain Periods, and continual
Vomitings. I have seen Children, who, after a Stroke of the Sun, have been
harrassed a long time with a little Cough.

156. Old Men who often expose themselves imprudently to the Sun, are little
apprized of all the Danger they incur by it. A certain Person, who purposely
sunned himself for a considerable time, in the clear Day of an intermitting
tertian Fever, underwent the Assault of an Apoplexy, which carried him off the
following Day. And even when the Disease may not be so speedy and violent, yet
this Custom (of sunning in hot Weather) certainly disposes to an Apoplexy, and
to Disorders of the Head. One of the slightest Effects of much solar Heat upon
the Head is, to cause a Defluxion from the Brain, a Swelling of the Glands of
the Neck, and a Dryness of the Eyes, which sometimes continues for a
considerable Term after it.

157. The Effect of too much culinary, or common Fire, is of the same Quality
with that of the Sun. A Man who fell asleep with his Head directly opposite,
and probably, very near to the Fire, went off in an Apoplexy, during his Nap.

158. The Action of too violent a Sun is not only pernicious, when it falls
upon the Head; but it is also hurtful to other Parts; and those who continue
long exposed to it, though their Heads should not be affected, experience
violent Pains, a disagreeable Sensation of Heat, and a considerable Stiffness
in the Parts that have been, in some Manner, parched by it; as in the Legs, the
Knees, the Thighs, Reins, and Arms; and sometimes they prove feverish.

159. In contemplating the Case of a Patient, Sun-struck, as we may term it, we
must endeavor to distinguish, whether there may not be also some other joint
Causes concurring to the Effect. A Traveller, a laboring Man, is often as much
affected by the Fatigue of his Journey, or of his Labor, as he is by the
Influence of solar Heat.

160. It is necessary to set about the Cure of this Disease, as as soon as ever
we are satisfied of its Existence: for such as might have been easily preserved
by an early Application, are considerably endangered by a Neglect of it. The
Method of treating this is very much the same, with that of the inflammatory
Diseases already mentioned; that is, by Bleeding, and cooling Medicines of
various Kinds in their Drinks, by Bathings, and by Glysters. And 1. If the
Disease be very high and urgent, a large Quantity of Blood should be taken
away, and occasionally repeated. LEWIS the XIV. was bled nine times to prevent
the Fatality of a Stroke of the Sun, which he received in Hunting in 1658.

2. After Bleeding, the Patient's Legs should be plunged into warm Water. This
is one of the Applications that affords the most speedy Relief; and I have seen
the Headache go off and return again, in Proportion to the Repetition, and the
Duration of these Bathings of the Legs. When the Disorder is highly dangerous,
it will be necessary to treat the Patient with S^^^^^pia, or warm Baths, in
which he may sit up to his Hips; and in the most dangerous Degrees of it, even
to bathe the whole Body: but the Water in this Case, as well as in Bathings of
the Feet, should be only sensibly warm: the Use of hot would be highly
pernicious.

3. Glysters made from a Decoction of any of the emollient Herbs are also very
effectual.

4. The Patient should drink plentifully of Almond Emulsion No. 4; of Limonade,
which is a Mixture of the Juice of Lemons and Water, (and is the best Drink in
this Disease) of Water and Vinegar, which is a very good Substitute for
Limonade; and of, what is still more efficacious, very clear Whey, with the
Addition of a little Vinegar. These various Drinks may all be taken cold; Linen
Cloths dipped in cold Water and Vinegar of Roses may be applied to the Forehead,
the Temples, or all over the Head, which is equivalent to every other
Application used upon such Occasions. Those which are the most cried up, are
the Juice of Purslain, of Lettuce, of Houseleek, and of Vervain. The Drink No.
32 is also serviceable, taken every Morning fasting.

161. Cold Baths have sometimes recovered Persons out of such violent Symptoms,
from this Cause, as have been almost quite despaired of.

A Man twenty Years of Age, having been a very long time exposed to the
scorching Sun, became violently delirious, without a Fever, and proved really
mad. After repeated Bleedings, he was thrown into a cold Bath, which was also
frequently repeated; pouring cold Water, at the same time, upon his Head. With
such Assistance he recovered, though very gradually.

An Officer who had rode Post for several Days successively, in very hot
Weather, swooned away, immediately on dismounting; from which he could not be
recovered by the ordinary Assistance in such Cases. He was saved however, in
Consequence of being plunged into a Bath of freezing Water. It should be
observed however, that in these Cases the cold Bath should never be recurred
to, without previous Bleeding.

162. It is past Doubt, that if a Person stands still in the violent Heat of
the Sun, he is more liable to be struck with it, than if he walks about; and
the Use of white Hats, or of some Folds of clean white Paper under a black one,
may sensibly contribute to prevent any Injury from the considerable Heat of the
Sun; though it is a very incompetent Defense against a violent Degree of it.

The natural Constitution, or even that Constitution, which has been formed
from long Custom and Habit, makes a very great Difference between the Effects
of solar Heat on different Persons, People insensibly accustom themselves to
the Impressions of it, as they do to those of all the other Bodies and
Elements, which are continually acting upon us; and by Degrees we arrive at a
Power of sustaining his violent Heat with Impunity; just as others arrive at
the Hardiness of bearing the most rigid Colds, with very little Complaint or
Inconvenience. The human Body is capable of supporting many more Violences and
Extremes, than it commonly does. Its natural Force is scarcely ever ascertained
among civilized Nations; because their Education generally tends to impair and
lessen it, and always succeeds in this Respect. If we were inclined to consider
a purely natural, a simply physical Man, we must look for him among savage
Nations; where only we can discover what we are able to be, and to bear. We
certainly could not fail of being Gainers, by adopting their corporal
Education; neither does it seem as yet to have been infallibly demonstrated,
that we should be great Losers in commuting our moral Education for theirs. As
some may think an Apology necessary for a Translation of this Chapter on a
Disease, which never, or very seldom, exists in this or the adjacent Island, I
shall observe here, that, abstracted from the Immorality of a narrow and local
Solicitude only for ourselves, we are politically interested as a Nation always
in Trade, and often at War, (and whose Subjects are extended into very distant
and and different Climates,) to provide against a sudden and acute Distemper,
to which our Armies, our Sailors and Colonies are certainly often exposed. A
Fatality from this Cause is not restrained to our Islands within the Tropic,
where several Instances of it have occurred during the late War; but it has
also been known to prevail as far northward as Pensylvania, in their Summers,
and even in their Harvests, I once received a sensible Scald on the Back of my
Thumb, from the Sun suddenly darting out through a clear Hole, as it were, in a
Cloud, after a short and impetuous Shower in Summer; which Scald manifestly
blistered within some Minutes after. Had this concentered Ray been darted on my
bare Head, the Consequence might have been more dangerous; or perhaps as fatal
as some of the Cases recorded by Dr. TISSOT, in this Chapter.


CHAPTER XI. Of the Rheumatism.
SECT. 163. THE Rheumatism may exist either with or without a Fever. The first
of these may be classed among the Diseases, of which I have already treated;
being an Inflammation which is manifested by a violent Fever, preceded by
Shivering, a subsequent Heat, hard Pulse, and a Headache. Sometimes indeed an
extraordinary Coldness, with general Uneasiness and Inquietude, exists several
Days before the Fever is perceived. On the second or third Day, and sometimes
even on the first, the Patient is seized with a violent Pain in some Part of
his Body, but especially about the Joints, which entirely prevents their
Motion, and which is often accompanied with Heat, Redness, and a Swelling of
the Part. The Knee is often the first Part attacked, and sometimes both the
Knees at once. When the Pain is fixed, an Abatement of the Fever frequently
happens; though in some Persons it continues for several Days, and increases
every Evening. The Pain diminishes in one Part after a Duration of some Days,
and then invades some other. From the Knee it descends to the Foot, or mounts
to the Hip, to the Loins, the Shoulder-blades, Elbow, Wrist, the Nape of the
Neck, and frequently is felt in the intermediate Parts. Sometimes one Part is
quite free from Pain, when another is attacked; at other times many Parts are
seized nearly at the same Instant; and I have sometimes seen every Joint
afflicted at once. In this Case the Patient is in a very terrible Situation,
being incapable of any Motion, and even dreading the Assistance of his
Attendants, as he can scarcely admit of touching, without a sensible
Aggravation of his Pains. He is unable to bear even the Weight of the
Bed-cloths, which must be, as it were, arched over his Limbs by a proper
Contrivance, to prevent their Pressure: and the very walking across the Chamber
increases his Torments. The Parts in which they are the most excruciating, and
obstinate, are the Region of the Loins, the Hips, and the Nape or hinder Part
of the Neck.

164. This Disease is also often extended over the Scalp and the Surface of the
Head; and there the Pains are excessive. I have seen them affect the Eyelids
and the Teeth with inexpressible Torment. As long as the Distemper is situated
in the more external Parts, the Patient, however painful his Situation may
prove, is in no great Danger, if he be properly treated: but if by some
Accident, some Error, or by any latent Cause, the Disease be repelled upon an
internal Part or Organ, his Case is extremely dangerous. If the Brain is
attacked, a frantic raging Delirium is the Consequence; if it falls upon the
Lungs, the Patient is suffocated: and if it attacks the Stomach or the Bowels,
it is attended with the most astonishing Pains, which are caused by the
Inflammation of those Parts, and which Inflammation, if violent, is See Note *
to Page 29.
speedily fatal. About two Years since I was called to a robust Man, whose Guts
were already in a gangrenous State, which was the Consequence of a Rheumatism,
that first attacked one Arm and one Knee; the Cure of which had been attempted
by sweating the Patient with some hot Remedies. These indeed brought on a
plentiful Sweat; but the inflammatory Humor seized the Intestines, whose
Inflammation degenerated into a Gangrene, after a Duration of the most acute
Pain for thirty-six Hours; his Torments terminating in Death two Hours after I
saw him.

165. This Malady however is often in a less violent Degree; the Fever is but
moderate, and ceases entirely when the Pain begins; which is also confined to
one; or not more than two Parts.

166. If the Disease continues fixed, for a considerable time, in one Joint,
the Motion of it is impaired for Life. I have seen a Person who has now a wry
Neck, of twenty Years standing, in Consequence of a Rheumatism in the Nape of
the Neck; and I also saw a poor young Man from Jurat, who was Bed-ridden, and
who had lost the Motion of one Hip and both Knees. He could neither stand nor
sit, and there were but a few Postures in which he could even lie in Bed.

167. An obstructed Perspiration, and inflammatory Thickness of the Blood,
constitute the most general Cause of the Rheumatism. This last concurring Cause
is that we must immediately encounter; since, as long as that subsists,
Perspiration cannot be perfectly re-established, which follows of Course, when
the Inflammation is cured. For which Reason this Distemper must be conducted
like the other inflammatory ones, of which I have already treated.

168. As soon as it is sufficiently manifest, the Glyster No. 5 should be
injected; and twelve Ounces of Blood be taken from the Arm an Hour after. The
Patient is to enter upon a Regimen, and drink plentifully of the Ptisan No. 2,
and of Almond Milk or Emulsion No. 4. As this last Medicine may be too costly
in Country Places for the poor Peasantry; they may drink, in lieu of it, very
clear Whey, sweetened with a little Honey. I have known a very severe
Rheumatism cured, after twice bleeding, without any other Food or Medicine, for
the Space of thirteen Days. The Whey also may be happily used by Way of Glyster.

169. If the Distemper is not considerably assuaged by the first Bleeding, it
should be repeated some Hours after. I have ordered it four times within the
first two Days; and some Days after I have even directed a fifth Bleeding. But
in general the Hardness of the Pulse becomes less after the second: and
notwithstanding the Pains may continue as severe as before, yet the Patient is
sensible of less Inquietude. The Glyster must be repeated every Day, and even
twice a Day, if each of them is attended only with a small Discharge; and
particularly if there be a violent Headache. In such Cases as are excessively
painful, the Patient can scarcely dispose himself into a proper Attitude or
Posture to receive Glysters; and in such Circumstances his Drinks should be
made as opening as possible; and a Dose of the Cream of Tartar No. 24 should be
given Night and Morning. This very Medicine, with the Assistance of Whey, cured
two Persons I advised it to, of rheumatic Pains, with frequent Returns of which
they had been infested for many Years, and which were attended with a small
Fever.

Apples coddled, Prunes stewed, and well ripened Summer Fruits are the
properest Nourishment in this Disease.

We may save the Sick a good deal of Pain, by putting one strong Towel always
under their Back, and another under their Thighs, in order to move them the
more easily. When their Hands are without Pain, a third Towel hung upon a Cord,
which is fastened across the Bed, must considerably assist them in moving
themselves.

170. When the Fever entirely disappears, and the Hardness of the Pulse is
removed, I have ordered the Purge No. 23, with a very good Effect; and if it is
attended with five or six Motions, the Patient is very sensibly relieved. The
Day but one after, it may be repeated successfully, and a third time, after an
Interval of a greater Number of Days.

171. When the Pains are extremely violent, they admit of no Application:
Vapour-Baths however may be employed, and provided they are often used, and for
a considerable time, they prove very efficacious. The Purpose of these Baths is
^^ly to convey the Steam of boiling Water to the Parts affected; which may
always easily be effected; by a Variety of simple and easy Contrivances; the
Choice of which must depend on the different Circumstances and Situation of the
Sick.

Whenever it is possible, some of the emollient Applications, No. 9, should be
continually employed. A half Bath, or an entire Bath of warm Water, in which
the Patient should remain an Hour, after sufficient Bleedings and many
Glysters, affords the greatest Relief. I have seen a Patient, under the most
acute Pains of the Loins, of the Hips, and of one Knee, put into one. He
continued still under extreme Torment in the Bath, and on being taken out of
it: but an Hour after he had been put to Bed, he sweated, to an incredible
Quantity, for thirty-six Hours, and was cured. The Bath should never be made
use of, until after repeated Bleedings, or at least other equivalent
Evacuations: for otherwise timed, it would aggravate the Disease.

172. The Pains are generally most severe in the Night; whence it has been
usual to give composing soporific Medicines. This however has been very
erroneous, as Opiates really augment the Cause of the Disease; they destroy the
Efficacy of the proper Remedies: and, even not seldom, far from asswaging the
Pains, they increase them. Indeed they agree so little in this Disease, that
even the Patient's natural Sleep at the Invasion of this Complaint, is rather
to his Detriment. They feel, the very Moment they are dropping asleep, such
violent Jirks as awaken them with great Pain: or if they do sleep a few
Minutes, the Pains are stronger when they awake.

173. The Rheumatism goes off either by Stool, by turbid thick Urine which
drops a great Proportion of a yellowish Sediment, or by Sweats; and it
generally happens that this last Discharge prevails toward the Conclusion of
the Disease. It may be kept up by drinking an Infusion of Elder-flowers. At the
Beginning however Sweating is pernicious.

174. It happens also, though but very seldom, that Rheumatisms determine by
depositing a sharp Humor upon the Legs; where it forms Vesications, or a kind
of Blisterings, which burst open and form Ulcers, that ought not to be healed
and dried up too hastily; as this would occasion a speedy Return of the
rheumatic Pains. They are disposed to heal naturally of themselves, by the
Assistance of a temperate regular Diet, and a few gentle Purges.

175. Sometimes again, an Abscess is formed either in the affected Part, or in
some neighboring one. I have seen a Vineyard Dresser, who after violent Pains
of the Loins, had an Abscess in the upper Part of the Thigh, which he neglected
for a long time. When I saw him it was of a monstrous Size. I ordered it to be
opened, when at once above three Pots of This, according to our Author's
Estimation of the Pot-Measure at Berne, which is that he always means, and
which he says contains exactly (of Water we suppose) fifty one Ounces and a
Quarter (though without a material Error it may be computed at three Pounds and
a Quarter) will amount at least to nine Pounds and three Quarters of Matter,
supposing this no heavier than Water. By Measure it will want but little of
five of our Quarts; a very extraordinary Bathings indeed of Pus at once, and
not unlikely to be attended by the (...) which soon followed.
Matter rushed out of it: but the Patient, being exhausted, died some time
after it.

Another Crisis of the Rheumatism has happened by a kind of Itch, which breaks
out upon all the Parts adjacent to the Seat of this Disease. Immediately after
this Eruption the Pains vanish: but the Pustules sometimes continue for several
Weeks.

176. I have never observed the Pains to last, with considerable Violence,
above fourteen Days, in this Species of the Rheumatism; though there remains a
Weakness, Numbness, and some Inflation, or Puffing, of the adjoining Parts: and
it will also be many Weeks, and sometimes even Months; especially if the
Distemper attacked them in the Fall,) before the Sick recover their usual
Strength. I have known some Persons, who, after a very painful Rheumatism, have
been troubled with a very disagreeable Sensation of Lassitude; which did not go
off till after a great Eruption, all over the Body, of little Vesications or
Blisterings, full of a watery Humor; many of them burst open, and others
withered and dried up without bursting.

177. The Return of Strength into the Parts affected may be promoted by
Frictions Night and Morning, with Flanel or any other woollen Stuff; by using
Exercise; and by conforming exactly to the Directions given in the Chapter on
Convalescence, or Recovery from acute Diseases. The Rheumatism may also be
prevented by the Means I have pointed out, in treating of Pleurisies and
Quinceys.

178. Sometimes the Rheumatism with a Fever, invades Persons who are not so
sanguine, or abounding in Blood; or whose Blood is not so much disposed to
Inflammation; those whose Flesh and Fibers are softer; and in whose Humors
there is more Thinness and Sharpness, than Viscidity and Thickness. Bleeding
proves less necessary for Persons so constituted, notwithstanding the Fever
should be very strong. Some Constitutions require more Discharges by Stool; and
after they are properly evacuated, some Blisters should be applied, which often
afford them a sensible Relief as soon as ever they begin to operate.
Nevertheless they should never be used where the Pulse is hard. The Powder No.
25 answers very well in these Cases.

179. There is another Kind of Rheumatism called chronical or lasting. It is
known by the following Characters or Marks. 1. It is commonly unattended with a
Fever. 2. It continues a very long time. 3. It seldom attacks so many Parts at
once as the former. 4. Frequently no visible Alteration appears in the affected
Part, which is neither more hot, red, or swelled, than in its healthy State;
though sometimes one or other of these Symptoms is evident. 5. The former, the
inflammatory Rheumatism, assaults strong, vigorous, robust Persons: but this
rather invades People arrived at a certain Period of Life, or such as are weak
and languishing.

180. The Pain of the chronical Rheumatism, when left to itself, or
injudiciously treated, lasts sometimes many Months, and even Years. It is
particularly and extremely obstinate, when it is exerted on the Head, the
Loins, or on the Hip, and along the Thighs, when it is called the Sciatica.
There is no Part indeed which this Pain may not invade; sometimes it fixes
itself in a small Spot, as in one Corner of the Head; the Angle of the Jaw; the
Extremity of a Finger; in one Knee; on one Rib, or on the Breast, where it
often excites Pains, which make the Patient apprehensive of a Cancer. It
penetrates also to the internal Parts. When it affects the Lungs, a most
obstinate Cough is the Consequence; which degenerates at length into very
dangerous Disororders of the Breast. In the Stomach and Bowels it excites most
violent Pains like a Cholic; and in the Bladder, Symptoms so greatly resembling
those of the Stone, that Persons who are neither deficient in Knowledge nor
Experience, have been more than once deceived by them.

181. The Treatment of this chronical Rheumatism does not vary considerably
from that of the former. Nevertheless, in the first Place, if the Pain is very
acute, and the Patient robust, a single Bleeding at the Onset is very proper
and efficacious. 2. The Humors ought to be diluted, and their Acrimony or
Sharpness should be diminished, by a very plentiful Use of a Ptisan of Half a
Pint of a pretty strong Infusion of the Leaves of Buckbean, which grows wild
here, taken once a Day rather before Noon, has also been found very serviceable
in that Species of a chronical Rheumatism, which considerably results from a
scorbutic State of the Constitution. K.
Burdock Roots No. 26. 3. Four or five Days after drinking abundantly of this,
the Purging Another very good Purge, in this Kind of Rheumatism, may also be
compounded of the best Gum Guiacum in Powder from twenty-five to forty Grains;
dissolved in a little Yolk of a fresh Egg; adding from five to ten Grains of
Jallap powdered, and from three to five Grains of powdered Ginger, with as much
plain or Surfeit Water, as will make a purging Draught for a stronger or weaker
grown Patient. Should the Pains frequently infest the Stomach, while the
Patient continues costive, and there is no other Fever than such a small
symptomatic one, as may arise solely from Pain, he may safely take, if grown up
and strong, from thirty to forty, and, if weaker, from twenty to thirty Drops
of the volatile Tincture of Gum Guiacum, in any diluting Infusion, that may not
coagulate or separate the Gum. It generally disposes at first to a gentle
Diaphoresis or Sweat, and several Hours after to one, and sometimes to a second
Stool, with little or no Griping. It may be taken at going to Bed. K.
Powder No. 21, may be taken with Success. In this Species of the Rheumatism a
certain Medicine is sometimes found serviceable. This has acquired some
Reputation, (particularly in the Place from whence they bring it, Geneva,)
under the Title of the Opiate for the Rheumatism, though I cannot say for what
Reason; as it is indeed neither more nor less than the Electuary Caryocostinum,
which may be procured at our Apothecaries. I shall observe, however, that this
Medicine has done Mischief in the inflammatory Rheumatism, and even in this, as
often as the Persons afflicted with it are feeble, thin and of a hot
Temperament; and either when they have not previously taken diluting Drinks, or
when it has been used too long. For, in such a Circumstance, it is apt to throw
the Patient into an irrecoverable Weakness. The Composition consists of the
hottest Spices, and of very sharp Purgatives.

182. When general Remedies have been used, and the Disorder still continues,
Recourse should be had to such Medicines, as are available to restore
Perspiration; and these should be persisted in for a considerable Time. The
Pills No. 18, with a strong Infusion of Elder-flowers, have often succeeded in
this Respect: and then after a long Continuance of diluting Drinks, if the
Fever is entirely subdued; if the Stomach exerts its Functions well; if the
Patient is no ways costive; if he is not of a dry Habit of Body; and if the
Part affected remains without Inflammation, the Patient may safely take the
Powder This was erroneously printed in the second Edition, No. 29.
No. 25, at Night going to Bed, with a Cup or two of an Infusion of Carduus
Benedictus, or the blessed Thistle, and a Morsel of Venice Treacle of the Size
of a Hazel Nut, or a Filberd. This Remedy brings on a very copious Sweating,
which often expels the Gum Guiacum, given from six to ten Grains Morning and
Night, is often very successful in these Cases. It may be made into Pills or
Bolusles with the Rob of Elder, or with the Extract of Juniper. E. L.
Disease. These Sweats may be rendered still more effectual, by wrapping up the
affected Part in a Flanel dipped in the Decoction No. 27.

183. But of all these Pains, the Sciatica is one of the most tedious and
obstinate. Nevertheless I have seen the greatest Success, from the Application
of seven or eight Cupping-Glasses to the tormented Part; by which, without the
Assistance of any other Remedy, I have cured, in a few Hours, Sciaticas of many
Years standing, which had baffled other Remedies. Blisters, or any such
stimulating Plasters, as bring on a Suppuration and Discharge from the
afflicted Part, contribute also frequently to the Cure: though less effectually
than Cupping, which should be repeated several times. Green Cere-cloth,
commonly called Oil-cloth, (whether the Ingredients be spread on Taffity or on
Linen) being applied to the diseased Part, disposes it to sweat abundantly, and
thus to discharge the sharp Humor which occasions the Pain. Sometimes both
these Applications, but especially that spread on Silk (which may be applied
more exactly and closely to the Part, and which is also spread with a different
Composition) raise a little Vesication on the Part as Blisters do. A Plaster
of Quicklime and Honey blended together has cured inveterate Sciaticas. Oil of
Eggs has sometimes succeeded in such Cases. A Seton has also been successfully
made in the lower Part of the Thigh. Finally some Pains which have not yielded
to any of these Applications, have been cured by actual burning, inflicted on
the very Spot, where the most violent Pain has been felt; except some
particular Reason, drawn from an anatomical Knowledge of the Part, should
determine the Surgeon not to apply it there. The Scull or Head should never be
cauterized with a burning Iron.

184. The hot Baths of Bourbon, Plombiers, Aix-la-Chapelle, and many others are
often very efficacious in these chronical Pains; notwithstanding I really
think, there is no rheumatic Pain that may not be cured without them. The
common People substitute to these a Bath made of the Husk of Grapes, after
their Juice is expressed, which cure some by making them sweat abundantly. Cold
Baths however are the best to keep off this Disease; but then they cannot
always be safely ventured on. Many Circumstances render the Use of them
impracticable to particular Persons. Such as are subject to this chronical
Rheumatism, would do very well to rub their whole Bodies every Morning, if they
could, but especially the afflicted Parts, with Flanel. This Habit keeps up
Perspiration beyond any other Assistance; and indeed sometimes even increases
it too much. It would be serviceable also, if such Subjects of this cruel
Disease wore Flanel all over their Skin, during the Winter. After a violent
Rheumatism, People should long be careful to avoid that cold and moist Air,
which disposes them to relapse.

185. Rheumatic People have too frequent a Recourse to very improper and
hurtful Medicines in this Distemper, which daily produce very bad Consequences.
Such are spirituous Medicines, Brandy, and Arquebusade Water. They either
render the Pain more obstinate and fixed, by hardening the Skin; or they repel
the Humor to some inward Part. And Instances are not wanting of Persons who
have died suddenly, from the Application of Spirit of Wine upon the Parts that
were violently afflicted with the Rheumatism. It also happens sometimes that
the Humor, having no Outlet through the Skin, is thrown internally on the Bone
and affects it. A very singular Fact occurred in this Respect, an Account of
which may be serviceable to some Persons afflicted with the Disease. A Woman at
Night was chaffing the Arm of her Husband, who had the Rheumatism there, with
Spirit of Wine; when a very lucky Accident prevented the Mischief she might
have occasioned by it. The Spirit of Wine took Fire from the Flame of the
Candle she made use of, and burned the diseased Part. It was dressed of course,
and the Suppuration that attended it, entirely cured the Rheumatism.

Sharp and greasy Unctions or Ointments produce very bad effects, and are
equally dangerous. A Caries, a Rottenness of the Bones, has ensued upon the Use
of a Medicine called, the Balsam of Sulphur with Turpentine. I was consulted in
1750, three Days before her Decease, about a Woman who had long endured acute
rheumatic Pains. She had taken various Medicines, and, among the rest, a
considerable Quantity of a Ptisan, in which Antimony was blended with some
purging Medicines, and a greasy spirituous Balsam had been rubbed into the
Part. The Fever, the Pains, and the Dryness of the Skin soon increased: the
Bones of the Thighs and Arms became carious: and in moving the Patient no more
than was necessary for her Relief and Convenience, without taking her out of
her Bed, both Thighs and one Arm broke. So dreadful an Example should make
People cautious of giving or applying Medicines inconsiderately, even in such
Diseases, as appear but trifling in themselves. I must also inform my Readers,
there are some rheumatic Pains, which admit of no Application; and that almost
every Medicine aggravates them, In such Cases the afflicted must content
themselves with keeping the Parts affected from the Impressions of the Air, by
a Flanel, or the Skin of some Animal with the Fur on.

It is also more advisable sometimes to leave a sufferable and inveterate Pain
to itself, especially in old or weakly People, than to employ too many
Medicines, or such violent ones, as should affect them more importantly than
the Pains did.

186. If the Duration of the Pains fixed in the same Place, should cause some
Degree of Stiffness in the Joint affected, it should be exposed twice a Day to
the Vapor of warm Water, and dried well afterward with hot Linen: then it
should be well chaffed, and lastly touched over with Ointment of Marshmallows.
Pumping, if superadded to this Vapor, considerably increases its Efficacy. I
directed, for a Case of this Sort, a very simple Machine of white Tin, or
Lattin, which combined the Application of the Steam and the Pump.

187. Very young Children are sometimes subject to such Violent Pains, and so
general too, that they cannot bear touching in any Part without excessive
Crying. We must be careful to avoid mistaking these Cases, and not to treat
them like Rheumatisms. They sometimes are owing to Worms, and go off when these
have been discharged.

CHAPTER XII. Of the Bite of a mad Dog.
SECT. 188. MEN may contract the particular and raging Symptom, which is very
generally peculiar to, and has thence been supposed characteristical of, this
Disease from this most common Cause, and that even without any Bite; but this
happens very rarely indeed. It is properly a Distemper belonging to the canine
Genus, consisting of the three Species of Dogs, Wolves, and Foxes, to whom only
it seems inherent and natural; scarcely ever arising in other Animals, without
its being inflicted by them. Whenever there occurs one of them who breeds it,
he bites others, and thus the Poison, the Cause of this terrible Disease, is
diffused. Other Animals besides the canine Species, and Men themselves being
exposed to this Accident, do sometimes contract the Disease in all its Rage and
Horror: though it is not to be supposed, that this is always an unfailing
consequence.

189. If a Dog who used to be lively and active, becomes all at once moapish
and morose; if he has an Aversion to eat; a particular and unusual Look about
his Eyes; a Restlessness, which appears from his continually running to and
fro, we may be apprehensive he is likely to prove mad; at which very Instant he
ought to be tied up securely, that it may be in our Power to destroy him as
soon as the Distemper is evident. Perhaps it might be even still safer to kill
him at once.

Whenever the Malady is certain, the Symptoms heighten pretty soon. His
Aversion to Food, but especially to Drink, grows stronger. He no longer seems
to know his Master; the Sound of his Voice changes; he suffers no Person to
handle or approach him; and bites those who attempt it. He quits his ordinary
Habitation, marching on with his Head and his Tail hanging downwards; his
Tongue lolling half out, and covered with Foam or Slaver, which indeed not
seldom happens indifferently to all Dogs, Other Dogs scent him, not seldom at a
considerable Distance, and fly him with an Air of Horror, which is a certain
Indication of his Disease. Sometimes he contents himself with biting only those
who happen to be near him: while at other times becoming more enraged, he
springs to the right and left on all Men and Animals about him. He hurries away
with manifest Dread from whatever Waters occur to him: at length he falls down
as spent and exhausted; sometimes he rises up again, and drags himself on for a
little time, commonly dying the third, or, at the latest, on the fourth Day
after the manifest Appearance of the Disease, and sometimes even sooner.

190. When a Person is bit by such a Dog, the Wound commonly heals up as
readily as if it was not in the least poisonous: but after the Expiration of a
longer or shorter Term, from three Weeks to three Months, but most commonly in
about six Weeks, the Person bitten begins to perceive, in the Spot that was
bit, a certain dull obtuse Pain. The Scar of it swells, inflames, bursts open,
and weeps out a sharp, foetid, and sanious, or somewhat bloody Humor. At the
same time the Patient becomes sad and melancholy: he feels a kind of
Indifference, Insensibility, and general Numbness; an almost incessant
Coldness; a Difficulty of breathing; a continual Anguish, and Pains in his
Bowels. His Pulse is weak and irregular, his Sleep restless, turbid, and
confused with Ravings, with starting up in Surprise, and with terrible Frights.
His Discharges by Stool are often much altered and irregular, and small cold
Sweats appear at very short Intervals, Sometimes there is also a slight Pain or
Uneasiness in the Throat. Such is the first Degree of this Disease, and it is
called by some Physicians the dumb Rage, or Madness.

191. Its second Degree, the confirmed or downright Madness, is attended with
the following Symptoms. The Patient is afflicted with a violent Thirst, and a
Pain in drinking. Soon after this he avoids all Drink, but particularly Water,
and within some Hours after, he even abhors it. This Horror becomes so violent,
that the bringing Water near his Lips, or into his Sight, the very Name of it,
or of any other Drink; the Sight of Objects, which, from their Transparence,
have any Resemblance of Water, as a Looking-Glass, etc. afflicts him with
extreme Anguish, and sometimes even with Convulsions. They continue however
still to swallow (though not without violent Difficulty) a little Meat or
Bread, and sometimes a little Soup. Some even get down the liquid Medicines
that are prescribed them, provided there be no Appearance of Water in them; or
that Water is not mentioned to them, at the same time. Their Urine becomes
thick and high-colored, and sometimes there is a Suppression or Stoppage of
it. The Voice either grows hoarse, or is almost entirely abolished: but the
Reports of the bitten barking like Dogs, are ridiculous and superstitious
Fictions, void of any Foundation; as well as many other Fables that have been
blended with the History of this Distemper. The Barking of Dogs, however, is
very disagreeable to them. They are troubled with short Deliriums or Ravings,
which are sometimes mixed with Fury. It is at such Times that they spit all
around them; that they attempt also to bite, and sometimes unhappily effect it.
Their Looks are fixed, as it were, and somewhat furious, and their Visage
frequently red. It is pretty common for these miserable Patients to be sensible
of the Approach of their raging Fit, and to conjure the Bystanders to be upon
their Guard. Many of them never have an Inclination to bite. The increasing
Anguish and Pain they feel become inexpressible: they earnestly wish for Death,
and some of them have even destroyed themselves, when they had the Means of
effecting it.

192. It is with the Spittle, and the Spittle only, that this dreadful Poison
unites itself. And here it may be observed, 1, That if the Wounds have been
made through any of the Patient's Clothes, they are less dangerous than those
inflicted immediately on the naked Skin. 2, That Animals who abound in Wool, or
have very thick Hair, are often preserved from the mortal Impression of the
Poison; because in these various Circumstances, the Clothes, the Hair, or the
Wool have wiped, or even dried up, the Slaver of their Teeth. 3, The Bites
inflicted by an infected Animal, very soon after he has bitten many others, are
less dangerous than the former Bites, because their Slaver is lessened or
exhausted. 4, If the Bite happens in the Face, or in the Neck, the Danger is
greater, and the Operation of the Venom is quicker too; by Reason the Spittle
of the Person so bit is sooner infected. 5, The higher the Degree of the
Disease is advanced, the Bites become proportionally more dangerous. From what
I have just mentioned here it may be discerned, why, of many who have been
bitten by the same Sufferer, some have been infected with this dreadful
Disease, and others not.

193. A great Number of Remedies have been highly cried up, as famous for the
Cure of this Disease; and, in Swisserland particularly, the Root of the
Eglantine or wild Rose, gathered at some particular times, under the favorable
Aspects of the Moon, and dried with some extraordinary Precautions. There is
also the This consisted of equal Parts of Rue, Vervain, Plantain, Polypody,
common Wormwood, Mugwort, Bastard Bawm, Betony, St. John's Wort, and lesser
Centaury Tops, to which Desault adds Coralline.
Powder of Palmarius, of calcined Egg Shells, that of the Lichen terrestris, or
Ground Liverwort, with one third Part of Pepper, a Remedy long celebrated in
England; Powder of Oyster Shells; of Vervain; bathing in Salt Water; St.
Hubert's Key, etc. etc. But the Death of a Multitude of those who have been
bitten, notwithstanding their taking the greatest Part of all these boasted
Antidotes; and the Certainty of no one's escaping, who had been attacked with
the high raging Symptom, the Hydrophobia, have demonstrated the Inefficacy of
them all, to all Europe. It is incontestible, that to the Year 1730, not a
single Patient escaped, in whom the Disease was indisputably manifest; and that
every Medicine then employed against it was useless. When Medicines had been
given before the great Symptom appeared, in some of those who took them, it
afterward appeared, in others not. The same different Events occurred also to
others who were bitten, and who took not the least Medicine; so that, upon the
whole, before that Date, no Medicine seemed to be of any Consequence. Since
that time, we have had the Happiness to be informed of a certain Remedy, which
is Mercury, joined to a few others.

194. In short there is a Necessity for destroying or expelling the Poison
itself, which Mercury effects, and is consequently the Counterpoison of it.
That Poison produces a general Irritation of the Nerves; this is to be removed
or assuaged by Antispasmodics: so that in Mercury, or Quicksilver, joined to
Antispasmodics, consists the whole that is indicated in the Cure of this
Disease. There really have been many Instances of Persons cured by these
Medicines, in whom the Distemper had been manifest in its Rage and Violence;
and as many as have unfortunately received the Cause of it in a Bite, should be
firmly persuaded, that in taking these Medicines, and using all other proper
Precautions, they shall be entirely secured from all its ill Consequences.
Those also in whom the Rage and Fury of this Distemper is manifest, ought to
use the same Medicines, with entire This Advice is truly prudent and judicious;
Hope, as I have observed on a different Occasion, being a powerful, though
impalpable, Cordial: and in such perilous Situations, we should excite the most
agreeable Expectations we possibly can in the Patient; that Nature, being
undepressed by any desponding melancholy ones, may exert her Functions the
more firmly, and cooperate effectually with the Medicines, against her
internal Enemy. K.
Hope and Confidence, which may justly be founded on the many Cures effected by
them. It is acknowledged, however, that they have proved ineffectual in a few
Cases; but what Disease is there, which does not sometimes prove incurable?

195. The very Moment after receiving the Bite, if it happens to be in the
Flesh, and if it can safely be effected, all the Part affected should be cut I
knew a brave worthy Gentleman abroad, who above forty Years past thus preserved
his Life, after receiving the Bite of a large Rattle-Snake, by resolutely
cutting it and the Flesh surrounding it out, with a sharp pointed Penknife. --
Perhaps those who would not suffer the Application of the actual Cautery, that
is, of a red hot Iron (which certainly promise^ well for a Cure) might be
persuaded to admit of a potential Cautery, where the Bite was inflicted on a
fleshy Part. Though even this is far from being unpainful, yet the Pain coming
on more gradually, is less terrifying and horrid. And when it had been applied
quickly after, and upon the Bite, and kept on for three or four Hours, the
Discharge, after cutting the Eschar, would sooner ensue, and in more Abundance,
than that from the actual Cautery; the only Preference of which seems to
consist in its being capable perhaps of absorbing, or otherwise consuming, all
the poisonous Saliva at once. This Issue should be dressed afterward according
to our Author's Direction; and in the gradual healing of the Ulcer, it may be
properly deterged by adding a little Pracipitate to the Digestive. Neither
would this intefere with the Exhibition of the Tonquin Powder No. 30, nor the
Antispasmodic Bolus No. 31, if they should be judged necessary. And these
perhaps might prove the most certain Means of preventing the mortal Effects of
this singular animal Poison, which it is so impossible to analyze, and so
extremely difficult to form any material Idea of; but which is not the Case of
some other Poisons. K.
away. The Ancients directed it to be cauterized, or burnt with a red hot Iron
(mere Scarification being of very little Effect) and this Method would very
probably prove effectual. It requires more Resolution, however, than every
Patient is endued with. The Wound should be washed and cleansed a considerable
Time with warm Water, with a little Sea Salt dissolved in it. After this, into
the Lips and Edges of the Wound, and into the Surface of the Part all about it,
should be rubbed a Quarter of an Ounce of the Ointment No. 28; and the Wound
should be dressed twice daily, with the soft lenient Ointment No. 29, to
promote Suppuration; but that of No. 28 is to be used only once a Day.

In Point of Regimen, the Quantity of Nourishment should be less than usual,
particularly in the Article of It seems not amiss to try the Effects of a
solely vegetable Diet, and that perhaps consisting more of the acescent than
alcalescent Herbs and Roots,) in this Disease, commencing immediately from the
Bite of a known mad Dog. These carnivorous Animals, who naturally reject all
vegetable Food, are the only primary Harbingers or Breeders of it; though they
are capable of transmitting it by a Bite to graminivorous and granivorous ones.
The Virtue of Vinegar in this Disease, said to have been accidentally
discovered on the Continent, seems not to have been hitherto experienced
amongst us; yet in Case of such a morbid Accident it may deserve a Trial;
though not so far, as to occasion the Omission of more certainly experienced
Remedies, with some of which it might be improper. K.
Flesh: he should abstain from Wine, spirituous Liquors, all Sorts of Spices,
and hot inflaming Food. He should drink only Barley-water, or an Infusion of
the Flowers of the Lime-tree. He should be guarded against Costiveness by a
soft relaxing Diet, or by Glysters, and bathe his Legs once a Day in warm
Water. Every third Day one Dose of the Medicine No. 30 should be taken; which
is compounded of Mercury, that counterworks the Poison, and of Musk which
prevents the Spasms, or convulsive Motions. I confess at the same time that I
have less Dependence on the Mercury given in this Form, and think the rubbing
in of its Ointment considerably more efficacious, which I should hope may
always prevent the Fatality of this dreadful, surprising Disease The great
Usefulness of mercurial Frictions, we may even say, the certain Security which
they procure for the Patients, in these Cases, provided they are applied very
soon after the Bite, have been demonstrated by their Success in Provence, at
Lions, at Montpellier, at Pondicherry, and in many other Places. Neither have
these happy Events been invalidated by any Observations or Instances to the
contrary. It cannot therefore be too strongly inculcated to those who have been
bitten by venomous Animals, to comply with the Use of them. They ought to be
used in such a Quantity, and after such a Manner, as to excite a moderate
Salivation, for fifteen, twenty, or even thirty Days. E. L.

Though this Practice may justly be pursued from great Caution, when no Cautery
had been speedily applied to, and no such Discharge had been obtained from, the
bitten Part; yet wherever it had, this long and depressing Salivation, I
conceive, would be very seldom necessary; and might be hurtful to weak
Constitutions. K.


.

196. If the raging Symptom, the Dread of Water, has already appeared, and the
Patient is strong, and abounds with Blood, he should, 1, Be bled to a
considerable Quantity, and this may be repeated twice, thrice, or even a fourth
Time, if Circumstances require it.

2, The Patient should be put, if possible, into a warm Bath; and this should
be used twice daily.

3, He should every Day receive two, or even three of the emollient Glysters
No. 5.

4, The Wound and the Parts adjoining to it should be rubbed with the Ointment,
No. 28, twice a Day.

5, The whole Limb which contains the Wound should be rubbed with Oil, and be
wrapped up in an oily Flanel.

6, Every three Hours a Dose of the Powder No. 30, should be taken in a Cup of
the Infusion of Lime-tree and Elder-flowers.

7, The Prescription No. 31, is to be given every Night, and to be repeated in
the Morning, if the Patient is not easy, washing it down with the same Infusion.

8, If there be a great Nauseousness at Stomach, with a Bitterness in the
Mouth, give the Powder No. 35, which brings up a copious Discharge of glewy and
bilious Humors.

9, There is very little Occasion to say any thing relating to the Patient's
Food, in such a Situation. Should he ask for any, he may be allowed Panada,
light Soup, Bread, Soups made of farinaceous or mealy Vegetables, or a little
Milk.

197. By the Use of these Remedies the Symptoms will be observed to lessen, and
to disappear by Degrees; and finally Health will be re-established. But if the
Patient should long continue weak, and subject to Terrors, he may take a Dose
of the Powder No. 14, thrice a Day.

198. It is certain that a Boy, in whom the raging Symptom of this Disease had
just appeared, was perfectly cured, by bathing all about the wounded Part with
Sallad-oil, in which some Camphire and Opium were dissolved; with the Addition
of repeated Frictions of the Ointment No. 28, and making him take some Eau de
Luce with a little Wine. This Medicine, a Coffee-cup of which may be given
every four Hours, allayed the great Inquietude and Agitation of the Patient;
and brought on a very plentiful Sweat, on which all the Symptoms vanished.

199. Dogs may be cured by rubbing in a triple Quantity of the same Ointment
directed for Men, and by giving them the Bolus No. 33. But both these Means
should be used as soon as ever they are bit. When the great Symptom is
manifest, there would be too much Danger in attempting to apply one, or to give
the other; and they should be immediately killed. It might be well, however, to
try if they would swallow down the Bolus, on its being thrown to them.

As soon as ever Dogs are bit, they should be safely tied up, and not let loose
again, before the Expiration of three or four Months.

200. A false and dangerous Prejudice has prevailed with Regard to the Bites
from Dogs, and it is this -- That if a Dog who had bit any Person, without
being mad at the time of his biting, should become mad afterward, the Person
so formerly bitten, would prove mad too at the same time. Such a Notion is full
as absurd, as it would be to affirm, that if two Persons had slept in the same
Bed, and that one of them should take the Itch, the Small-Pocks, or any other
contagious Disease, ten or twelve Years afterward, that the other should also
be infected with that he took, and at the same time too.

Of two Circumstances, whenever a Person is bit, one must certainly be, either
the Dog which gives the Bite, is about to be mad himself, in which Case this
would be evident in a few Days, and then it must be said the Person was bitten
by a mad Dog: Or else, that the Dog was absolutely found, having neither
conceived, or bred in himself, nor received from without the Cause, the
Principle of Madness: in which last Case I ask any Man in his Senses, if he
could communicate it. No Person, no Thing imparts what it has not. This false
and crude Notion excites those who are possessed with it to a dangerous Action:
they exercise that Liberty the Laws unhappily allow them of killing the Dog; by
which Means they are left uncertain of his State, and of their own Chance. This
is a dreadful Uncertainty, and may be attended with embarrassing and
troublesome Consequences, independent of the Poison itself. The reasonable
Conduct would be to fecure and observe the Dog very closely, in order to know
certainly whether he is, or is not, mad.

201. It is no longer necessary to represent the Horror, the Barbarity and
Guilt of that cruel Practice, which prevailed, not very long since, of
suffocating Persons in the Height of this Disease, with the Bed-cloaths. or
between Matrasses. It is now prohibited in most Countries; and doubtless will
be punished, or at least ought to be, even in those where as yet it is not.

Another Cruelty, of which we hope to see no repeated Instance, is that of
abandoning those miserable Patients to themselves, without the least Resource
or Assistance: a most detestable Custom even in those Times, when there was not
the least Hope of saving them; and still more criminal in our Days, when they
may be recovered effectually. I do again affirm, that it is not very often,
these afflicted Patients are disposed to bite; and that even when they are,
they are afraid of doing it; and request the Bystanders to keep out of their
Reach: So that no Danger is incurred; op where there is any, it may easily be
avoided by a few Precautions.

CHAPTER XIII. Of the Small-Pocks.
SECT. 202. THE Small-Pocks is the most frequent, the most extensive of all
Diseases; since out of a hundred Persons there are not more than As far as the
Number of inoculated Persons, who remained entirely uninfected (some very few
after a second Inoculation) has enabled me, I have calculated the Proportion
naturally exempted from this Disease, though residing within the Influence of
it, to be full 25 in 1000. See Analysis of Inoculation, Edit. 2d. P. 157.
Note*. K.
four or five exempted from it. It is equally true however, that if it attacks
almost every Person, it attacks them but once, so that having escaped through
it, they are always secure cure from It has sometimes been observed, (and the
Observation has been such, as not to be doubted,) that a very mild distinct
Small-Pocks has sometimes invaded the same Person twice: But such Instances are
so very rare, that we may very generally affirm, those who have once had it,
will never have it again E. L.

In Deference to a few particular Authorities, I have also supposed such a
repeated Infection, (Analysis of Inoculation, Ed. 2d. P. 43.) though I have
really never seen any such myself; nor ever heard more than two Physicians
affirm it, one at Versailles, and another in London; the last of whom declared,
he took it upon the Credit of a Country Physician, thoroughly acquainted with
this Disease, and a Witness to the Repetition of it. Hence we imagine the
Editor of this Work at Lions might have justly termed this Re-infection
extremely rare, which would have a Tendency to reconcile the Subjects of the
Small Pocks, more generally, to the most salutary Practice of Inoculation.
Doubtless some other eruptive Fevers, particularly the Chicken-Pocks, Crystals,
etc. have been often mistaken for the real Small-Pocks by incompetent Judges,
and sometimes even by Persons better qualified, yet who were less attentive to
the Symptoms and Progress of the former. But whoever will be at the Pains to
read Dr. De Beaux's Parallele de la petite verole naturelle avec l'artificic
le, or a practical abstract of Part of it in the Monthly Review, Vol. XXV. P.
307 to 311, will find such a just, clear and useful Distinction of them, as may
prevent many future Deceptions on this frequently interesting Subject. K.


it. It must be acknowledged, at the same Time, to be one of the most
destructive Diseases; for if in some Years or Seasons, it proves to be of a
very mild and gentle Sort, in others it is almost as fatal as the Plague: It
being demonstrated, by calculating the Consequences of it is most raging, and
its gentlest Prevalence; that it kills one seventh of the Number it attacks.

203. People generally take the Small-Pocks in their Infancy, or in their
Childhood. It is very seldom known to attack only one Person in one Place; its
Invasions being very generally epidemical, and seizing a large Proportion of
those who have not suffered it. It commonly ceases at the End of some Weeks, or
of some Months, and rarely ever appears again in the same Place, until four,
five, or six Years after.

204. This Malady often gives some Intimation of its Approach three or four
Days before the Appearance of the Fever, by a little Dejection; by less
Vivacity and Gaiety than usual; a great Propensity to sweat; less Appetite; a
slight Alteration of the Countenance, and a kind of pale livid Color about the
Eyes: Notwithstanding which, in Children of a lax and phlegmatic Constitution,
I have known a moderate Agitation of their Blood, (before their Shivering
approached,) give them a The same Appearances very often occur in such Subjects
by Inoculation, before actual Sickening, as I have observed and instanced,
Analysis Ed. 1st. P. 62. Ed. 2. P. 75, 76.
Vivacity, Gaiety, and a rosy Improvement of their Complexion, beyond what
Nature had given them.

Certain short Vicissitudes of Heat or Coldness succeed the former introductory
Appearances, and at length a considerable Shivering of the Duration of one,
two, three, or four Hours: This is succeeded by violent Heat, accompanied with
Pains of the Head, Loins, Vomiting, or at least with a frequent Propensity to
vomit.

This State continues for some Hours, at the Expiration of which the Fever
abates a little in a Sweat, which is sometimes a very large one: the Patient
then finds himself better, but is notwithstanding cast down, torpid or heavy,
very squeamish, with a Headache and Pain in the Back, and a Disposition to be
drowsy. The last Symptom indeed is not very common, except in Children, less
than seven or eight Years of Age.

The Abatement of the Fever is of small Duration; and some Hours after,
commonly toward the Evening, it returns with all its Attendants, and
terminates again by Sweats, as before.

This State of the Disease lasts three or four Days; at the End of which Term,
and seldom later, the first Eruptions appear among the Sweat, which terminates
the Paroxysm or Return of the Fever. I have generally observed the earliest
Eruption to appear in the Face, next to that on the Hands, on the fore Part of
the Arms, on the Neck, and on the upper Part of the Breast. As soon as the
Eruption appears, if the Distemper is of a gentle Kind and Disposition, the
Fever almost entirely vanishes: the Patient continues to sweat a little, or
transpire; the Number of Eruptions increases, others coming out on the Back,
the Sides, the Belly, the Thighs, the Legs, and the Feet. Sometimes they are
pushed out very numerously even to the Soles of the Feet; where, as they
increase in Size, they often excite very sharp Pain, by Reason of the great
Thickness and Hardness of the Skin in these Parts.

Frequently on the first and second Day of Eruption (speaking hitherto always
of the mild Kind and Degree of the Disease) there returns again a very gentle
Revival of the Fever toward the Evening, which, about the Termination of it,
is attended with a considerable and final Eruption: though as often as the
Fever terminates perfectly after the earliest Eruption, a very distinct and
very small one is a pretty certain Consequence. For though the Eruption is
already, or should prove only moderate, the Fever, as I have before said, does
not totally disappear; a small Degree of it still remaining, and heightening a
little every Evening.

These Pustules, or Efflorescences, on their first Appearances, are only so
many very little red Spots, considerably resembling a Fleabite; but
distinguishable by a small white Point in the Middle, a little raised above the
rest, which gradually increases in Size, with the Redness extended about it.
They become whiter, in Proportion as they grow larger; and generally upon the
sixth Day, including that of their first Eruption, they attain their utmost
Magnitude, and are full of Pus or Matter. Some of them grow to the Size of a
Pea, and some still a little larger; but this never happens to the greatest
Number of them. From this time they begin to look yellowish, they gradually
become dry, and fall off in brown Scales, in ten or eleven Days from their
first Appearance. As their Eruption occurred on different Days, they also
wither and fall off successively. The Face is sometimes clear of them, while
Pustules still are seen upon the Legs, not fully ripe, or suppurated: and those
in the Soles of the Feet often remain much longer.

205. The Skin is of course extended or stretched out by the Pustules; and
after the Appearance of a certain Quantity, all the Interstices, or Parts
between the Pustules, are red and bright, as it were, with a proportionable
Inflation or Swelling of the Skin. The Face is the first Part that appears
bloated, from the Pustules there first attaining their utmost Size: and this
Inflation is sometimes so considerable, as to look monstrous; the like happens
also to the Neck, and the Eyes are entirely closed up by it. The Swelling of
the Face abates in Proportion to the scabbing and drying up of the Pustules;
and then the Hands are puffed up prodigiously. This happens successively to the
Legs, the Tumor or Swelling being the Consequence of the Pustules attaining
their utmost Size, which happens by Succession, in these different Parts.

206. Whenever there is a very considerable Eruption, the Fever is heightened
at the time of Suppuration, which is not to be wondered at; one single Boil
excites a Fever: How is it possible then that some hundreds, nay some
thousands, of these little Abscesses should not excite one? This Fever is the
most dangerous Period, or Time of the Disease, and occurs between the ninth and
the thirteenth Days; as many Circumstances vary the Term of Suppuration, two or
three Days. At this painful and perilous Season then, the Patient becomes very
hot, and thirsty: he is harrassed with Pain; and finds it very difficult to
discover a favorable easy Posture. If the Malady runs very high, he has no
Sleep; he raves, becomes greatly oppressed, is seized with a heavy Drowsiness;
and when he dies, he dies either suffocated or lethargic, and sometimes in a
State compounded of both these Symptoms

The Pulse, during this Fever of Suppuration, is sometimes of an astonishing
Quickness, while the Swelling of the Wrists makes it seem, in some Subjects, to
be very small. The most critical and dangerous Time is, when the Swellings of
the Face, Head and Neck are in their highest Degree. Whenever the Swelling
begins to fall, the Scabs on the Face to dry [ supposing neither of these to be
too sudden and premature, for the visible Quantity of the Pustules] and the
Skin to shrivel, as it were, the Quickness of the Pulse abates a little, and
the Danger diminishes. When the Pustules are very few, this second Fever is so
moderate, that it requires some Attention to discern it, so that the Danger is
next to none.

207. Besides these Symptoms, there are some others, which require considerable
Attention and Vigilance. One of these is the Soreness of the Throat, with which
many Persons in the Small-Pocks are afflicted, as soon as the Fever grows
pretty strong. It continues for two or three Days; feels very strait and
troublesome in the Action of Swallowing; and whenever the Disease is extremely
acute, it entirely prevents Swallowing. It is commonly ascribed to the Eruption
of Pustules in the Throat; but this is a Mistake, such Pustules being almost
constantly As Pustules are, and not very seldom, visible on the Tongue, and
sometimes on the Roof, even to its Process called the Palate, which I have
plainly seen; it seems not very easy to assign any insuperable Obstacle to the
Existence of a few within the Throat; though this scarcely ever occurs, in the
distinct Small-Pocks. Doubtless however, a considerable Inflammation of that
Part will be as likely to produce the great Difficulty of Swallowing, as the
Existence of Pustules there; which our learned Author does not absolutely
reject, and consequently will forgive this Supposition of them; especially if
he credits the ocular Testimony of Dr. Violante, cited in the Analysis, Ed. 2.
p. 71. K.
imaginary. It begins, most frequently, before the Eruption appears; if this
Complaint is in a light Degree, it terminates upon the Eruption; and whenever
it revives again in the Course of the Disease, it is always in Proportion to
the Degree of the Fever. Hence we may infer it does not arise from the
Pustules, but is owing to the Inflammation; and as often as it is of any
considerable Duration, it is almost ever attended with another Symptom, the
Salivation, or a Discharge of a great Quantity of Spittle, This Salivation
rarely exists, where the Disease is very gentle, or the Patient very young; and
is full as rarely absent, where it is severe, and the Patient is past seven or
eight Years old; but when the Eruption is very confluent, and the Patient
adult, or grown up, the Discharge is surprising. Under these Circumstances it
flows out incessantly, allowing the afflicted Patient no Rest nor Respite,
often incommoding him more than any other Symptom of the Distemper; and so much
the more, as after its Continuance for some Days, the Lips, the Inside of the
Cheeks, the Tongue, and the Roof of the Mouth are entirely peeled or flead, as
it were. Nevertheless, however painful and embarrassing this Discharge may
prove, it is very important and salutary. Mere Infants are less subject to it,
some of them having a Looseness, in lieu of it: and yet I have observed even
this last Discharge to be considerably less frequent in them, than a Salivation
is in grown People.

208. Children, to the Age of five or six Years, are liable to Convulsions
before Eruption: these however are not dangerous, if they are not accompanied
with other grievous and violent Symptoms. But such Convulsions as supervene
either when Eruption, having already occured, suddenly retreats, or strikes in,
according to the common Phrase; or during the Course of the Fever of
Suppuration, are greatly more terrifying.

Involuntary Discharges of Blood from the Nose often occur, in the first Stages
of this Distemper, which are extremely serviceable, and commonly lessen, or
carry off, the Headache. Mere Infants are less subject to this Discharge;
though they have sometimes a little of it: and I have known a considerable
Stupor or Drowsiness, vanish immediately after this Bleeding.

209. The Small-Pocks is commonly distinguished into two Kinds, the confluent
and the distinct, such a Distinction really existing in Nature: but as the
Treatment of each of them is the same; and as the Quantity or Dose of the
Medicines is only to be varied, in Proportion to the Danger of the Patient (not
to enter here into very tedious Details, and such as might exceed the
Comprehension of many of our Readers; as well as whatever might relate
particularly to the malignant Small-Pocks) I shall limit myself within the
Description I have premised, which includes all the Symptoms common to both
these Kinds of the Small-Pocks. I content myself with adding here, that we may
expect a very confluent and dangerous Pock, if, at the very time of Seizure,
the Patient is immediately attacked with many violent Symptoms; more especially
if his Eyes are extremely quick, lively, and even glistening, as it were; if he
vomits almost continually; if the Pain of his Loins be violent; and if he
suffers at the same time great Anguish and Inquietude: if in Infants there is
great Stupor or Heaviness; if Eruption appears on the third Day, and sometimes
even on the second; as the hastier Eruptions in this Disease signify the most
dangerous Kind and Degree of it; and on the contrary, the flower Eruption is,
it is the safer too; supposing this Slowness of the Eruption not to have been
the Consequence of great Weakness, or of some violent inward Pain.

210. The Disorder is sometimes so very mild and slight, that Eruption appears
with scarcely any Suspicion of the Child's having the least Ailment, and the
Event is as favorable as the Invasion. The Pustules appear, grow large,
suppurate, and attain their Maturity, without confining the Patient to his Bed,
or lessening either his Sleep, or Appetite.

It is very common to see Children in the Country (and they are seldom more
than Children who have it so very gently) run about in the open Air, through
the whole Course of this Disease, and feeding just as they do in Health. Even
those who take it in a somewhat higher Degree, commonly go out when Eruption is
finished, and give themselves up, without Reserve, to the Voracity of their
Hunger. Notwithstanding all this Neglect, many get perfectly cured; though such
a Conduct should never be proposed for Imitation, since Numbers have
experienced its pernicious Consequences; and several of these Children have
been brought to me, especially from Jurat, who, after such Neglect, in the
Course of the mild and kindly Sort of this Distemper, have contracted
Complaints and Infirmities of different Kinds which have been found very
difficult to subdue.

211. This still continues to be one of those Distempers, whose Danger has long
been increased by its improper Treatment, and especially by forcing the
Patients into Sweats: and it still continues to be increased, particularly
among Country People. They have seen Eruption appear, while the Patient sweats,
and observed he found himself better after its Appearance: and hence they
conclude that, by quickening and forcing out this Eruption, they contributed to
his Relief: and suppose, that by increasing the Quantity of his Sweats, and the
Number of his Eruptions, the Blood is the better cleared and purified from the
Poison. These are mortal Errors, which daily Experience has demonstrated, by
their tragical Consequences.

When the Contagion or Poison, which generates this Disease, has been admitted
into the Blood, it requires a certain Term to produce its usual Effects: at
which time the Blood being tainted by the Venom it has received, and by that
which such Venom has formed or assimilated from it, Nature makes an Effort to
free herself of it, and to expel it by the Skin, precisely at the time when
every thing is predisposed for that Purpose. This Effort pretty generally
succeeds being very often rather too rapid and violent, and very seldom too
weak. Hence it is evident, that whenever this Effort is deficient, it ought not
to be heightened by hot Medicines or Means, which make it too violent and
dangerous: for when it already exceeds in this Respect, a further Increase of
such Violence must render it mortal. There are but few Cases in which the
Efforts of Nature, on this Occasion, are too languid and feeble, especially in
the Country; and whenever such rare Cases do occur, it is very difficult to
form a just and proper Estimation of them: for which Reason we should be very
reserved and cautious in the Use of heating Medicines, which are so mortally
pernicious in this Disease.

Wine, Venice Treacle, cordial Confections, hot Air, and Loads of Bed-cloths,
annually sweep off thousands of Children, who might have recovered, if they had
taken nothing but warm Water; and every Person who is interested in the
Recovery of Patients from this Distemper, ought carefully to prevent the
smallest Use of such Drugs; which, if they should not immediately aggravate it
to a fatal Degree, yet will certainly increase the Severity and Torment of it,
and annex the most unhappy and tragical Consequences to it.

The Prejudice in this Point is so strongly rooted, that a total Eradication of
it must be very difficult: but I only desire People would be convinced by their
own Eyes, of the different Success of the hot Regimen, and of that I shall
propose. And here indeed I must confess, I found more Attention and Docility,
on this Point, among the Inhabitants of the City, and especially in the last
epidemical spreading of the Small-Pocks, than I presumed to hope for. Not only
as many as consulted me on the Invasion of it, complied exactly with the
cooling Regimen I advised them; but their Neighbors also had Recourse to it,
when their Children sickened: and being often called in when it had been many
Days advanced, I observed with great Pleasure, that in many Houses, not one
heating Medicine had been given; and great Care had been taken to keep the Air
of the Patient's Chamber refreshingly cool and temperate. This encourages me to
expect, that this Method hereafter will become general here. What certainly
ought most essentially to conduce to this is, that notwithstanding the
Diffusion or spreading of this Disease was as numerous and extensive as any of
the former, the Mortality, in Consequence of it, was evidently less.

212. At the very Beginning of the Small-Pocks (which may be reasonably
suspected, from the Presence of the Symptoms I have already described;
supposing the Person complaining never to have had it, and the Disease to
prevail near his Residence) the Patient is immediately to be put on a strict
Regimen, and to have his Legs bathed Night and Morning in warm Water. This is
the most proper and promising Method to lessen the Quantity of Eruption in the
Face and Head, and to facilitate it every where else on the Surface. Glysters
also greatly contribute to abate the Headache, and to diminish the Reachings to
vomit, and the actual Vomitings, which greatly distress the Patient; but which
however it is highly absurd and pernicious to stop by any stomachic cordial
Confection, or by Venice Treacle; and still more dangerous to attempt removing
the Cause of them, by a Vomit or Purge, which are hurtful in the beginning of
the Small-Pocks Dr. Tissot justly proposes Glysters in the inflammatory
Apparatus of the Small-Pocks, and as judiciously rejects the Practice of
stopping the Reachings to vomit, by any cordial Confection or Opiate. But it is
probable the Caution he gives against attempting to abate them by a Vomit or
Purge, should, in some Cases at least, be restrained only to such of those
Evacuants, as have any Violence in their Operation. Indisputably this is an
improper Stage for stimulating, or adding to the Agitation of the Blood; but
where there was a rational Probability of abating this Stimulation, and of
guarding, or relieving the Head, either by gently indulging the Puking, if
manifestly bilious, with Draughts of warm Water, or of very light green Tea, we
think this may be safely and discretely allowed. In Cases too where a
considerable Costiveness had preceded the Attack of this Disease, and the Eyes
and Countenance were highly inflamed, a little Manna with Magnesia Alba, or
Cream of Tartar, or perhaps a Dram or two of Glauber Salt, according to the
Patient's Age, etc. might be prudently ventured on: And if this, or the like
Laxative, was not attended with any Discharge in three or four Hours, one might
be promoted by inviting it downward, with a moderately opening Glyster. These
Means promise rationally to abate the violent Effervescence, to restrain the
Fever, etc. as it is very common for Patients under frequent bilious Pukings
before Eruption, to confess themselves immediately easier upon each Discharge.
After Eruption I have given a very sensible and immediate Relief to an
inoculated Patient of twenty four Years, by allowing him to drink a Pint, or
better of small, and pretty warm, green Tea, which brought on a considerable
and very bitter Discharge from his Stomach, and entirely removed his Oppression
and Nausea. K.
.

If the Fever be moderate, the Bathings of the Legs on the first Day of
sickening, and one Glyster may suffice then. The Patient must be restrained to
his Regimen; and instead of the Ptisan No. 1, 2, 4, a very young Child should
drink nothing but Milk, diluted with two thirds of Elder-flower or Lime-tree
Tea, or with Bawm Tea, if there be no perceivable Fever; and in short, if they
have an Aversion to the Taste of them all, with only the same Quantity of good
clear A Negroe Girl, about five or six Years old, under a coherent Pock, stole
by Night out of the Garret where she lay, into a Kitchen out of Doors, where
she drank plentifully of cold Water. How often she repeated these nightly
cooling Potions I never could certainly learn, though they occured in my own
House in South Carolina in Summer. But it is certain the Child recovered as
speedily as others, whose Eruption was more distinct, and who drank
Barley-Water, very thin Rice or Indian Corn Gruel, Bawm Tea or the like. In
fact, throughout the Course of this Visitation from the Small-Pocks in Carolina
in 1738, we had but too many Demonstrations of the fatal Cooperation of
violent Heat with their Contagion; and not a very few surprising Instances of
the salutary Effects of being necessarily and involuntarily exposed to some
very cooling Accidents after Infection, and in some Cases after Eruption too:
which I then more particularly mentioned in a small controversial Tract printed
there. K.
Water. An Apple coddled or baked may be added to it; and if they complain of
Hunger a little Bread may be allowed; but they must be denied any Meat, or Meat
Broth, Eggs and strong Drink; since it has appeared from Observations
frequently repeated, that Children who had been indulged with such Diet, proved
the worse for it, and recovered more slowly than others. In this early Stage
too, clear Whey alone may serve them instead of every other Drink, the good
Effects of which I have frequently been a Witness to; or some Buttermilk may be
allowed. When the Distemper is of a mild Species, a perfect Cure ensues,
without any other Assistance or Medicine: but we should not neglect to purge
the Patient as soon as the Pustules are perfectly scabbed on the greater Part
of his Face, with the Prescription No. 11, which must be repeated six Days
after. He should not be allowed Flesh 'till after this second Purge; though
after the first he may be allowed some well-boiled Pulls, or Garden-stuff and
Bread, and in such a Quantity, as not to be pinched with Hunger, while he
recovers from the Disease.

213. But if the Fever should be strong, the Pulse hard, and the Pain of the
Head and Loins should be violent, he must, 1. immediately lose Blood from the
Arm; receive a Glyster two Hours after; and, if the Fever continues, the
Bleeding must be repeated, I have directed a Repetition of it even to the
fourth Time, within the two first Days, to young People under the Age of
eighteen; and it is more especially necessary in such Persons as, with a hard
and full Pulse, are also affected with a heavy Drowsiness and a Delirium, or
Raving.

2. As long as the Fever continues violently, two, three, and even four
Glysters should be given in the twenty-four Hours; and the Legs should be
bathed twice.

3. The Patient is to be taken out of Bed, and supported in a Chair, as long as
he can tolerably bear it.

4. The Air of his Chamber should frequently be renewed, and if it be too hot,
which it often is in Summer, in order to refresh it and the Patient, the Means
must be employed which are directed 36.

5. He is to be restrained to the Ptisans No. 2 or 4; and if that does not
sufficiently moderate the Fever, he should take every Hour, or every two Hours,
according to the Urgency of the Case, a Spoonful of the Mixture No. 10: mixed
with a Cup of Ptisan. After the Eruption, the Fever being then abated, there is
less Occasion for Medicine; and should it even entirely disappear, the Patient
may be regulated, as directed, 212.

214. When, after a Calm, a Remission or Intermission of some Days, the Process
of Suppuration revives the Fever, we ought first, and especially, to keep the
We must remember that Dr. TISSOT is treating here of the higher and confluent
Degrees of this Disease; for in the distinct Small-Pocks, it is common to find
Persons for several Days without a Stool, and without the least perceiveable
Disorder for want of one, (their whole Nourishment being very light and
liquid,) in which Cases, while Matters proceed well in all other Respects,
there seems little Occasion for a great Solicitude about Stools: But if one
should be judged necessary after four or five Days Costiveness, accompanied
with a Tightness or Hardness of the Belly, doubtless the Glyster should be of
the lenient Kind, (as those directed by our Author are,) and not calculated to
produce more than a second Stool at the very most. Indeed, where there is
Reason to apprehend a strong secondary Fever, from the Quantity of Eruption,
and a previously high Inflammation, it is more prudent to provide for a
Mitigation of it, by a moderately open Belly, than to suffer a long
Costiveness; yet so as to incur very little Hazard of abating the Salivation,
or of retarding the Growth or Suppuration of the Pustules, by a Superpurgation,
which it may be too easy to excite in some Habits. If the Discharge by
spitting, and the Brightness and Quantity of Suppuration, have been in
Proportion to the Number of Eruptions; though the Conflict from the secondary
Fever, where these have been numerous, is often acute and high; and the
Patient, who is in great Anguish, is far from being out of Danger; yet Nature
pretty generally proves stronger than the Disease, in such Circumstances. As
the Elect. Catholicon is little used, or made here, the lenitive Electuary of
our Dispensatory may be substituted for it, or that of the Edinburgh
Dispensatory, which was calculated particularly for Glysters. K.
Body very open. For this Purpose, a an Ounce of Catholicon should be added to
the Glyster; or they might be simply made of Whey, with Honey, Oil and Salt. b
Give the Patient three times every Morning, at the Interval of two Hours
between each, three Glasses of the Ptisan No. 32. g Purge him after two Days,
with the Potion No. 23, but on that Day, he must not take the Ptisan No. 32.

2. He must, if the Distemper be very violent, take a double Dose of the
Mixture No. 10.

3. The Patient should be taken out of Bed, and kept up in a Room well aired
Day and Night, until the Fever has abated. Many Persons will probably be
surprised at this Advice; nevertheless it is that which I have often
experienced to be the most efficacious, and without which the others are
ineffectual. They will say, how shall the Patient sleep at this rate? To which
it may be answered, Sleep is not necessary, nay, it is hurtful in this State
and Stage of the Disease. Besides, he is really unable to sleep; the continual
Salivation prevents it, and it is very necessary to keep up the Salivation;
which is facilitated by often injecting warm Water and Honey into his Throat.
It is also of considerable Service to throw some up his Nostrils, and often
thus to cleanse the Scabs which form within them. A due Regard to these
Circumstances not only contributes to lessen the Patient's Uneasiness, but very
effectually also to his Cure.

4. If the Face and Neck are greatly swelled, emolient Cataplasms ought to be
applied to the Soles of the Feet; and if these should have very little Effect,
Sinapisms should be applied. These are a kind of Plaster or Application
composed of Yeast, Mustardflower, and some Vinegar. They sometimes occasion
sharp and almost burning Pain; but in Proportion to the Sharpness and Increase
of these Pains, the Head and Neck are remarkably relieved.

215. The Eyelids are puffed up and swelled when the Disease runs high, so as
to conceal the Eyes, which are closed up fast for several Days. Nothing further
should be attempted, with Respect to this Circumstance, but the frequent
moistening of them with a little warm Milk and Water. The Precautions which
some take to stroke them with Saffron, a Gold Ducat, or Rosewater, are equally
childish and insignificant. What chiefly conduces to prevent the Redness or
Inflammation of the Eyes after the Disease, and in general all its other bad
Consequences, is to be content for a considerable time, with a very moderate
Quantity of Food, and particularly to abstain from Flesh and Wine. In the very
bad Small-Pocks, and in little Children, the Eyes are closed up from the
Beginning of the Eruption.

216. One extremely serviceable Assistance, and which has not been made use of
for a long time past, except as a Means to preserve the Smoothness and Beauty
of the Face; but yet which has the greatest Tendency to preserve Life itself,
is the Opening of the Pustules, not only upon the Face, but all over the Body.
In the first Place, by opening them, the Lodgment or Retention of Pus is
prevented, which may be supposed to prevent any Erosion, or eating down, from
it; whence Scars, deep Pits, and other Deformities are obviated. Secondly, in
giving a Vent to the Poison, the Retreat of it into the Blood is cut off, which
removes a principal Cause of the Danger of the Small-Pocks. Thirdly, the Skin
is relaxed; the Tumor of the Face and Neck diminish in Proportion to that
Relaxation; and thence the Return of the Blood from the Brain is facilitated,
which must prove a great Advantage. The Pustules should be opened every where,
successively as they ripen. The precise time of doing it is when they are
entirely white; when they just begin to turn but a very little yellowish; and
when the red Circle surrounding them is quite pale. They should be opened with
very fine sharp-pointed Scissars; this does not give the Patient the least
Pain; and when a certain Number of them are opened, a Sponge dipped in a little
warm Water is to be repeatedly applied to suck up and remove that Pus, which
would soon be dried up into Scabs. But as the Pustules, when emptied thus, soon
fill again, a Discharge of this fresh Matter must be obtained in the same
Manner some Hours after; and this must sometimes be repeated five or even six
times successively. Such extraordinary Attention in this Point may probably be
considered as minute, and even trivial, by some; and is very unlikely to become
a This Practice which I had heard of, and even suggested to myself, but never
seen actually enterprized, seems so very rational as highly to deserve a fair
Trial in the confluent Degrees of the Small-Pocks [for in the very distinct it
can scarcely be necessary] wherein every probable Assistance should be
employed, and in which the most potent Medicines are frequently unsuccessful.
We have but too many Opportunities of trying it sufficiently; and it certainly
has a more promissing Aspect than a Practice so highly recommended many Years
ago, of covering all the Pustules (which is sometimes the whole Surface of the
Patient) in Melilot, or suppose any other suppurating, Plaster; which must
effectually prevent all Perspiration, and greatly increase the Soreness, Pain,
and Embarrassment of the Patient, at the Height of the Disease. I can conceive
but one bad Consequence that might possibly sometimes result from the former;
but this (besides the Means that may be used to avert it) is rather remote, and
so uncertain, until the Trial is repeatedly made, that I think it ought not to
be named, in Competition with the Benefits that may possibly arise from it in
such Cases, as seem, otherwise, too generally irrecoverable. I own indeed, that
Dr. GATTI gives his Suffrage strongly against this Practice, in his late Tract
concerning Inoculation; RHAZES however used and recommended it, which I
recollect the more readily, from having lately read the learned Mr. CHANNING's
clear and elegant Latin Translation of him, from the original Arabic, which is
printed in the opposite Pages. K.
general Practice: but I do again affirm it to be of much more Importance than
many may imagine; and that as often as the Fever attending Suppuration is
violent and menacing, a very general, exact and repeated opening, emptying and
absorbing of the ripened Pustules, is a Remedy of the utmost Importance and
Efficacy; as it removes two very considerable Causes of the Danger of this
Disease, which are the Matter itself, and the great Tension and Stiffness of
the Skin.

217. In the Treatment of this Disease, I have said nothing with Respect to
Anodynes, or such Medicines as procure Sleep, which I am sensible are pretty
generally employed in it; but which I scarcely ever direct in this violent
Degree of the Disease, and the Danger of which Medicine in it I have
demonstrated in the Letter to Baron HALLER, which I have already mentioned. For
which Reason, wherever the Patient is not under the Care and Direction of a
Physician, they should very carefully abstain from the Use of Venice Treacle,
Laudanum, Diacodium, that is, the Syrup of white Poppies, or even of the wild
red Poppy; Syrup of Amber, Pills of Storax, of Cynoglossum or Hounds-tongue,
and, in one Word, of every Medicine which produces Sleep. But still more
especially should their Use be entirely banished, throughout the Duration of
the secondary Fever, when even natural Sleep itself is dangerous. One
Circumstance in which their Use may sometimes be permitted, is in the Case of
weakly Children, or such as are liable to Convulsions, where Eruption is
effected not without Difficulty. But I must again inculcate the greatest
Circumspection, in the Use of such Medicines, whose Effects are fatal The Use
of Opiates in this Disease undoubtedly requires no small Consideration, the
great SYDENHAM himself not seeming always sufficiently guarded in the
Exhibition of them; as far as Experience since his Day has enabled Physicians
to judge of this Matter. In general our Author's Limitations of them seem very
just; though we have seen a few clear Instances, in which a light Raving, which
evidently arose from Want of Sleep (joined to some Dread of the Event of the
Disease by Inoculation) was happily removed, with every other considerable
Complaint, by a moderate Opiate. In sore and fretful Children too, under a
large or middling Eruption, as the time gained to Rest is taken from Pain, and
from wasting their Spirits in Crying and Clamor, I have seen Suppuration very
benignly promoted by Diacodium. But in the Crisis of the secondary Fever in the
confluent or coherent Pock, when there is a morbid Fullness, and Nature is
struggling to unload herself by some other Outlets than those of the Skin,
which now are totally obstructed (and which seems the only Evacuation, that is
not restrained by Opiates) the giving and repeating them then, as has too often
been practiced, seems importantly erroneous: for I think Dr. SWAN has taken a
judicious Liberty of dissenting from the great Author he very justly
translates, in forbidding an Opiate, if the Spitting abates, or grows so tough
and ropy, as to endanger Suffocation. As the Difference of our Economy in the
Administration of Physic from that in Swisserland, and Dr. TISSOT's just
Reputation, may dispose many Country Practitioners to peruse this Treatise, I
take the Liberty of referring such Readers for a Recollection of some of my
Sentiments on Opiates, (long before the Appearance of this Work in French) to
the second Edition of the Analysis from P. 94 to 97, etc.. And here I adopt
with Pleasure, the following judicious Remark of a learned and experienced
Gentleman, who has done me the Favor of attentively perusing my second
Edition, in order to this third and more correct one. -- Opiates should never
be given to procure Sleep, but Ease, in this Distemper; and their Doses must be
small, just enough to take off the Sense of Soreness, and no more. Diacodium is
the best of all, and never hinders the Expectoration. -- It may be added
indeed, that Sleep will very often naturally attend the Ease procured by the
Opiate (especially if long Wakefulness has preceded) but there will rarely, if
ever, be any ill Consequence, from that moderate Portion of Sleep, which this
gentle temperate Opiate, in a prudent Dose, disposes to. K.
when the Blood Vessels are turgid or full; whenever there is Inflammation,
Fever, a great Distention of the Skin; whenever the Patient raves, or complains
of Heaviness and Oppression; and when it is necessary that the Belly should be
open; the Urine plentifully discharged; and the Salivation be freely promoted.

218. If Eruption should suddenly retreat, or strike in, heating, soporific,
spirituous, and volatile Remedies should carefully be avoided: but the Patient
may drink plentifully of the Infusion No. 12 pretty hot, and should be
blistered on the fleshy Part of the Legs. This is a very embarrassing and
difficult Case, and the different Circumstances attending it may require
different Means and Applications, the Detail and Discussion of which are beyond
my Plan here. Sometimes a single Bleeding has effectually recalled Eruption at
once.

219. The only certain Method of surmounting all the Danger of this Malady, is
to inoculate. But this most salutary Method, which ought to be regarded as a
particular and gracious Dispensation of Providence, can scarcely be attainable
by, or serviceable to, the Bulk of the People; except in these Countries, where
Hospitals That I have long since had the Honor of agreeing with our learned
Author, in this Consideration for the Benefit of the Body of the People, which
is the Benefit of the State, will appear from P. 288 of Analys. Ed. 1st. and
from P. 371, 372, of the second. K.
are destined particularly for Inoculation. In those where as yet there are
none, the only Resource that is left for Children who cannot be inoculated at
home, is to dispose them happily for the Distemper, by a simple easy
Preparation.

220. This Preparation consists, upon the whole, in removing all Want of, and
all Obstructions to, the Health of the Person subject to this Disease, if he
have any such; and in bringing him into a mild and healthy, but not into a very
robust and vigorous State; as this Distemper is often exceedingly violent in
the last.

It is evident, that since the Defects of Health are very different in
different Bodies, the Preparations of them must as often vary; and that a Child
subject to some habitual Disorder, cannot be prepared in the same Method with
another who has a very opposite one. The Detail and Distinctions which are
necessary on this important Head, would be improper here, whether it might be
owing to their unavoidable Length; or to the Impossibility of giving Persons,
who are not Physicians, sufficient Knowledge and Information, to qualify them
for determining on, and preferring, the most proper Preparation in various
Cases. Nevertheless I will point out some such as may be very likely to agree,
pretty generally, with Respect to strong and healthy Children The Subject of
this Section flows from the Combination of an excellent Understanding with
great Experience, mature Reflection, and real Probity; and fundamentally
exposes both the Absurdity of such as universally decry any Preparation of any
Subject previous to Inoculation, (which is said to be the Practice of a present
very popular Inoculator in Paris,) and the opposite Absurdity of giving one and
the very same Preparation to all Subjects, without Distinction; though this was
avowed to have been successfully practiced in Pennsylvania, some Years since;
which the Reader may see Analys. Ed. 2, from P. 329 to 331, and the Note there.
K.
.

The first Step then is an Abatement of their usual Quantity of Food. Children
commonly eat too much. Their Limitation should be in Proportion to their Size
and Growth, wherever we can exactly ascertain them: but with Regard to all, or
to much the greater Number of them, we may be allowed to make their Supper very
light and very small.

Their second Advantage will consist in the Choice of their Food. This
Circumstance is less within the Attainment of, and indeed less necessary for,
the common People, who are of course limited to a very few, than to the Rich,
who have Room to make great Retrenchments on this Account. The Diet of Country
People being of the simplest Kind, and almost solely consisting of Vegetables
and of Milk-meats, is the most proper Diet toward preparing for this Disease.
For this Reason, such Persons have little more to attend to in this Respect,
but that such Aliments be sound and good in their Kind; that their Bread be
well baked; their Pulls dressed without Bacon, or rancid strong Fat of any Sort;
that their Fruits should be well ripened; that their Children should have no
Cakes or Tarts, [But see Note * P. 20.] and but little Cheese. These simple
Regulations may be sufficient, with Regard to this Article of their Preparation.

Some Judgment may be formed of the good Consequences of their Care in these
two Points, concerning the Quantity and Quality of the Children's Diet, by the
moderate Shrinking of their Bellies; as they will be rendered more lively and
active by this Alteration in their living; and yet, notwithstanding a little
less Ruddiness in their Complexion, and some Abatement of their common Plight
of Body, their Countenances, upon the whole, will seem improved.

The third Article I would recommend, is to bathe their Legs now and then in
warm Water, before they go to Bed. This promotes Perspiration, cools, dilutes
the Blood, and allays the Sharpness of it, as often as it is properly timed.

The fourth Precaution is the frequent use of very clear Whey. This agreeable
Remedy, which consists of the Juices of Herbs filtred through and concocted, or
as it were, sweetened by the Organs of a healthy Animal, answers every visible
Indication: (I am still speaking here of sound and hearty Children.) It imparts
a Flexibility or Soupleness to the Vessels; it abates the Density, the heavy
Consistence and Thickness of the Blood; which being augmented by the Action of
the poisonous Cause of the Small-Pocks, would degenerate into a most dangerous
inflammatory There may certainly be an inflammatory Acrimony or Thinness, as
well as Thickness, of the Blood; and many medical Readers may think a morbid
Fusion of the red Globules to be a more frequent Effect of this Contagion, than
an increased Viscidity, or Density, of them. See Analys. Ed. 2d. P. 75 to 83.
But this Translation, conforming to the Spirit of its Original, admits very
little Theory, and still less Controversy, into its Plan. K.
Viscidity or Thickness. It removes all Obstructions in the Viscera, or Bowels
of the lower Cavity, the Belly. It opens the Passages which strain off the
Bile; sheaths, or blunts, its Sharpness, gives it a proper Fluidity, prevents
its Putridity, and sweetens whatever excessive Acrimony may reside throughout
the Mass of Humors. It likewise promotes Stools, Urine, and Perspiration; and,
in a Word, it communicates the most favorable Disposition to the Body, not to
be too violently impressed and agitated by the Operation of an inflammatory
Poison: And with Regard to such Children as I have mentioned, for those who are
either sanguine or bilious, it is beyond all Contradiction, the most effectual
preparatory Drink, and the most proper to make them amends for the Want of
Inoculation.

I have already observed, that it may also be used to great Advantage, during
the Course of the Disease: but I must further observe, that however salutary it
is, in the Cases for which I have directed it, there are many others in which
it would be hurtful. It would be extremely pernicious to order it to weak,
languishing, schirrous, pale Children, subject to Vomitings, Purgings,
Acidities, and to all Diseases which prove their Bowels to be weak, their
Humors to be sharp: so that People must be very cautious not to regard it as
an universal and infallible Remedy, toward preparing for the Small-Pocks.
Those to whom it is advised, may take a few Glasses every Morning, and even
drink it daily, for their common Drink; they may also sup it with Bread for
Breakfast, for Supper, and indeed at any time.

If Country People will pursue these Directions, which are very easy to observe
and to comprehend, whenever the Small-Pocks rages, I am persuaded it must
lessen the Mortality attending it. Some will certainly experience the Benefit
of them; such I mean as are very sensible, and discreet, and strongly
influenced by the truest Love of their Children. Others there are, alas! who
are too stupid to discern the Advantage of them, and too unnatural to take any
just Care of their Families.

CHAPTER XIV. Of the Measles.
SECT. 221. THE Measles, to which the human Species are as generally liable, as
to the Small-Pocks, is a Distemper considerably related to it; though,
generally speaking, it is less fatal; notwithstanding which, it is not a little
destructive in some Countries. In Swisserland we lose much fewer in the
Disease, than from the Consequences of it.

It happens now and then that the Small-Pocks and the Measles rage at the same
time, and in the same Place; though I have more frequently observed, that each
of them was epidemical in different Years. Sometimes it also happens that both
these Diseases are combined at once in the same Person; and that one supervenes
before the other has finished its Course, which makes the Case very perilous.

222. In some Constitutions the Measles gives Notice of its Approach, many Days
before its evident Invasion, by a small, frequent; and dry Cough, without any
other sensible Complaint; though more frequently by a general Uneasiness; by
Successions of Shivering and of Heat; by a severe Headache in grown Persons; a
Heaviness in Children; a considerable Complaint of the Throat; and, by what
particularly characterizes this Distemper, an Inflammation and a considerable
Heat in the Eyes, attended with a Swelling of the Eyelids, with a Defluxion of
sharp Tears, and so acute a Sensation, or Feeling of the Eyes, that they cannot
bear the Light; by very frequent Sneezings and a Dripping from the Nose of the
same Humor with that, which trickles from the Eyes.

The Heat and the Fever increase with Rapidity; the Patient is afflicted with a
Cough, a Stuffing, with Anguish, and continual Reachings to vomit; with violent
Pains in the Loins; and sometimes with a Looseness, under which Circumstance he
is less persecuted with Vomiting. At other times, and in other Subjects,
Sweating chiefly prevails, though in less Abundance than in the Small-Pocks.
The Tongue is foul and white; the Thirst is often very high; and the Symptoms
are generally more violent than in the mild Small-Pocks.

At length, on the fourth or fifth Day, and sometimes about the End of the
third, a sudden Eruption appears, and in a very great Quantity, especially
about the Face; which in a few Hours is covered with Spots, each of which
resembles a Flea-bite; many of them soon joining form red Streaks or Suffusions
larger or smaller, which inflame the Skin, and produce a very perceivable
Swelling of the Face; whence the very Eyes are sometimes closed. Each small
Spot or Suffusion is raised a little above the Surface, especially in the Face,
where they are manifest both to the Sight and the Touch. In the other Parts of
the Body, this Elevation or Rising is scarcely perceivable by any Circumstance,
but the Roughness of the Skin.

The Eruption, having first appeared in the Face, is afterward extended to the
Breast, the Back, the Arms, the Thighs and Legs. It generally spreads very
plentifully over the Breast and the Back, and sometimes red Suffusions are
found upon the Breast, before any Eruption has appeared in the Face.

The Patient is often relieved, as in the Small-Pocks, by plentiful Discharges
of Blood from the Nose, which carry off the Complaints of the Head, of the
Eyes, and of the Throat.

Whenever this Distemper appears in its mildest Character, almost every Symptom
abates after Eruption, as it happens in the Small-Pocks; though, in general,
the Change for the better is not as thoroughly perceivable, as it is in the
Small-Pocks. It is certain the Reachings and Vomitings cease almost entirely;
but the Fever, the Cough, the Headache continue; and I have sometimes observed
that a bilious Vomiting, a Day or two after the Eruption, proved a more
considerable Relief to the Patient than the Eruption had proved. On the third
or fourth Day of the Eruption, the Redness diminishes; the Spots, or very small
Pustules, dry up and fall off in very little branny Scales; the Cuticle, or
superficial Skin also shrivels off, and is replaced by one succeeding beneath
it. On the 9th Day, when the Progress of the Malady has been speedy, and on the
eleventh, when it has been very slow, no Trace of the Redness is to be found;
and the Surface immediately resumes its usual Appearance.

223. Notwithstanding all which the Patient is not safe, except, during the
Course of the Distemper, or immediately after it, he has had some considerable
Evacuation; such as the Vomiting I have just mentioned; or a bilious Looseness;
or considerable Discharges by Urine; or very plentiful Sweating. For when any
of these Evacuations supervenes, the Fever vanishes; the Patient resumes his
Strength, and perfectly recovers. It happens sometimes too, and even without
any of these perceivable Discharges, that insensible Perspiration expels the
Relics of the poisonous Cause of this Disease, and the Patient recovers his
Health. Yet it occurs too often, that this Venom not having been entirely
expelled (or its internal Effects not having been thoroughly effaced) it is
repelled upon the Lungs, where it produces a slight Inflammation. In
Consequence of this the Oppression, the Cough, the Anguish and Fever return,
and the Patient's Situation becomes very dangerous. This Outrage is frequently
less vehement, but it proves tedious and chronical, leaving a very obstinate
Cough behind it, with many Resemblances of the Whooping-Cough. In 1758 there
was a very epidemic state of the Measles at Lausanne, which affected great
Numbers: Almost all who had it, and who were not very carefully and judiciously
attended, were seized in Consequence of it with that Cough, which proved very
violent and obstinate.

224. However, notwithstanding this be the frequent Progress and Consequence of
this Disease, when left entirely to itself, or erroneously treated, and more
particularly when treated with a hot Regimen; yet when proper Care was taken to
moderate the Fever at the Beginning, to dilute, and to keep up the Evacuations,
such unhappy Consequences have been very rare.

225. The proper Method of conducting this Distemper is much the same with that
of the Small-Pocks.

1, If the Fever be high, the Pulse hard, the Load and Oppression heavy, and
all the Symptoms violent, the Patient must be bled once or twice.

2, His Legs must be bathed, and he must take some Glysters: the Vehemence of
the Symptoms must regulate the Number of each.

3, The Ptisans No. 3 or 4 must be taken, or a Tea of Elder and Lime-tree
flowers, to which a fifth Part Milk may be added.

4, The Vapor, the Steam of warm Water should also be employed, as very
conducive to assuage the Cough, the Soreness of the Throat, and the Oppression
the Patient labors under.

5, As soon as the Efflorescence, the Redness, becomes pale, the Patient is to
be purged with the Draught No. 23.

6, He is still to be kept strictly to his Regimen, for two Days after this
Purge; after which he is to be put upon the Diet of those who are in a State of
Recovery.

7, If during the Eruption such Symptoms supervene as occur [at the same Term]
in the Small-Pocks, they are to be treated in the Manner already directed there.

226. Whenever this Method has not been observed, and the Accidents described
223 supervene, the Distemper must be treated like an Inflammation in its first
State, and all must be done as directed 225. If the Disease is not vehement,
Our Author very prudently limits this Discharge, and the Repetition of it, in
this Disease ( 225) as an erroneous Excess of it has sometimes prevailed. I
have seen a very epidemical Season of the Measles, where Bleeding was not
indicated in one third of the infected. And yet I have known such an Abuse of
Bleeding in it, that being repeated more than once in a Case before Eruption
(the Measles probably not being suspected) the Eruption was retarded several
Days; and the Patient, a young Lady of Condition, remained exceeding low,
faint, and sickish; 'till after recruiting a very little, the Measles appeared,
and she recovered. In a Youth of a lax Fiber, where the Measles had appeared, a
seventh or eighth Bleeding was ordered on a Stitch in the Side, supervening
from their too early Disappearance, and the Case seemed very doubtful. But
Nature continued very obstinately favorable in this Youth, who at length,
though very slowly, recovered. His Circulation remained so languid, his
Strength, with his Juices, so exhausted, that he was many Weeks before he could
sit upright in a Chair; being obliged to make Use of a Cord depending from the
Ceiling, to raise himself erectly in his Seat. These certain Instances of the
Abuse of Bleeding in this Disease, are nevertheless by no Means intended to
prohibit the Use of it, when clearly indicated, as it often is. The medical
Reader may see Dr. MEAD's rational Sentiments on this Head, in his Book De
variol. et morbil. from P. 94 to 95.
Bleeding may be omitted. If it is of some standing in gross Children, loaded
with Humors, inactive, and pale, we must add to the Medicines already
prescribed the Potion No. 8, and Blisters to the Legs.

227. It often happens from the Distance of proper Advice, that the Relics, the
Dregs as it were, of the Disease have been too little regarded, especially the
Cough; in which Circumstance it forms a real Suppuration in the Lungs, attended
with a slow Fever. I have seen many Children in Country Villages destroyed by
this Neglect. Their Case is then of the same Nature with that described 68 and
82, and terminates in the same Manner in a Looseness, (attended with very
little Pain) and sometimes a very foetid one, which carries off the Patient. In
such Cases we must recur to the Remedies prescribed 74, Article 3, 4, 5; to the
Powder No. 14; and to Milk and Exercise. But it is so very difficult to make
Children take the Powder, that it may be sometimes necessary to trust to the
Milk without it, which I have often seen in such Situations accomplish a very
difficult Cure. I must advise the Reader at the same time, that it has not so
complete an Effect, as when it is taken solely, unjoined by any other Aliment;
and that it is of the last Importance not to join it with any, which has the
least Acidity or Sharpness. Persons in easy Circumstances may successfully
take, at the same time, Pfeffer. Bristol Water will be no bad Substitute for
any of these, in such Cases. K.
Seltzer, Peterstal, or some other light Waters, which are but moderately
loaded with mineral Ingredients. These are also successfully employed in all
the Cases, in which the Cure I have mentioned is necessary.

228. Sometimes there remains, after the Course of the Measles, a strong dry
Cough, with great Heat in the Breast, and throughout the whole Body, with
Thirst, an excessive Dryness of the Tongue, and of the whole Surface of the
Body. I have cured Persons thus indisposed after this Distemper, by making them
breathe in the Vapor of warm Water; by the repeated Use of warm Baths; and by
allowing them to take nothing for several Days but Water and Milk.

Before I take leave of this Subject, I assure the Reader again, that the
contagious Cause of the Measles is of an extremely sharp and acrid Nature. It
appears to have some Resemblance to the bilious Humor, which produces the
Erisipelas, or St. Anthony's Fire; and thence it demands our particular
Attention and Vigilance; without which very troublesome and dangerous
Consequences may be apprehended. I have seen, not long since, a young Girl, who
was in a very languid State after the Measles, which she had undergone three
Years before: It was at length attended with an Ulceration in her Neck, which
was cured, and her Health finally restored by Sarsaparilla with Milk and Water.

229. The Measles have been communicated by The only Account I have read of
this Practice, is in the learned Dr. HOME's Medical Facts and Experiments,
published in 1759, which admits, that but nine out of fifteen of the Subjects
of this Practice took. Cotton dipped in the Blood of a Patient in the Measles was
inserted into the Arms of twelve; and three received the Cotton into their
Nostrils, after the Chinese Manner of infusing the Small-Pocks; but of these
last not one took, and one of those who had taken, had the Measles again two
Months after. I think the sharp hot Lymph distilling from the inflamed Eyes of
Persons in this Disease, a likelier Vehicle to communicate it than the Blood,
especially the dry Blood, which was sometimes tried; since the human Serum
seems the Fluid more particularly affected by it; and this must have been
evaporated, when the Blood grew dry. A few practical Strictures on this Work,
and particularly on this Practice described in it, appeared in the Monthly
Review, Vol. XXI. P. 68 to 75. One Dr. Cook, who treats the Public sometimes,
with a few medical Crumbs in the Newspapers, has assumed (without the least
Reference or Acknowledgement) this Notion of inoculating the Measles from the
watery Discharge by the Eyes in it. Of this however, of whatever Consequence it
may prove, I was certainly the first Proposer, though I have never made any
Experiment of its Event; but only mentioned it to my Lord HOME, who assured me
he would communicate it to Dr. HOME. K.
Inoculation in some Countries, where it is of a very malignant Disposition;
and that Method might also be very advantageous in this Disease. But what we
have already observed, with Respect to the Inoculation of the Small-Pocks, viz.
That it cannot be extended to the general Benefit of the People, without the
Foundation of Hospitals for that very Purpose, is equally applicable to the
Inoculation of the Measles.

CHAPTER XV. Of the ardent or burning Fever.
SECT. 230. THE much greater Number of the Diseases I have hitherto considered,
result from an Inflammation of the Blood, combined with the particular
Inflammation of some Part; or occasioned by some Contagion or Poison, which
must be evacuated. But when the Blood is solely and strongly inflamed, without
an Attack on any particular Part, this Fever, which we term hot or burning, is
the Consequence.

231. The Signs which make it evident are, a Hardness and Fullness of the Pulse
in a higher Degree than happens in any other Malady; an excessive Heat; great
Thirst; with an extraordinary Dryness of the Eyes, Nostrils, Lips, of the
Tongue, and of the Throat; a violent Headache; and sometimes a Raving at the
Height of the Paroxysm, or Increase of the Fever, which rises considerably
every Evening. The Respiration is also somewhat oppressed, but especially at
the Return of this Paroxysm, with a Cough now and then: though without any Pain
in the Breast, and without any Expectoration, or coughing up. The Body is
costive; the Urine very high colored, hot, and in a small Quantity, The Sick
are also liable to start sometimes, but especially when they seem to sleep; for
they have little sound refreshing Sleep, but rather a kind of Drowsiness, that
makes them very little attentive to, or sensible of, whatever happens about
them, or even of their own Condition. They have sometimes a little Sweat or
Moisture; though commonly a very dry Skin; they are manifestly weak, and have
either little or no Smell or Taste.

232. This Disease, like all other inflammatory ones, is produced by the Causes
which thicken the Blood, and increase its Motion; such as excessive Labor,
violent Heat, Want of Sleep, the Abuse of Wine or other strong Liquors; the
long Continuance of a dry Constitution of the Air, Excess of every Kind, and
heating inflaming Food.

233. The Patient, under these Circumstances, ought, 1, immediately to be put
upon a Regimen; to have the Food allowed him given only every eight Hours, and,
in some Cases only twice a Day: and indeed, when the Attack is extremely
violent, Nourishment may be wholly omitted.

2, Bleeding should be performed and repeated, 'till the Hardness of the Pulse
is sensibly abated. The first Discharge should be considerable, the second
should be made four Hours after. If the Pulse is softened by the first, the
second may be suspended, and not repeated before it becomes sufficiently hard
again to make us apprehensive of Danger; but should it continue strong and
hard, the Bleeding may be repeated on the same Day to a third Time, which often
happens to be the utmost Repetition that is necessary.

3, The Glyster No. 5, should be given twice, or even thrice, daily.

4, His Legs are to be bathed twice a Day in warm Water: his Hands may be
bathed in the same Water. Linen or Flanel Cloths dipped in warm Water may be
applied over the Breast, and upon the Belly; and he should regularly drink the
Almond Milk No. 4 and the Ptisan No. 7. The poorest Patients may content
themselves with the last, but should drink very plentifully of it; and after
the Bleeding properly repeated, fresh Air and the plentiful Continuance of
small diluting Liquors generally establish the Health of the Patient.

5, If, notwithstanding the repeated Bleedings, the Fever still rages highly,
it may be lessened by giving a Spoonful of the Potion No. 10 every Hour 'till
it abates; and afterward every three Hours, until it becomes very moderate.

234. Haemorrhages, or Bleedings from the Nose frequently occur in this Fever,
greatly to the Relief and Security of the Patient.

The first Appearances of Amendment are a softening of the Pulse, (which
however does not wholly lose all its Hardness, before the Disease entirely
terminates) a sensible Abatement of the Headache; a greater Quantity of Urine,
and that less high colored; and a manifestly approaching Moisture of the
Tongue. These favorable Signs keep increasing in their Degree, and there
frequently ensue, between the ninth and the fourteenth Day, and often after a
Flurry of some Hours Continuance, very large Evacuations by Stool; a great
Quantity of Urine, which lets fall a palely reddish Sediment, the Urine above
it being very clear, and of a natural Color; and these accompanied with Sweats
in a less or greater Quantity. At the same Time the Nostrils and the Mouth grow
moist: the brown and dry Crust which covered the Tongue, and which was hitherto
inseparable from it, peels off of itself; the Thirst is diminished; the
Clearness of the Faculties rises; the Drowsiness goes off, it is succeeded by
comfortable Sleep, and the natural Strength is restored. When Things are
evidently in this Way, the Patient should take the Potion No. 23, and be put
upon the Regimen of those who are in a State of Recovery. It should be repeated
at the End of eight or ten Days. Some Patients have perfectly recovered from
this Fever, without the least Sediment jn their Urine.

235. The augmenting Danger of this Fever may be discerned, from the continued
Hardness of the Pulse, though with an Abatement of its Strength; if the Brain
becomes more confused; the Breathing more difficult; if the Eyes, Nose, Lips,
and Tongue become still more dry, and the Voice more altered. If to these
Symptoms there be also added a Swelling of the Belly; a Diminution of the
Quantity of Urine; a constant Raving; great Anxiety, and a certain Wildness of
the Eyes, the Case is in a manner desperate; and the Patient cannot survive
many Hours. The Hands and Fingers at this Period are incessantly in Motion, as
if feeling for something upon the Bed-cloths, which is commonly termed, their
hunting for Flies.

CHAPTER XVI. Of putrid Fevers.
SECT. 236. HAVING treated of such feverish Distempers as arise from an
Inflammation of the Blood, I shall here treat of those produced by corrupt
Humors, which stagnate in the Stomach, the Guts, or other Bowels of the lower
Cavity, the Belly; or which have already passed from them into the Blood. These
are called putrid Fevers, or sometimes bilious Fevers, when a certain
Degeneracy or Corruption of the Bile seems chiefly to prevail in the Disease.

237. This Distemper frequently gives Notice of its Approach, several Days
before its manifest Attack; by a great Dejection, a Heaviness of the Head;
Pains of the Loins and Knees; a Foulness of the Mouth in the Morning; little
Appetite; broken Slumber; and sometimes by an excessive Headache for many Days,
without any other Symptom. After this, or these Disorders, a Shivering comes
on, followed by a sharp and dry Heat: the Pulse, which was small and quick
during the Shivering, is raised during the Heat, and is often very strong,
though it is not attended with the same Hardness, as in the preceding Fever;
except the putrid Fever be combined with an inflammatory one, which it
sometimes is. During this Time, that is the Duration of the Heat, the Headache
is commonly extremely violent; the Patient is almost constantly affected with
Loathings, and sometimes even with Vomiting; with Thirst, disagreeable Risings,
a Bitterness in the Mouth; and very little Urine. This Heat continues for many
Hours, frequently the whole Night; it abates a little in the Morning, and the
Pulse, though always feverish, is then something less so, while the Patient
suffers less, though still greatly dejected.

The Tongue is white and furred, the Teeth are foul, and the Breath smells very
disagreeably. The Color, Quantity and Consistence of the Urine, are very
various and changeable. Some Patients are costive, others frequently have small
Stools, without the least Relief accruing from them. The Skin is sometimes dry,
and at other times there is some sensible Perspiration, but without any Benefit
attending it. The Fever augments every Day, and frequently at unexpected
irregular Periods. Besides that great Paroxysm or Increase, which is
perceivable in all the Subjects of this Fever, some have also other less
intervening ones.

238. When the Disease is left to itself, or injudiciously treated; or when it
proves more powerful than the Remedies against it, which is by no Means seldom
the Case, the Aggravations of it become longer, more frequent and irregular.
There is scarcely an Interval of Ease. The Patient's Belly is swelled out like
a Football: a Delirium or Raving comes on; he proves insensible of his own
Evacuations, which come away involuntarily; he rejects Assistance, and keeps
muttering continually, with a quick, small, irregular Pulse. Sometimes little
Spots of a brown, or of a livid Color appear on the Surface, but particularly
about the Neck, Back and Breast. All the Discharges from his Body have a most
foetid Smell: convulsive Motions also supervene, especially in the Face; he
lies down only on his Back, sinks down insensibly toward the Feet of the Bed,
and picks about, as if catching Flies; his Pulse becomes so quick and so small,
that it cannot be perceived without Difficulty, and cannot be counted. His
Anguish seems inexpressible: His Sweats stream down from Agony: his Breast
swells out as if distended by Fullness, and he dies miserably.

239. When this Distemper is less violent, or more judiciously treated, and the
Medicines succeed well, it continues for some Days in the State described 237,
without growing worse, though without abating, None of these Symptoms however
appear, described 238; but, on the contrary, all the Symptoms become milder,
the Paroxysms, or Aggravations, are shorter and less violent, the Headache more
supportable; the Discharges by Stool are less frequent, but more at once, and
attended with Relief to the Patient. The Quantity of Urine is very
considerable, though it varies at different Times in Color and Consistence, as
before. The Patient soon begins to get a little Sleep, and grows more composed
and easy. The Tongue disengages itself from its Filth and Furriness, and Health
gradually, yet daily, advances.

240. This Fever seems to have no critical Time, either for its Termination in
Recovery, or in Death. When it is very violent, or very badly conducted, it
proves sometimes fatal on the ninth Day. Persons often die of it from the
eighteenth to the twentieth; sometimes only about the fortieth; after having
been alternately better and worse.

When it happens but in a light Degree, it is sometimes cured within a few
Days, after the earliest Evacuations. When it is of a very different Character,
some Patients are not out of Danger before the End of six Weeks, and even still
later. Nevertheless it is certain that these Fevers, extended to this Length of
Duration, often depend in a great Measure on the Manner of treating them; and
that in general their Course must be determined, some time from the fourteenth
to the thirtieth Day.

241. The Treatment of this Species of Fevers is comprised in the following
Method and Medicines.

1, The Patient must be put into a Regimen; and notwithstanding he is far from
costive, and sometimes has even a small Purging, he should receive one Glyster
daily. His common Drink should be Lemonade, (which is made of the Juice of
Lemons. Sugar and Water) or the Ptisan No. 3. Instead of Juice of Lemons,
Vinegar may be occasionally substituted, which, with Sugar and Water, makes an
agreeable and very wholesome Drink in these Fevers.

2, If there be an Inflammation also, which may be discovered by the Strength
and the Hardness of the Pulse, and by the Temperament and Complexion of the
Patient; if he is naturally robust, and has heated himself by any of the Causes
described, 232, he should be bled once, and even a second time, if necessary,
some Hours after. I must observe, however, that very frequently there is no
such Inflammation, and that in such a Case Bleeding would be hurtful.

3, When the Patient has drank very plentifully for two Days of these Liquids,
if his Mouth still continues in a very foul State, and he has violent Reachings
to vomit, he must take the Powder No. 34, dissolved in half a That is about two
Ounces more than a Pint and half of our Measure.
Pot of warm Water; a About three Ounces.
Glass of it being to be drank every half Quarter of an Hour. But as this
Medicine vomits, it must not be taken, except we are certain the Patient is not
under any Circumstance which forbids the Use of a Vomit: all which
Circumstances shall be particularly mentioned in the Chapter, respecting the
Use of such Medicines, as are taken by way of Precaution, or Prevention. If the
first Glasses excite a plentiful Vomiting, we must forbear giving another, and
be content with obliging the Patient to drink a considerable Quantity of warm
Water. But if the former Glasses do not occasion Vomiting, they must be
repeated, as already directed until they do. Those who are afraid of taking
this Medicine, which is usually called the Emetic, may take that of No. 35,
also drinking warm Water plentifully during its Operation; but the former is
preferable, as more prevalent, in dangerous Cases. We must caution our Readers
at the same time, that wherever there is an Inflammation of any Part, neither
of these Medicines must be given, which might prove a real Poison in such a
Circumstance; and even if the Fever is extremely violent, though there should
be no particular Inflammation, they should not be given.

The Time of giving them is soon after the End of the Paroxysm, when the Fever
is at the lowest. The Medicine No. 34 generally purges, after it ceases to make
the Patient vomit: But No. 35 is seldom attended with the same Effect.

When the Operation of the Vomit is entirely over, the Sick should return to
the Use of the Ptisan; and great Care must be taken to prohibit them from the
Use of Flesh Broth, under the Pretext of working off a Purging with it. The
same Method is to be continued on the following Days as on the first; but as it
is of Importance to keep the Body open, he should take every Morning some of
the Ptisan No. 32. Such, as this would be too expensive for, may substitute, in
the room of it, a fourth Part of the Powder No. 34, that is, one Grain and a
half of Tartar emetic, in five or six Glasses of Water, of which they are to
take a Cup every two Hours, beginning early in the Morning. Nevertheless, if
the Fever be very high, No. 32 should be preferred to it.

4, After the Operation of the Vomit if the Fever still continue, if the Stools
are remarkably foetid; and if the Belly is tense and distended as it were, and
the Quantity of Urine is small, a Spoonful of the Potion No. 10 should be given
every two Hours which checks the Putridity, and abates the Fever. Should the
Distemper become violent, and very pressing, it ought to be taken every Hour.

5, Whenever, notwithstanding the giving all these Medicines as directed, the
Fever continues obstinate; the Brain is manifestly disordered; there is a
violent Headache, or very great Restlessness, two blistering Plasters No. 36
must be applied to the inside and fleshy Part of the Legs, and their
Suppuration and Discharge should be continued as long as possible.

6, If the Fever is extremely violent indeed, there is a Necessity absolutely
to prohibit the Patient from receiving the least Nourishment.

7, When it is thought improper, or unsafe, to give the Vomit, the Patient
should take in the Morning, for two successive Days, three Doses of the Powder
No. 24, at the Interval of one Hour between each: This Medicine produces some
bilious Stools, which greatly abate the Fever, and considerably lessen the
Violence of all the other Symptoms of the Disease. This may be done with
Success, when the excessive Height of the Fever prevents us from giving the
Vomit: and we should limit ourselves to this Medicine, as often as we are
uncertain, whether the Circumstances of the Disease and the Patient will admit
of the Vomiting; which may also be dispensed with, in many Cases.

8, When the Distemper has manifestly and considerably declined, the Paroxysms
are more slight; and the Patient continues without any Fever for several Hours,
the daily Use of the purging opening Drinks should be discontinued. The common
Ptisans however should be still made use of; and it will be proper to give
every other Day two Doses of the Powder No. 24, which sufficiently obviates
every ill Consequence from this Disease.

9, If the Fever has been clearly off for a long Part of the Day; if the Tongue
appears in a good healthy State; if the Patient has been well purged; and yet
one moderate Paroxysm of the Fever returns every Day, he should take four Doses
As these contain but half a Dram of the Bark, the Quantity of each Dose might
be doubled in large adult Persons: those who were younger and small, might take
two Scruples for each Dose in the Intervals; and half a Dram might suffice
for all from nine or ten Years to fourteen or fifteen. However, if the
Paroxysms have been gentle and regular, there is no Doubt but the Dose directed
by Dr. TISSOT might have a very good Effect; the Severity of the Fits and
Symptoms requiring the largest Quantities of the Bark, to be given during the
Intermission. K.
of the Powder No. 14, between the End of one Return and the Beginning of the
next, and continue this Repetition some Days. People who cannot easily procure
this Medicine, may substitute, instead of it, the bitter Decoction, No. 37,
four Glasses of which may be taken at equal Intervals, between the two
Paroxysms or Returns of the Fever.

10. As the Organs of Digestion have been considerably weakened through the
Course of this Fever, there is a Necessity for the Patient's conducting himself
very prudently and regularly long after it, with Regard both to the Quantity
and Quality of his Food. He should also use due Exercise, as soon as his
Strength will permit; without which he may be liable to fall into some
chronical and languishing Disorder, productive of considerable Langour and
Weakness. As our Jail, Hospital, Camp, and often Ship Fevers may generally be
ranged in this Class, as of the most putrid Kind, and not seldom occasioned by
bad Food, bad Air, unclean unwholesome Lodging, etc. a judicious Use may
certainly be made of a small Quantity of genuine, and not ungenerous Wine in
such of them, as are not blended with an inflammatory Cause, or inflammable
Constitution, or which do not greatly result from a bilious Cause; though in
these last, where there is manifest Lowness and Dejection, perhaps a little
Rhenish might be properly interposed between the Lemonade and other Drinks
directed 241. Doubtless Dr. TISSOT was perfectly apprized of this salutary Use
of it in some low Fevers; but the Necessity of its being regulated by the
Presence of a Physician has probably disposed him rather to omit mentioning it,
than to leave the Allowance of it to the Discretion of a simple Country
Patient, or his ignorant Assistants. Wine, we know, was not the smallest
Article in the Practice of Hippocrates, even in some feverish Disorders; and,
indeed, when greatly diluted, it becomes manifestly acetous (acid) and may be
so managed, as to prove attemperating, if not even cooling. But what makes
still more for the prudent Exhibition of Wine, in this kind of Fevers, is the
Experience of Dr. de Monchy, in his Account of Diseases occurring in Voyages to
the West Indies; who assures us, that in the Treatment of a putrid Fever, on a
Voyage to South America, he found a well regulated Use, even of undiluted Wine,
which the Patients greatly coveted, very conducive to their Cure. All who have
perused the ingenious Dr. Pringle's Account of Camp Fevers, must be abundantly
convinced of the frequent Utility of Wine in them. K.


CHAPTER XVII. Of malignant Fevers.
SECT. 242. THOSE Fevers are termed malignant, in which the Danger is more than
the Symptoms would make us apprehensive of: they have frequently a fatal Event,
without appearing so very perilous; on which Account it has been well said of
this Fever, that it is a Dog which bites without barking.

243, The distinguishing Criterion or Mark of malignant Fevers is a total Loss
of the Patient's Strength, immediately on their first Attack. They arise from a
Corruption of the Humors, which is noxious to the very Source and Principle of
Strength, the Impairing or Destruction of which is the Cause of the Feebleness
of the Symptoms; by Reason none of the Organs are strong enough to exert an
Opposition sufficiently vigorous, to subdue the Cause of the Distemper.

If, for Instance or Illustration, we were to suppose, that when two Armies
were on the Point of engaging, one of them should be nearly deprived of all
their Weapons, the Contest would not appear very violent, nor attended with
great Noise or Tumult, though with a horrible Massacre. The Spectator (who,
from being ignorant of the Disarmament of one Army,) would not be able to
calculate the Carnage of the Battle, but in Proportion to its Noise and Tumult,
must be extremely deceived in his Conception of it. The Number of the Slain
would be astonishing, which might have been much less (though the Noise and
Clangor of it had been greater) if each Army had been equally provided for the
Combat.

244. The Causes of this Disease are a long Use of animal Food or Flesh alone,
without Pulls, Fruits or Acids; the continued Use of other bad Provisions, such
as Bread made of damaged Corn or Grain, or very stale Meat. Eight Persons who
dined together on corrupt Fish, were all seized with a malignant Fever, which
killed five of them, notwithstanding the Endeavors of the most able
Physicians. These Fevers are also frequently the Consequence of a great Dearth
or Famine; of too hot and moist an Air, or an Air, which highly partakes of
these two Qualities; so that they happen to spread most in hot Years, in Places
abounding with Marshes and standing Waters. They are also the Effects of a very
close and stagnant Air, especially if many Persons are crowded together in it,
this being a Cause that particularly tends to corrupt the Air. Tedious Grief
and Vexation also contribute to generate these Fevers.

245. The Symptoms of malignant Fevers are, as I have already observed, a total
and sudden Loss of Strength, without any evident preceding Cause, sufficient to
procure such a Loss of it. At the same time there is also an utter Dejection of
the Mind, which becomes almost insensible and inattentive to every thing, and
even to the Disease itself; a sudden Alteration in the Countenance, especially
in the Eyes; some small Shiverings, which are varied throughout the Space of
twenty-four Hours, with little Paroxysms or Vicissitudes of Heat; sometimes
there is a great Headache and a Pain in the Loins; at other Times there is no
perceivable Pain in any Part; a kind of Sinkings or Faintings, immediately from
the Invasion of the Disease, which is always very unpromising; not the least
refreshing Sleep; frequently a kind of half Sleep, or Drowsiness; a light and
silent or inward Raving, which discovers itself in the unusual and astonished
Look of the Patient, who seems profoundly employed in meditating on something,
but really thinks of nothing, or not at all: Some Patients have, however,
violent Ravings; most have a Sensation of Weight or Oppression, and at other
times of a Binding or Tightness about, or around, the Pit of the Stomach.

The sick Person seems to labor under great Anguish: he has sometimes slight
convulsive Motions and Twitchings in his Face and his Hands, as well as in his
Arms and Legs. His Senses seem torpid, or as it were benumbed. I have seen many
who had lost, to all Appearance, the whole five, and yet some of them have
recovered. It is not uncommon to meet with some, who neither see, understand,
nor speak. Their Voices change, become weak, and are sometimes quite lost. Some
of them have a fixed Pain in some Part of the Belly: this arises from a
Stuffing or Obstruction, and often ends in a Gangrene, whence this Symptom is
highly dangerous and perplexing.

The Tongue is sometimes very little altered from its Appearance in Health; at
other times it is covered over with a yellowish brown Humor; but it is more
rarely dry in this Fever than in the others; and yet it sometimes does resemble
a Tongue that has been long smoaked.

The Belly is sometimes very soft, and at other Times tense and hard. The Pulse
is weak, sometimes pretty regular, but always more quick than in a natural
State, and at sometimes even very quick; and such I have always found it, when
the Belly has been distended.

The Skin is often neither hot, dry, nor moist: it is frequently overspread
with petechial or eruptive Spots (which are little Spots of a reddish livid
Color) especially on the Neck, about the Shoulders, and upon the Back. At
other times the Spots are larger and brown, like the Color of Wheals from the
Strokes of a Stick.

The Urine of the Sick is almost constantly crude, that is of a lighter Color
than ordinary. I have seen some, which could not be distinguished, merely by
the Eye, from Milk. A black and stinking Purging sometimes attends this Fever,
which is mortal, except the Sick be evidently relieved by the Discharge.

Some of the Patients are infested with livid Ulcers on the Inside of the
Mouth, and on the Palate. At other times Abscesses are formed in the Glands of
the Groin, of the Arm-pit, in those between the Ears and the Jaw; or a Gangrene
may appear in some Part, as on the Feet, the Hands, or the Back. The Strength
proves entirely spent, the Brain is wholly confused: the miserable Patient,
stretched out on his Back, frequently expires under Convulsions, an enormous
Sweat, and an oppressed Breast and Respiration. Haemorrhages also happen
sometimes and are mortal, being almost unexceptionably such in this Fever.
There is also in this, as in all other Fevers, an Aggravation of the Fever in
the Evening.

246. The Duration and Crisis of these malignant, as well as those of putrid
Fevers, are very irregular. Sometimes the Sick die on the seventh or eighth
Day, more commonly between the twelfth and the fifteenth, and not infrequently
at the End of five or six Weeks. These different Durations result from the
different Degree and Strength of the Disease. Some of these Fevers at their
first Invasion are very slow; and during a few of the first Days, the Patient,
though very weak, and with a plainly different Look and Manner, scarcely thinks
himself sick.

The Term or Period of the Cure or the Recovery, is as uncertain as that of
Death, in this Distemper. Some are out of Danger at the End of fifteen Days,
and even sooner; others not before the Expiration of several Weeks.

The Signs which portend a Recovery are, a little more Strength in the Pulse; a
more concocted Urine; less Dejection and Discouragement; a less confused Brain;
an equal kindly Heat; a pretty warm or hot Sweat in a moderate Quantity,
without Inquietude or Anguish; the Revival of the different Senses that were
extinguished, or greatly suspended, in the Progress of the Disease; though the
Deafness is not a very threatening Symptom, if the others amend while it
continues.

This Malady commonly leaves the Patient in a very weak Condition; and a long
Interval will ensue between the End of it, and their recovering their full
Strength.

247. It is, in the first place, of greater Importance in this Distemper than
in any other, both for the Benefit of the Patients, and those who attend them,
that the Air should be renewed and purified. Vinegar should often be evaporated
from a hot Tile or Iron in the Chamber, and one Window kept almost constantly
open.

2, The Diet should be light; and the Juice of Sorrel may be mixed with their
Water; the Juice of Lemons may be added to Soups prepared from different Grains
and Pulls; the Patient may eat sharp acid Fruits, such as tart juicy The French
Word is Griottes, which Boyer englishes, the Agriot the red or sour Cherry; and
Chambaud. the sweeter large black Cherry or Mazzard -- But as Dr. TISSOT was
recommending the Use of Acids, it is more probably the first of these: so that
our Morellas, which make a pleasant Preserve, may be a good Substitute to them,
supposing them not to be the same. Our Berbery Jam, and Jelly of Red Currants,
may be also employed to answer the same Indication. The French Word Griotte is
probably derived from the Latin Word agrestis, signifying wild, which these
Cherries may be in some Part of France; all vegetable Productions being so in
some Place or other. Thus Peaches are said to be wild, or native, in Persia,
Shallots are found wild in Carolina, and Parsley in Bermudas. K.
Cherries, Gooseberries, small black Cherries; and those who can afford them,
may be allowed Lemons, Oranges, and Pomegranates.

3, The Patient's Linen should be changed every two Days.

4, Bleeding is very rarely necessary, or even proper, in this Fever; the
Exceptions to which are very few, and cannot be thoroughly ascertained, as fit
and proper Exceptions to the Omission of Bleeding, without a Physician, or some
other very skilful Person's seeing the Patient.

5, There is often very little Occasion for Glysters, which are sometimes even
dangerous in this Fever.

6, The Patient's common Drink should be Barley Water, made acid with the
Spirit No. 10, at the Rate of one Quarter of an Ounce to at least full three
Pints of the Water, or acidulated agreeably to his Taste. He may also drink
Lemonade.

7, It is necessary to open and evacuate the Bowels, where a great Quantity of
corrupt Humors is generally lodged. The Powder No. 35 may be given for this
Purpose, after the Operation of which the Patient generally finds himself
better, at least for some Hours, It is of Importance not to omit this at the
Beginning of the Disease; though if it has been omitted at first, it were best
to give it even later, provided no particular Inflammation has supervened, and
the Patient has still some Strength. I have given it, and with remarkable
Success, on the twentieth Day.

8, Having by this Medicine expelled a considerable Portion of the bad Humors,
which contribute to feed and keep up the Fever, the Patient should take every
other Day, during the Continuance of the Disease, and sometimes even every Day,
one Dose of the Cream of Tartar and Rhubarb No. 38. This Remedy evacuates the
corrupt Humors, prevents the Corruption of the others; expells the Worms that
are very common in these Fevers, which the Patient sometimes discharges upwards
and downwards; and which frequently conduce to many of the odd and
extraordinary Symptoms, that are observed in malignant Fevers. In short, it
strengthens the Bowels, and, without checking the necessary Evacuations, it
moderates the Looseness, when it is hurtful.

9, If the Skin be dry, with a Looseness, and that by checking it, we design to
increase Perspiration, instead of the Rhubarb, the Cream of Tartar may be
blended with the Ipecacuana, No. 39, which, being given in small and frequent
Doses, restrains the Purging, and promotes Perspiration. This Medicine, as the
former, is to be taken in the Morning; two Hours after, the Sick must begin
with the Potion, No. 40, and repeat it regularly every three Hours; until it be
interrupted by giving one of the Medicines No. 38 or 39: After which the Potion
is to be repeated again, as already directed, till the Patient grows
considerably better.

10, If the Strength of the Sick be very considerably depressed, and he is in
great Dejection and Anguish, he should take, with every Draught of the Potion,
the Bolus, or Morsel No. 41, If the Diarrhaea, the Purging is violent, there
should be added, once or twice a Day to the Bolus, the Weight of twenty Grains,
or the Size of a very small Bean, of Diascordium; or, if that is not readily to
be got, as much Venice Treacle.

11, Whenever, notwithstanding all this Assistance, the Patient continues in a
State of Weakness and Insensibility, two large Blisters should be applied to
the fleshy Insides of the Legs, or a large one to the Nape of the Neck: and
sometimes, if there be a great Drowsiness, with a manifest Embarrassment of the
Brain, they may be applied with great Success over the whole Head. Their
Suppuration and Discharge is to be promoted abundantly; and, if they dry up
within a few Days, others are to be applied, and their Evacuation is to be kept
up for a considerable Time.

12, As soon as the Distemper is sufficiently abated, for the Patient to remain
some Hours with very little or no Fever, we must avail ourselves of this
Interval, to give him six, or at least five See Note to 241. Art. 9.
Doses of the Medicine No. 14, and repeat the same the next Day, which may
prevent the Return of the Fever: Observation and Experience have demonstrated
the Advantage of the Bark, to obviate a Gangrene, and prevent the Putrefaction
of animal Substances. We therefore conclude it may be usefully employed in
malignant Fevers, as soon as the previous and necessary Evacuations shall have
taken Place. E. L. -- Provided there be very clear and regular Remissions at
least. K.
after which it may be sufficient to give daily only two Doses for a few Days.

13, When the Sick continue entirely clear of a Fever, or any Return, they are
to be put into the Regimen of Persons in a State of Recovery, But if his
Strength returns very slowly, or not at all; in order to the speedier
Establishment and Confirmation of it, he may take three Doses a Day of the
Theriaca Pauperum, or poor Man's Treacle No. 42, the first of them fasting, and
the other twelve Hours after. It were to be wished indeed, this Medicine was
introduced into all the Apothecaries Shops, as an excellent Stomachic, in which
Respect it is much preferable to Venice Treacle, which is an absurd
Composition, dear, and often dangerous. It is true, it does not dispose the
Patients to Sleep; but when we would procure them Sleep, there are better
Medicines than the Treacle to answer that Purpose. Such as may not think the
Expense of the Medicine No. 14, too much, may take three Doses of it daily for
some Weeks, instead of the Medicine No. 42, already directed.

248. It is necessary to eradicate a Prejudice that prevails among Country
People, with Regard to the Treatment of these Fevers; not only because it is
false and ridiculous, but even dangerous too. They imagine that the Application
of Animals can draw out the Poison of the Disease; in Consequence of which they
apply Poultry, or Pigeons, Cats, or sucking Pigs to the Feet, or upon the Head
of the Patient, having first split the living Animals open. Some Hours after
they remove their strange Application, corrupted, and stinking very
offensively; and then ascribe such Corruption and horrid Stink to the Poison
they suppose their Application to be charged with; and which they suppose to be
the Cause of this Fever. But in this supposed Extraction of Poison, they are
grossly mistaken, since the Flesh does not stink in Consequence of any such
Extraction, but from its being corrupted through Moisture and Heat: and they
contract no other Smell but what they would have got, if they had been put in
any other Place, as well as on the Patient's Body, that was equally hot and
moist. Very far from drawing out the Poison, they augment the Corruption of the
Disease; and it would be sufficient to communicate it to a sound Person, if he
was to suffer many of these animal Bodies, thus absurdly and uselessly
butchered, to be applied to various Parts of his Body in Bed; and to lie still
a long time with their putrified Carcases fastened about him, and corrupting
whatever Air he breathed there.

With the same Intention they fasten a living Sheep to the Bed's-soot for
several Hours: which, though not equally dangerous, is in some Measure hurtful;
since the more Animals there are in a Chamber, the Air of it is proportionably
corrupted, or alter^d at least from its natural Simplicity, by their
Respiration and Exhalations; but admitting this to be less pernicious, it is
equally absurd. It is certain indeed the Animals, who are kept very near the
sick Person, breathe in the poisonous, or noxious Vapors which exhale from his
Body, and may be incommoded with them, as well as his Attendants: but it is
ridiculous to suppose their being kept near the Sick causes such Poison to come
out of their Bodies. On the very contrary, in contributing still further to the
Corruption of the Air, they increase the Disease. They draw a false
Consequence, and no Wonder, from a false Principle; saying, if the Sheep dies
the Sick will recover. Now, most frequently the Sheep does not die;
notwithstanding which the Sick sometimes recover; and sometimes they both die.

249. The Cause of malignant Fevers is, not infrequently, combined with other
Diseases, whose Danger it extremely increases. It is blended, for Instance,
with the Poison of the Small-Pocks, or of the Measles. This may be known by the
Union of those Symptoms, which carry the Marks of Malignity, with the Symptoms
of the other Diseases. Such combined Cases are extremely dangerous; they demand
the utmost Attention of the Physician; nor is it possible to prescribe their
exact Treatment here, since it consists in general of a Mixture of the
Treatment of each Disease; though the Malignity commonly demands the greatest
Attention.

CHAPTER XVIII. Of intermitting Fevers.
SECT. 250. INTERMITTING Fevers, commonly called here, Fevers and Agues, are
those, which, after an Invasion and Continuance for some Hours, abate very
perceivably, as well as all the Symptoms attending them, and then entirely
cease: nevertheless, not without some periodical or stated Return of them.

They were very frequent with us some Years since; and indeed might even be
called epidemical: but for the five or six last Years, they have been much less
frequent throughout the greater Part of Swisserland: notwithstanding they still
continue in no small Number, wherever the Inhabitants breathe the Air that
prevails in all the marshy Borders of the Rhone, and in some other Situations
that are exposed to much the same humid Air and Exhalations.

251. There are several Kinds of intermitting Fevers, which take their
different Names from the Interval, or different Space of time, in which the
Fits return.

If the Paroxysm or Fit returns every Day, it is either a true Quotidian, or a
double Tertian Fever: The first of these may be distinguished from the last by
this Circumstance, that in the Quotidian, or one Day Fever, the Fits are long;
and correspond pretty regularly to each other in Degree and Duration. This
however is less frequent in Swisserland. In the double Tertian, the Fits are
shorter, one being alternately light, and the other more severe.

In the simple Tertian, or third Day's Fever, the Fits return every other Day;
so that three Days include one Paroxysm, and the Return of another.

In a Quartan, the Fit returns every fourth Day, including the Day of the first
and that of the second Attack: so that the Patient enjoys two clear Days
between the two sick ones.

The other kinds of Intermittents are much rarer. I have seen however one true
Quintan, or fifth Day Ague, the Patient having three clear Days between two
Fits; and one regularly weekly Ague, as it may be called, the Visitation of
every Return happening every Sunday.

252. The first Attack of an intermittent Fever often happens, when the Patient
thought himself in perfect Health. Sometimes however it is preceded by a
Sensation of Cold, and a kind of Numbness, which continue some Days before the
manifest Invasion of the Fit* It begins with frequent Yawnings, a Lassitude, or
Sensation of Weariness, with a general Weakness, with Coldness, Shivering and
Shaking: There is also a Paleness of the extreme Parts of the Body, attended
with Loathings, and sometimes an actual Vomiting. The Pulse is quick, weak, and
small, and there is a considerable Degree of Thirst.

At the End of an Hour or two, and but seldom so long as three or four Hours, a
Heat succeeds, which increases insensibly, and becomes violent at its Height.
At this Period the whole Body grows red, the Anxiety of the Patient abates; the
Pulse is very strong and large, and his Thirst proves excessive. He complains
of a violent Headache, and of a Pain in all his Limbs; but of a different. Sort
of Pain from that he was sensible of, while his Coldness continued. Finally,
having endured this hot State, four, five, or six Hours, he falls into a
general Sweat for a few more: upon which all the Symptoms already mentioned
abate, and sometimes Sleep supervenes.

At the Conclusion of this Nap the Patient often wakes without any sensible
Fever; Complaining only of Lassitude and Weakness. Sometimes his Pulse returns
entirely to its natural State between the two Fits; though it often continues a
little quicker than in perfect Health; and does not recover its first
Distinctness and Slowness, till some Days after the last Fit.

One Symptom, which most particularly characterises these several Species of
intermitting Fevers, is the Quality of the Urines which the Sick pass after the
Fit. They are of a reddish Color, and let fall a Sediment, or Settling, which
exactly resembles Brick-dust. They are sometimes frothy too, and a Pellicle, or
very thin filmy Skin, appears on the Top, and adheres to the Sides of the Glass
that contains them.

253. The Duration of each Fit is of no fixed Time or Extent, being various
according to the particular sort of Intermittents, and through many other
Circumstances. Sometimes they return precisely at the very same Hour; at other
times they come one, two or three Hours sooner; and in other Instances as much
later than the former. It has been imagined that those Fevers, whose Paroxysms
returned sooner than usual, were sooner finally terminated: but there seems to
be no general Rule in this Case.

254. Intermitting Fevers are distinguished into those of Spring and Autumn.
The former generally prevail from February to June: the latter are those which
reign from July to January. Their essential Nature and Characters are the very
same, as they are not different Distempers; though the various Circumstances
attending them deserve our Consideration. These Circumstances depend on the
Season itself, and the Constitution of the Patients, during such Season. The
Spring Intermittents are sometimes blended with an inflammatory Disposition,
that being the usual Disposition of Bodies in that Season; but as the Weather
then advances daily into an improving State, the Spring Fevers are commonly of
a shorter Duration. The autumnal Fevers are frequently combined and aggravated
with a Principle of Putrefaction; and as the Air of that Season rather
degenerates, they are more tedious and obstinate.

255. The autumnal Fevers seldom begin quite so early as July, but much oftener
in August: and the Duration to which they are frequently extended, has
increased the Terror which the People entertain of Fevers that begin in that
Month. But that Prejudice which ascribes their Danger to the Influence of
August, is a very absurd Error; since it is better they should set in then,
than in the following Months; because they are obstinate in Proportion to the
Tardiness, the Slowness, of their Approach. They sometimes appear at first
considerably in the Form of putrid Fevers. not assuming that of Intermittents
till some Days after their Appearance: but very happily there is little or no
Danger in mistaking them for putrid Fevers, or in treating them like such. The
Brick-coloured Sediment, and particularly the Pellicle or Film on the Surface
of the Urine, are very common in autumnal Intermittents, and are often wanting
in the Urine of putrid Fevers. In these latter, it is generally less high
colored, and leaning rather to a yellow, a kind of Cloudiness is suspended in
the Middle of it. These also deposite a white Sediment, which affords no bad
Prognostic.

256. Generally speaking, intermitting Fevers are not mortal; often terminating
in Health of their own Accord (without the Use of any Medicines) after some
Fits. In this last Respect Intermittents in the Spring differ considerably from
those in the Fall, which continue a long time, and sometimes even until Spring,
if they are not removed by Art, or if they have been improperly treated.

Quartan Fevers are always more obstinate and inveterate than Tertians; the
former sometimes persevering in certain Constitutions for whole Years. When
these Sorts of Fevers occur in boggy marshy Countries, they are not only very
chronical or tedious, but Persons infested with them are liable to frequent
Relapses.

257. A few Fits of an Intermittent are not very injurious, and it happens
sometimes, that they are attended with a favorable Alteration of the Habit in
Point of Health; by their exterminating the Cause or Principle of some languid
and tedious Disorder; though it is erroneous to consider them as salutary. If
they prove tedious and obstinate, and the Fits are long and violent, they
weaken the whole Body, impairing all its Functions, and particularly the
Digestions: They make the Humors sharp and unbalmy, and introduce several
other Maladies, such as the Jaundice, Dropsy, Asthma, and slow wasting Fevers.
Nay sometimes old Persons, and those who are very weak, expire in the Fit;
though such an Event never happens but in the cold Fit.

258. Very happily Nature has afforded us a Medicine, that infallibly cures
these Fevers; this is the Kinkina, or Jesuits Bark; and as we are possessed of
this certain Remedy, the only remaining Difficulty is to discover, if there be
not some other Disease combined with these Fevers, which Disease might be
aggravated by the Bark. Should any such exist, it must be removed by Medicines
adapted to it, before the Bark is given. This admirable Medicine was unknown in
Europe, 'till about one hundred and twenty years past; we are obliged to the
Spaniards for it, who found it in the Province of Quito in Peru; the Countess
of Chinchon being the first European who used it in America, whence it was
brought to Spain, under the Name of the Countess's Powder. The Jesuits having
soon dispensed and distributed it abroad, it became still more public by the
Name of the Jesuits Powder: and since it has been known by that of Kinkina or
the Peruvian Bark. It met with great Opposition at first; some deeming it a
Poison, while others considered it as a divine Remedy: so that the Prejudices
of many being heightened by their Animosity, it was nearly a full Century,
before its true Virtue and its Use were agreed to: and about twenty Years since
the most unfavourable Prejudices against it pretty generally subsided. The
Insufficience of other Medicines in several Cases; its great Efficaciousness;
and the many and surprising Cures which it did, and daily does effect; the
Number of Distempers; the different Kinds of Fevers, in which it proves the
sovereign Remedy; its Effects in the most difficult chirurgical Cases; the
Comfort, the Strength and Spirits it gives those who need and take it, have at
length opened every Person's Eyes; so that it has almost unanimously obtained
the first Reputation, among the most efficacious Medicines. The World is no
longer amused with Apprehensions of its injuring the Stomach; of its fixing or
shutting up the Fever (as the Phrase has been) without curing it; that it shuts
up the Wolf in the Sheepfold; that it throws those who take it into the Scurvy,
the Asthma, the Dropsy, the Jaundice. On the contrary, they are persuaded it
prevents these very Diseases; and, that if it is ever hurtful, it is only when
it is either adulterated, as most great Remedies have been; or has been wrongly
prescribed, or improperly taken; or lastly, when it meets with some latent,
some unknown Particularities in a Constitution, which Physicians term an
Idiosyncrasy, and which prevent or pervert its very general Effects. TISSOT.


259. In the Vernal, or Spring-Fevers, if the Fits are not very severe; if the
Patient is evidently well in their Intervals; if his Appetite, his Strength,
and his Sleep continue as in Health, no Medicine should be given, nor any other
Method be taken, but that of putting the Person, under such a gentle
Intermittent, upon the Regimen directed for Persons in a State of Recovery.
This is such a Regimen as pretty generally agrees with all the Subjects of
these Fevers: for if they should be reduced to the Regimen proper in acute
Diseases, they would be weakened to no Purpose, and perhaps be the worse for
it. But at the same time if we were not to retrench from the Quantity, nor
somewhat to vary the Quality, of their usual Food in a State of Health; as
there is not the least Digestion made in the Stomach, during the whole Term of
the Fit; and as the Stomach is always weakened a little by the Disease, crude
and indigested Humors would be produced, which might afford a Fuel to that
Disease. Not the least solid Food should be allowed, for at least two Hours
before the usual Approach of the Fit.

260. If the Fever extends beyond the sixth, or the seventh Fit, and the
Patient seems to have no Occasion for a Purge; which may be learned by
attending to the Chapter, that treats of Remedies to be taken by Way of
Precaution; It happens very seldom that intermitting Fevers require Yet I have
known many in whom no Purge was necessary, and have seen some rendered more
obstinate and chronical by erroneous Purging. But a Vomit (given about an Hour
before the stated Return of the Fit) is very generally necessary before the
Bark is given. K.
no Purge toward their Cure, especially in Places, which are disposed to
generate Putridity. There is always some material Cause essential to these
Fevers, of which Nature disembarrasses herself more easily by Stools, than by
any other Discharge: And as there is not the least Danger to be apprehended
from a gentle Purge, such as those of No. 11 or 23, we think it would be
prudent always to premise a Dose or two of either to the Bark. E. L.
he may take the Bark, that is the Powder No. 14. If it is a Quotidian, a daily
Fever, or a double Tertian, six Doses, containing three Quarters of an Ounce,
should be taken between the two Fits; and as these Intermissions commonly
consist of but ten or twelve, or at the most of fourteen or fifteen Hours,
there should be an Interval of only one Hour and a half between the Dose.
During this Interval the Sick may take two of his usual Refreshments or
Suppings.

When the Fever is a Tertian, an Ounce should be given between the two Fits:
which makes eight Doses, one of which is to be taken every three Hours.

In a Quartan I direct one Ounce and a half, to be taken in the same Manner. It
is mere trifling to attempt preventing the Returns with smaller Doses. The
frequent Failures of the Bark are owing to over small Doses. On such Occasions
the Medicine is cried down, and censured as useless, when the Disappointment is
solely the Fault of those who do not employ it properly. The last Dose is to be
given two Hours before the usual Return of the Fit.

The Doses, just mentioned, frequently prevent the Repetition of the Fit; but
whether it returns or not, after the time of its usual Duration is past, repeat
the same Quantity, in the same Number of Doses, and Intervals, which certainly
keeps off another. For six Days following, half the same Quantity must be
continued in the Intervals, that would have occurred between the Fits, if they
had returned: and during all this time the Patient should inure himself to as
much Exercise as he can well bear.

261. Should the Fits be very strong, the Pain of the Head violent, the Visage
red, the Pulse full and hard; if there is any Cough; if even after the Fit is
over, the Pulse still is perceivably hard; if the Urine is inflamed, hot and
high-colored, and the Tongue very dry, the Patient must be bled This does not
seem directed, with Respect to the Cure of the Intermittent, but from a
judicious Caution to prevent its degenerating into a continual Fever; into
which, in such full and sanguine Habits, as are most liable to these acute
Symptoms, it certainly sometimes has degenerated. Bleeding therefore, under
these Circumstances, has a very probable Tendency to fix it, as an
Intermittent, which is by much the less dangerous Disease. But bleeding
Patients of low lax Habits in, or soon after, the Cure of Intermittents,
whether with or without the Bark, as well as severe or unseasonable Purging,
has certainly been found to occasion Relapses, and to render the Disease more
chronical. Rhubarb in Powder seems the best Purge, where Purging may be
necessary, after an Intermittent; and it would be still the better, if a third
Part of the Bark were given with it. K.

Dr. TISSOT's own Sentiments on these Evacuations in this Disease, especially
in Quartans, follow 262 and 3.


, and drink plentifully of Barley Water No. 3. These two Remedies generally
bring the Patient into the State described 259: in which State he may take on a
Day, when the Fever is entirely off, three or four Doses of the Powder No. 24,
and then leave the Fever to pursue its own Course for the Space of a few Fits.
But should it not then terminate of itself, the Bark must be recurred to.

If the Patient, even in the Interval of the Returns, has a foetid, furred
Mouth, a Loathing, Pains in the Loins, or in the Knees, much Anxiety, and bad
Nights, he should be purged with the Powder No. 21 or the Potion No. 23, before
he takes the Bark.

262. If Fevers in Autumn appear to be of the continual Kind, and very like
putrid Fevers, the Patients should drink abundantly of Barley Water; and if at
the Expiration of two or three Days, there still appears to be a Load or
Oppression at the Stomach, the Powder No. 34 or that of 35 is to be given (but
see 241): and if, after the Operation of this, the Signs of Putridity continue,
the Body is to be opened with repeated Doses of the Powder No. 24; or where the
Patients are very robust, with No. 21; and when the Fever becomes quite
regular, with distinct Remissions at least, the Bark is to be given as directed
260.

But as autumnal Fevers are more obstinate; after having discontinued the Bark
for eight Days; and notwithstanding there has been no Return of the Fever, it
is proper to resume the Bark, and to give three Doses of it daily for the
succeeding eight Days, more especially if it was a Quartan; in which Species I
have ordered it to be repeated, every other eight Days, for six times.

Many People may find it difficult to comply with this Method of Cure, which is
unavoidably expensive, through the Price of the Bark. I thought however this
ought not to prevent me from averring it to be the only certain one; since
nothing can be an equivalent Succedaneum or Substitute to this Remedy, which is
the only sure and safe one in all these Cases. The World had long been
prepossessed with Prejudices to the contrary: it was supposed to be hurtful to
the Stomach; to prevent which it has been usual to make the Sick eat something
an Hour after it. Nevertheless, very far from injuring the Stomach, it is the
best Medicine in the Universe to strengthen it; and it is a pernicious Custom,
when a Patient is obliged to take it often, to eat an Hour after it. It had
also been imagined to cause Obstructions, and that it subjected Patients to a
Dropsy: but at present we are convinced, it is the obstinate and inveterate
Duration of the Intermittent, that causes Obstructions, and paves the Way to a
Dropsy. The Bark, in Consequence of its speedily curing the Fever, does not
only prevent the former Disease; but when it continues, through an injudicious
Omission of the Bark, a proper Use of it is serviceable in the Dropsy. In a
Word, if there is any other Malady combined with the Fever, sometimes that
indeed prevents the Success of the Bark, yet without rendering it hurtful. But
whenever the intermitting Fever is simple and uncombined, it ever has, and will
render the Patient all possible Service. In another Place I shall mention such
Means and Methods as may in some Degree, though but inadequately, be
substituted instead of it.

After the Patient has begun with the Bark, he must take no purging Medicine,
as that Evacuation would, with the greatest Probability, occasion a Return of
the Fever.

263. Bleeding is never, or extremely seldom indeed, necessary in a Quartan
Ague, which occurs in the Fall oftener than in the Spring; and with the Symptoms
of Putridity, rather than of Inflammation. See Note * 261.

264. The Patient ought, two Hours before the Invasion of the Fit, to drink a
small Glass of warm Elder-flower Tea, sweetened with Honey, every Quarter of an
Hour, and to walk about moderately: this disposes him to a very gentle Sweat,
and thence renders the ensuing Coldness and the whole Fit milder. He is to
continue the same Drink throughout the Duration of the cold Fit; and when the
hot one approaches, he may either continue the same, or substitute that of No.
2, which is more cooling. It is not necessary however, in this State, to drink
it warm, it is sufficient that it be not over cold. When the Sweat, at the
Termination of the hot Fit, is concluded, the Patient should be well wiped and
dried, and may get up. If the Fit was very long, he may be allowed a little
Gruel, or some other such Nourishment during the Sweat.

265. Sometimes the first, and a few successive Doses of the Bark purge the
Patient. This is no otherwise an ill Consequence, than by its retarding the
Cure; since, when it purges, it does not commonly [ though sometimes] prevent
the Return of the Fever; so that these Doses may be considered as to no
Purpose, and others should be repeated, which, ceasing to purge, do prevent it.
Should the Looseness notwithstanding continue, the Bark must be discontinued
for one entire Day, in order to give the Patient half a Quarter of an Ounce of
Rhubarb: after which the Bark is to be resumed again; and if the Looseness
still perseveres, fifteen Grains of Venice Treacle should be added to each
Dose, but not otherwise. All other Medicines which are superadded, very
generally serve only to increase the Bulk of the Dose, while they lessen its
Virtue.

266. Before our thorough Experience of the Bark, other bitter Medicines were
used for the same Purpose: these indeed were not destitute of Virtue in such
Cases, though they were considerably less available than the Bark. Under No.
43, some valuable Prescriptions of that kind may be seen, whose Efficacy I have
often experienced: though at other times I have been obliged to leave them off,
and recur to the Bark more successfully. Filings of Iron, which enter into the
third Prescription, are an excellent Febrifuge in particular Cases and
Circumstances. In the Middle of the Winter 1753, I cured a Patient of a Quartan
Ague with it, who would not be prevailed on to take the Bark. It must be
confessed he was perfectly regular in observing the Regimen directed for him;
and that, during the most rigid Severity of the Winter, he got every Day on
Horseback, and took such a Degree of other Exercise in the open Air, as
disposed him to perspire abundantly.

267. Another very practicable easy Method, of which I have often availed my
Patients, under Tertian Fevers (but which succeeded with me only twice in
Quartans) was to procure the Sufferer a very plentiful Sweat, at the very time
when the Fit was to return, in its usual Course. To effect this he is to drink,
three or four Hours before it is expected, an Infusion of Elder-flowers
sweetened with Honey, which I have already recommended 264; and one Hour before
the usual Invasion of the Shivering, he is to go into Bed, and take, as hot as
he can drink it, the Prescription No. 44.

I have also cured some Tertians and even Quartans, in 1751 and 1752, by giving
them, every four Hours between the Fits, the Powder No. 45. But I must
acknowledge that, besides its having often failed me, and its never succeeding
so speedily as the Bark, I have found it weaken some Patients; it disorders, or
disagrees with, their Stomachs: and in two Cases, where it had removed the
Fever, I was obliged to call in the Bark, for a thorough Establishment of the
Patient's Health. Nevertheless as these Medicines are very cheap and
attainable, and often do succeed, I thought I could not properly omit them.

268. A Multitude of other Remedies are cried up for the Cure of Fevers: though
none of them are equally efficacious with those I have directed; and as many of
them are even dangerous, it is prudent to abstain from them. Some Years since
certain Powders were sold here, under the Name of the Berlin Powders; these are
nothing but the Bark masqued or disguised (which has sometimes been publicly
discovered) and have always been sold very dear: though the Bark well chosen,
and freshly powdered when wanted, is greatly preferable.

269. I have often known Peasants, who had labored for several Months under
intermitting Fevers; having made Use of many bad Medicines and Mixtures for
them, and observed no Manner of Regimen. Such I have happily treated by giving
them the Remedies No. 34, or 35; and afterward, for some Days, that of No. 38;
at the End of which time, I have ordered them the Bark, (See 260,) or other
Febrifuges, as at 266, 267: and then finally directed them for some Days, to
take Morsels of the poor Man's Treacle (See 247, Art. 13,) to strengthen and
confirm their Digestions, which I have found very weak and irregular.

270. Some Intermittents are distinguished as pernicious or malignant, from
every Fit's being attended with the most violent Symptoms. The Pulse is small
and irregular, the Patient exceedingly dejected, and frequently swooning;
afflicted with inexpressible Anguish, Convulsions, a deep Drowsiness, and
continual Efforts to go to Stool, or make Urine, but ineffectually. This
Disease is highly pressing and dangerous; the Patient may die in the third Fit,
and rarely survives the sixth, if he is not very judiciously treated. Not a
Moment should be lost, and there is no other Step to be taken, but that of
giving the Bark continually, as directed 260, to prevent the succeeding Fits.
These worst Kinds of Intermittents are often combined with a great Load of
putrid Humors in the first Passages: and as often as such an aggravating
Combination is very evident, we should immediately after the End of one Fit,
give a Dose of Ipecacuana No. 35, and when its Operation is finished, give the
Bark. But I choose to enter into very few Details on this Species of
Intermittents, both as they occur but seldom, and as the Treatment of them is
too difficult and important, to be submitted to the Conduct of any one but a
Physician. My Intention has only been to represent them sufficiently, that they
may be so distinguished when they do occur, as to apprize the People of their
great Danger.

271. The same Cause which produces these intermitting Fevers, frequently also
occasions Disorders, that return periodically at the same Hour, without
Shivering, without Heat, and often without any Quickness of the Pulse. Such
Disorders generally observe the Intermissions of quotidian or tertian Fevers,
but much seldomer those of Quartans. I have seen violent Vomitings, and
Reachings to vomit, with inexpressible Anxiety; the severest Oppressions, the
most racking Cholics; dreadful Palpitations and excessive Tooth-achs; Pains in
the Head, and very often an unaccountable Pain over one Eye, the Eyelid,
Eyebrow and Temple, on the same Side of the Face; with a Redness of that Eye,
and a continual, involuntary trickling of Tears. I have also seen such a
prodigious Swelling of the affected Part, that the Eye projected, or stood out,
above an Inch from the Head, covered by the Eyelid, which was also extremely
inflated, or puffed up. All these Maladies begin precisely at a certain Hour,
last about the usual time of a Fit; and terminating without any sensible
Evacuation, return exactly at the same Hour, the next Day, or the next but one.

There is but one known Medicine that can effectually oppose this Sort, which
is the Bark, given as directed 260. Nothing affords Relief in the Fit, and no
other Medicine ever suspends or puts it off. But I have cured some of these
Disorders with the Bark, and especially those affecting the Eyes, which happen
oftener than the other Symptoms, after their Duration for many Weeks, and after
the ineffectual Use of Bleeding, Purging, Baths, Waters, Blisters, and a great
Number of other Medicines. If a sufficient Dose of it be given, the next fit is
very mild; the second is prevented; and I never saw a Relapse in these Cases,
which sometimes happens after the Fits of common Intermittents seemed cured.

272. In Situations where the Constitution of the Air renders these Fevers very
common, the Inhabitants should frequently burn in their Rooms, at least in
their lodging Rooms, some aromatic Wood or Herbs. They should daily chew some
Juniper Berries, and drink a fermented Infusion of them. These two Remedies are
very effectual to fortify the weakest Stomachs, to prevent Obstructions, and to
promote Perspiration. And as these are the Causes which prolong these Fevers
the most obstinately; nothing is a more certain Preservation from them than
these cheap and obvious Assistances. I have seen several Cases in very marshy
maratime Countries, with little good drinking Water, and far South of
Swisserland, where intermitting Fevers, with Agues at different Intervals, are
annually endemic, very popular, and often so obstinate as to return repeatedly,
whenever the weekly precautionary Doses of the Bark have been omitted, (through
the Patient's nauseating the frequent Swallowing of it,) so that the Disease
has sometimes been extended beyond the Term of a full Year, and even far into a
second, including the temporary Removals of it by the Bark. Nevertheless, in
some such obstinate intermittents, and particularly Quartans there, wherein the
Bark alone has had but a short and imperfect Effect, I have known the following
Composition, after a good Vomit, (taken about an Hour before the usual Return
of the Fit, at which Juncture it operates briskly,) attended with speedy and
final Success, viz. Take of fresh Sassafras Bark, of Virginia Snake-root, of
Roch-Allom, of Nutmeg, of diaphoretic Antimony, of Salt of Wormwood, of each
one Dram. To these well rubbed together into fine Powder, add the Weight of
the whole, of the best and freshest Bark; then drop in three or four Drops of
the chemical Oil of Mint, and with Syrup of Cloves, or Saffion, make it into
the Consistence of an Electuary or Bolus, for twelve Doses for a grown Person,
to be taken at the Distance of three or four Hours from each other, while the
Patient is awake, according to the longer or shorter Intermission of the Fever.

I have also known, particularly in obstinate autumnal Agues there, an Infusion
of two Ounces of the best Bark in fine Powder, or two Ounces and a Half in
gross Powder, in a Quart of the best Brandy, for three or four Days (a small
Wine Glass to be taken by grown Persons at the Distance of from four to six
Hours) effectually and speedily terminate such inveterate Agues, as had given
but little Way to the Bark in Substance. This was certainly most suitable for
those who were not of a light delicate Habit and Temperament, and who had not
been remarkable for their Abstinence from strong Liquors: the inebriating Force
of the Brandy being remarkably lessened by the Addition, and long Infusion, of
the Bark. These Facts which I saw, are the less to be wondered at, as in such
inveterate, but perfectly clear and distinct Intermittents, both the State of
the Fluids and Solids seem very opposite to their State in an acutely
inflammatory Disease. K.




CHAPTER XIX. Of the Erisipelas, and the Bites of Animals.
SECT. 273. THE Erisipelas, commonly called in English, St. Anthony's Fire, and
in Swisserland the Violet, is sometimes but a very slight Indisposition which
appears on the Skin, without the Person's being sensible of any other Disorder;
and it most commonly breaks out either in the Face, or on the Legs. The Skin
becomes tense, or stiff, rough and red; but this Redness disappears on pressing
the Spot with a Finger, and returns on removing it. The Patient feels in the
Part affected a burning Heat which makes him uneasy, and sometimes hinders him
from sleeping. The Disorder increases for the Space of two or three Days;
continues at its Height one or two, and then abates. Soon after this, that Part
of the Skin which was affected, falls off in pretty large Scales, and the
Disorder entirely terminates.

274. But sometimes this Malady is considerably more severe, beginning with a
violent Shivering, which is succeeded by a burning Heat, a vehement Headache, a
Sickness at Heart, as it is commonly termed, or Reachings to vomit, which
continue till the Erisipelas appears, which sometimes does not happen before
the second, or even the third Day. The Fever then abates, and the Sickness goes
off, though frequently a less Degree of Fever, and of Sickness or Loathing
remain, during the whole Time, in which the Disease is in its increasing State.
When the Eruption and Inflammation happen in the Face, the Headache continues
until the Decline, or going off, of the Disease, The Eyelid swells, the Eye is
closed, and the Patient has not the least Ease or Tranquillity. It often passes
from one Cheek to the other, and extends successively over the Forehead, the
Neck, and the Nape of the Neck; under which Circumstance the Disease is of a
more than ordinary Duration. Sometimes also when it exists in a very high
Degree, the Fever continues, the Brain is obstructed and oppressed; the Patient
raves; his Case becomes extremely dangerous; whence sometimes, if he is not
very judiciously assisted, he dies, especially if of an advanced Age. A violent
Erisipelas on the Neck brings on a Quinsey, which may prove very grievous or
even fatal.

When it attacks the Leg, the whole Leg swells up; and the Heat and Irritation
from it is extended up to the Thigh.

Whenever this Tumor is considerable, the Part it seizes is covered with small
Pustules filled with a clear watery Humor, resembling those which appear after
a Burn, and drying afterward and scaling off. I have sometimes observed,
especially when this Distemper affected the Face, that the Humor, which issued
from these little Pustules, was extremely thick or glewy, and formed a thick
Scurf, or Scabs nearly resembling those of sucking Children: they have
continued fast on the Face many Days before they fell off.

When the Disease may be termed violent, it sometimes continues eight, ten,
twelve Days at the same Height; and is at last terminated by a very plentiful
Sweat, that may sometimes be predicted by a Restlessness attended with
Shiverings, and a little Anxiety of some Hours Duration. Throughout the
Progress of the Disease, the whole Skin is very dry, and even the Inside of the
Mouth.

275. An Erisipelas rarely comes to Suppuration, and when it does, the
Suppuration is always unkindly, and much disposed to degenerate into an Ulcer.
Sometimes a malignant kind of Erisipelas is epidemical, seizing a great Number
of Persons, and frequently terminating in Gangrenes.

276. This Distemper often shifts its Situation; it sometimes retires suddenly;
but the Patient is uneasy and disordered; he has a Propensity to vomit, with a
sensible Anxiety and Heat: the Erisipelas appears again in a different Part,
and he feels himself quite relieved from the preceding Symptoms. But if instead
of re-appearing on some other Part of the Surface, the Humor is thrown upon
the Brain, or the Breast, he dies within a few Hours; and these fatal Changes
and Translations sometimes occur, without the least Reason or Color for
ascribing them either to any Error of the Patient, or of his Physician.

If the Humor has been transferred to the Brain, the Patient immediately
becomes delirious, with a highly flushed Visage, and very quick sparkling Eyes:
very soon after he proves downright frantic, and goes off in a Lethargy.

If the Lungs are attacked, the Oppression, Anxiety and Heat are inexpressible.

277. There are some Constitutions subject to a very frequent, and, as it were,
to an habitual Erisipelas. If it often affects the Face, it is generally
repeated on the same Side of it; and that Eye is, at length, considerably
weakened by it.

278. This Distemper results from two Causes; the one an acrid sharp Humor,
which is commonly bilious, diffused through the Mass of Blood; the other
consists in that Humour's not being sufficiently discharged by Perspiration.

279. When this Disease is of a gentle Nature, such as it is described 273, it
will be sufficient to keep up a very free Perspiration, but without heating the
Patient; and the best Method to answer this Purpose is putting him upon the
Regimen so often already referred to, with a plentiful Use of Nitre in
Elder-flower Tea. Flesh, Eggs and Wine are prohibited of course, allowing the
Patient a little Pulls and ripe Fruits. He should drink Elder-flower Tea
abundantly, and take half a Dram of Nitre every three Hours; or, which
amounts to the same thing, let three Drachms of Nitre be dissolved in as much
Infusion of Elder-flowers, as he can drink in twenty-four Hours. Nitre may be
given too in a Bolus with Conserve of Elder-berries. These Medicines keep the
Body open, and increase Urine and Perspiration.

280. When the Distemper prevails in a severer Degree, if the Fever is very
high, and the Pulse, at the same time, strong or hard, it may be necessary to
bleed once: but this should never be permitted in a large Quantity at a time in
this Disease; it being more advisable, if a sufficient Quantity has not been
taken at once, to bleed a second time, and even a third, if the Fever should
prove very high, as it often does, and that sometimes in so violent a Degree,
as to render it extremely dangerous; and in a few such Cases Nature has
sometimes saved the Patients by effecting a large Haemorrhage, or Bleeding, to
the Quantity of four or five Pounds. This Conduct a very intelligent and
prudent Physician may presume to imitate; but I dare not advise the same
Conduct to that Class of Physicians, for which only I write: it being safer for
them to use repeated Bleedings in such Cases, than one in an excessive
Quantity. These erisipelatous Fevers are often excited by a Person's being too
long overheated.

After Bleeding the Patient is to be restrained to his Regimen; Glysters are to
be given until there is a sensible Abatement of the Fever: and he should drink
the Barley Water freely, No. 3.

When the Fever is somewhat diminished, either the Purge No. 23 should be
given, or a few Doses of Cream of Tartar No. 24, every Morning. Purging is
absolutely necessary to carry off the stagnant Bile, which is generally the
first Cause of the violent Degrees of this Distemper. It may sometimes be
really necessary too, if the Disease is very tedious; if the Loathing and
Sickness at Stomach is obstinate; the Mouth ill-savoured, and the Tongue foul,
(provided there be only a slight Fever, and no Fear of an Inflammation) to give
the Medicines No. 34 or 35, which, in Consequence of the Agitation, the Shaking
they occasion, remove these Impediments still better than Purges.

It commonly happens that this Disease is more favorable after these
Evacuations; nevertheless it is sometimes necessary to repeat them the next
Day, or the next but one; especially if the Malady affects the Head. Purging is
the true Evacuation for curing it, whenever it attacks this Part. By carrying
off the Cause of the Disease, they diminish it, and prevent its worst Events.

Whenever, even after these Evacuations, the Fever still continues to be very
severe, the Patient should take every two Hours, or, occasionally, oftener, two
Spoonfuls of the Prescription No. 10, added to a Glass of Ptisan.

It will be very useful, when this Disease is seated in the Head or Face, to
bath the Legs frequently in warm Water; and, where it is violent there, also to
apply Sinapisms to the Soles of the Feet. I have seen this Application, in
about four Hours attract, or draw down an Erisipelas to the Legs, which had
spread over the Nose, and both the Eyes. When the Distemper once begins to go
off by Sweating, this should be promoted by Elder-flower Tea and Nitre (See
279) and the Sweating may be encouraged to Advantage for some Hours.

281. The best Applications that can be made to the affected Part are 1st, The
Herb Robert, a Species of Geranium, or Crane's Bill; or Chervil, or Parsley, or
Elder Flowers: and if the Complaint be of a very mild Disposition, it may be
sufficient to apply a very soft smooth Linen over it, which some People dust
over with a little dry Meal.

2, If there is a very considerable Inflammation, and the Patient is so
circumstanced as to be very tractable and is regularly attended, Flanels wrung
out of a strong Decoction of Elder-flowers and applied warm, afford him the
speediest Ease and Relief. By this simple Application I have appeased the most
violent Pains of a St. Anthony's Fire, which is the most cruel Species of an
Erisipelas, and has some peculiar Marks or Symptoms extraordinary.

3, The Plaster of Smalt, and Smalt itself No. 46, are also very successfully
employed in this Disorder. This Powder, the farinacious, that is the mealy
ones, or others recommended for it, agree best when a thin watery Humor
distills or weeps from the little Vesications attending it, which it is
convenient to absorb by such Applications; without which Precaution this Humor
might gall, or even ulcerate, the Part.

All other Plasters, which are partly compounded of greasy, or of resinous
Substances, are very dangerous: they often repel, or strike in the Erisipelas,
occasioning it to ulcerate, or even to gangrene. If People who are naturally
subject to this Disease should apply any such Plaster to their Skin, even in
its soundest State, an Erisipelas is the speedy Consequence.

282. Whenever the Humor occasioning the Distemper is repelled, and thrown
upon the Brain, the Throat, the Lungs, or any internal Part, the Patient should
be bled; Blisters must be applied to the Legs; and Elder Tea, with Nitre
dissolved in it, should be plentifully drank.

283. People who are liable to frequent Returns of an Erisipelas, should very
carefully avoid using I should think it would not always be necessary to extend
this Restriction to fresh clarified Whey; especially if a small Quantity of the
Leaves of Wood Sorrel, or of French Sorrel, had been infused sometime in it; or
if the Milk had been turned with the Juice of a good ripe Lemon. See also, on
this Point, Dr. TISSOT's Conclusion of this. Some have allowed Water and Milk
in an Erisipelas. K.
Milk, Cream, and all fat and viscid, or clammy Food, Pies, brown Meat, Spices,
thick, and heady Liquors, a sedentary Life, the more active Passions,
especially Rage, and, if possible, all Chagrin too. Their Food should chiefly
consist of Herbage, of Fruits, and of Substances inclining to Acidity, and
which tend to keep the Body open; they should drink Water, and some of the
light white Wines; by no Means omitting the frequent Use of Cream of Tartar. A
careful Conformity to these Regulations is of real Importance, as, besides the
Danger of the frequent Visitations of this Disease, they denote some slight
Indispositions of the Liver and the Gallbladder; which, if too little attended
to, might in time prove very troublesome and pernicious.

Such mineral Waters as are gently opening are very proper for these
Constitutions, as well as the Juice of Succory, and clarified Whey, of which
they should take about three Pints every Morning, during the five or six Summer
Months. This becomes still more efficacious, if a little Cream of Tartar and
Honey be added to it.

Of Stings, or little Wounds, by Animals.
284. The Stings or little Bites of Animals, frequently producing a kind of
Erisipelas, I shall add a very few Words concerning them in this Place.

Of the Serpents in this Country none but the Vipers are poisonous; and none of
these are found except at Boume, where there is a Viperary, if we may be
allowed that Word. We have no Scorpions, which are, in some Degree, poisonous;
our Toads are not in the least so: whence the only Stings we are exposed to,
are those of Bees, Wasps, Hornets, Muskitos or Gnats, and Dragon These, in some
Parts of America, are called Muskito Hawks; but we do not recollect their
biting there. K.
Flies: all of which are sometimes attended with severe Pain, a Swelling, and a
very considerable erisipelatous Redness; which, if it happens in the Face,
sometimes entirely closes the Eyes up; occasioning also a Fever, Pains of the
Head, Restlessness, and Sickness at Heart; and when the Pains are in a violent
Degree, Faintings, and Convulsions, though always without any mortal
Consequence. These Symptoms go off naturally within a few Days, without any
Assistance: Nevertheless they may either be prevented, diminished in Degree, or
shortened in Duration.

1, By extracting the Sting of the Animal, if it is left behind.

2, By a continual Application of one of the Remedies directed 281, Article 1
and 2, particularly the Infusion of Elder-flowers, to which a little Venice
Treacle is added; or by covering the Part affected with a Pultice, made of Crum
of Bread, Milk, Honey, and a little Venice Treacle Pounded Parsley is one of
the most availing Applications in such Accidents. E. L.
.

3, By bathing the Legs of the Person stung repeatedly in warm Water.

4, By retrenching a little of their customary Food, especially at Night, and
by making them drink an Infusion of Elder-flowers, with the Addition of a
little Nitre. Oil, if applied very quickly after the Sting, sometimes prevents
the Appearance of any Swelling, and from thence the Pains that attend it.

CHAPTER XX. Of spurious, or false Inflammations of the Breast, and of
spurious, bilious Pleurisies.
SECT. 285. THE Inflammation of the Breast and that Pleurisy, which is called
bilious, are the same Disease. It is properly a putrid Fever, attended with an
Infarction or Stuffing of the Lungs, though without Pain; in which Circumstance
it is called a putrid or bilious Peripneumony: but when attended with a Pain of
the Side, a Stitch, it is called a spurious or bastard Pleurisy.

286. The Signs which distinguish these Diseases from the inflammatory ones of
the same Name, described Chap. IV and V, are a less hard and less strong, but a
quicker Pulse, though unaccompanied with the same Symptoms which constitute the
inflammatory ones, (See 47 and 90.) The Mouth is foul, and has a Sensation of
Bitterness; the Patient is infested with a sharp and dry Heat; he has a Feeling
of Heaviness and Anxiety all about his Stomach, with Loathings: he is less
flushed and red in these, than in the inflammatory Diseases, but rather a
little yellow. He has a dejected wan Look; his Urine resembles that in putrid
Fevers, and not that of inflammatory ones; and he has very often a small
bilious Looseness, which is extremely offensive. The Skin is commonly very dry
in this Disease; the Humor spit up is less thick, less reddish, and rather
more yellow, than in the inflammatory Diseases of the same Names.

287. These Diseases must be treated like putrid Fevers, as in 241. Supposing
some little Degree of Inflammation to be combined with the Disease, it may be
removed by a single Bleeding. After this the Patient is to drink Barley Water
No. 3, to make Use of Glysters; and as soon as all Symptoms of any Inflammation
wholly disappear, he is to take the vomiting and purging Draught No. 34. But
the utmost Caution must be taken not to give it, before every Appearance of any
Inflammation is totally removed; as giving it sooner would be certain Death to
the sick: and it is dreadful but to think of agitating, by a Vomit, Lungs that
are inflamed, and overloaded with Blood, whose Vessels burst and discharge
themselves, only from the Force of Expectoration. After an Interval of some
Days, he may be purged again with the Medicine No. 23. The Prescription No. 25
succeeds also very well as a Vomit. If the Fever is violent, he must drink
plentifully of the Potion No. 10.

Blisters to the Legs are very serviceable, when the Load and Oppression are
not considerably abated after general Evacuations.

288. The false Inflammation of the Breast is an Over-fulness or Obstruction in
the Lungs, accompanied with a Fever; it is caused by extremely thick and
tenacious Humors: and not by a really inflammatory Blood, or by any putrid or
bilious Humor.

289. This Distemper happens more frequently in the Spring, than in any other
Season. Old Men, puny, ill-constitutioned Children, languid Women, feeble young
Men, and particularly such as have worn their Constitutions out by drinking,
are the Subjects most frequently attacked by it; especially if they have used
but little Exercise throughout the Winter; if they have fed on viscid, mealy
and fat Aliments, as Pastry, Chestnuts, thick Milk or Pap, and Cheese. All their
Humors have contracted a thick glutinous Quality; they are circulated with
Difficulty, and when Heat or Exercise in the Spring increases their Motion at
once, the Humors already stuffing up the Lungs, still more augment that
Plenitude, whence these vital Organs are fatally extended, and the Patient dies.

290. This Distemper is known to exist,

1, By the previous Existence of the Causes already mentioned.

2, By the Symptoms which precede and usher it in: For Example, the Patient
many Days beforehand has a slight Cough; a small Oppression when he moves
about; a little Restlessness, and is sometimes a little choleric or fretful.
His Countenance is higher colored than in Health; he has a Propensity to
sleep, but attended with Confusion and without Refreshment, and has sometimes
an extraordinary Appetite.

3, When this State has continued for some Days, there comes on a cold
Shivering, though more considerable for its Duration than its Violence; it is
succeeded by a moderate Degree of Heat; but that attended with much Inquietude
and Oppression. The sick Person cannot confine himself to the Bed; but walks to
and fro in his Chamber, and is greatly dejected. The Pulse is weak and pretty
quick; the Urine is sometimes but little changed from that in Health; at other
times it is discharged but in a small Quantity, and is higher colored: he
coughs but moderately, and does not expectorate, or cough up, but with
Difficulty. The Visage becomes very red, and even almost livid; he can neither
keep awake, nor sleep well; he raves for some Moments, and then his Head grows
clear again. Sometimes it happens, especially to Persons of advanced Age, that
this State suddenly terminates in a mortal Swoon or Fainting: at other times
and in other Cases, the Oppression and Anguish increase; the Patient cannot
breathe but when sitting up, and that with great Difficulty and Agony: the
Brain is utterly disturbed and embarrassed; this State lasts for some Hours,
and then terminates of a sudden.

291. This is a very dangerous Distemper; because, in the first place, it
chiefly attacks those Persons whose Temperament and Constitution are deprived
of the ordinary Resources for Health and Recovery: in the second place, because
it is of a precipitate Nature, the Patient sometimes dying on the third Day,
and but seldom surviving the seventh; while the Cause of it requires a more
considerable Term for its Removal, or Mitigation. Besides which, if some
Indications present, for the Employment of a Remedy, there are frequently
others which forbid it; and all that seems to be done is, as follows;

1, If the Patient has still a pretty good Share of Health; if he is not of too
advanced an Age; if the Pulse has a perceivable Hardness, and yet at the same
time some Strength; if the Weather is dry, and the Wind blows from the North,
he should be bled once, to a moderate Quantity. But if the greater Part of
these Circumstances are wanting, Bleeding would be very prejudicial. Were we
obliged to establish some general and positive Rule in this Case, it were
better to exclude Bleeding, than to admit it.

2, The Stomach and the Bowels should be unloaded from their viscid glutinous
Contents; and the Medicines which succeed the best in this Respect are No. 35,
when the Symptoms show there is a great Necessity for vomiting, and there is no
Inflammation; or the Prescription No. 25, which after vomiting, purges by
Stool, promotes Urine, breaks down and divides the viscid Humors, that
occasion the Disease, and increases Perspiration. When we are afraid of
hazarding the Agitations of a Vomit and its Consequences, the Potion, No. 11
may be given; but we must be very cautious, in Regard to old Men, even with
this; as such may expire during the Operation of it.

3, They should, from the Beginning of the Disease, drink plentifully of the
Ptisan No. 26, which is the best Drink in this Disease; or that of No. 12,
adding half a Dram of Nitre to every Pint of it.

4, A Cup of the Mature No. 8 must be taken every two Hours.

5, Blisters are to be applied to the Insides of the Legs.

When the Case is very doubtful and perplexing, it were best to confine
ourselves to the three last-mentioned Remedies, which have often been
successful in severe Degrees of this Disease; and which can occasion no ill
Consequence.

292. When this Malady invades old People, though they partly recover, they
never recover perfectly, entirely, from it: and if due Precaution is not taken,
they are very liable to fall into a Dropsy of the Breast after it.

293. The spurious or false Pleurisy is a Distemper that does not affect the
Lungs, but only the Teguments, the Skin, and the Muscles which cover the Ribs.
It is the Effect of a Rheumatic Humor thrown upon these Parts, in which, as it
produces very sharp Pains resembling that which is called a Stitch, it has,
from this Circumstance, been termed a Pleurisy.

It is generally supposed by the mere Multitude, and even by some of a
different Rank, that a false Pleurisy is more dangerous than a genuine, a true
one; but this is a Mistake. It is often ushered in by a Shivering, and almost
ever attended with a little Fever, a small Cough, and a slight Difficulty of
breathing; which, as well as the Cough, is occasioned from the Circumstance of
a Patient's (who feels Pain in Respiration, or Breathing) checking Breathing as
much as he can; this accumulates a little too much Blood in the Lungs; but yet
he has no Anguish, not the other Symptoms of acute true Pleurisies. In some
Patients this Pain is extended, almost over the whole Breast, and to the Nape
of the Neck. The sick Person cannot repose himself on the Side affected.

This Disorder is not more dangerous than a Rheumatism, except in two Cases, 1,
When the Pain is so very severe, that the Patient strongly endeavors not to
breathe at all, which brings on a great Infarction or Stoppage in the Lungs. 2,
When this Humor, like any other rheumatic one, is transferred to some internal
Part.

294. It must be treated exactly like a Rheumatism. See 168 and 169.

After bleeding once or more, a Blister applied to the affected Part is often
attended with a very good Effect: this being indeed the Kind of The Seneka
Rattle-snake-root, already recommended in true Pleurisies, will, with the
greatest Probability, be found not less effectual in these false ones, in which
the Inflammation of the Blood is less. The Method of giving it may be seen P.
58, N. (a.) By Dr. TISSOT's having never mentioned this valuable Simple
throughout his Work, it may be presumed, that when he wrote it, this Remedy had
not been admitted into the Apothecaries Shops in Swisserland, K.
Pleurisy, in which it particularly agrees.

295. This Malady sometimes gives way to the first Bleeding; often terminating
on the third, fourth or fifth Day, by a very plentiful Sweat, and rarely
lasting beyond the seventh. Sometimes it attacks a Person very suddenly, after
a Stoppage of Perspiration; and then, if at once, before the Fever commences,
and has had time to inflame the Blood, the Patient takes some Faltrank, it
effects a speedy Cure by restoring Perspiration. They are such Cases as these,
or that mentioned 96, which have given this Composition the Reputation it has
obtained in this Disease; a Reputation nevertheless, which has every Year
proved tragical in its Consequences to many Peasants, who being deceived by
some misleading Resemblances in this Distemper, have rashly and ignorantly made
Use of it in true inflammatory Pleurisies.

CHAPTER XXI. Of the Cholic and its different Kinds.
SECT. 296. THE Appellation of a Cholic is commonly given to all Pains of the
Belly indiscriminately; but I apply it in this Place only to such as attack the
Stomach, or the Intestines, the Guts.

Cholics may and do result from very many Causes; and the greater Number of
Cholics are chronical or tedious Complaints, being more common among the
inactive Inhabitants of Cities, and Workmen in sedentary Trades, than among
Country People. Hence I shall treat here only of the small Variety of Cholics,
which happen the most usually in Villages. I have already proved that the fatal
Events of some Distempers were occasioned by endeavoring to force the Patients
into Sweats; and the same unhappy Consequences have attended Cholics, from
accustoming the Subjects of this Disease to Drams, and hot inflaming spirituous
Liquors, with an Intention to expel the Wind.

Of the inflammatory Cholic.
297. The most violent and dangerous Kind of Cholic is that, which arises from
an Inflammation of the Stomach, or of the Intestines. It begins most commonly
without any Shivering, by a vehement Pain in the Belly, which gradually becomes
still more so. The Pulse grows quick and hard; a burning Pain is felt through
the whole Region of the Belly; sometimes there is a watery Diarrhoea, or
Purging; at other Times the Belly is rather costive, which is attended with
Vomiting, a very embarrassing and dangerous Symptom: the Countenance becomes
highly flushed; the Belly tense and hard; neither can it be touched scarcely
without a cruel Augmentation of the Patient's Pain, who is also afflicted with
extreme Restlessness; his Thirst is very great, being unquenchable by Drink;
the Pain often extends to the Loins, where it proves very sharp, and severe;
little Urine is made, and that very red, and with a Kind of burning Heat. The
tormented Patient has not a Moment's Rest, and now and then raves a little. If
the Disease is not removed or moderated, before the Pains rise to their utmost
Height and Violence, the Patient begins at length to complain less; the Pulse
becomes less strong and less hard than before, but quicker; his Face first
abates of its Flush and Redness, and soon after looks pale; the Parts under the
Eyes become livid; the Patient sinks into a low stupid Kind of Delirium, or
Raving; his Strength entirely deserts him; the Face, Hands, Feet, and the whole
Body, the Belly only excepted, become cold: the Surface of the Belly appears
bluish; extreme Weakness follows, and the Patient dies. There frequently
occurs, just a Moment before he expires, an abundant Discharge of excessively
foetid Matter by Stool; and during this Evacuation he dies, with his Intestines
quite gangrened, or mortified.

When the Distemper assaults the Stomach, the Symptoms are the very same, but
the Pain is felt higher up, at the Pit of the Stomach. Almost every Thing that
is swallowed is cast up again; the Anguish of the tortured Patient is terrible,
and the Raving comes on very speedily. This Disease, proves mortal in a few
Hours.

298. The only Method of succeeding in the Cure of it is as follows:

1, Take a very large Quantity of Blood from the Arm; this almost immediately
diminishes the Violence of the Pains, and allays the Vomiting; besides its
contributing to the greater Success of the other Remedies. It is often
necessary to repeat this Bleeding within the Space of two Hours.

2, Whether the Patient has a Looseness, or has not, a Glyster of a Decoction
of Mallows, or of Barley Water and Oil, should be given every two Hours.

3, The Patient should drink very plentifully of Almond Milk No. 4; or a Ptisan
of Mallow Flowers, or of Barley, all which should be warm.

4, Flanels dipped in hot, or very warm Water, should be continually applied over
the Belly, shifting them every Hour, or rather oftener; for in this Case they
very quickly grow dry.

5, If the Disease, notwithstanding all this, continues very obstinate and
violent, the Patient should be put into a warm Water Bath, the extraordinary
Success of which I have observed.

When the Distemper is over, that is to say, when the Pains have terminated,
and the Fever has ceased, so that the Patient recovers a little Strength, and
gets a little Sleep, it will be proper to give him a Purge, but a very gentle
one. Two Ounces of Manna, and a Quarter of an Ounce of Sedlitz Glauber or Epsom
Salt may be substituted, where the other is not readily to be procured. K.
Salt dissolved in a Glass of clear Whey are generally sufficient, at this
Period, to purge the most robust and hardy Bodies. Manna alone may suffice for
more delicate Constitutions: as all acri^ sharp Purges would be highly
dangerous, with Regard to the great Sensibility and tender Condition of the
Stomach and of the Intestines, after this Disease.

299. It is sometimes the Effect of a general Inflammation of the Blood; and is
produced, like other inflammatory Diseases, by extraordinary Labor, very great
Heat, heating Meats or Drinks, etc. It is often the Consequence of other
Cholics which have been injudiciously treated, and which otherwise would not
have degenerated into inflammatory ones; as I have many times seen these
Cholics introduced after the use of heating Medicines; one Instance of which
may be seen 164.

300. Ten Days after I had recovered a Woman out of a severe Cholic, the Pains
returned violently in the Night. She, supposing them to arise only from Wind,
hoped to appease them by drinking a deal of distilled Walnut water; which, far
from producing any such Effect, rendered them more outrageous. They were soon
heightened to a surprising Degree, which might reasonably be expected. Being
sent for very early in the Morning. I found her Pulse hard, quick, short; her
Belly was tense and hard; she complained greatly of her Loins; her Urine was
almost entirely stopped. She past but a few Drops, which felt as it were scalding
hot, and these with excessive Pain. She went very frequently to the
Close-stool, with scarcely any Effect; her Anguish, Heat, Thirst, and the
Dryness of her Tongue were even terrifying; and her wretched State, the Effect
of the strong hot Liquor she had taken, made me very apprehensive for her. One
Bleeding, to the Quantity of fourteen Ounces, somewhat abated all the Pains;
she took several Glysters, and drank off a few Pots of Orgeat in a few Hours.
By these Means the Disease was a little mitigated; by continuing the same Drink
and the Glysters the Looseness abated; the Pain of the Loins went off, and she
passed a considerable Quantity of Urine, which proved turbid, and then letting
fall a Sediment, the Patient recovered, Nevertheless I verily believe, if the
Bleeding had been delayed two Hours longer, this spirituous Walnut Water would
have been the Death of her. During the Progress of this violent Disease, no
Food is to be allowed; and we should never be too inattentive to such Degrees
of Pain, as sometimes remain after their Severity is over; lest a Schirrus, an
inward hard Tumor, should be generated, which may occasion the most inveterate
and tedious Maladies.

301. An Inflammation of the Intestines, and one of the Stomach, may also
terminate in an Abscess, like an Inflammation of any other Part; and it may be
apprehended that one is forming, when, though the Violence of the Pain abates,
there still remains a slow, obtuse, heavy Pain, with general Inquietude, little
Appetite, frequent Shiverings; the Patient at the same time not recovering any
Strength. In such Cases the Patient should be allowed no other Drinks, but what
are already directed in this Chapter, and some Soops made of Pulls, or other
farinaceous Food.

The Breaking of the Abscess may sometimes be discovered by a slight Swoon or
fainting Fit; attended with a perceivable Cessation of a Weight or Heaviness in
the Part, where it was lately felt: and when the Pus, or ripe Matter, is
effused into the Gut, the Patient sometimes has Reachings to vomit, a Vertigo,
or Swimming in the Head, and the Matter appears in the next Stools. In this
Case there remains an Ulcer within the Gut, which, if either neglected, or
improperly treated, may pave the Way to a slow wasting Fever, and even to
Death. Yet this I have cured by making the Patient live solely upon skimmed
Milk, diluted with one third Part Water, and by giving every other Day a
Glyster, consisting of equal Parts of Milk and Water, with the Addition of a
little Honey.

When the Abscess breaks on the Outside of the Gut, and discharges its Contents
into the Cavity of the Belly, it becomes a very miserable Case, and demands
such further Assistance as cannot be particularized here.

Of the bilious Cholic.
302. The bilious Cholic discovers itself by very acute Pains, but is seldom
accompanied with a Fever; at least not until it has lasted a Day or two. And
even if there should be some Degree of a Fever, yet the Pulse, though quick, is
neither strong nor hard: the Belly is neither tense or stretched as it were,
nor burning hot, as in the former Cholic; the Urine comes away with more Ease,
and is less high-colored. Nevertheless the inward Heat and Thirst are
considerable; the Mouth is bitter; the Vomiting or Purging, when either of them
attend it, discharges a yellowish Humor or Excrement; and the Patient's Head
is often vertiginous or dizzy.

303. The Method of curing this is,

1, By injecting Glysters of Whey and Honey; or, if Whey is not readily
procurable, by repeating the Glyster No. 5.

2, By making the Sick drink considerably of the same Whey, or of a Ptisan made
of the Root of Dog's-Grass (the common Grass) and a little Juice of Lemon; for
want of which a little Vinegar and Honey may be substituted instead of it.
Pullet, or rather chicken Water, but very weak, may often do instead of Ptisan,
or serve for a little Variety of Drink to some Patients. E. L. -- K.


3, By giving every Hour one Cup of the Medicine No. 32; or, where this is not
to be had, half a Dram of Cream of Tartar at the same short Intervals.

4, Fomentations of warm Water and Half-baths are also very proper.

5, If the Pains are sharp and violent, in a robust strong Person, and the
Pulse is strong and tense, Bleeding should be used to prevent an Inflammation.

6, No other Nourishment should be given, except some maigre Soops, made from
Vegetables, and particularly from Sorrel.

7, After plentiful Dilution with the proper Drink, if no Fever supervenes; if
the Pains still continue, and the Patient discharges but little by Stool, he
should take a moderate Purge. That directed No. 47 is a very proper one.

304. This bilious Cholic is habitual to many Persons; and may be prevented or
greatly mitigated by an habitual Use of the Powder No. 24; by submitting to a
moderate Retrenchment in the Article of Flesh-meat; and by avoiding heating and
greasy Food, and the Use of Milk.

Of Cholics from Indigestions, and of Indigestion.
305. Under this Appellation I comprehend all those Cholics, which are either
owing to any overloading Quantity of Food taken at once; or to a Mass or
Accumulation of Aliments formed by Degrees in such Stomachs, as digest but very
imperfectly; or which result from noxious Mixtures of Aliment in the Stomach,
such as that of Milk and Acids; or from Food either not wholesome in its self,
or degenerated into an unwholesome Condition.

This Kind of Cholic may be known from any of these Causes having preceded it;
by its Pains, which are accompanied with great Restlessness, and come on by
Degrees, being less fixed than in the Cholics before treated of. These Cholics
are also without any Fever, Heat, or Thirst, but accompanied with a Giddiness
of the Head, and Efforts to vomit, and rather with a pale, than a high-colored
Visage.

306. These Disorders, from these last Causes, are scarcely ever dangerous in
themselves; but may be made such by injudicious Management, and doing more than
is necessary or proper: as the only thing to be done is, to promote the
Discharges by warm Drinks. There are a considerable Variety of them, which seem
equally good, such as warm Water, or even cold Water with a Toast, with the
Addition either of a little Sugar, or a little Salt: a light Infusion of
Camomile, or of Elder-flowers, common Tea, or Baum, it imports little which,
provided the Patient drink plentifully of them: in Consequence of which the
offending Matter is discharged, either by vomiting, or a considerable purging;
and the speedier and more in Quantity these Discharges are, the sooner the
Patient is relieved.

If the Belly is remarkably full and costive, Glysters of warm Water and Salt
should be injected.

The Expulsion of the obstructing Matter is also facilitated, by rubbing the
Belly heartily with hot Cloths.

Sometimes the Humors, or other retained Contents of the Belly, are more
pernicious from their Quality, than their Quantity; and then the Malady may be
dissipated without the former Discharges, by the irritating sharp Humor being
diluted, or even drowned, as it were, in the Abundance of small watery Drinks.
When the Pains invade first in the Stomach, they become less sharp, and the
Patient feels less Inquietude, as soon as the Cause of the Pain has descended
out of the Stomach into the Intestines, whose Sensations are something less
acute than, or somewhat different from, those of the Stomach.

It is often found that after these plentiful Discharges, and when the Pains
are over, there remains a very disagreeable Taste in the Mouth, resembling the
Savor of rotten Eggs. This may be removed by giving some Doses of the Powder
No. 24, and drinking largely of good Water:

It is an essential Point in these Cases to take no Food, before a perfect
Recovery.

307. Some have been absurd enough in them, to fly at once to some heating
Cordial Confection, to Venice Treacle, Aniseed Water, Geneva, or red Wine to
stop these Evacuations; but there cannot be a more fatal Practice: since these
Evacuations are the only thing which can cure the Complaint, and to stop them
is to deprive the Person, who was in Danger of drowning, of the Plank which
might save him. Nay, should this Endeavor of stopping them unhappily succeed,
the Patient is either throws into a putrid Fever, or some chronical tedious
Malady; unless Nature, much wiser than such a miserable Assistant, should
prevail over the Obstacles opposed to her Recovery, and restore the obstructed
Evacuations by her own Economy, in the Space of a few Days.

308. Sometimes an Indigestion happens with very little Pain or Cholic, but
with violent Reachings to vomit, inexpressible Anguish, Faintings, and cold
Sweats: and not seldom also the Malady begins, only with a very sudden and
unexpected Fainting: the Patient immediately loses all his Senses, his Face is
pale and wan: he has some Hiccups rather than Reachings to vomit, which joined
to the Smallness of his Pulse, to the Easiness of his respiring or breathing,
and to the Circumstance of his being attacked immediately, or very soon, after
a Meal, makes this Disorder distinguishable from a real Apoplexy. Nevertheless,
when it rises to this Height, with these terrible Symptoms, it sometimes kills
in a few Hours. The first thing to be done is to throw up a sharp Glyster, in
which Salt and Soap are to be dissolved; next to get down as much Salt and
Water as he can swallow; and if that is ineffectual, the Powder No. 34 is to be
dissolved in three Cups of Water; one half of which is to be given directly;
and, if it does not operate in a Quarter of an Hour, the other half. Generally
speaking the Patient's Sense begins to return, as soon as he begins to vomit.

Of the flatulent or windy Cholic.
309. Every Particular which constitutes our Food, whether solid or liquid,
contains much Air, but some of them more than others. If they do not digest
soon enough, or but badly, which occasions a sensible Escape of such Air; if
they are such as contain an extraordinary Quantity of Air; or if the Guts being
straitened or compressed any where in the Course of their Extent, prevent that
Air from being equally diffused (which must occasion a greater Proportion of it
in some Places) then the Stomach and the Guts are distended by this Wind; and
this Distention occasions these Pains, which are called flatulent, or windy.

This Sort of Cholic rarely appears alone and simple; but is often complicated
with, or added, as it were, to the other Sorts, of which it is a Consequence;
and is more especially joined with the Cholic from Indigestions, whose Symptoms
it multiplies and heightens. It may be known, like that, by the Causes which
have preceded it, by its not being accompanied either with Fever, Heat, or
Thirst; the Belly's being large and full, though without Hardness, being
unequal in its Largeness, which prevails more in one Part of it, than in
another, forming something like Pockets of Wind, sometimes in one Part,
sometimes in another; and by the Patient's feeling some Ease, merely from the
rubbing of his Belly, as it moves the Wind about; which escaping either upwards
or downwards affords him still a greater Relief.

310. When it is combined with any different Species of the Cholic, it requires
no distinct Treatment from that Species; and it is removed or dissipated by the
Medicines which cure the principal Disease.

Sometimes however it does happen to exist alone, and then it depends on the
Windiness of the solid and liquid Food of the Person affected with it, such as
the Must or new Wine, Beer, especially very new Beer, certain Fruits and
Garden-stuff. It may be cured by a Glyster; by chaffing the Body with hot
Cloths; by the Use of Drink moderately spiced; and especially by Camomile Tea,
to which a little cordial Confection, or even Venice Treacle, may be added.
When the Pains are almost entirely vanished, and there is no Fever, nor any
unhealthful Degree of Heat; and if the Patient is sensible of a Weakness at
Stomach, he may take a little aromatic, or spiced Wine, or even a small cordial
stomachic Dram. It should be observed, that these are not to be allowed in any
other Kind of Cholic.

311. When any Person is frequently subject to cholic-like Pains, it is a Proof
that the digestive Faculty is impaired, the restoring of which should be
carefully attended to; since, without this, the Health of the Patient must
suffer considerably, and he must be very likely to contract many tedious and
troublesome Disorders.

Of Cholics from Cold.
312. When any Person has been very cold, and especially in his Feet, it is not
uncommon for him to be attacked, within a few Hours after it, with violent
Cholic Pains, in which heating and spirituous Medicines are very pernicious:
but which are easily cured by rubbing the Legs well with hot Cloths, and
keeping them afterward for a considerable time in warm Water; advising the
Patient at the same time to drink freely of a light Infusion of Camomile or
Elder-flowers.

The Cure will be effected the sooner, if the Patient is put to Bed and sweats
a little, especially in the Legs and Feet.

A Woman who had put her Legs into a pretty cool Spring, after traveling in
the Height of Summer, was very quickly after attacked with a most violent
Cholic. She took different hot Medicines; she became still worse; she was
purged, but the Distemper was still further aggravated. I was called in on the
third Day, a few Hours before her Decease

In such Cases, if the Pain be excessive, it may be necessary to bleed;
Bleeding should not be determined on too hastily in this Sort of Cholic, but
rather be omitted, or deferred at least, till there be an evident Tendency to
an Inflammation. E. L.

The Propriety or Impropriety of Bleeding in a Cholic, from this Cause, should
be determined, I think, from the State of the Person it happens to: So that
bleeding a strong Person with a firm Fiber, and a hard Pulse, may be very
prudent and precautionary: But if it be a weakly lax Subject with a soft and
low Pulse, there may be Room either for omitting, or for suspending, it. K.


to give a Glyster of warm Water; to keep the Legs several Hours over the Steam
of hot Water, and afterward in the Water; to drink plentifully of an Infusion
of the Flowers of the Lime-tree, with a little Milk; and if the Distemper is
not subdued by these Means, Blisters should be applied to the Legs, which I
have known to be highly efficacious.

313. It appears throughout the Course of this Chapter, that it is necessary to
be extremely on our Guard, against permitting the Use of heating and spirituous
Medicines in Cholics, as they may not only aggravate, but even render them
mortal. In short they should never be given, and when it is difficult to
discover the real Cause of the Cholic, I advise Country People to confine
themselves to the three following Remedies, which cannot be hurtful in any Sort
of Cholic, and may remove as many as are not of a violent Nature. First then,
let Glysters be frequently repeated. 2, Let the Patient drink warm Water
plentifully, or Elder-flower Tea. 3, Let the Belly be often fomented in pretty
warm Water, which is the most preferable Fomentation of any.

314. I have said Nothing here of the Use of any Oils in this Disease, as they
agree but in very few Species of Cholics, and not at all in those of which I
lave been treating. For this Reason I advise a total Disuse of them, since they
may be of bad Consequence in many Respects.

315. Chronical Diseases not coming within the Plan of this Work, I purposely
forbear treating of any Kind of those tedious Cholics, which afflict some
People for many Years: but I think it my Duty to admonish such, that their
Torments being very generally occasioned by Obstructions in the Viscera, or
different Bowels of the Belly, or by some other Fault, and more particularly in
those Organs, which are intended to prepare the Bile, they should, 1, avoid
with the greatest Care, the Use of sharp, hot, violent Medicines, Vomits,
strong Purges, Elixirs, etc. 2, They should be thoroughly on their Guard
against all those, who promise them a very speedy Cure, by the Assistance of
some specific Remedy; and ought to look upon them as Mountebanks, into whose
Hands it is highly dangerous to trust themselves. 3, They should be persuaded,
or rather convinced, that they can entertain no reasonable Hope of being cured,
without an exact Conformity to a proper and judicious Regimen; and a long
Perseverance in a Course of mild and safe Remedies. 4, They should continually
reflect with themselves, that there is little Difficulty in doing them great
Mischief; and that their Complaints are of that Sort, which require the
greatest Knowledge and Prudence in those Persons, to whom the Treatment and
Cure of them are confided.

CHAPTER XXII. Of the Iliac Passion, and of the Cholera-morbus.
SECT. 316. THESE violent Diseases are fatal to many Country People, while
their Neighbors are frequently so ignorant of the Cause of their Death, that
Superstition has ascribed it to Poison, or to Witchcraft.

317. The first of these, the Miserere, or Iliac Passion, is one of the most
excruciating Distempers. If any Part of the Intestines, the Cavity of the Guts
is closed up, whatever may have occasioned it, the Course or Descent of the
Food they contain is necessarily stopped; in which Case it frequently happens,
that the continual Motion observed in the Guts of a living Animal dissected,
and which was intended to detrude, or force their Contents downwards, is
propagated in a directly contrary Manner, from the Guts toward the Mouth.

This Disease sometimes begins after a Constipation, or Costiveness, of some
Days; at other times without that Costiveness, having been preceded by Pains in
any Part of the Belly, especially around the Navel; but which Pains, gradually
increasing after their Commencement, at length become extremely violent, and
throw the Patient into excessive Anguish. In some of these Cases a hard Tumor
may be felt, which surrounds the Belly like a Cord. The Flatulences within
become very audible, some of them are discharged upwards; in a little time
after, Vomitings come on, which increase till the Patient has thrown up all he
had taken in, with a still further Augmentation of the excessive Pain. With the
first of his Vomitings he only brings up the last Food he had taken, with his
Drink and some yellowish Humor: but what comes up afterward proves stinking;
and when the Disease is greatly heightened, they have what is called the Smell
of Excrement or Dung; but which rather resembles that of a putrid dead Body. It
happens too sometimes, that if the Sick have taken Glysters composed of
Materials of a strong Smell; the same Smell is perceivable in the Matter they
vomit up. I confess, however, I never saw either real Excrements, or the
Substance of their Glysters, brought up, much less the Suppositories that were
introduced into the Fundament: and were it credible that Instances of this Kind
had occurred, they must be allowed very difficult to account for. Throughout
this whole Term of the Disease, the Pa^^ent has not a single Discharge by
Stool; the Belly is greatly ^istended; the Urine not seldom suppressed, and at
other times ^hick and foetid. The Pulse, which at first was pretty hard,
becomes quick and small; the Strength entirely vanishes; a Raving ^omes on; a
Hiccup almost constantly supervenes, and sometimes general Convulsions; the
Extremities grow cold, the Pulse is ^carcely perceivable; the Pain and the
Vomiting cease, and the Patient dies very quickly after.

318 As this Disease is highly dangerous, the Moment it is strongly
apprehended, it is necessary to oppose it by proper Means and Remedies: the
smallest Error may be of fatal Consequence, and hot inflaming Liquids have been
known to kill the Patient in a few Hours. I was called in the second Day of the
Disease to a young Person, who had taken a good deal of Venice Treacle: nothing
could afford her any Relief, and she died early on the third Day.

This Disease should be treated precisely in the same Manner as an inflammatory
Cholic; the principal Difference being, that in the former there are no Stools,
but continual Vomitings.

1, First of all then the Patient should be plentifully bled, if the Physician
has been called in early enough, and before the Sick has lost his Strength.

2, He should receive opening Glysters made of a Decoction of Barley Water,
with five or six Ounces of Oil in each.

3, We should endeavor to allay the violent Efforts to vomit, by giving every
two Hours a Spoonful of the Mixture No. 48.

4, The Sick should drink plentifully, in very small Quantities, very often
repeated, of an appeasing, diluting, refreshing Drink, which tends at the same
time to promote both Stools and Urine. Nothing is preferable to the Whey No.
49, if it can be had immediately: if not, give simple clear Whey sweetened with
Honey, and the Drinks prescribed 298, Art. 3.

5, The Patient is to be put into a warm Bath, and kept there as long as he can
bear it; repeating it as often daily too, as his Strength will permit.

6, After Bleeding, warm Bathing, repeated Glysters and Fomentations, if each
and all of these have availed nothing; the Fume or Smoke of Tobacco may be
introduced in the Manner of a Glyster, of which I shall speak further, in the
Chapter on Persons drowned.

I cured a Person of this Disease, by conveying him into a Bath, immediately
after bleeding him, and giving him a Purge on his going into the Bath.

319. If the Pain abates before the Patient has quite lost his Strength; if the
Pulse improves at the same time; if the Vomitings are less in Number, and in
the Quantity of the Matter brought up; if that Matter seems in a less putrid
offensive State; if he feels some Commotion and Rumbling in his Bowels; if he
has some little Discharge by Stool; and if at the same time he feels himself a
little stronger than before, his Cure may reasonably be expected; but if he is
otherwise circumstanced he will soon depart. It frequently happens, a single
Hour before Death, that the Pain seems to vanish, and a surprising Quantity of
extremely foetid Matter is discharged by Stool: the Patient is suddenly seized
with a great Weakness and Sinking, falls into a cold Sweat, and immediately
expires.

320. This is the Disease which the common People attribute to, and term, the
Twisting of the Guts; and in which they make the Patient swallow Bullets, or
large Quantities of Quicksilver. This twisting, tangling, or knotting of the
Guts is an utter, an impossible Chimera; for how can they admit of such a
Circumstance, as one of their Extremities, their Ends, is connected to the
Stomach, and the other irremovably fastened to the Skin of the Fork or Cleft of
the Buttocks? In fact this Disease results from a Variety of Causes, which have
been discovered on a Dissection of those who have died of it. It were to be
wished indeed this prudent Custom, so extremely conducive to enrich, and to
perfect, the Art of Physic, were to prevail more generally; and which we ought
rather to consider as a Duty to comply with, than a Difficulty to submit to; as
it is our Duty to contribute to the Perfection of a Science, on which the
Happiness of Mankind so considerably depends. I shall not enter into a Detail
of these Causes; but whatever they are, the Practice of swallowing Bullets in
the Disease is always pernicious, and the like Use of Mercury must be often so
Notwithstanding this, a Practitioner of great Probity and Experience assures
me, he has seen a Cure affected in this Case, by giving two Ounces of
Quicksilver, every third Hour, when every other Remedy had been ineffectual. K.
. Each of these pretended Remedies may aggravate the Disease, and contribute an
insurmountable Obstacle to the Cure. -- Of that Iliac Passion which is
sometimes a Consequence of Ruptures, I shall treat in another Place.

Of the Cholera-morbus.
321. This Disease is a sudden, abundant, and painful Evacuation, by vomiting
and by Stool.

It begins with much Flatulence, or Wind, with swelling and slight Pains in the
Belly, accompanied with great Dejection; and followed with large Evacuations
either by Stool or by Vomit at first, but whenever either of them has begun,
the other quickly follows. The Matter evacuated is either yellowish, green,
brown, whitish, or black; the Pains in the Belly are violent; the Pulse,
(almost constantly feverish,) is sometimes strong at first, but soon sinks into
Weakness, in Consequence of the prodigious Discharge. Some Patients purge a
hundred times in the Compass of a few Hours; they may even be seen to fall
away; and if the Disease exists in a violent Degree, they are scarcely to be
known within three or four Hours from the Commencement of these Discharges.
After a great Number of them they are afflicted with Spasms or Cramps, in their
Legs, Thighs, and Arms, which torment them as much as the Pains in the Belly.
When the Disease rages too highly to be assuaged, Hiccups, Convulsions, and a
Coldness of the Extremities approach; there is a scarcely intermitting
Succession of fainting, or swooning Fits, the Patient dying either in one of
them, or in Convulsions.

322. This Disease, which constantly depends on Bile raised to the highest
Acrimony, commonly prevails toward the End of July and in August: especially
if the Heats have been very violent, and there have been little or no Summer
Fruits, which greatly conduce to attemper and allay the putrescent Acrimony of
the Bile.

323. Nevertheless, however violent this Distemper may be, it is less
dangerous, and also less tormenting than the former, many Persons recovering
from it.

1, Our first Endeavor should be to dilute, or even to drown this acrid Bile,
by Draughts, by Deluges, of the most mitigating Drinks; the Irritation being so
very great, that every thing having the least Sharpness is injurious. Wherefore
the Patient should continually take in, by Drink, and by Way of Glyster, either
Barley Water, Almond-Milk, or pure Water; with one eighth Part Milk, which has
succeeded very well in my Practice. Or he may use a very light Decoction, or
Ptisan, as it were, of Bread, which is made by gently boiling a Pound of
toasted Bread in three or four Pots of Water for half an Hour. In Swisserland
we prefer Oat-bread. We also successfully use pounded Rye, making a light
Ptisan of it.

A very light thin Soup made of a Pullet, a Chicken, or of one Pound of lean
Veal, in three Pots of Water, is very proper too in this Disease. Whey is also
employed to good Purpose; and in those Places where it can easily be had,
Butter-milk is the best Drink of any. But, whichever of these Drinks shall be
thought preferable, it is a necessary Point to drink very plentifully of it;
and the Glysters should be given every two Hours.

2, If the Patient is of a robust Constitution, and sanguine Complexion, with a
strong Pulse at the Time of the Attack, and the Pains are very severe, a first,
and in some Cases a second Bleeding, very early on the Invasion, asswages the
Violence of the Malady, and allows more Leisure for the Assistance of other
Remedies. I have seen the Vomiting cease almost entirely, after the first
Bleeding.

The Rage of this Disease abates a little after a Duration of five or six
Hours: We must not however, during this Remission, or Abatement, forbear to
throw in proper Remedies; since it returns soon after with great Force, which
Return however indicates no Alteration of the Method already entered upon.

3, In general, the warm Bath refreshes the Patient while he continues in it:
but the Pains frequently return soon after he is taken out; which, however, is
no Reason for omitting it, since it has frequently been found to give a more
durable Relief. The Patient should continue in it a considerable Time, and,
during that Time, he should take six or seven Glasses of the Potion No. 32,
which has been very efficacious in this Disease. By these Means the Vomiting
has been stopped; and the Patient, upon going out of the Bath, has had several
large Stools, which very considerably diminished the Violence of the Disease.

4, If the Patient's Attendants are terrified by these great Evacuations, and
determine to check them (however prematurely) by Venice Treacle, Mint Water,
Syrup of white Poppies, called Diacodium, by Opium or Mithridate, it either
happens, that the Disease and all its Symptoms are heightened, to which I have
been a Witness; or, if the Evacuations should actually be stopped, the Patient,
in Consequence of it, is thrown into a more dangerous Condition. I have been
obliged to give a Purge, in order to renew the Discharges, to a Man, who had
been thrown into a violent Fever, attended with a raging Delirium, by a
Medicine composed of Venice Treacle, Mithridate and Oil. Such Medicines ought
not to be employed, until the Smallness of the Pulse, great Weakness, violent
and almost continual Cramps, and even the Insufficience of the Patient's
Efforts to vomit, make us apprehensive of his sinking irrecoverably. In such
Circumstances indeed he should take every Quarter or half Quarter of an Hour, a
Spoonful of the Mixture No. 50, still continuing the diluting Drinks. After the
first Hour, they should only be given every Hour, and that only to the Extent
of eight Doses. But I desire to insist upon it here, that this Medicine should
not be given too early in this Distemper.

324. If the Patient is likely to recover, the Pains and the Evacuations
gradually abate; the Thirst is less; the Pulse continues very quick, but it
becomes regular. There have been Instances of their Propensity to a heavy Kind
of Drowsiness at this time; for perfect refreshing Sleep advances but slowly
after this Disease. It will still be proper to persevere in the Medicines
already directed, though somewhat less frequently. And now we may begin to
allow the Patient a few Soups from farinaceous mealy Substances; and as soon as
the Evacuations accompanying this Disease are evidently ceased, and the Pains
are vanished, though an acute Sensibility and great Weakness continue, beside
such Soups, he may be allowed some new-laid Eggs, very lightly boiled, or even
raw, for some Days. After this he must be referred to the Regimen so frequently
recommended to Persons in a State of Recovery: when the concurring Use of the
Powder No. 24, taken twice a Day, will greatly assist to hasten and establish
his Health.

CHAPTER XXIII. Of a Diarrhoea, or Looseness.
SECT. 325. EVERY one knows what is meant by a Looseness or Purging, which the
Populace frequently call a Flux, and sometimes a Cholic.

There are certain very chronical, or tedious and obstinate ones, which arise
from some essential Fault in the Constitution. Of such, as foreign to my Plan,
I shall say nothing.

Those which come on suddenly, without any preceding Disorder, except sometimes
a slight Qualm or short Loathing, and a Pain in the Loins and Knees; which are
not attended with smart Pains nor a Fever (and frequently without any Pain, or
any other Complaint) are oftener of Service than prejudicial. They carry off a
Heap of Matter that may have been long amassed and corrupted in the Body;
which, if not discharged, might have produced some Distemper; and, far from
weakening the Body, such Purgings as these render it more strong, light and
active.

326. Such therefore ought by no Means to be stopped, nor even speedily
checked: they generally cease of themselves, as soon as all the noxious Matter
is discharged; and as they require no Medicine, it is only necessary to
retrench considerably from the ordinary Quantity of Nourishment; to abstain
from Flesh, Eggs and Wine or other strong Drink; to live only on some Soaps, on
Pulls, or on a little Fruit, whether raw or baked, and to drink rather less than
usual. A simple Ptisan with a little Syrup of Capillaire, or Maiden hair, is
sufficient in these Purgings, which require no Venice Treacle, Confection, nor
any Drug whatever.

327. But should it continue more than five or six Days, and manifestly weaken
the Patient: if the Pain attending it grows a little severe; and especially if
the Irritation, the urging to Stool, proves more frequent, it becomes
seasonable to check or to stop it. For this Purpose the Patient is to be put
into a Regimen; and if the Looseness has been accompanied with a great
Loathing, with Risings or Wamblings at Stomach, with a foul furred Tongue, and
a bad Taste in the Mouth, he must take the Powder No. 35. But if these Symptoms
do not appear, give him that of No. 51: and during the three following Hours,
let him take, every half Hour, a Cup of weak light Broth, without any Fat on it.

If the Purging, after being restrained by this Medicine, should return within
a few Days, it would strongly infer, there was still some tough viscid Matter
within, that required Evacuation. To effect this he should take the Medicines
No. 21, 25 or 27; and afterward take fasting, for two successive Mornings,
half the Powder No. 51.

On the Evening of that Day when the Patient took No. 35, or No. 51, or any
other Purge, he may take a small Dose of Venice Treacle.

328. A Purging is often neglected for a long time, without observing the least
Regimen, from which Neglect they degenerate into tedious, and as it were,
habitual, perpetual ones, and entirely weaken the Patient. In such Cases the
Medicine No. 35 should be given first; then, every other Day for four times
successively, he should take No. 51: during all which time he should li^e on
nothing but Panada (See 57) or on Rice boiled in weak Chicken-broth, A
strengthening stomachic Plaster has sometimes been successfully applied, which
may be often moistened in a Decoction of Herbs boiled in Wine. Cold and
Moisture should be carefully avoided in these Cases, which frequently occasion
immediate Relapses, even after the Looseness had ceased for many Days.

CHAPTER XXIV. Of the Dysentery, or Bloody Flux.
SECT. 329. THE Dysentery is a Flux or Looseness of the Belly, attended with
great Restlessness and Anguish, with severe Gripings, and frequent Propensities
to go to Stool. There is generally a little Blood in the Stools, though this is
not a constant Symptom, and is not essential to the Existence of a Dysentery;
notwithstanding it may not be much less dangerous, for the Absence of this
Symptom.

330. The Dysentery is often epidemical; beginning sometimes at the End of
July, though oftener in August, and going off when the Frosts set in. The great
preceding Heats render the Blood and the Bile acrid and sharp; and though
during the Continuance of the Heat, Perspiration is kept up (See Introduct. P.
14) yet as soon as the Heat abates, especially in the Mornings and Evenings,
that Discharge is diminished; and by how much the more Viscidity or Thickness
the Humors have acquired, in Consequence of the violent Heats, (the Discharge
of the sharp Humor by Perspiration being now checked,) it is thrown upon the
Bowels, which it irritates, producing Pains in, and Evacuations from them.

This Kind of Dysentery may happen at all times, and in all Countries; but if
other Causes, capable of producing a Putridity of the Humors, be complicated
with it; such as the crouding up a great Number of People into very little
Room, and very close Quarters, as in Hospitals, Camps, or Prisons, this
introduces a malignant Principle into the Humors, which, cooperating with the
simple Cause of the Dysentery, renders it the more difficult and dangerous.

331. This Disease begins with a general Coldness rather than a Shivering,
which lasts some Hours; the Patient's Strength soon abates, and he feels sharp
Pains in his Belly, which sometimes continue for several Hours, before the Flux
begins. He is affected with Vertigos, or Swimmings in the Head, with Reachings
to vomit, and grows pale; his Pulse at the same time being very little, if at
all, feverish, but commonly small, and at length the Purging begins. The first
Stools are often thin, and yellowish; but in a little time they are mixed with a
viscid ropy Matter, which is often tinged with Blood. Their Color and
Consistence are various too, being either brown, greenish, or black, thinner or
thicker, and foetid. The Pains increase before each of the Discharges, which
grow very frequent, to the Number of eight, ten, twelve, or fifteen in an Hour:
then the Fundament becomes considerably irritated, and the Tenesmus (which is a
great Urgency to go to Stool, though without any Effect) is joined to the
Dysentery or Flux, and often brings on a Protrusion or falling down of the
Fundament, the Patient being now most severely afflicted. Worms are sometimes
voided, and glairy hairy Humors, resembling Pieces of Peelings of Guts, and
sometimes Clots of Blood.

If the Distemper rises to a violent Height, the Guts become inflamed, which
terminates either in Suppuration or in Mortification; the miserable Patient
discharges Pus, or black and foetid watery Stools: The Hiccup supervenes; he
grows delirious; his Pulse sinks; and he falls into cold Sweats and Faintings
which terminate in Death.

A kind of Phrenzy, or raging Delirium, sometimes comes on before the Minute of
Expiration. I have seen a very unusual Symptom accompany this Disease in two
Persons, which was an Impossibility of swallowing, for three Days before Death.

But in general this Distemper is not so extremely violent; the Discharges are
less frequent, being from twenty-five to forty within a Day and Night. Their
Contents are less various and uncommon, and mixed with very little Blood; the
Patient retains more Strength; the Number of Stools gradually decreases; the
Blood disappears; the Consistence of the Discharges improves; Sleep and
Appetite return, and the Sick recover.

Many of the Sick have not the least Degree or Fever, nor of Thirst, which
perhaps is less common in this Disease, than in a simple Purging or Looseness.

Their Urine sometimes is but in a small Quantity; and many Patients have
ineffectual Endeavors to pass it, to their no small Affliction and
Restlessness.

332. The most efficacious Remedy for this Disease is a Vomit. That of No. 34.
(when there is no present Circumstance that forbids the giving a Vomit) if
taken immediately on the first Invasion of it, often removes it at once; and
always shortens its Duration. That of No. 35 is not less effectual; it has been
considered for a long time, even as a certain Specific, which it is not, though
a very useful Medicine. If the Stools prove less frequent after the Operation
of either of them, it is a good Sign; if they are no ways diminished, we may
apprehend the Disease is like to be tedious and obstinate.

The Patient is to be ordered to a Regimen, abstaining from all Flesh-meat with
the strictest Attention, until the perfect Cure of the Disease. The Ptisan No.
3 is the best Drink for him.

The Day after the Vomit, he must take the Powder No. 51 divided into two
Doses: the next Day he should take no other Medicine but his Ptisan; on the
fourth the Rhubarb must be repeated, after which the Violence of the Disease
commonly abates. His Diet during the Disease is nevertheless to be continued
exactly for some Days; after which he may be allowed to enter upon that of
Persons in a State of Recovery.

333. The Dysentery sometimes commences with an inflammatory Fever; a feverish,
hard, full Pulse, with a violent Pain in the Head, and Loins, and a stiff
distended Belly. In such a Case the Patient must be bled once; and daily
receive three or even four of the Glysters No. 6, drinking plentifully of the
Drink No. 3.

When all Dread of an Inflammation is entirely over, the Patient is to be
treated in the Manner just related; though often there is no Necessity for the
Vomit: and if the inflammatory Symptoms have run high, his first Purge should
be that of No. 11, and the Use of the Rhubarb may be postponed, till about the
manifest Conclusion of the Disease.

I have cured many Dysenteries, by ordering the Sick no other Remedy, but a Cup
of warm Water every Quarter of an Hour; and it were better to rely only on this
simple Remedy, which must be of some Utility, than to employ those, of whose
Effects Country People are ignorant, and which are often productive of very
dangerous ones.

334. It sometimes happens that the Dysentery is combined with a putrid Fever,
which makes it necessary, after the Vomit, to give the Purges No. 23 or 47, and
several Doses of No. 24, before the Rhubarb is given. No. 32 is excellent in
this combined Case.

There was in Swisserland, in the Autumn of 1755, after a very numerous
Prevalence of epidemical putrid Fevers had ceased, a Multitude of Dysenteries,
which had no small Affinity with, or Relation to, such Fevers. I treated them
first, with the Prescription No. 34, giving afterward No. 32; and I directed
the Rhubarb only to very few, and that toward the Conclusion of the Disease.
By much the greater Number of them were cured at the End of four or five Days.
A small Proportion of them, to whom I could not give the Vomit, or whose Cases
were more complicated, remained languid a considerable time, though without
Fatality or Danger

335. When the Dysentery is blended with Symptoms of Malignity (See 245.) after
premising the Prescription No. 35, those of No. 38 and 39 may be called in
successfully.

336. When the Disease has already been of many Days standing, without the
Patient's having taken any Medicines, or only such as were injurious to him, he
must be treated as if the Distemper had but just commenced; unless some
Symptoms, foreign to the Nature of the Dysentery, have supervened upon it.

337. Relapses sometimes occur in Dysenteries, some few Days after the Patients
appeared well; much the greater Number of which are occasioned either by some
Error in Diet, by cold Air, or by being considerably overheated. They are to
be prevented by avoiding these Causes of them; and may be removed by putting
the Patient on his Regimen, and giving him one Dose of the Prescription No. 51.
Should it return even without any such discoverable Causes, and if it manifests
itself to be the same Distemper renewed, it must be treated as such.

338. This Disease is sometimes combined too with an intermitting Fever; in
which Case the Dysentery must be removed first, and the Intermittent
afterward. Nevertheless, if at each Access, the Fits of the Fever have been
very strong, Bark must be given as directed, 259.

339. One pernicious Prejudice, which still generally prevails is, that Fruits
are noxious in a Dysentery, that they even give it, and aggravate it; and this
perhaps is an extremely ill-grounded one. In truth bad Fruits, and such as have
not ripened well, in unseasonable Years, may really occasion Cholics, a
Looseness (though oftener a Costiveness) and Disorders of the Nerves, and of the
Skin; but never can occasion an epidemical Dysentery or Flux. Ripe Fruits, of
whatever Species, and especially Summer Fruits, are the real Preservatives from
this Disease. The greatest Mischief they can effect, must result from their
thinning and washing down the Humors, especially the mick glutinous Bile, if
they are in such a State; good ripe Fruits being the true Dissolvents of such;
in Consequence of which indeed they may bring on a Purging, but such a one, as
is rather a Guard against a Dysentery.

We had a great, an extraordinary Abundance of Fruit in 1759 and 1760, but
scarcely any Dysenteries. It has even been observed to be more rare, and less
dangerous than formerly; and if the Fact is certain, it cannot be attributed to
any thing more probably, than to the very numerous Plantations of Trees, which
have rendered Fruit very plenty, cheap and common. Whenever I have observed
Dysenteries to prevail. I made it a Rule to eat less Flesh, and Plenty of
Fruit; I have never had the slightest Attack of one; and several Physicians use
the same Caution with the same Success.

I have seen eleven Patients in a Dysentery in one House, of whom nine were
very tractable: they eat Fruit and recovered. The Grandmother and one Child,
whom she loved more than the rest, were carried off. She managed the Child
after her own F^shion, with burnt Wine, Oil, and some Spices, but no Fruit. She
conducted herself in the very same Manner, and both died.

In a Country Seat near Berne, in the Year 1751, when these Fluxes made great
Havoc, and People were severely warned against the Use of Fruits, out of
eleven Persons in the Family, ten eat plentifully of Plums, and not one of them
was seized with it; The poor Coachman alone rigidly observed that Abstinence
from Fruit injoined by this Prejudice, and took a terrible Dysentery.

This same Distemper had nearly destroyed a Swiss Regiment in Garrison in the
South of France; the Captains purchased the whole Crop of several Acres of
Vineyard; there they carried the sick Soldiers, and gathered the Grapes for
such as could not bear being carried into the Vineyard; those who were well
eating nothing else; after this not one more died, nor were any more even
attacked with the Dysentery.

A Clergyman was seized with a Dysentery, which was not in the least mitigated
by any Medicines he had taken. By mere Chance he saw some red Currants; he
longed for them, and eat three Pounds of them between seven and nine o'Clock in
the Morning; that very Day he became better, and was entirely well on the next.

I could greatly enlarge the Number of such Instances; but these may suffice to
convince the most incredulous, whom I thought it might be of some Importance to
convince. Far from forbidding good Fruit, when Disenteries rage, the Patients
should be encouraged to eat them freely; and the Directors of the Police,
instead of prohibiting them, ought to see the Markets well provided with them.
It is a Fact of which Persons, who have carefully informed themselves, do not
in the least doubt. Experience demonstrates it, and it is founded in Reason, as
good Fruit counter-operates all the Causes of Dysenteries The Experience of all
Countries and Times so strongly confirms these important Truths, that they
cannot be too often repeated, too generally published, whenever and wherever
this Disease rages. The Succession of cold Showers to violent Heats; too moist
a Constitution of the Air; an Excess of animal Food; Uncleanliness and
Contagion, are the frequent Causes of epidemical Fluxes. E. L.

I have retained the preceding Note, abridged from this Gentleman, as it
contains the Suffrage of another experienced Physician against that Prejudice
of ripe Fruits occasioning Fluxes, which is too popular among ourselves, and
probably more so in the Country than in London. I have been also very credibly
assured, that the Son of a learned Physician was perfectly cured of a very
o^^tinate Purging, of a Year's Continuance (in Spite of all the usual officinal
Remedies) by his devouring large Quantities of ripe Mulberries (for which he
ardently longed) and at length drinking very freely of their expressed Juice.
The Fact occurred after his Father's Decease, and was affirmed to me by a
Gentleman intimately acquainted with them both. K.


.

340. It is important and even necessary, that each Subject of this Disease
should have a Close-stool or Convenience apart to himself, as the Matter
discharged is extremely infectious: and if they make use of Bed-pans, they
should be carried immediately out of the Chamber, the Air of which should be
continually renewed, burning Vinegar frequently in it.

It is also very necessary to change the Patient's Linen frequently; without
all which Precautions the Distemper becomes more violent, and attacks others
who live in the same House. Hence it is greatly to be wished the People in
general were convinced of these Truths.

It was BOERHAAVE's Opinion, that all the Water which was drank, while
Dysenteries were epidemical, should be stummed, as we term it, or sulphurized
Our learned Author, or his medical Editor at Lions, observes here, `that in the
Edition of this Treatise at Paris, there was an essential Mistake, by making
Boerhaave recommend the Addition of Brandy, Eau de vie, instead of stumming or
sulphurizing it, for which this Note, and the Text too use the Verb branter,
which Word we do not find in any Dictionary. We are told, however, it means, to
impregnate the Casks in which the Water is reserved, with the Vapor of
Sulphur, and then stopping them; in the same Manner that Vessels are managed in
some Countries, for the keeping of Wine. He observes the Purpose of this is to
oppose Corruption by the acid Steams of the Sulphur. K.
.

341. It has happened, by some unaccountable Fatality, that there is no
Disease, for which a greater Number of Remedies are advised, than for the
Dysentery. There is scarcely any Person who boasts not of his own Prescription,
in Preference to all the rest, and who does not boldly engage to cure, and that
within a few Hours, a tedious severe Disease (of which he has formed no just
Notion) with some Medicine or Composition, of whose Operation he is totally
ignorant: while the poor Sufferer, restless and impatient, swallows every
Body's Recommendation, and gets poisoned either through Fear, downright Disgust
or Weariness, or through entire Complaisance. Of these many boasted
Compositions, some are only indifferent, but others pernicious. I shall not
pretend to detail all I know myself, but after repeatedly affirming, that the
only true Method of Cure is that I have advised here, the Purpose of which is
evacuating the offending Matter; I also affirm that all those Methods, which
have a different Scope or Drift, are pernicious; but shall particularly
observe, that the Method most generally followed, which is that of stopping the
Stools by Astringents, or by Opiates, is the worst of all, and even so mortal a
one, as to destroy a Multitude of People annually, and which throws others into
incurable Diseases. By preventing the Discharge of these Stools, and enclosing
the Wolf in the Fold, it either follows, 1, that this A first or second Dose of
Glauber Salt has been known to succeed in the epidemical Summer Fluxes of the
hotter Climates, when repeated Doses of Rhubarb and Opiates had failed. Such
Instances seem a collateral Confirmation of Dr. TISSOT's rational and
successful Use of cooling opening Fruits in them. The vitriolic Salt, just
recommended, probably restrains the Effervescence of the Blood; and imparts, by
its styptic Quality, more Tone and Firmness to the Bowels, than any warm
Evacuant could, during the intemperate Heats, which tend to produce
colliquative Fluxes. K.
retained Matter irritates and inflames the Bowels, from which Inflammation
excruciating Pains arise, an acute inflammatory Cholic, and finally a
Mortification and Death; or a Schirrhus, which degenerates into a Cancer, (of
which I have seen a dreadful Instance) or else an Abscess, Suppuration and
Ulcer. Or, 2, this arrested Humor is repelled elsewhere, producing a Schirrhus
in the Liver, or Asthmas, Apo^^^^^ ^^ilepsy, or Falling Sickness; horrible
rheumatic Pains, (...) Disorders of the Eyes, or of the Teguments, the (...)
and Surface.

Such are the Consequences of all the astringent Medicines, and of those which
are given to procure Sleep in this Disease: as Venice Treacle, Mithridate and
Diascordium, when given too early in Dysenteries.

I have been consulted on Account of a terrible Rheumatism, which ensued
immediately after taking a Mixture of Venice Treacle and Plantain, on the
second Day of a Dysentery.

As those who advise such Medicines, are certainly unaware of their
Consequences, I hope this Account of them will be sufficient to prevent their
Repetition.

342. Neither are Purges without their Abuse and Danger; they determine the
Course of all the Humors more violently to the tender afflicted Parts; the
Body becomes exhausted; the Digestions fail; the Bowels are weakened, and
sometimes even lightly ulcerated, whence incurable Diarrhoeas or Purgings
ensue, and prove fatal after many Years Affliction.

343. If the Evacuations prove excessive, and the Distemper tedious, the
Patient is likely to fall into a Dropsy; but if this is immediately opposed, it
may be removed by regular and drying Diet, by Strengtheners, by Friction and
proper Exercise.

CHAPTER XXV. Of the Itch.
SECT. 344. THE Itch is an infections Disorder, contracted by touching infected
Persons or Clothes, but not imbibed from the Air: So that by carefully avoiding
the Medium, or Means of Contagion, the Disorder may be certainly escaped.

Though any Part of the Body may be infested with the Itch, it commonly sh^ws
itself on the Hands, and chiefly between the Fingers. At first one or two
little Pimples or Pustules appear, filled with a Kind of clear Water, and
excite a very disagreeable Itching. If these Pustules are broke by scratching
them, the Water oozing from them infects the neighboring Parts. At the
Beginning of this Infection it can scarcely be distinguished, if a Person is
not well apprized of its Nature; but in the Progress of it, the little Pustules
increase both in Number and Size; and when they are opened by scratching, a
loathsome Kind of Scab is formed, and the Malady extends over the whole
Surface. Where they continue long, they produce small Ulcers, and are at that
time highly contagious.

345. Bad Diet, particularly the Use of salted Meat, bad unripe Fruit, and
Uncleanliness occasion this Disease: though it is oftnest taken by Contagion.
Some very good Physicians suppose it is never contracted otherwise; but I must
take Leave to dissent, as I have certainly seen it exist without Contagion.

When it happens to a Person, who cannot suspect he has received it by Contact,
his Cure should commence with a total Abstinence from all salt, sour, fat, and
spicy Food. He should drink a Ptisan of wild and bitter Succory, or that of No.
26, five or six Glasses of which may be daily taken; at the End of four or five
Days, he may be purged with No. 21, or with an Ounce of Sedlitz [or Glauber]
Salt. His Abstinence, his Regimen is to be continued; the Purge to be repeated
after six or seven Days; and then all the Parts affected, and those very near
them, are to be rubbed in the Morning fasting, with a fourth Part of the
Ointment No. 52. The three following Days the same Friction is to be repeated,
after which the same Quantity of Ointment is to be procured, and used in the
same Proportion; but only every other Day. It happens but seldom that this
Method fails to remove this disagreeable Malady; sometimes however it will
return, in which Case the Patient must be purged again, and then recur to the
Ointment, whose good Effects I have experienced, and continually do.

If the Disease has been very lately contracted, and most certainly by Contact,
the Ointment may be fearlessly employed, as soon as it is discovered, without
taking any Purge before it. But if, on the contrary, the Disease has been long
neglected, and has rose to a high Degree, it will be necessary to restrain the
Patient a long time to the Regimen I have directed; he must be repeatedly
purged, and then drink plentifully of the Ptisan No. 26, before the Ointment is
rubbed in. When the Malady is thus circumstanced, I have always begun with the
Ointment No. 28, half a Quarter of which is to be used every Morning. I have
also frequently omitted the Use of that No. 52, having always found the former
as certain, but a little flower in its Effects.

346. While these Medicines are employed, the Patient must avoid all Cold and
Wet, especially if he makes Use of No. 28, I have seen a pretty singular
Consequence from the Abuse of mercurial Unction for the Itch; whether it
happened from the Strength or Quantity of the Ointment, or from taking Cold
after applying it, as this Subject, a healthy Youth of about sixteen, probably
did, by riding three or four Miles through the Rain. But without any other
previous Complaint, he awoke quite blind one Morning, wondering, as he said,
when it would be Day. His Eyes were very clear, and free from Inflammation, but
the Pupil was wholly immovable, as in a Gutta Serena. I effected the Cure by
some moderate Purges repeated a few Times; by disposing him to sweat, from
lying pretty much in Bed (it being toward Winter) and by promoting his
Perspiration chiefly with Sulphur: After which the shaved Scalp was embrocated
with a warm nervous Mixture, in which Balsam of Peru: was a considerable
Ingredient. In something less than three Weeks he could discern a glowing Fire,
or the bright Flame of a Candle. As his Sight increased, he discerned other
Objects, which appeared for some Days inverted to him, with their Colors
confused; but Red was most distinguishable. He discovered the Aces sooner than
other Cards; and in about six or seven Weeks recovered his full Sight in all
its natural Strength, which he now enjoys. K.
in which there is Quicksilver; which, if such Precautions were neglected,
might bring on a Swelling of the Throat and Gums, and even rise to a
Salivation. Yet this Ointment has one Advantage in its having no Smell, and
being susceptible of an agreeable one; while it is very difficult to disguise
the disagreeable Odor of the other.

The Linen of a Person in this Disease ought to be often changed; but his upper
Clothes must not be changed: because these having been infected, might, when
worn again, communicate the Itch to the Wearer again, after he had been cured.

Shirts, Breeches, and Stockings may be fumigated with Sulphur, before they are
put on; and this Fumigation should be made in the open Air.

347. If this Disorder becomes very inveterate and tedious, it exhausts the
Patient in Consequence of its not suffering him to sleep at Nights, as well as
by his restless Irritation; and sometimes even brings on a Fever, so that he
falls away in Flesh, and his Strength abates.

In such a Case he must take, 1, a gentle Purge.

2, Make Use frequently of warm Baths.

3, He must be put on the Regimen of Persons in a State of Recovery.

4, He must take Morning and Evening, fifteen Days successively, the Powder No.
53, with the Ptisan No. 26.

This Malady is often very obstinate, and then the Medicines must be varied
according to the Circumstances, the Detail of which I avoid here.

348. After giving repeated Purges in such obstinate Cases, mineral Waters
abounding with Sulphur, such as Sea Water, and those of Dulwich, Harrigate,
Shadwell, etc. will be full as effectual. K.
those of Yverdun, etc. often effect a Cure; and simple cold Bathings in Rivers
or Lakes, have sometimes succeeded in very inveterate Cases of this Disorder.

Nothing conduces more to the long Continuance of this Malady, than the Abuse
of hot Waters, such as Infusions of Tea, etc.

349. I shall conclude this Chapter, with a repeated Injunction not to be too
free or rash in the Use of the Ointment No. 52, This, however, used Night and
Morning, and half a Dram of Sulphur vivum powdered, taken daily inwardly,
have very rarely been known to f^^l, of curing this Complaint, here, in a
Fortnight. K.
and other outward Remedies for extinguishing the Itch. There is hardly any
Complaint, but what has been found to be the Consequence of too sudden a
Removal of this Disorder by outward Applications, before due Evacuations have
been made, and a moderate Abatement of the Sharpness of the Humors has been
effected.

CHAPTER XXVI. The Treatment of Diseases peculiar to Women.
SECT. 350. BESIDES all the preceding Diseases to which Women are liable in
common with Men, their Sex also exposes them to others peculiar to it, and
which depend upon four principal Sources; which are their monthly Discharges,
their Pregnancy, their Labors in Childbirth* and the Consequences of their
Labors. It is not my present Design to treat professedly on each of the
Diseases arising from these Causes, which would require a larger Volume than I
have proposed; but I shall confine myself to certain general Directions on
these four Heads.

351. Nature, who intended Women for the Increase, and the Nourishment of the
human Race at the Breast, has subjected them to a periodical Efflux, or
Discharge, of Blood: which Circumstance constitutes the Source, from whence the
Infant is afterward to receive his Nutrition and Growth.

This Discharge generally commences, with us, between the Age of sixteen and
eighteen. Young Maidens, before the Appearance of this Discharge, are
frequently, and many for a long time, in a State of Weakness, attended with
various Complaints, which is termed the Chlorosis, or Green Sickness, and
Obstructions: and when their Appearance is extremely slow and backward, it
occasions very grievous, and sometimes even mortal Diseases. Nevertheless it is
too usual, though very improper, to ascribe all the Evils, to which they are
subject at this Term of Life, solely to this Cause, while they really often
result from a different Cause, of which the Obstructions themselves are
sometimes only the Effect; and this is the natural, and, in some Degree, even
necessary Feebleness of the Sex. The Fibers of Women which are intended to be
relaxed, and to give Way, when they are unavoidably extended by the Growth of
the Child, and its enclosing Membranes (which frequently arise to a very
considerable Size) should necessarily be less stiff and rigid, less strong, and
more lax and yielding than the Fibers of Men. Hence the Circulation of their
Blood is more slow and languid than in Males; their Blood is less compact and
dense, and more watery; their Fluids are more liable to stagnate in their
different Bowels, and to form Infarctions and Obstructions.

352. The Disorders to which such a Constitution subjects them might, in some
Measure be prevented, by assisting that Langour or Feebleness of their natural
Movements, with such an Increase of their Force as Exercise might contribute
to: But this Assistance, which in some Manner is more necessary for Females
than Males, they are partly deprived of, by the general Education and Habitude
of the Sex; as they are usually employed in managing Household Business, and
such light sedentary Work, as affords them less Exercise and Motion, than the
more active Occupations of Men. They stir about but little, whence their
natural Tendency to Weakness increases from Habit, and thence becomes morbid
and sickly. Their Blood circulates imperfectly; its Qualities become impaired;
the Humors tend to a pretty general Stagnation; and none of the vital
Functions are completely discharged.

From such Causes and Circumstances, they begin to sink into a State of
Weakness, sometimes while they are very young, and many Years before this
periodical Discharge could be expected. This State of Langour disposes them to
be inactive; a little Exercise soon fatigues them, whence they take none at
all. It might prove a Remedy, and even effect a Cure, at the Beginning of their
Complaint; but as it is a Remedy, that is painful and disagreeable to them,
they reject it, and thus increase their Disorders.

Their Appetite declines with the other vital Functions, and gradually becomes
still less; the usual salutary Kinds of Food never exciting it; instead of
which they indulge themselves in whimsical Cravings, and often of the oddest
and most improper Substances for Nutrition, which entirely impair the Stomach
with its digestive Functions, and consequently Health itself.

But sometimes after the Duration of this State for a few Years, the ordinary
time of their monthly Evacuations approaches, which however make not the least
Appearance, for two Reasons. The first is, that their Health is too much
impaired to accomplish this new Function at a time when all the others are so
languid: and the second is, that under such Circumstances, the Evacuations
themselves are unnecessary; since their final Purpose is to discharge (when the
Sex are not pregnant) that superfluous Blood, which they were intended to
produce, and whose Retention would be unhealthy, when not applied to the Growth
of the Foetus, or Nourishment of the Child: and this Superfluity of Blood does
not exist in Women who have been long in a very low and languishing State.

353. Their Disorder, however, continues to increase, as every one daily must,
which does not terminate. This Increase of it is attributed to the Suppression
or Nonappearance of their monthly Efflux, which is often erroneous; since the
Disorder is not always owing to that Suppression, which is often the Effect of
that Distemperature. This is so true, that even when the Efflux happens, if
their Weakness still continues, the Patients are far from being the better for
it, but the reverse. Neither is it unusual to see young Lads, who have received
from Nature, and from their Parents, a Sort of feminine Constitution,
Education, and Habitude, infested with much the same Symptoms, as obstructed
young Women.

Country Girls, who are generally more accustomed to such hardy Work and
Exercise as Country Men, are less subject to these Complaints, than Women who
live in Cities.

354. Let People then be careful not to deceive themselves on this important
Account; since all the Complaints of young Maidens are not owing to the want of
their Customs. Nevertheless it is certain there are some of them, who are
really afflicted from this Cause. For Instance, when a strong young Virgin in
full Health, who is nearly arrived to her full Growth, and who manifestly
abounds with Blood, does not obtain this Discharge at the usual time of Life,
then indeed this superfluous Blood is the Fountain of very many Disorders, and
greatly more violent ones than those, which result from the contrary Causes
already mentioned.

If the lazy inactive City Girls are more subject to the Obstructions, which
either arise from the Weakness and Langour I have formerly taken Notice of, or
which accompany it; Country Girls are more subject to Complaints from this
latter Cause (too great a Retention of superfluous Blood) than Women who live
in Cities: and it is this last Cause that excites those singular Disorders,
which appear so supernatural to the common People, that they ascribe them to
Sorcery.

355. And even after these periodical Discharges have appeared, it is known
that they have often been suppressed, without the least unhealthy Consequence
resulting from that Suppression. They are often suppressed, in the
Circumstances mentioned 351, by a Continuance of the Disease, which was first
an Obstacle or Retardment to their Appearance; and in other Cases, they have
been suppressed by other Causes, such as Cold, Moisture, violent Fear, any very
strong Passion; by too chilly a Course of Diet, with Indigestion; or too hot
and irritating Diet; by Drinks cooled with Ice, by Exercise too long continued,
and by unusual Watching. The Symptoms, occasioned by such Suppressions, are
sometimes more violent than those, which preceded the first Appearance of the
Discharge.

356. The great Facility with which this Evacuation may be suppressed,
diminished, or disordered, by the Causes already assigned; the terrible Evils
which are the Consequences of such Interruptions and Irregularities of them;
seem to me very cogent Reasons to engage the Sex to use all possible Care, in
every Respect, to preserve the Regularity of them; by avoiding, during their
Approach and Continuance, every Cause that may prevent or lessen them. Would
they be thoroughly persuaded, not solely by my Advice, but by that of their
Mothers, their Relations, their Friends, and by their own Experience, of what
great Importance it is to be very attentive to themselves, at those critical
times, I think there is not one Woman, who from the first, to the very last
Appearance of them, would not conduct herself with the the most scrupulous
Regularity.

Their Demeanor, in these Circumstances, very fundamentally interests their
own Health, as well as that of their Children: and consequently their own
Happiness, as well as that of their Husbands and Families.

The younger and more delicate they are, Caution becomes the more necessary for
them. I am very sensible a strong Country Girl is too negligent in regulating
herself at those critical Seasons, and sometimes without any ill Consequence;
but at another time she may suffer feverely for it; and I could produce a long
List of many, who, by their Imprudence on such Occasions, have thrown
themselves into the most terrible Condition.

Besides the Caution with which Females should avoid these general Causes, just
mentioned in the preceding Section, every Person ought to remember what has
most particularly disagreed with her during that Term, and forever constantly
to reject it.

357. There are many Women whose Customs visit them without the slightest
Impeachment of their Health: others are sensibly disordered on every Return of
them; and to others again they are very tormenting, by the violent Cholics, of
a longer or a shorter Duration, which precede or accompany them. I have known
some of these violent Attacks last but some Minutes, and others which continued
a few Hours. Nay some indeed have persisted for many Days, attended with
Vomiting, Fainting, with Convulsions from excessive Pain, with Vomiting of
Blood, Bleedings from the Nose, etc. which, in short, have brought them to the
very Jaws of Death. So very dangerous a Situation requires the closest
Attention: though, as it results from several and frequently very opposite
Causes, it is impossible, within the present Plan, to direct the Treatment that
may be proper for each Individual. Some Women have the Unhappiness to be
subject to these Symptoms every Month, from the first Appearance, to the final
Termination of these Discharges; except proper Remedies and Regimen, and
sometimes a happy Childbirth, remove them. Others complain but now and then,
every second, third, or fourth Month; and there are some again, who have
suffered very severely durng the first Months, or Years, after their first
Eruptions, suffer no more afterward. A fourth Number, after having had their
Customs for a long Time, without the least Complaint, find themselves afflicted
with cruel Pains, at every Return of them; if by Imprudence, or some inevitable
Fatality, they have incurred any Cause, that has suppressed, diminished, or
delayed them. This Consideration ought to suggest a proper Caution even to
such, as generally undergo these Discharges, without Pain or Complaint: since
all may be assured, that though they suffer no sensible Disorder at that Time,
they are nevertheless more delicate, more impressible by extraneous Substances;
more easily affected by the Passions of the Mind; and have also weaker Stomachs
at these particular Periods.

358. These Discharges may also be sometimes too profuse in Quantity, in which
Case the Patients become conoxious to very grievous Maladies; into the
Discussion of which however I shall not enter here, as they are much less
frequent than those, arising from a Suppression of them. Besides which, in such
Cases, Recourse may be had to the Directions I shall give hereafter; when I
treat of the Quantity of Blood, which it may be expedient to part with, during
the Course of Gravidation or Pregnancy. See 365.

359. Finally even when they are the most regular, after their Continuance for
a pretty certain Number of Years (rarely exceeding thirty-five) they go off of
their own Accord, and necessarily between the Age of forty-five and fifty;
sometimes even sooner, but seldom continuing longer: and this Crisis of their
ceasing is generally a very troublesome, and often a very dangerous one for the
Sex.

360. The Evils mentioned 352 may be prevented, by avoiding the Causes
producing them; and, 1, by obliging young Maidens to use considerable Exercise;
especially as soon as there is the least Reason to suspect the Approach of this
Disorder, the Chlorosis, or Green Sickness.

2. By watching them carefully, that they eat nothing unwholesome or improper;
as there are scarcely any natural Substances, even among such as are most
improper for them, and the most distasteful, which have not sometimes been the
Objects of their sickly, their unaccountable Cravings. Fat Aliments, Pastry,
farinaceous or mealy, and sour and watery Foods are pernicious to them.
Herb-Teas, which are frequently directed as a Medicine for them, are sufficient
to throw them into the Disorder, by increasing that Relaxation of their Fibers,
which is a principal Cause of it. If they must drink any such Infusions, as
medicated Drinks, let them be taken cold: but the best Drink for them is Water,
in which red hot Iron has been extinguished.

3. They must avoid hot sharp Medicines, and such as are solely intended to
force down their Terms, which are frequently attended with very pernicious
Consequences, and never do any good: and they are still the more hurtful, as
the Patient is the younger.

4, If the Malady increases, it will be necessary to give them some Remedies:
but these should not be Purges, nor consist of Diluters, and Decoctions of
Herbs, of Salts, and a Heap of other useless and noxious Ingredients; but they
should take Filings of Iron, which is the most certain Remedy in such Cases.
These Filings should be of true simple Iron, and not from Steel; and Care
should be taken that it be not rusty, in which State it has very little Effect.

At the Beginning of this Distemper, and to young Girls, it is sufficient to
give twenty Grains daily, enjoining due Exercise, and a suitable Diet. When it
prevails in a more severe Degree, and the Patient is not so young, a Quarter of
an Ounce may be safely ventured on: certain Bitters or Aromatics may be
advantageously joined to the Filings, which are numbered in the Appendix, 54,
55, 56, and constitute the most effectual Remedies in this Distemper, to be
taken in the Form of Powder, of vinous Infusion, or of Electuary The French
Word here, Opiat, is sometimes used by them for a compound Medicine of the
Consistence of an Electuary: and cannot be supposed, in this Place, to mean any
Preparation, into which Opium enters. K.
. When there is a just Indication to bring down the Discharge, the vinous
Infusion No. 55 must be given, and generally succeeds: but I must again repeat
it (as it should carefully be considered) that the Stoppage or Obstruction of
this Discharge is frequently the Effect, not the Cause of this Disease; and
that there should be no Attempt to force it down, which, in such a Case, may
sometimes prove more hurtful than beneficial; since it would naturally return
of its own Accord, on the Recovery, and with the Strength, of the Patient: as
their Return should follow that of perfect Health, and neither can precede
Health, nor introduce it. There are some Cases particularly, in which it would
be highly dangerous to use hot and active Medicines, such Cases for Instance,
as are attended with some Degree of Fever, a frequent Coughing, a Haemorrhage
or Bleeding, with great Leanness and considerable Thirst: all which Complaints
should be removed, before any hot Medicines are given to force this Evacuation,
which many very ignorantly imagine cures all other female Disorders; an Error,
that has prematurely occasioned the Loss of many Women's Lives.

361. While the Patient is under a Course of these Medicines, she should not
take any of those I have forbidden in the preceding Sections; and the Efficacy
of these should also be furthered with proper Exercise. That in a Carriage is
very healthy; Dancing is so too, provided it be not extended to an Excess. In
Case or a Relapse in these Disorders, the Patient is to be treated, as if it
were an original Attack.

362. The other Sort of Obstructions, described 354, requires a very different
Treatment. Bleeding, which is hurtful in the former Sort, and the Use, or
rather Abuse, of which has thrown several young Women into irrecoverable
Weaknesses, has often removed this latter Species, as it were, in a Moment.
Bathing of the Feet, the Powder No. 20, and (...) succeeded: but at other times
it is necessary (...) date the Remedies and the Method to each particular
(...), and to judge of it from its own peculiar Circumstances and Appearances.

363. When these Evacuations naturally cease through Age (See 359) if they stop
suddenly and all at once, and had formerly flowed very largely, Bleeding (...)
1, necessarily be directed, and repeated every six, every four, or even every
three Months.

2, The usual Quantity of Food should be somewhat diminished, especially of
Flesh, of Eggs, and of strong Drink.

3, Exercise should be increased.

4, The Patient should frequently take, in a Morning fasting, the Powder No.
24, which is very beneficial in such Cases; as it moderately increases the
natural Excretions by Stool, Urine, and Perspiration; and thence lessens that
Quantity of Blood, which would otherwise superbound.

Nevertheless, should this total Cessation of the monthly Discharge be preceded
by, or attended with, any extraordinary Loss of Blood, which is frequently the
Case, Bleeding is not so necessary; but the Regimen and Powder just directed
are very much so; to which the Purge No. 23 should now and then be joined, at
moderate Intervals. The Use of astringent Medicines at this critical time might
dispose the Patient to a Cancer of the Womb.

Many Women die about this Age, as it is but too easy a Matter to injure them
then; a Circumstance that should make them very cautious and prudent in the
Medicines they recur to. On the other hand it also frequently happens, that
their Constitutions alter for the better, after this critical time of Life;
their Fibers grow stronger; they find themselves sensibly more hearty and
hardy; many former slight Infirmities disappear, and they enjoy a healthy and
happy old Age. I have known several who threw away their Spectacles at the Age
of fifty-two, of fifty-three, which they had used five or six Years before.

The Regimen I have just directed, the Powder No. 24, and the Potion No. 32,
agree very well in almost all inveterate Discharges (I speak of the female
Peasantry) at whatever time of Life.

Of Disorders attending Gravidation, or the Term of going with Child.
364. Gravidation is generally a less ailing or unhealthy State in the Country,
than in very populous Towns. Nevertheless Country Women are subject, as well as
Citizens, to Pains of the Stomach, to vomiting in a Morning, to Headache and
Toothache; but these Complaints very commonly yield to Bleeding, which is
almost the only Remedy necessary Too great a Fullness of Blood is undoubtedly
the Cause of all these Complaints; but as there are different Methods of
opposing this Cause, the gentlest should always be preferred; nor should the
Constitution become habituated to such Remedies, as might either impair the
Strength of the Mother, or of her Fruit. Some Expedients therefore should be
thought of, that may compensate for the Want of Bleeding, by enjoining proper
Exercise in a clear Air, with a less nourishing, and less juicy Diet. E. L.

This Note might have its Use sometimes, in the Cases of such delicate and
hysterical, yet pregnant Women, as are apt to suffer from Bleeding, or any
other Evacuation, though no Ways immoderate. But it should have been
considered, that Dr. TISSOT was professedly writing here to hearty active
Country Wives, who are very rarely thus constituted; and whom he might be
unwilling to confuse with such multiplied Distinctions and Directions, as would
very seldom be necessary, and might sometimes prevent them from doing what was
so. Besides which, this Editor might have seen, our Author has hinted at such
Cases very soon after. K.


for pregnant Women.

365. Sometimes after carrying too heavy Burdens; after too much or too
violent Work; after receiving excessive Jolts, or having had a Fall, they are
subject to violent Pains of the Loins, which extend down to their Thighs, and
terminate quite at the Bottom of the Belly; and which commonly signify, that
they are in Danger of an Abortion, or Miscarrying.

To prevent this Consequence, which is always dangerous, they should, 1,
immediately go to Bed; and if they have not a Mattress, they should lie upon a
Bed stuffed with Straw, a Feather-bed being very improper in such Cases. They
should repose, or keep themselves quite still in this Situation for several
Days, not stirring, and speaking as little as possible.

2, They should directly lose eight or nine Ounces of Blood from the Arm.

3, They should not eat Flesh, Flesh-broth, nor Eggs; but live solely on Soups,
made of farinaceous or mealy Substances.

4, They should take every two Hours half a Paper of the Powder No. 20; and
should drink nothing but the Ptisan No. 2.

Some sanguine robust Women are very liable to miscarry at a certain Time, or
Stage, of their Pregnancy. This may be obviated, by their bleeding some Days
before that time approaches, and by their observing the Regimen I have advised.
But this Method would avail very little for delicate Citizens, who miscarry
from a very different Cause; and whose Abortions are to be prevented by a very
different Treatment.

Of Delivery, or Childbirth.
366. It has been observed that a greater Proportion of Women die in the
Country in, or very speedily after, their Delivery, and that from the Scarcity
of good Assistance, and the great Plenty of what is bad; and that a greater
Proportion of those in Cities die after their Labors are effected, by a
Continuance of their former bad Health.

The Necessity there is for better instructed, better qualified Midwives,
through a great Part of Swisserland, is but too manifest an Unhappiness, which
is attended with the most fatal Consequences, and which merits the utmost
Attention of the Government.

The Errors which are incurred, during actual Labor, are numberless, and too
often indeed are also irremediable. It would require a whole Book, expressly
for that Purpose (and in some Countries there are such) to give all the
Directions that are necessary to prevent so many Fatalities: and it would be as
necessary to form a sufficient Number of well-qualified Midwives to comprehend,
and to observe them; which exceeds the Plan of the Work I have proposed. I
shall only mark out one of the Causes, and the most injurious one on this
Occasion: This is the Custom of giving hot irritating things, whenever the
Labor is very painful, or is slow; such as Castor, or its Tincture, Saffron,
Sage, Rue, Savin, Oil of Amber, Wine, Venice Treacle, Wine burnt with Spices,
Coffee, Brandy, Aniseed-Water, Walnut-Water, Fennel-Water, and other Drams or
strong Liquors. All these things are so many Poisons in this Respect, which
very far from promoting the Woman's Delivery, render it more difficult by
inflaming the Womb (which cannot then so well contract itself) and the Parts,
through which the Birth is to pass, in Consequence of which they swell, become
more straitened, and cannot yield or be dilated. Sometimes these stimulating
hot Medicines also bring on Haemorrhages, which prove mortal in a few Hours.

367. A considerable Number, both of Mothers and Infants, might be preserved by
the directly opposite Method. As soon as a Woman who was in very good Health,
just before the Approach of her Labor, being robust and well made, finds her
Travel come on, and that it is painful and difficult; far from encouraging
those premature Efforts which are always destructive; and from furthering them
by the pernicious Medicines I have just enumerated, the Patient should be bled
in the Arm, which will prevent the Swelling and Inflammation; assuage the
Pains; relax the Parts, and dispose every thing to a favorable Issue.

During actual Labor no other Nourishment should be allowed, except a little
Panada every three Hours, and as much Toast and Water as the Woman chooses.

Every fourth Hour a Glyster should be given, consisting of a Decoction of
Mallows, and a little Oil. In the Intervals between these Glysters, she should
be set over a Kind of Stove, or in a pierced easy Chair, containing a Vessel in
which there is some hot Water: the Passage should be gently rubbed with a
little Butter; and Stupes wrung out of a Fomentation of simple hot Water, which
is the most efficacious of any, should be applied over the Belly.

The Midwives, by taking this Method, are not only certain of doing no
Mischief, but they also allow Nature an Opportunity of doing Good: as a great
many Labors, which seem difficult at first, terminate happily; and this safe
and unprecipitate Manner of Proceeding, at least affords time to call in
further Assistance. Besides, the Consequences of such Deliveries are healthy
and happy; when by pursuing the heating oppressing Practice, even though the
Delivery be effected, both the Mother and Infant have been so cruelly, though
undesignedly, tormented, that both of them frequently perish.

368. I acknowledge these Means are insufficient, when the Child is unhappily
situated in the Womb; or when there is an embarrassing Conformation in the
Mother: though at least they prevent the Case from proving worse, and leave
time for calling in Men-Midwives, or other Female ones, who may be better
qualified.

I beg Leave again to remind the Midwives, that they should be very cautious of
urging their Women to make any forced Efforts to forward the Birth, which are
extremely injurious to them, and which may render a Delivery very dangerous and
embarrassing, that might otherwise have been happily effected: and I insist the
more freely on the Danger attending these unseasonable Efforts, and on the very
great Importance of Patience, as the other very pernicious Practice is become
next to universal amongst us.

The Weakness, in which the laboring Woman appears, makes the Bystanders
fearful that she will not have Strength enough to be delivered; which they
think abundantly justifies them in giving her Cordials; but this Way of
Reasoning is very weak and chimerical. Their Strength, on such Occasions, is
not so very speedily dissipated: the small light Pains sink them, but in
Proportion as the Pains become stronger, their Strength arises; being never
deficient, when there is no extraordinary and uncommon Symptom; and we may
reasonably be assured, that in a healthy, well formed Woman, mere Weakness
never prevents a Delivery.

Of the Consequences of Labor, or Childbirth.
369. The most usual Consequences of Childbirth in the Country are, 1, An
excessive Haemorrhage. 2, An Inflammation of the Womb. 3, A sudden Suppression
of the Lochia, or usual Discharges after Delivery. And, 4, the Fever and other
Accidents, resulting from the Milk.

Excessive Bleedings or Floodings, should be treated according to the Manner
directed, 365: and if they are very excessive, Folds of Linen, which have been
wrung out of a Mixture of equal Parts of Water and Vinegar, should be applied
to the Belly, the Loins, and the Thighs: these should be changed for fresh
moist ones, as they dry; and should be omitted, as soon as the Bleeding abates.

370. The Inflammation of the Womb is discoverable by Pains in all the lower
Parts of the Belly; by a Tension or Tightness of the whole; by a sensible
Increase of Pain upon touching it; a Kind of red Stain or Spot, that mounts to
the Middle of the Belly, as high as the Navel: which Spot, as the Disease
increases, turns black, and then is always a mortal Symptom; by a very
extraordinary Degree of Weakness; an astonishing Change of Countenance; a light
Delirium or Raving; a continual Fever with a weak and hard Pulse; sometimes
incessant Vomitings; a frequent Hiccup; a moderate Discharge of a reddish
stinking, sharp Water; frequent Urgings to go to Stool; a burning Kind of Heat
of Urine; and sometimes an entire Suppression of it.

371. This most dangerous and frequently mortal Disease should be treated like
inflammatory ones. After Bleeding, frequent Glysters of warm Water must by no
Means be omitted; some should also be injected into the Womb, and applied
continually over the Belly. The Patient may also drink continually, either of
simple Barley-Water, with a Quarter of an Ounce of Nitre in every Part of it,
or of Almond Milk No. 4.

372. The total Suppression of the Lochia, the Discharge after Labor, which
proves a Cause of the most violent Disorders, should be treated exactly in the
same Manner: but if unhappily hot Medicines have been given, in order to force
them down, the Case will very generally prove a most hopeless one.

373. If the Milk-fever run very high, the Barley Ptisan directed 371, and
Glysters, with a very light Diet consisting only of Panada, or made of some
other farinaceous Substance, and that very thin, very generally remove it.

374. Delicate infirm Women, who have not all the requisite and necessary
Attendance they want; and such as from Indigence are obliged to work too soon,
are exposed to many Accidents, which frequently arise from a Want of due
Perspiration, and an insufficient Discharge of the Lochia; and hence the
Separation of the Milk in their Breasts being disturbed, there are milky
Congestions, or Knots as it were, which are always very painful and
troublesome, and especially when they are formed more inwardly. They often
happen on the Thighs, in which Case the Ptisan No. 58 is to be drank, and the
Pultices No. 59 must be applied. These two Remedies gradually dissipate and
remove the Tumor, if that may be effected without Suppuration. But if that
proves impossible, and Pus, or Matter, is actually formed, a Surgeon must open
the Abscess, and treat it like any other.

375. Should the Milk coagulate, or curdle as it were, in the Breast, it is of
the utmost Importance immediately to attenuate or dissolve that Thickness,
which would otherwise degenerate into a Hardness and prove a Scirrhus; and from
a Scirrhus in Process of Time a Cancer, that most tormenting and cruel
Distemper.

This horrible Event however may be prevented by an Application to these small
Tumors, as soon as ever they appear. For this Purpose nothing is more
effectual than the Prescriptions No. 57 and 60; but under such menacing
Circumstances, it is always prudent to take the best Advice, as early as
possible.

From the Moment these hard Tumors become excessively and obstinately so, and
yet without any Pain, we should abstain from every Application, all are
injurious; and greasy, sharp, resinous and spirituous ones speedily change the
Scirrhus into a Cancer. Whenever it becomes manifestly such, all Applications
are also equally pernicious, except that of No. 60. Cancers have long been
thought and found incurable; but within a few Years past, some have been cured
by the Remedy No. 57: which nevertheless is not infallible, though it should
always be tried The Use of Hemlock, which has been tried at Lions, by all who
have had cancerous Patients, having been given in very large Doses, has been
attended with no Effect there, that merited the serious Attention of
Practitioners. Many were careful to obtain the Extract from Vienna, and even to
procure it from Dr. Storck himself. But now it appears to have had so little
Success, as to become entirely neglected. E. L.

Having exactly translated in this Place, and in the Table of Remedies, our
learned Author's considerable Recommendation of the Extract of Hemlock in
Cancers, we think it but fair, on the other hand, to publish this Note of his
Editor's against it; that the real Efficacy or Inefficacy of this Medicine may
at length be ascertained, on the most extensive Evidence and Experience. As far
as my own Opportunities and Reflections, and the Experience of many others,
have instructed me on this Subject, it appears clear to myself, that though the
Consequences of it have not been constantly unsuccessful with us, yet its
Successes have come very short of its Failures: Nevertheless, as in all such
Cancers, every other internal Medicine almost universally fails, we think with
Dr. TISSOT, it should always be tried (from the mere Possibility of its
succeeding in some particular Habit and Circumstances) at least till longer
Experience shall finally determine against it. K.


.

376. The Nipples of Women, who give Milk, are often fretted or excoriated,
which proves very severely painful to them. One of the best Applications is the
most simple Ointment, being a Mixture of Oil and Wax melted together; or the
Ointment No. 66. Should the Complaint prove very obstinate, the Nurse ought to
be purged, which generally removes it.

CHAPTER XXVII. Medical Directions concerning Children.
SECT. 377. THE Diseases of Children, and every thing relating to their Health,
are Objects which generally seem to have been too much neglected by Physicians;
and have been too long confided to the Conduct of the most improper Persons for
such a Charge. At the same time it must be admitted, their Health is of no
little Importance; their Preservation is as necessary as the Continuance of the
human Race; and the Application of the Practice of Physic to their Disorders
is susceptible of nearer Approaches to Perfection, than is generally conceived.
It seems to have even some Advantage over that Practice which regards grown
Persons; and it consists in this, that the Diseases of Children are more
simple, and less frequently complicated, than those of Adults.

It may be said indeed, they cannot make themselves so well understood, and
mere Infants certainly not at all. This is true in fact to a certain Degree,
but not rigidly true; for though they do not speak our Language, they have one
which we should contrive to understand. Nay every Distemper may be said, in
some Sense, to have a Language of its own, which an attentive Physician will
learn. He should therefore use his utmost Care to understand that of Infants,
and avail himself of it, to increase the Means of rendering them healthy and
vigorous, and to cure them of the different Distempers to which they are
liable. I do not propose actually to complete this Task myself, in all that
Extent it may justly demand; but I shall set forth the principal Causes of
their Distempers, and the general Method of treating them. By this Means I
shall at least preserve them from some of the Mischiefs which are too
frequently done them; and the lessening such Evils as Ignorance, or erroneous
Practice, occasions, is one of the most important Purposes of the present Work.

378. Nearly all the Children who die before they are one Year, and even two
Years, old, die with Convulsions: People say they died of them, which is partly
true, as it is in Effect the Convulsions that have destroyed them. But then
these very Convulsions are the Consequences, the Effects, of other Diseases,
which require the utmost Attention of those, who are entrusted with the Care
and Health of the little Innocents; as an effectual Opposition to these
Diseases, these morbid Causes, is the only Means of removing the Convulsions.
The four principal known Causes are, the Meconium, the Excrements contained in
the Body of the Infant, at the Birth; Acidities, or sharp and sour Humors; the
Cutting of the Teeth, and Worms. I shall treat briefly of each.

Of the Meconium.
379. The Stomach and Guts of the Infant, at its Entrance into the World, are
filled with a black Sort of Matter of a middling Consistence, and very viscid
or glutinous, which is called the Meconium. It is necessary this Matter should
be discharged before the Infant sucks, since it would otherwise corrupt the
Milk, and, becoming extremely sharp itself, there would result from their
Mixture a double Source of Evils, to the Destruction of the Infant.

The Evacuation of this Excrement is procured, 1, By giving them no Milk at all
for the first twenty-four Hours of their Lives. 2, By making them drink during
that time some Water, to which a little Sugar or Honey must be added, which
will dilute this Meconium, and promote the Discharge of it by Stool, and
sometimes by vomiting.

To be the more certain of expelling all this Matter, they should take one
Ounce of Compound Syrup This Method [says the Editor and Annotator of Lyons] is
useful, whenever the Mother does not suckle her Child. Art is then obliged to
prove a Kind of Substitute to Nature, though always a very imperfect one. But
when a Mother, attentive to her own true Interest, as well as her Infant's,
and, listening to the Voice of Nature and her Duty, suckles it herself, these
Remedies [he adds] seem hurtful, or at least, useless. The Mother should give
her Child the Breast as soon as she can. The first Milk, the Colostrum, or
Strippings, as it is called in Quadrupeds, which is very serous or watery, will
be serviceable as a Purgative; it will forward the Expulsion of the Meconium,
prove gradually nourishing, and is better than Biscuits, or Panada, which [he
thinks] are dangerous in the first Days after the Birth. E. L.

This Syrup of Succory being scarcely ever prepared with us, though
sufficiently proper for the Use assigned it here, I have retained the preceding
Note, as the Author of it directs these Strippings, for the same Purpose, with
an Air of certain Experience; and as this Effect of them seems no ways
repugnant to the physical Wisdom and Economy of Nature, on such important
Points. Should it in fact be their very general Operatoin, it cannot be unknown
to any Male or Female Practitioner in Midwifery, and may save poor People a
little Expense, which was one Object of our humane Author's Plan. The Oil of
Ricinus, corruptly called Castor Oil (being expressed from the Berries of the
Palma Christi) is particularly recommended by some late medical Writers from
Jamaica, etc. for this Purpose of expelling the Meconium, to the Quantity of a
small Spoonful. These Gentlemen also consider it as the most proper, and almost
specific Opener, in the dry Belly-ach of that torrid Climate; which tormenting
Disease has the closest Affinity to the Miserere, or Iliac Passion, of any I
have seen. The Annotator's Objection to our Author's very thin light Panada,
seems to be of little Weight. K.


of Succory, which should be diluted with a little Water, drinking up this
Quantity within the Space of four or five Hours. The Practice is a very
beneficial one, and it is to be wished it were to become general. This Syrup is
greatly preferable to all others, given in such Cases, and especially to Oil of
Almonds.

Should the great Weakness of the Child seem to call for some Nourishment,
there would be no Inconvenience in allowing a little Biscuit well boiled in
Water, which is pretty commonly done, or a little very thin light Panada.

Of Acidities, or sharp Humors.
380. Notwithstanding the Bodies of Children have been properly emptied
speedily after their Birth, yet the Milk very often turns four in their
Stomachs, producing Vomitings, violent Cholies, Convulsions, a Looseness, and
even terminating in Death. There are but two Purposes to be pursued in such
Cases, which are to carry off the sour or sharp Humors, and to prevent the
Generation of more. The first of these Intentions is best effected by the Syrup
of Succory Or, for Want of it, the solutive Syrup of Roses. K.
, just mentioned.

The Generation of further Acidities is prevented, by giving three Doses daily,
if the Symptoms are violent, and but two, or even one only, if they are very
moderate, of the Powder No. 61, drinking after it Bawm Tea, or a Tea of
Lime-tree Flowers.

381. It has been a Custom to load Children with Oil of Almonds, The Magnesia
is an excellent Substitute in Children, for these Oils Dr. TISSOT so justly
condemns here. K.
as soon as ever they are infested with Gripes: but it is a pernicious Custom,
and attended with very dangerous Consequences. It is very true that this Oil
sometimes immediately allays the Gripes, by involving, or sheathing up, as it
were, the acrid Humors, and somewhat blunting the Sensibility of the Nerves.
But it proves only a palliative Remedy, or asswaging for a time, which, far
from removing, increases the Cause, since it becomes sharp and rancid itself;
whence the Disorder speedily returns, and the more Oil the Infant takes, it is
griped the more. I have cured some Children of such Disorders, without any
other Remedy, except abstaining from Oil, which weakens their Stomachs, whence
their Milk is less perfectly, and more slowly digested, and becomes more easily
soured. Besides this Weakness of the Stomach, which thus commences at that very
early Age, has sometimes an unhealthy Influence on the Constitution of the
Child, throughout the Remainder of his Life.

A free and open Belly is beneficial to Children; now it is certain that the
Oil very often binds them, in Consequence of its diminishing the Force and
Action of the Bowels. There is scarcely any Person, who cannot observe this
Inconvenience attending it; notwithstanding they all continue to advise and to
give it, to obtain a very different Purpose: But such is the Power of Prejudice
in this Case, and in so many others; People are so strongly prepossessed with a
Notion, that such a Medicine must produce such an Effect, that its never having
produced it, avails nothing with them, their Prejudice still prevails; they
ascribe its Want of Efficacy to the Smallness of the Doses; these are doubled
then, and notwithstanding its bad Effects are augmented, their obstinate
Blindness continues.

This Abuse of the Oil also disposes the Child to knotty hard Tumors, and at
length often proves the first Cause of some Diseases of the Skin, whose Cure is
extremely difficult.

Hence it is evident, this Oil should be used on such Occasions but very
seldom; and that it is always very injudicious to give it in Cholics, which
arise from sharp and sour Humors in the Stomach or in the Bowels.

382. Infants are commonly most subject to such Cholics during their earliest
Months; after which they abate, in Proportion as their Stomachs grow stronger.
They may be relieved in the Fit by Glysters of a Decoction of Camomile Flowers,
in which a Bit of Soap of the Size of a Hazel Nut is d^^^^ed. A Piece of Flanel
wrung out of a Decoction of Camomile Flowers, with the Addition of some Venice
Treacle, and applied hot over the Stomach and on the Belly, is also very
beneficial, and relieving.

Children cannot always take Glysters, the Continuance of which Inability might
be dangerous to them; and every one is acquainted with the common Method of
substituting Suppositories to them, whether they are formed of the smooth and
supple Stalks of Vines, etc. of Soap, or of Honey boiled up to a proper
Consistence.

But one of the most certain Means to prevent these Cholics, which are owing to
Children's not digesting their Milk, is to move and exercise them as much as
possible; having a due Regard however to their tender time of Life.

383. Before I proceed to the third Cause of the Diseases of Children, which
is, the Cutting of their Teeth, I must take Notice of the first Care their
Birth immediately requires, that is, the Washing of them the first Time, merely
to cleanse, and afterward to strengthen them.

Of washing Children.
384. The whole Body of an Infant just born is covered with a gross Humor,
which is occasioned by the Fluids, in which it was suspended in the Womb. There
is a Necessity to cleanse it directly from this, for which nothing is so proper
as a Mixture of one third Wine, and two thirds Water; Wine alone would be
dangerous. This Washing may be repeated some Days successively; but it is a bad
Custom to continue to wash them thus warm, the Danger of which is augmented by
adding some Butter to the Wine and Water, which is done too often. If this
gross Humor, that covers the Child, seems more thick and glutinous than
ordinary, a Decoction of Camomile Flowers, with a little Bit of Soap, may be
used to remove it. The Regularity of Perspiration is the great Foundation of
Health; to procure this Regularity the Teguments, the Skin, must be
strengthened; but warm Washing tends to weaken it. When it is of a proper
Strength it always performs its Functions; nor is Perspiration disordered
sensibly by the Alteration of the Weather. For this Reason nothing should be
omitted, that may fix it in this State; and to attain so important an
Advantage, Children should be washed some few Days after their Birth, with cold
Water, in the State it is brought from the Spring.

For this Purpose a Sponge is employed, with which they begin, by washing first
the Face, the Ears, the back Part of the Head (carefully avoiding the That Part
of the Head where a Pulsation may be very plainly felt, where the Bones are
less hard, and not as yet firmly joined with those about them. K.
Fontanelle, or Mould of the Head) the Neck, the Loins, the Trunck of the Body,
the Thighs, Legs, and Arms, and in short every Spot. This Method which has
obtained for so many Ages, and which is practiced at present by many People,
who prove very healthy, will appear shocking to several Mothers; they would be
afraid of killing their Children by it; and would particularly fail of Courage
enough to endure the Cries, which Children often make, the first time they are
washed. Yet if their Mothers truly love them, they cannot give a more
substantial Mark of their Tenderness to them, than by subduing their Fears and
their Repugnance, on this important Head.

Weakly Infants There is however a certain Degree of Weakness, which may very
reasonably deter us from this Washing; as when the Infant manifestly wants
Heat, and needs some Cordial and frequent Frictions, to prevent its expiring
from downright Feebleness; in which Circumstances Washing must be hurtful to
i^* TISSOT.
are those who have the greatest Need of being washed: such as are remarkably
strong may be excused from it; and it seems scarcely credible (before a Person
has frequently seen the Consequences of it) how greatly this Method conduces to
give, and to hasten on, their Strength. I have had the Pleasure to observe,
since I first endeavored to introduce this Custom among us, that several of
the most affectionate and most sensible Mothers have used it with the greatest
Success. The Midwives, who have been Witnesses of it; the Nurses and the
Servants of the Children, whom they have washed, publish it abroad; and should
the Custom become as general, as every thing seems to promise it will, I am
fully persuaded, that by preserving the Lives of a great Number of Children, it
will certainly contribute to check the Progress of Depopulation.

They should be washed very regularly every Day, in every Season, and every
Sort of Weather; and in the fine warm Season they should be plunged into a
large Pail of Wafer, into the Basins around Fountains, in a Brook, a River, or
a Lake.

After a few Days, crying, they grow so well accustomed to this Exercise, that
it become, one of their Pleasures; so that they laugh all the Time of their
going through it.

The first Benefit of this Practice is, as I have already said, the keeping up
their Perspiration, and rendering them less obnoxious to the Impressions of the
Air and Weather: and it is also in Consequence of this first Benefit, that they
are preserved from a great Number of Maladies, especially from knotty Tumors,
often called Kernels; from Obstructions; from Diseases of the Skin, and from
Convulsions; its general Consequence being to insure them firm, and even robust
Health.

385. But Care should be taken not to prevent, or, as it were to undo, the
Benefit this Washing procures them, by the bad Custom of keeping them too hot.
There is not a more pernicious one than this, nor one that destroys more
Children. They should be accustomed to light Clothing by Day, and light
Covering by Night, to go with their Heads very thinly covered, and not at all
in the Daytime, after their attaining the Age of two Years, They shoud avoid
sleeping in Chambers that are too hot, and should live in the open Air, both in
Summer and Winter, as much as possible. Children who have been kept too hot in
such Respects, are very often liable to Colds; they are weakly, pale,
languishing, bloated and melancholy. They are subject to hard, knotty
Swellings, a Consumption, all Sorts of languid Disorders, and either die in
their Infancy, or only grow up into a miserable valetudinary Life: while those
who are washed or plunged into cold Water, and habitually exposed to the open
Air, are just in the opposite Circumstances.

386. I must further add here, that Infancy is not the only Stage of Life in
which cold Bathing is advantageous. I have advised it with remarkable Success
to Persons of every Age, even to that of seventy: and there are two Kinds of
Diseases, more frequent indeed in Cities than in the Country, in which cold
Baths succeed very greatly; that is, in Debility or Weakness of the Nerves; and
when Perspiration is disordered, when Persons are fearful of every Breath of
Air, liable to Defluctions or Colds, feeble and languishing, the cold Bath
re-establishes Perspiration; restores Strength to the Nerves; and by that Means
dispels all the Disorders, which arise from these two Causes, in the animal
Economy. It should be used before Dinner. But in the same Proportion that cold
Bathing is beneficial, the habitual Use, or rather Abuse, of warm Baths, is
pernicious; they dispose the Persons addicted to them to the Apoplexy; to the
Dropsy; to Vapors, and to the hypochondriacal Disease: and Cities, in which
they are too frequently used, become, in some Measure, desolate from such
Distempers.

Of the Cutting of the Teeth.
387. Cutting of the Teeth is often very tormenting to Children, some dying
under the severe Symptoms attending it. If it proves very painful, we should,
during that Period, 1, Keep their Bellies open by Glysters consisting only of a
simple Decoction of Mallows: but Glysters are not necessary, if the Child, as
it sometimes happens, has then a Purging.

2, Their ordinary Quantity of Food should be lessened for two Reasons; first,
because the Stomach is then weaker than usual; and next, because a small Fever
sometimes accompanies the Cutting.

3, Their usual Quantity of Drink should be increased a little; the best for
them certainly is an Infusion of the Flowers of the Lime or Linden-tree, to
which a little Milk may be added.

4, Their Gums should frequently be rubbed with a Mixture of equal Parts of
Honey, and Mucilage of Quince-seeds; and a Root of March-Mallows, or of
Liquorice, may be given them to chew.

It frequently happens that, during Dentition, or the Time of their Toothing,
Children prove subject to Knots or Kernels.

Of Worms.
388. The Meconium, the Acidity of the Milk, and Cutting of the Teeth are the
three great Causes of the Diseases of Children. There is also a fourth, Worms,
which is likewise very often pernicious to them; but which, nevertheless, is
not, at least not near so much, a general Cause of their Disorders, as it is
generally supposed, when a Child exceeding two Years of Age proves sick. There
are a great Variety of Symptoms, which dispose People to think a Child has
Worms; though there is but one that demonstrates it, which is discharging them
upwards or downwards. There is great Difference among Children too in this
Respect, some remaining healthy, though having several Worms, and others being
really sick with a few.

They prove hurtful, 1, by obstructing the Guts, and compressing the
neighboring Bowels by their Size. 2, By sucking up the Chyle intended to
nourish the Patient, and thus depriving him of his very Substance as well as
Subsistence: and, 3, by irritating the Guts and even I have seen a Child about
three Years old, whose Navel, after swelling and inflaming, suppurated, and
through a small Orifice (which must have communicated with the Cavity of the
Gut or the Belly) discharged one of those Worms we call teretes, about three
Inches long. He had voided several by Stool, after taking some vermifuge
Medicines. The Fact I perfectly remember; and to the best of my Recollection,
the Ulcer healed some time after, and the Orifice closed: but the Child died
the following Year of a putrid Fever, which might be unused, or was aggravated,
by Worms. K.
gnawing them.

389. The Symptoms which make it probable they are infested with Worms, are
slight, frequent, and irregular Cholics; a great Quantity of Spittle running
off while they are fasting; a disagreeable Smell of their Breath, of a
particular Kind, especially in the Morning; a frequent Itchiness of their Noses
which makes them scratch or rub them often; a very irregular Appetite, being
sometimes voracious, and at other Times having none at all: Pains at Stomach
and Vomitings: sometimes a costive Belly; but more frequently loose Stools of
indigested Matter; the Belly rather larger than ordinary, the rest of the Body
meagre; a Thirst which no Drink allays; often great Weakness, and some Degree
of Melancholy. The Countenance has generally an odd unhealthy Look, and varies
every Quarter of an Hour; the Eyes often look dull, and are surrounded with a
Kind of livid Circle: the White of the Eye is sometimes visible while they
sleep, their Sleep being often attended with terrifying Dreams or Deliriums,
and with continual Startings, and Grindings of their Teeth. Some Children find
it impossible to be at Rest for a single Moment. Their Urine is often whitish,
I have seen it from some as white as Milk. They are afflicted with
Palpitations, Swoonings, Convulsions, long and profound Drowsiness; cold Sweats
which come on suddenly; Fevers which have the Appearances of Malignity;
Obscurities and even Loss of Sight and of Speech, which continue for a
considerable Time; Palsies either of their Hands, their Arms, or their Legs,
and Numbnesses. Their Gums are in a bad State, and as though they had been
knawed or corroded: they have often the Hiccup, a small and irregular Pulse,
Ravings, and what is one of the least doubtful Symptoms, frequently a small dry
Cough; and not seldom a Mucosity or Sliminess in their Stools: sometimes very
long and violent Cholics, which terminate in an Abscess on the Outside of the
Belly, from whence Worms issue. (See Note * p. 197.)

390. There are a great Multitude of Medicines against Worms. The This Word
occurs in none of the common Dictionaries; but suspecting it for the Semen
Santonici of the Shops, I find the learned Dr. HIKKER has rendered it so, in
his very well received Translation of this valuable Work into Low Dutch. K.
Grenette or Worm-seed, which is one of the most common, is a very good one.
The Prescription No. 62, is also a very successful one; and the Powder No. 14
is one of the best. Flower of Brimstone, the Juice of Nasturtium, or Cresses,
Acids and Honey Water have often been very serviceable; but the first three I
have mentioned, succeeded by a Purge, are the best. No. 63 is a purging
Medicine, that the most averse and difficult Children may easily take. But
when, notwithstanding these Medicines, the Worms are not expelled, it is
necessary to take Advice of some Person qualified to prescribe more efficacious
ones. This is of considerable Importance, because, notwithstanding a great
Proportion of Children may probably have Worms, and yet many of them continue
in good Health, there are, nevertheless, some who are really killed by Worms,
after having been cruelly tormented by them for several Years.

A Disposition to breed Worms always shows the Digestions are weak and
imperfect; for which Reason Children liable to Worms should not be nourished
with Food difficult to digest. We should be particularly careful not to stuff
them with Oils, which admiting such Oils should immediately kill some of their
Worms, do yet increase that Cause, which disposes them to generate others. A
long continued Use of Filings of Iron is the Remedy, that most effectually
destroys this Disposition to generate Worms.

Of Convulsions.
391. I have already said, 378, that the Convulsions of Children are almost
constantly the Effect of some other Disease, and especially of some of the four
I have mentioned. Some other, though less frequent Causes, sometimes occasion
them, and these may be reduced to the following.

The first of them is the corrupted Humors, that often abound in their
Stomachs and Intestines; and which, by their Irritation, produce irregular
Motions throughout the whole System of the Nerves, or at least through some
Parts of them; whence these Convulsions arise, which are merely involuntary
Motions of the Muscles. These putrid Humors are the Consequence of too great a
Load of Aliments, of unsound ones, or of such as the Stomachs of Children are
incapable of digesting. These Humors are also sometimes the Effect of a
Mixture and Confusion of different Aliments, and of a bad Distribution of their
Nourishment.

It may be known that the Convulsions of a Child are owing to this Cause, by
the Circumstances that have preceded them; by a disgusted loathing Stomach; by
a certain Heaviness and Load at it; by a foul Tongue; a threat Belly; by its
bad Complexion, and by its disturbed unrefreshing Sleep.

The Child's proper Diet, that is, a certain Diminution of the Quantity of its
Food; some Glysters of warm Water, and one Purge of No. 63, generally remove
such Convulsions.

392. The second Cause is the bad Quality of their Milk. Whether it be that the
Nurse has fallen into a violent Passion, some considerable Disgust, great
Fright or frequent Fear: whether she has eat unwholesome Food, drank too much
Wine, spirituous Liquors, or any strong Drink: whether she is seized with a
Descent of her monthly Discharges, which may have greatly disordered her
Health; or finally whether she prove really sick: In all these Cases the Milk
is vitiated, and exposes the Infant to violent Symptoms, which sometimes
speedily destroy it.

The Remedies for Convulsions, from this Cause, consist, 1, In letting the
Child abstain from this corrupted Milk, until the Nurse shall have recovered
her State of Health and Tranquillity, the speedy Attainment of which may be
forwarded by a few Glysters; by gentle pacific Medicines; by an entire Absence
of whatever caused or conduced to her bad Health; and by drawing off all the
Milk that had been so vitiated.

2, In giving the Child itself some Glysters: in making it drink plentifully of
a light Infusion of the Flowers of the Lime-tree; in giving it no other
Nourishment for a Day or two, except Panada and other light Spoon-meat, without
Milk.

3, In purging the Child (supposing what has been just directed to have been
unavailable) with an Ounce, or an Ounce and a Half, of compound Syrup of
Succory, or as much Manna. These lenient gentle Purges carry off the Remainder
of the corrupted Milk, and remove the Disorders occasioned by it.

393. A third Cause which also produces Convulsions, is the feverish Distempers
which attack Children, especially the Small-Pocks and the Measles; but in
general such Convulsions require no other Treatment, but that proper for the
Disease, which has introduced them.

394. It is evident from what has been said in the Course of this Chapter, and
it deserves to be attended to, that Convulsions are commonly a Symptom
attending some other Disease, rather than an original Disease themselves: that
they depend on many different Causes; that from this Consideration there can be
no general Remedy for removing or checking them; and that the only Means and
Medicines which are suitable in each Case, are those which are proper to oppose
the particular Cause producing them, and which I have already pointed out in
treating of each Cause.

The greater Part of the pretended Specifics, which are indiscriminately and
ignorantly employed in all Sorts of Convulsions, are often useless, and still
oftener prejudicial. Of this last Sort and Character are,

1, All sharp and hot Medicines, spirituous Liquors, Oil of Amber, other hot
Oils and Essences, volatile Salts, and such other Medicines as, by the Violence
of their Action on the irritable Organs of Children, are likelier to produce
Convulsions, than to allay them.

2, Astringent Medicines, which are highly pernicious, whenever the Convulsions
are caused by any sharp Humor, that ought to be discharged from the Body by
Stool; or when such Convulsions are the Consequences of an This very important
Consideration, on which I have treated pretty largely, in the Analysis, seems
not to be attended to in Practice, so frequently as it ought. K.
Effort of Nature, in order to effect a Crisis: And as they almost ever depend
on one or the other of these Causes, it follows that Astringents can very
rarely, if ever, be beneficial. Besides that there is always some Danger in
giving them to Children, without a mature, a thorough Consideration of their
particular Case and Situation, as they often dispose them to Obstructions.

3, The over early, and too considerable Use of Opiates, either not properly
indicated, or continued too long, such as Venice Treacle, Mithridate, Syrup of
Poppies (and it is very easy to run upon some of these Sholes) are also
attended with the most embarrassing Events, in Regard to Convulsions; and it
may be affirmed they are improper, for nine Tenths of those they are advised
to. It is true they often produce an apparent Ease and Tranquillity for some
Minutes, and sometimes for some Hours too; but the Disorder returns even with
greater Violence for this Suspension, by Reason they have augmented all the
Causes producing it; they impair the Stomach; they bind up the Belly; they
lessen the usual Quantity of Urine; and besides, by their abating the
Sensibility of the Nerves (which ought to be considered as one of the chief
Sentinels appointed by Nature, for the Discovery of any approaching Danger)
they dispose the Patient insensibly to such Infarctions and Obstructions, as
tend speedily to produce some violent and mortal Event, or which generate a
Disposition to languid and tedious Diseases: and I do again repeat it, that
notwithstanding there are some Cases, in which they are absolutely necessary,
they ought in general to be employed with great Precaution and Prudence. To
mention the principal Indications for them in convulsive Cases, they are proper,

1, When the Convulsions still continue, after the original Cause of them is
removed.

2, When they are so extremely violent, as to threaten a great and very speedy
Danger of Life; and when they prove an Obstacle to the taking Remedies
calculated to extinguish their Cause; and,

3, When the Cause producing them is of such a Nature, as is apt to yield to
the Force of Anodynes; as when, for Instance, they have been the immediate
Consequence of a Fright.

395. There is a very great Difference in different Children, in Respect to
their being more or less liable to Convulsions. There are some, in whom very
strong and irritating Causes cannot excite them; not even excruciating Gripes
and Cholics; the most painful Cutting of their Teeth; violent Fevers; the
Small-Pocks; Measles; and though they are, as it were, continually corroded by
Worms, they have not the slightest Tendency to be convulsed. On the other Hand,
some are so very obnoxious to Convulsions, or so easily convulsible, if that
Expression may be allowed, that they are very often seized with them from such
very slight Causes, that the most attentive Consideration cannot investigate
them. This Sort of Constitution, which is extremely dangerous, and exposes the
unhappy Subject of it, either to a very speedy Death, or to a very low and
languid State of Health, requires some peculiar Considerations; the Detail of
which would be the more foreign to the Design of this Treatise, as they are
pretty common in Cities, but much less so in Country Places. In general cold
Bathing and the Powder No. 14 are serviceable in such Circumstances.

General Directions with Respect to Children.
396. I shall conclude this Chapter by such farther Advice, as may contribute
to give Children a more vigorous Constitution and Temperament, and to preserve
them from many Disorders.

First then, we should be careful not to cram them too much, and to regulate
both the Quantity and the set Time of their Meals, which is a very practicable
Thing, even in the very earliest Days of their Life; when the Woman who nurses
them will be careful to do it regularly. Perhaps indeed this is the very Age,
when such a Regulation may be the most easily attempted and effected; because
it is that Stage, when the constant Uniformity of their Way of living should
incline us to suppose, that what they have Occasion for is most constantly very
much the same.

A Child who has already attained to a few Years, and who is surrendered up
more to his own Exercise and Vivacity, feels other Calls; his Way of Life is
become a little more various and irregular; whence his Appetite must prove so
too. Hence it would be inconvenient to subject him over exactly to one certain
Rule, in the Quantity of his Nourishment, or the Distance of his Meals. The
Dissipation or passing off of his Nutrition being unequal, the Occasions he has
for repairing it cannot be precisely stated and regular. But with Respect to
very little Children in Arms, or on the Lap, a Uniformity in the first of these
Respects, the Quantity of their Food, very consistently conduces to a useful
Regularity with Respect to the second, the Times of feeding them. Sickness is
probably the only Circumstance, that can warrant any Alteration in the Order
and Intervals of their Meals; and then this Change should consist in a
Diminution of their usual Quantity, notwithstanding a general and fatal Conduct
seems to establish the very Reverse: and this pernicious Fashion authorizes the
Nurses to cram these poor little Creatures the more, in Proportion as they have
real Need of less feeding. They conclude of Course, that all their Cries are
the Effects of Hunger, and the Moment an Infant begins, then they immediately
stop his Mouth with his Food; without once suspecting, that these Wailings may
be occasioned by the Uneasiness, which an over-loaded Stomach may have
introduced; or by Pains, whose Cause is neither removed nor mitigated, by
making the Children eat; though the mere Action of eating may render them
insensible to slight Pains, for a very few Minutes; in the first Place, by
calling off their Attention; and secondly, by hushing them to sleep, a common
Effect of feeding Children, being in fact a very general and constant one, and
depending on the same Causes, which dispose so many grown Persons to sleep
after Meals.

A Detail of the many Evils Children are exposed to, by thus forcing too much
Food upon them, at the very Time when their Complaints are owing to Causes,
very different from Hunger, might appear incredible. They are however so
numerous and certain, that I seriously wish sensible Mothers would open their
Eyes to the Consideration of this Abuse, and agree to put an End to it.

Those who overload them with Victuals, in Hopes of strengthening them, are
extremely deceived; there being no one Prejudice equally fatal to such a Number
of them. Whatever unnecessary Aliment a Child receives, weakens, instead of
strengthening him. The Stomach, when overdistended, suffers in its Force and
Functions, and becomes less able to digest thoroughly. The Excess of the Food
last received impairs the Concoction of the Quantity, that was really
necessary; which, being badly digested, is so far from yielding any Nourishment
to the Infant, that it weakens it, proves a Source of Diseases, and concurs to
produce Obstructions, Rickets, the Evil, slow Fevers, a Consumption and Death.

Another unhappy Custom prevails, with regard to the Diet of Children, when
they begin to receive any other Food besides their Nurse's Milk, and that is,
to give them such as exceeds the digestive Power of their Stomachs; and to
indulge them in a Mixture of such Things in their Meals, as are hurtful in
themselves, and more particularly so, with regard to their feeble and delicate
Organs.

To justify this pernicious Indulgence, they affirm it is necessary to accustom
their Stomachs to every Kind of Food; but this Notion is highly absurd, since
their Stomachs should first be strengthened, in order to make them capable of
digesting every Food; and crouding indigestible, or very difficultly digestible
Materials into it, is not the Way to strengthen it. To make a Foal sufficiently
strong for future Labor, he is exempted from any, till he is four Years old;
which enables him to submit to considerable Work, without being the worse for
it. But if, to inure him to Fatigue, he should be accustomed immediately from
his Birth to submit to Burdens above his Strength, he could never prove any
thing but an utter Jade, incapable of real Service. The Application of this to
the Stomach of a Child is plainly obvious.

I shall add another very important Remark, and it is this, that the too early
Work to which the Children of Peasants are forced, become of real Prejudice to
the Public. Hence Families themselves are less numerous, and the more Children
there are removed from their Parents, while they are very young, it follows,
that those who are left are obliged to work the more, and very often even at
hard Labor, at an Age when they should exercise themselves in the usual
Diversions and Sports of Children. Hence they wear out in a Manner, before they
attain the ordinary Term of Manhood; they never arrive at their utmost
Strength, nor reach their full Stature; and it is too common to see a
Countenance with the Look of twenty Years, joined to a Stature of twelve or
thirteen. In fact, they often sink under the Weight of such hard involuntary
Labor, and fall into a mortal Degree of Wasting and Exhaustion.

397. Secondly, which indeed is but a Repetition of the Advice I have already
given, and upon which I cannot insist too much, they must be frequently washed
or bathed in cold Water.

398. Thirdly, they should be moved about and exercised as much as they can
bear, after they are some Weeks old: the earlier Days of their tender Lives
seeming consecrated, by Nature herself, to a nearly total Repose, and to
sleeping, which seems not to determine, until they have Need of Nourishment: so
that, during this very tender Term of Life, too much Agitation or Exercise
might be attended with mortal Consequences. But as soon as their Organs have
attained a little more Solidity and Firmness, the more they are danced about
(provided it is not done about their usual Time of Repose, which ought still to
be very considerable) they are so much the better for it; and by increasing it
gradually, they may be accustomed to a very quick Movement, and at length very
safely to such, as may be called hard and hearty Exercise. That Sort of Motion
they receive in Go-Carts, or other Vehicles, particularly contrived for their
Use, is more beneficial to them, than what they have from their Nurses Arms,
because they are in a better Attitude in the former, and it heats them less in
Summer, which is a Circumstance of no small Importance to them; considerable
Heat and Sweat disposing them to be ricketty.

399. Fourthly, they should be accustomed to breathe in the free open Air as
much as possible.

If Children have unhappily been less attended to than they ought, whence they
are evidently feeble, thin, languid, obstructed, and liable to Scirrhosities
(which constitute what is termed a ricketty or consumptive State) these four
Directions duly observed retrieve them from that unhappy State; provided the
Execution of them has not been too long delayed.

400. Fifthly, If they have any natural Discharge of a Humor by the Skin,
which is very common with them, or any Eruption, such as Tetters, white Scurf,
a Rash, or the like, Care must be taken not to check or repel them, by any
greasy or restringent Applications Not a Year passes without Numbers of
Children having been destroyed by Imprudence in this Respect; while others have
been reduced to a deplorable and weakly Habit.

I have been a Witness to the most unhappy Consequences of external Medicines
applied for the Rash and white Scurf; which, however frightful they may
appear, are never dangerous; provided nothing at all is applied to them,
without the Advice and Consideration of a truly skilful Person.

When such external Disorders prove very obstinate, it is reasonable to suspect
some Fault or Disagreement in the Milk the Child sucks; in which Case it should
immediately be discontinued, corrected, or changed. But I cannot enter here
into a particular Detail of all the Treatment necessary in such Cases.

CHAPTER XXVIII. Directions with respect to drowned Persons The Misfortune of a
young Man drowned in bathing himself, at the Beginning of the Season,
occasioned the Publication of this Chapter by itself in June 1761. A few Days
after, the like Misfortune happened to a laboring Man; but he was happily
taken out of the Water sooner than the first (who had remained about Half an
Hour under it) and he was recovered by observing Part of the Advice this
Chapter contains; of which Chapter several Bystanders had Copies. -- This Note
seems to be from the Author himself.
.
SECT. 401. WHENEVER a Person who has been drowned, has remained a Quarter of
an Hour under Water, there can be no considerable Hope of his Recovery; the
Space of two or three Minutes in such a Situation being often sufficient to
kill a Man irrecoverably. Nevertheless, as several Circumstances may happen to
have continued Life, in such an unfortunate Situation, beyond the ordinary
Term, we should always endeavor to afford them the most effectual Relief, and
not give them up as irrecoverable too soon: since it has often been known, that
until the Expiration of two, and sometimes even of three Hours, such Bodies
have exhibited some apparent Tokens of Life.

Water has sometimes been found in the Stomachs of drowned Persons; at other
times none at all. Besides the greatest Quantity which has ever been found in
it has not exceeded that, which may be drank without any Inconvenience; whence
we may conclude, the mere Quantity was not mortal; neither is it very easy to
conceive how drowning Persons can swallow Water. What really kills them is mere
Suffocation, or the Interception of Air, of the Action of Breathing; and the
Water which descends into the Lungs, and which is determined there, by the
Efforts they necessarily, though involuntarily make, to draw Breath, after they
are under Water: for there absolutely does not any Water descend, either into
the Stomach or the Lungs of Bodies plunged into Water, after they are dead; a
Circumstance which serves to establish a legal Sentence and Judgment, in some
criminal Cases and Trials. This Water, intimately blending itself with the Air
in the Lungs, forms a viscid inactive Kind of Froth, which entirely destroys
the Functions of the Lungs; whence the miserable Sufferer is not only
suffocated, but the Return of the Blood from the Head being also intercepted,
the Blood Vessels of the Brain are overcharged, and an Apoplexy is combined
with the Suffocation. This second Cause, that is, the Descent of the Water into
the Lungs, is far from being general; it having been evident from the
Dissection of several drowned Bodies, that it really never had existed in them.

402. The Intention that should be pursued, is that of unloading the Lungs, and
the Brain, and of reviving the extinguished Circulation. For which Purpose we
should, 1, immediately strip the Sufferer of all his wet Clothes; rub him
strongly with dry coarse Linen; put him, as soon as possible into a well heated
Bed, and continue to rub him well a very considerable time together.

2, A strong and healthy Person should force his own warm Breath into the
Patient's Lungs; and also the Smoke of Tobacco, if some was at Hand, by Means
of some Pipe, Chanel, Funnel or the like, that may be introduced into the
Mouth. This Air or Fume, being forcibly blown in, by stopping the Sufferer's
Nostrils close at the same Time, penetrates into the Lungs, and there rarifies
by its Heat that Air, which blended with the Water, composed the viscid Spume
or Froth. Hence that Air becomes disengaged from the Water, recovers its
Spring, dilates the Lungs; and, if there still remains within any Principle of
Life, the Circulation is renewed again that Instant.

3, If a moderately expert Surgeon is at Hand, he must open the jugular Vein,
or any large Vein in the Neck, and let out ten or twelve Ounces of Blood. Such
a Bleeding is serviceable on many Accounts. First, merely as Bleeding, it
renews the Circulation, which is the constant Effect of Bleeding in such
Swoonings, as arise from an intercepted or suffocated Circulation. Secondly, it
is that particular Bleeding, which most suddenly removes, in such Cases, the
Infarction or Obstruction of the Head and Lungs: and, thirdly, it is sometimes
the only Vessel, whence Blood will issue under such Circumstances. The Veins of
the Feet then afford none; and those of the Arms seldom; but the Jugulars
almost constantly furnish it.

Fourthly, the Fume of Tobacco should be thrown up, as speedily and plentifully
as possible, into the Intestines by the Fundament. There are very commodious
Contrivances devised for this Purpose; but as they are not common, it may be
effected by many speedy Means. One, by which a Woman's Life was preserved,
consisted only in introducing the small Tube of a Tobacco Pipe well lighted up:
the Head or Bowl of it was wrapped up in a Paper, in which several Holes were
pricked, and through these the Breath was strongly forced. At the fifth Blast a
considerable Rumbling was heard in the Woman's Belly; she threw up a little
Water, and a Moment afterward came to her Senses. Two Pipes may be thus
lighted and applied, with their Bowls covered over; the Extremity of one is to
be introduced into the Fundament; and the other may be blown through into the
Lungs.

Any other Vapor may also be conveyed up, by introducing a Canula, or any
other Pipe, with a Bladder firmly fixed to it. This Bladder is fastened at its
other End to a large Tin Funnel, under which Tobacco is to be lighted. This
Contrivance has succeeded with me upon other Occasions, in which Necessity
compelled me to invent and apply it.

Fifthly, the strongest Volatiles should be applied to the Patient's Nostrils.
The Powder of some strong dry Herb should be blown up his Nose, such as Sage,
Rosemary, Rue, Mint, and especially Marjoram, or very well dried Tobacco; or
even the Fume, the Smoke of these Herbs. But all these Means are most properly
employed after Bleeding, when they are most efficacious and certain.

Sixthly, as long as the Patient shows no Signs of Life, he will be unable to
swallow, and it is then useless, and even dangerous, to pour much Liquid of any
Kind into his Mouth, which could do nothing but keep up, or increase
Suffocation. It is sufficient, in such Circumstances, to instill a few Drops of
some irritating Liquor, which might also be cordial and reviving. But as soon
as ever he discovers any Motion, he should take, within the Space of one Hour,
five or six common Spoonfuls of Oxymel of Squills diluted with warm Water: or,
if that Medicine was not to be had very speedily, a strong Infusion of the
blessed Thistle, or Carduus benedictus, of Sage, or of Chamomile Flowers
sweetened with Honey, might do instead of it: and supposing nothing else to be
had, some warm Water, with the Addition of a little common Salt, should be
given. Some Persons are bold enough to recommend Vomits in such Cases; but they
are not without their Inconvenience; and it is not as a Vomit that I recommend
the Oxymel of Squills in them.

Seventhly, notwithstanding the Sick discover some Tokens of Life, we should
not cease to continue our Assistance; since they sometimes irrecoverably
expire, after these first Appearances of recovering.

And lastly, though they should be manifestly re-animated, there sometimes
remains an Oppression, a Coughing and Feverishness, which effectually
constitute a Disease: and then it becomes necessary sometimes to bleed them in
the Arms; to give them Barley Water plentifully, or Elder flower Tea.

403. Having thus pointed out such Means as are necessary, and truly effectual,
in such unfortunate Accidents, I shall very briefly mention some others, which
it is the general Custom to recur to and apply in the first Hurry.

1, These unhappy People are sometimes wrapped up in a Sheep's, or a Calf's, or
a Dog's Skin, immediately flead from the Animal: such Applications have
sometimes indeed revived the Heat of the Drowned; but their Operations are more
slow, and less efficacious, than the Heat of a well-warmed Bed; with the
additional Vapor of burnt Sugar, and long continued Frictions with hot Flanels.

2, The Method of rolling them in an empty Hogshead, is dangerous, and mispends
a deal of important Time.

3, That also of hanging them up by the Feet is attended with Danger, and ought
to be wholly discontinued. The Froth or Foam, which is one of the Causes of
their Death, is too thick and tough to discharge itself, in Consequence of its
own Weight. Nevertheless, this is the only Effect that can be expected, from
this Custom of suspending them by the Feet; which must also be hurtful, by its
tending to increase the Overfulness of the Head and of the Lungs.

404. It is some Years since a Girl of eighteen Years old was recovered [though
it is unknown whether she remained under Water only a little Time or some
Hours] who was motionless, frozen as it were, insensible, with her Eyes closed,
her Mouth wide open, a livid Color, a swollen Visage, a Tumor or Bloating of
the whole Body, which was overladen as it were, or Water-soaked. This miserable
Object was extended on a Kind of Bed, of hot of very warm Ashes, quickly heated
in great Kettles; and by laying her quite naked on these Ashes; by covering her
with others equally hot; by putting a Bonnet round her Head, with a Stocking
round her Neck stuffed with the same, and heaping Coverings over all this, at
the End of Half an Hour her Pulse returned, she recovered her Speech, and cried
out, I freeze, I freeze: A little Cherry-Brandy was given her, and then she
remained buried, as it were, eight Hours under the Ashes; being taken out of
them afterward without any other Complaint, except that of great Lassitude or
Weariness, which went entirely off the third Day. This Method was undoubtedly
so effectual, that it well deserves Imitation; but it should not make us
inattentive to the others. Heated Gravel or Sand mixed with Salt, or hot Salt
alone, would have been equally efficacious, and they have been found so.

At the very Time of writing this, two young Ducks, that were drowned, have
been revived by a dry Bath of hot Ashes. The Heat of a Dung-heap may also be
beneficial; and I have just been informed, by a very creditable and sensible
Spectator of it, that it effectually contributed to restore Life to a Man, who
had certainly remained six Hours under Water.

405. I shall conclude these Directions with an Article printed in a little
Work at Paris, about twenty Years since, by Order of the King, to which there
is not the least Doubt, but that any other Sovereign will readily accede.

Notwithstanding the common People are very generally disposed to be
compassionate, and may wish to give all Assistance to drowned Persons, it
frequently happens they do not, only because they dare not; imagining they
expose themselves by it to Prosecutions. It is therefore necessary that they
should know, and it cannot be too often repeated, in order to eradicate such a
pernicious Prejudice, that the Magistrates have never interposed to prevent
People from trying every possible Means to recover such unfortunate Persons, as
shall be drowned and taken out of the Water. It is only in those Cases, when
the Persons are known to be absolutely and irrecoverably dead, that Justice
renders it necessary to seize their Bodies.

CHAPTER XXIX. Of Substances stopped between the Mouth and the Stomach.
SECT. 406. THE Food we take in descends from the Mouth through a very strait
Passage or Channel called the Oesophagus, the Gullet, which going parallel with
the Spine or Backbone, joins to, or terminates at, the Stomach.

It happens sometimes that different Bodies are stopped in this Channel, without
being able either to descend or to return up again; whether this Difficulty
arises from their being too large; or whether it be owing to their having such
Angles or Points, as by penetrating into, and adhering to the Sides of this
membranous Canal, absolutely prevent the usual Action and Motion of it.

407. Very dangerous Symptoms arise from this Stoppage, which are frequently
attended with a most acute Pain in the Part; and at other times, with a very
incommodious, rather than painful, Sensation; sometimes an ineffectual
Commotion at, or rising of, the Stomach, attended with great Anguish; and if
the Stoppage be so circumstanced, that the Glottis is closed, or the Windpipe
compressed, a dreadful Suffocation is the Consequence: the Patient cannot
breathe, the Lungs are quite distended; and the Blood being unable to return
from the Head, the Countenance becomes first red, then livid; the Neck swells;
the Oppression increases, and the poor Sufferer speedily dies*

When the Patient's Breathing is not stopped, nor greatly oppressed; if the
Passage is not entirely blocked up, and he can swallow something, he lives very
easily for a few Days, and then his Case becomes a particular Disorder of the
Oesophagus, or Gullet, But if the Passage is absolutely closed, and the
Obstruction cannot be removed for many Days, a terrible Death is the
Consequence.

408. The Danger of such Cases does not depend so much on the Nature of the
obstructing Substance, as on its Size, with regard to that of the Passage of
the Part where it stops, and of the Manner in which it forms the Obstruction;
and frequently the very Food may occasion Death; while Substances less adapted
to be swallowed are not attended with any violent Consequences, though
swallowed.

A Child of six Days old swallowed a Comfit or Sugar Plumb, which stuck in the
Passage, and instantly killed it.

A grown Person perceived that a Bit of Mutton had stopped in the Passage; not to
alarm any Body he arose from Table; a Moment afterward, on looking where he
might be gone, he was found dead. Another was choked by a Bit of Cake; a third
by a Piece of a Skin of a Ham; and a fourth by an Egg, which he swallowed whole
in a Bravado.

A Child was killed by a Chestnut swallowed whole. Another died suddenly,
choked (which is always the Circumstance, when they die instantly after such
Accidents) by a Pear which he had tossed up, and catched in his Mouth. A Woman
was choked with another Pear. A Piece of a Sinew continued eight Days in the
Passage, so that it prevented the Patient from getting down any Thing use; at
the Expiration of that Time it fell into the Stomach, being loosened by its
Putridity: the Patient notwithstanding died soon after, being killed by the
Inflammation, Gangrene, and Weakness it had occasioned. Unhappily there occur
but too many Instances of this Sort, of which it is unnecessary to cite more.

409. Whenever any Substance is thus detained in the Gullet, there are two Ways
of removing it; that is either by extracting it, or pushing it down. The safest
and most certain Way is always to extract or draw it out, but this is not
always the easiest: and as the Efforts made for this Purpose greatly fatigue
the Patient, and are sometimes attended with grievous Consequences; therefore,
if the Occasion is extremely urging, it may be eligible to thrust it down, if
that is easier; and if there is no Danger from the Reception of the obstructing
Body into the Stomach.

The Substances which may be pushed down without Danger are all common
nourishing ones, as Bread, Meat, Cakes, Fruits, Pulls, Morsels of Tripe, and
even Skin of Bacon. It is only very large Morsels of particular Aliments, that
prove very difficult to digest; yet even such are rarely attended with any
Fatality.

410 The Substances we should endeavor to extract or draw out, though it be
mo^^ painful and less easy than to push them down, are all those, whose
Consequences might be highly dangerous, or even mortal, if swallowed. Such are
all totally indigestible Bodies, as Cork, Linen-Rags, large Fruit Stones,
Bones, Wood, Glass, Stones, Metals; and more especially if any further Danger
may be superadded to that of its Indigestibility, from the Shape, whether
rough, sharp, pointed, or angular, of the Substance swallowed. Wherefore we
should chiefly endeavor to extract Pins, Needles, Fish-bones, other pointed
Fragments of Bones, Bits of Glass, Scissars, Rings, or Buckles.

Nevertheless it has happened, that every one of these Substances have at one
Time or another been swallowed, and the most usual Consequences of them are
violent Pains of the Stomach, and in the Guts; Inflammations, Suppurations,
Abscesses, a slow Fever, Gangrene, the Miserere or Iliac Passion; external
Abscesses, through which the Bodies swallowed down have been discharged; and
frequently, after a long Train of Maladies, a dreadful Death.

411. When such Substances have not passed in too deep, we should endeavor to
extract them with our Fingers, which often succeeds. If they are lower, we
should make use of Nippers, or a small Forceps; of which Surgeons are provided
with different Sorts. Those which some Smoakers carry about them might be very
convenient for such Purposes; and in Case of Necessity they might be made very
readily out of two Bits of Wood. But this Attempt to extract rarely succeeds,
if the Substance has descended far into the Oesophagus, and if it be of a
flexible Nature, which exactly applies itself to, and fills up the Cavity or
Channel of the Gullet.

412. If the Fingers and the Nippers fail, or cannot be duly applied,
Crotchets, a Kind of Hooks, must be employed.

Such may be made at once with a pretty strong Iron Wire, crooked at the End.
It must be introduced in the flat Way, and for the better conducting of it,
there should be another Curve or Hook at the End it is held by, to serve as a
Kind of Handle to it, which has this further Use, that it may be secured by a
String tied to it; a Circumstance not to be omitted in any Instrument employed
on the like Occasions, to avoid such ill Accidents as have sometimes ensued,
from these Instruments slipping out of the Operator's Hold. After the Crotchet
has passed beyond and below the Substance, that obstructs the Passage, it is
drawn up again, and hooks up with it and extracts that Impediment to swallowing.

This Crotchet is also very convenient, whenever a Substance somewhat flexible,
as a Pin or a Fishbone sticks, as it were, across the Gullet: the Crotchet in
such Cases seizing them about their middle Part, crooks and thus disengages
them. If they are very brittle Substances, it serves to break them; and if any
Fragments still adhere within, some other Means must be used to extract them.

413. When the obstructing Bodies are small, and only stop up Part of the
Passage; and which may either easily elude the Hook, or straiten it by their
Resistance, a Kind of Rings may be used, and made either solid or flexible.

The solid ones are made of Iron Wire, or of a String of very fine Brass Wire.
For this Purpose the Wire is bent into a Circle about the middle Part of its
Length, the Sides of which Circle do not touch each other, but leave a Ring, or
hollow Cavity, of about an Inch Diameter. Then the long unbent Sides of the
Wire are brought near each other; the circular Part or Ring is introduced into
the Gullet, in order to be conducted about the obstructing Body, and so to
extract it. Very flexible Rings may be made of Wool, Thread, Silk, or small
Packthread, which may be waxed, for their greater Strength and Consistence.
Then they are to be tied fast to a Handle of Iron Wire, of Whalebone, or of any
alexible Wood; after which the Ring is to be introduced to surround the
obstructing Substance, and to draw it out.

Several of these Rings passed through one another are often made use of, the
more certainly to lay hold of the obstructing Body, which may be involved by
one, if another should miss it. This Sort of Rings has one Advantage, which is,
that when the Substance to be extracted is once laid hold of, it may then, by
turning the Handle, be retained so strongly in the Ring thus twisted, as to be
moved every Way; which must be a considerable Advantage in many such Cases.

414. A fourth Material employed on these unhappy Occasions is the Sponge. Its
Property of swelling considerably, on being wet, is the Foundation of its
Usefulness here.

If any Substance is stopped in the Gullet, but without filling up the whole
Passage, a Bit of Sponge is introduced into that Part that is unstopt, and
beyond the Substance. The Sponge soon dilates, and grows larger in this moist
Situation, and indeed the Enlargement of it may be forwarded, by making the
Patient swallow a few Drops of Water; and then drawing back the Sponge by the
Handle it is fastened to, as it is now too large to return through the small
Cavity, by which it was conveyed in, it draws out the obstructing Body with it,
and thus unplugs, as it were, and opens the Gullet.

As dry Sponge may shrink or be contracted, this Circumstance has proved the
Means of squeezing a pretty large Piece of it into a very small Space. It
becomes greatly compressed by winding a String or Tape very closely about it,
which Tape may be easily unwound and withdrawn, after the Sponge has been
introduced. It may also be enclosed in a Piece of Whalebone, split into four
Sticks at one End, and which, being endued with a considerable Spring,
contracts upon the Sponge. The Whalebone is so smoothed and accommodated, as
not to wound; and the Sponge is also to be safely tied to a strong Thread; that
after having disengaged the Whalebone from it, the Surgeon may also draw out
the Sponge at Pleasure.

Sponge is also applied on these Occasions in another Manner. When there is no
Room to convey it into the Gullet, because the obstructing Substance ingrosses
its whole Cavity; and supposing it not hooked into the Part, but solely
detained by the Straitness of the Passage, a pretty large Bit of Sponge is to
be introduced toward the Gullet, and close to the obstructing Substance: Thus
applied, the Sponge swells, and thence dilates that Part of the Passage that is
above this Substance. The Sponge is then with drawn a little, and but a very
little, and this Substance being les pressed upon above than below, it
sometimes happens, that the greater Straitness and Contraction of the lower
Part of the Passage, than of its upper Part, causes that Substance to ascend;
and as soon as this first Loosening or Disengagement of it has happened, the
total Disengagement of it easily follows.

415. Finally, when all these Methods prove unavailable, there remains one
more, which is to make the Patient vomit; but this can scarcely be of any
Service, but when such obstructing Bodies are simply engaged in, and not hooked
or struck into the Sides of the Oesophagus; since under this latter
Circumstance vomiting might occasion further Mischief.

If the Patient can swallow, a Vomiting may be excited with the Prescription
No. 8 or with No. 34, or 35. By this Operation a Bone was thrown out, which had
stopped in the Passage four and twenty Hours.

When the Patient cannot swallow, an Attempt should be made to excite him to
vomit by introducing into, and twirling about the feathery End of a Quill in,
the Bottom of the Throat, which the Feather however will not effect, if the
obstructing Body strongly compresses the whole Circumference of the Gullet; and
then no other Resource is left, but giving a Glyster of Tobacco. A certain
Person swallowed a large Morsel of Calf's Lights, which stopped in the Middle of
the Gullet, and exactly filled up the Passage. A Surgeon unsuccessfully
attempted various Methods to extract it; but another seeing how unavailable all
of them were; and the Patient's Visage becoming black and swelled; his Eyes
ready to start, as it were, out of his Head; and falling into frequent
Swoonings, attended with Convulsions too, he caused a Glyster of an Ounce of
Tobacco boiled to be thrown up; the Consequence of which was a violent
Vomiting, which threw up the Substance that was so very near killing him.

416. A sixth Method, which I believe has never hitherto been attempted, but
which may prove very useful in many Cases, when the Substances in the Passage
are not too hard, and are very large, would be to fix a Worm (used for
withdrawing the Charge of Guns that have been loaded) fast to a flexible
Handle, with a waxed Thread fastened to the Handle, in order to withdraw it, if
the Handle slipped from the Worm; and by this Contrivance it might be very
practicable, if the obstructing Substance was not too deep in the Passage of
the Gullet, to extract it. -- It has been known that a Thorn fastened in the
Throat, has been thrown out by laughing.

417. In the Circumstances mentioned 409, when it is more easy and convenient
to push the obstructing Body downwards, it has been usual to make use of Leeks,
which may generally be had any where (but which indeed are very subject to
break) or of a Wax-candle oiled, and but a very little heated, so as to make it
flexible; or of a Piece of Whalebone; or of Iron-Wire; one Extremity of which
may be thickened and blunted in a Minute with a little melted Lead. Small
Sticks of some flexible Wood may be as convenient for the same Use, such as the
Birch-tree, the Hazel, the Ash, the Willow, a flexible Plummet, or a leaden
Ring. All these Substances should be very smooth, that they may not give the
least Irritation; for which Reason they are sometimes covered over with a thin
Bit of Sheep's Gut. Sometimes a Sponge is fastened to one End of them, which,
completely filling up the whole Passage, pushes down whatever Obstacle it meets
with.

In such Cases too, the Patient may be prompted to attempt swallowing down
large Morsels of some unhurtful Substance, such as a Crust of Bread, a small
Turnep, a Lettuce Stalk, or a Bullet, in Hopes of their carrying down the
obstructing Cause with them. It must be acknowledged, however, that these
afford but a feeble Assistance; and if they are swallowed without being well
secured to a Thread, it may be apprehended they may even increase the
Obstruction, by their own Stoppage.

It has sometimes very happily, though rarely, occured, that those Substances
attempted to be detruded or thrust downwards, have stuck in the Wax-Candle, or
the Leek, and sprung up and out with them: but this can never happen, except in
the Case of pointed Substances.

418. Should it be impossible to extract the Bodies mentioned 410, and all such
as it must be dangerous to admit into the Stomach, we must then prefer the
least of two Evils, and rather run the Hazard of pushing them down, than suffer
the Patient to perish dreadfully in a few Moments. And we ought to scruple this
Resolution the less, as a great many Instances have demonstrated, that
notwithstanding several bad Consequences, and even a tormenting Death, have
often followed the swallowing of such hurtful or indigestible Substances; yet
at other times they have been attended with little or no Disorder.

419. One of these four Events is always the Case, after swallowing such
Things. They either, 1, go off by Stool; or, 2, they are not discharged, and
kill the Patient. Or else, 3, they are discharged by Urine; or, 4, are visibly
extruded to the Skin. I shall give some Instances of each of these Events.

420. When they are voided by Stool, they are either voided soon after they
have been swallowed, and that without having occasioned scarce any troublesome
Symptoms; or the voiding of them has not happened till a long time after
swallowing, and is preceded with very considerable Pain. It has been seen that
a Bone of the Leg of a Fowl, a Peach-stone, the Cover of a small Box of Venice
Treacle, Pins, Needles, and Coins of different Sorts, have been voided within a
few Days after they had slipped down into the Stomach; and that with little or no
Complaint. A small Flute, or Pipe also, four Inches long, which occasioned
acute Pains for three Days, has been voided happily afterward, besides Knives,
Razors, and one Shoe-buckle. I have seen but a few Days since, a Child between
two and three Years old, who swallowed a Nail above an Inch long, the Head of
which was more than three Tenths of an Inch broad: it stopped a few Moments about
the Neck, but descended while its Friends were looking for me; and was voided
with a Stool that Night, without any bad Consequence. And still more lately I
have known the entire Bone of a Chicken's Wing thus swallowed, which only
occasioned a slight Pain in the Stomach for ^^rce or four Days.

Sometimes such Substances are retained within for a long Time, not being
voided till after several Months, and even Years, without the least ill Effect:
and some of them have never either appeared, nor been complained of.

421. But the Event is not always so happy; and sometimes, though they are
discharged through the natural Passages, the Discharges have been preceded by
very acute Pains in the Stomach, and in the Bowels. A Girl swallowed down some
Pins, which afflicted her with violent Pains for the Space of Six Years; at the
Expriation of which Term she voided them and recovered. Three Needles being
swallowed brought on Cholics, Swoonings and Convulsions for a Year after: and
then being voided by Stool, the Patient recovered. Another Person who swallowed
two, was much happier, in suffering but six Hours from them; when they were
voided by Stool, and he did well.

It sometimes happens that such indigestible Substances, after having past all
the Meanders, the whole Course of the Intestines, have been stopped in the
Fundament, and brought on very troublesome Symptoms; but such however, as an
expert Surgeon may very generally remove. If it is practicable to cut them, as
it is when they happen to be thin Bones, the Jaw-bones of Fish, or Pins, they
are then very easily extracted.

422. The second Event is when these fatal Substances are never voided, but
cause very embarrassing Symptoms which finally kill the Patient; and of these
Cases there have been but too many Examples.

A young Girl having swallowed some Pins, which she held in her Mouth, some of
them were voided by Stool; but others of them pricked and pierced into her
Guts, and even into the Muscles of her Belly, with the severest Pain; and
killed her at the and of three Weeks.

A Man swallowed a Needle, which pierced through his Stomach, and into his
Liver I saw a very similar Instance and Event in a Lady's little favorite
Bitch, whose Body she desired to be opened, from suspecting her to have been
poisoned. But it appeared that a small Needle with fine Thread, which she had
swallowed, had passed out of the Stomach into the Duodenum (one of the Guts)
through which the Point had pierced, and pricked and corroded the concave Part
of the Liver, which was all rough and putrid. The whole Carcass was greatly
bloated and extremely offensive, very soon after the poor Animal's Death, which
happened two or three Months after the Accident, and was preceded by a great
Wheezing, Restlessness and Loss of Appetite. The Needle was rusty, but the
Thread entire, and very little altered. K.
, and ended in a mortal Consumption.

A Plummet which slipped down, while the Throat of a Patient was searching,
killed him at the End of two Years.

It is very common for different Coins, and of different Metals, to be
swallowed without any fatal or troublesome Effects. Even a hundred Luidores I
knew a Man of the Name of Poole, who being taken in the same Ship with me, 1717
or 18, by Pirates, had swallowed four Guineas, and a Gold Ring, all which he
voided some Days after without any Injury or Complaint* and saved them. I
forgot the exact Number of Days be retained them, but the Pirates staid with us
from Saturday Night to Thursday Noon. K.
have been swallowed, and all voided. Nevertheless these fortunate Escapes
ought not to make People too secure and incautious on such Occasions, since
such melancholy Consequences have happened, as may very justly alarm them. One
single Piece of Money that was swallowed, entirely obstructed the Communication
between the Stomach and the Intestines, and killed the Patient. Whole Nuts have
often been inadvertently swallowed; but there have been some Instances of
Persons in whom a Heap Many fatal Examples of this Kind may be seen in the
Philosophical Transactions; and they should caution People against swallowing
Cherry-stones, and still more against those of Prunes, or such as are pointed,
though not very acutely. K.
of them has been formed, which proved the Cause of Death, after producing much
Pain and Inquietude.

423. The third Issue or Event is, when these Substances, thus swallowed down,
have been discharged by Urine: but these Cases are very rare.

A Pin of a middling Size has been discharged by Urine, three Days after it
slipped down: and a little Bone has been expelled the same Way, besides
Cherry-stones, Plumb-stones, and even one Peach-stone.

424. Finally, the fourth Consequence or Event is, when the indigestible
Substances thus swallowed, have pierced through the Stomach or Intestines, and
even to the Skin itself; and occasioning an Abscess, have made an Outlet for
themselves, or have been taken out of the Abscess. A long Time is often
required to effect this extraordinary Trajection and Appearance of them;
sometimes the Pains they occasion are continual; in other Cases the Patient
complains for a Time after which the Pain ceases, and then returns again. The
Imposthume, or Gathering, is formed in the Stomach, or in some other Part of
the Belly: and sometimes these very Substances, after having pierced through
the Guts, make very singular Roots, and are discharged very remotely from the
Belly. One Needle that had been swallowed found its Way out, at the End of four
Years, through the Leg; another at the Shoulder.

425. All these Examples, and many others of cruel Deaths, from swallowing
noxious Substances, demonstrate the great Necessity of an habitual Caution in
this Respect; and give their Testimony against the horrid, I had almost said,
the criminal Imprudence, of People amusing themselves with such Tricks as may
lead to such terrible Accidents; or even holding any such Substance in their
Mouths, as, by slipping down through Imprudence or Accident, may prove the
Occasion of their Death. Is it possible that any one, without shuddering, can
hold Pins or Needles in their Mouths, after reflecting on the dreadful
Accidents, and cruel Deaths, that have thus been caused by them?

426. It has been shown already, that Substances obstructing the Passage of the
Gullet sometimes suffocate the Patient; that at other times they can neither be
extracted nor thrust down; but that they stop in the Passage, without killing
the Patient, at least not immediately and at once. This is the Case when they
are so circumstanced, as not to compress the Trach^^a, the Windpipe, and not
totally to prevent the swallowing of Food; which last Circumstance can scarcely
happen, except the Obstruction has been formed by angular or pointed Bodies.
The Stoppage of such Bodies is sometimes attended, and that without much
Violence, with a small Suppuration, which loosens them; and then they are
either returned upwards through the Mouth, or descend into the Stomach. But at
other times an extraordinary Inflammation is produced, which kills the Patient.
Or if the Contents of the Abscess attending the Inflammation tend outwardly, a
Tumor is formed on the external Part of the Neck which is to be opened, and
through whose Orifice the obstructing Body is discharged. In other Instances
again they take a different Course, attended with little or no Pain, and are at
length discharged by a Gathering behind the Neck, on the Breast, the Shoulder,
or various other Parts.

427. Some Persons, astonished at the extraordinary Course and Progression of
such Substances, which, from their Size, and especially from their Shape, seem
to them incapable of being introduced into, and in some Sort, circulating
through the human Body, without destroying it, are very desirous of having the
Rout and Progression of such intruding Substances explained to them. To gratify
such Inquirers, I may be indulged in a short Digression, which perhaps is the
less foreign to my Plan; as in dissipating what seems marvelous, and has been
thought supernatural in such Cases, I may eradicate that superstitious
Prejudice, which has often ascribed Effects of this Sort to Witchcraft; but
which admit of an easy Explanation. This very Reason is the Motive that has
determined me to give a further Extent to this Chapter.

Wherever an Incision is made through the Skin, a certain Membrane appears,
which consists of two Coats or Lamin^e, separated from each other by small
Cells or Cavities, which all communicate together; and which are furnished,
more or less, with Fat, There is not any Fat throughout the human Body, which
is not enclosed in, or enveloped with, this Coat, which is called the adipose,
fatty, or cellular Membrane.

This Membrane is not only found under the Skin, but further plying and
insinuating itself in various Manners, it is extended throughout the whole
Body. It distinguishes and separates all the Muscles; it constitutes a Part of
the Stomach, of the Guts, of the Bladder, and of all the Viscera or Bowels. It
is this which forms what is termed the Cawl, and which also furnishes a Sheath
or Envelopement to the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves. In some Parts it is very
thick, and is abundantly replenished with Fat; in others it is very thin and
unprovided with any; but wherever it extends, it is wholly insensible, or void
of all Sensation, all Feeling.

It may be compared to a quilted Coverlet, the Cotton, or other Stuffing of
which, is unequally distributed; greatly abounding in some Places, with none at
all in others, so that in these the Stuff above and below, touch each other.
Within this Membrane, or Coverlet, as it were, such extraneous or foreign
Substances are moved about; and as there is a general Communication throughout
the whole Extent of the Membrane, it is no ways surprising, that they are moved
from one Part to another very distant, in a long Course and Duration of
Movement. Officers and Soldiers very often experience, that Bullets which do
not pass through the Parts where they have entered, are transferred to very
different and remote ones.

The general Communication throughout this Membrane is daily demonstrated by
Facts, which the Law prohibits; this is the Butchers inflating, or blowing up,
the cellular Membrane throughout the whole Carcass of a Calf, by a small Incision
in the Skin, into which they introduce a Pipe or the Nozzle of a small Bellows;
and then, on blowing forcibly, the Air evidently puffs up the whole Body of the
Calf into this artificial Tumor or Swelling.

Some very criminal Impostors have availed themselves of this wicked
Contrivance, thus to bloat up Children into a Kind of Monsters, which they
afterward expose to View for Money.

In this cellular Membrane the extravasated Waters of hydropic Patients are
commonly diffused; and here they give Way to that Motion, to which their own
Weight disposes them. But here I may be asked -- As this Membrane is crossed
and intersected in different Parts of it, by Nerves, Veins, Arteries, etc. the
wounding of which unavoidably occasions grievous Symptoms, how comes it, that
such do not ensue upon the Intrusion of such noxious Substances? To this I
answer, 1, that such Symptoms do sometimes really ensue; and, 2, that
nevertheless they must happen but seldom, by Reason that all the aforesaid
Parts, which traverse and intersect this Membrane, being harder than the Fat it
contains; such foreign Substances must almost necessarily, whenever ever they
rencounter those Parts, be turned aside toward the Fat which surrounds them,
whose Resistance is very considerably less; and this he more certainly so, as
these Nerves, etc. are always of a cylindrical Form. -- But to return from this
necessary Digression.

428. To all these Methods and Expedients, which I have already recommended on
the important Subject of this Chapter, I shall further add some general
Directions.

1. It is often useful, and even necessary, to take a considerable Quantity of
Blood from the Arm; but especially if the Patient's Respiration, or Breathing,
is extremely oppressed; or when we cannot speedily succeed in our Effort to
remove the obstructing Substance; as the Bleeding is adapted to prevent the
Inflammation, which the frequent Irritations from such Substances occasion; and
as by its disposing the whole Body into a State of Relaxation, it might
possibly procure an immediate Discharge of the offending Substance.

2. Whenever it is manifest that all Endeavors, either to extract, or to push
down the Substance stopped in the Passage, are ineffectual, they should be
discontinued; because the Inflammation occasioned by persisting in them, would
be as dangerous as the Obstruction itself; as there have been Instances of
People's dying in Consequence of the Inflammation; notwithstanding the Body,
which caused the Obstruction, had been entirely removed.

3. While the Means already advised are making use of, the Patient should often
swallow, or, if he cannot, he should frequently receive by Injection through a
crooked Tube or Pipe, that may reach lower down than the Glottis, some very
emollient Liquor, as warm Water, either alone or mixed with Milk, or a
Decoction of Barley, of Mallows, or of Bran. A twofold Advantage may arise
from this; the first is, that these softening Liquors smooth and sooth the
irritated Parts; and secondly, an Injection, strongly thrown in, has often been
more successful in loosening the obstructing Body, than all Attempts with
Instruments.

4. When after all we are obliged to leave this in the Part, the Patient must
be treated as if he had an inflammatory Disease; he must be bled, ordered to a
Regimen, and have his whole Neck surrounded with emollient Pultices. The like
Treatment must also be used, though the obstructing Substance be removed; if
there is Room to suppose any Inflammation left in the Passage.

5. A proper Degree of Agitation has sometimes loosened the inhering Body, more
effectually than Instruments. It has been experienced that a Blow with the Fist
on the Spine, the Middle of the Back, has often disengaged such obstructed and
obstructing Bodies; and I have known two Instances of Patients who had Pins
stopped in the Passage; and who getting on Horseback to ride out in Search of
Relief at a neighboring Village, found each of them the Pin disengaged after
an Hour's Riding: One spat it out, and the other swallowed it, without any ill
Consequence.

6. When there is an immediate Apprehension of the Patient's being suffocated;
when bleeding him has been of no Service; when all Hope of freeing the Passage
in time is vanished, and Death seems at Hand, if Respiration be not restored;
the Operation of Bronchotomy, or opening of the Windpipe, must be directly
performed; an Operation neither difficult to a tolerably knowing and expert
Surgeon, nor very painful to the Patient.

7. When the Substance that was stopped passes into the Stomach, the Patient must
immediately be put into a very mild and smooth Regimen. He should avoid all
sharp, irritating, inflaming Food; Wine, spirituous Liquors, all strong Drink,
and Coffee; taking but little Nourishment at once, and no Solids, without their
having been thoroughly well chewed. The best Diet would be that of farinaceous
mealy Soups, made of various leguminous Grains, and of Milk and Water, which is
much better than the usual Custom of swallowing different Oils.

429. The Author of Nature has provided, that in eating, nothing should pass by
the Glottis into the Windpipe. This Misfortune nevertheless does sometimes
happen; at which very Instant there ensues an incessant and violent Cough, an
acute Pain, with Suffocation; all the Blood being forced up into the Head, the
Patient is in extreme Anguish, being agitated with violent and involuntary
Motions, and sometimes dying on the Spot. A Hungarian Grenadier, by Trade a
Shoemaker, was eating and working at the same time. He tumbled at once from
his Seat, without uttering a single Word. His Comrades called out for
Assistance; some Surgeons speedily arrived, but after all their Endeavors he
discovered no Token of Life. On opening the Body, they found a Lump, or large
Morsel, of Beef, weighing two Ounces, forced into the Windpipe, which it
plugged up so exactly, that not the least Air could pass through it into the
Lungs.

430. In a Case so circumstanced, the Patient should be struck often on the
Middle of the Back; some Efforts to vomit should be excited; he should be
prompted to sneeze with Powder of Lilly of the Valley, Sage, or any cephalic
Snuffs, which should be blown strongly up his Nose.

A Pea, pitched into the Mouth in playing, entered into the Windpipe, and
sprung out again by vomiting the Patient with Oil. A little Bone was brought up
from another, by making him sneeze, with powdered Lilly of the Valley.

In short, if all these Means of assisting, or saving the Patient are evidently
ineffectual, Bronchotomy must be speedily performed (See No. 6, of the
preceding Section.) By this Operation, some Bones, a Bean, and a Fish-bone have
been extracted, and the Patient has been delivered from approaching Death.

431. Nothing should be left untried, when the Preservation of human Life is
the Object. In those Cases, when an obstructing Body can neither be disengaged
from the Throat, the Passage to the Stomach, nor be suffered to remain there
without speedly killing the Patient, it has been proposed to make an Incision
into this Passage, the Oesophagus, through which such a Body is to be
extracted; and to employ the like Means, when a Substance which had slipped even
into the Stomach itself, was of a Nature to excite such Symptoms, as must
speedily destroy the Patient.

When the Oesophagus is so fully and strongly closed, that the Patient can
receive no Food by the Mouth, he is to be nourished by Glysters of Soup, Gelly,
and the like.

CHAPTER XXX. Of external Disorders, and such as require chirurgical
Application. Of Burns, Wounds, Contusions or Bruises: Of Sprains, Ulcers,
frost-bitten Limbs, Chilblains, Ruptures, Boils: Of Fellons, Thorns or
Splinters in the Fingers or Flesh: of Warts, and of Corns.
SECT. 432. Laboring Countrymen are exposed in the Course of their daily Work,
to many outward Accidents, such as Cuts, Contusions, etc. which, however
considerable in themselves, very generally end happily; and that chiefly in
Consequence of the pure and simple Nature of their Blood, which is generally
much less acrimonious, or sharp, in the Country, than in great Towns or Cities.
Nevertheless, the very improper Treatment of such Accidents, in the Country,
frequently renders them, however light in themselves, very troublesome; and
indeed, I have seen so many Instances of this, that I have thought it necessary
to mark out here the proper Treatment of such Accidents, as may not necessarily
require the Hand or Attendance of a Surgeon. I shall also add something very
briefly, concerning some external Disorders, which at the same time result from
an inward Cause.

Of Burns.
433. When a Burn is very trifling and superficial, and occasions no Vesication
or Blister, it is sufficient to clap a Compress of several Folds of soft Linen
upon it, dipped in cold Water, and to renew it every Quarter of an Hour, till the
Pain is entirely removed. But when the Burn has blistered, a Compress of very
fine Linen, spread over with the Pomatum, No. 64, should be applied over it,
and changed twice a Day.

If the true Skin is burnt, and even the Muscles, the Flesh under it, be
injured, the same Pomatum may be applied; but instead of a Compress* (...)
should be spread upon a Pledget of soft Lint, to be applied very exactly over
it, and over the Pledget again, a Slip of the simple Plaster No. 65. which
every Body may easily prepare; or, if they should prefer it, the Plaster No.
66.

But, independently of these external Applications, which are the most
effectual ones, when they are directly to be had; whenever the Burn has been
very violent, is highly inflamed, and we are apprehensive of the Progress and
the Consequences of the Inflammation, the same Means and Remedies must be
recurred to, which are used in violent Inflammations: the Patient should be
bled, and, if it is necessary, it should be repeated more than once, and he
should be put into a Regimen; drink nothing but the Ptisans No. 2 and 4, and
receive daily two simple Glysters.

If the Ingredients for the Ointment, called Nutritum, are not at Hand to make
the Pomatum No. 64; one Part of Wax should be melted in eight such Parts of
Oil, to two Ounces of which Mixture the Yolk of an Egg should be added An
Application still more simple and sooner prepared, is that of one Egg (both the
Yolk and the White) beat up with two common Spoonfuls of the sweetest Oil,
without any Rankness. When the Pain of the Burn, and all its other Symptoms
have very nearly disappeared, it is sufficient to apply the Sparadrap, or
Oilcloth No. 66.

Of Wounds.
434. If a Wound has penetrated into any of the Cavities, and has wounded any
Part contained in the Breast, or in the Belly: Or if, without having entered
into one of the Cavities, it has opened some great Blood-vessel; or if it has
wounded a considerable Nerve, which occasions Symptoms much more violent, than
would otherwise have happened; if it has penetrated even to and injured the
Bone: it short, if any great and severe Symptom supervenes, there is an
absolute Necessity for calling in a Surgeon. But whenever the Wound is not
attended with any of these Circumstances; when it affects only the Skin, the
fat Membrane beneath it, the fleshy Parts and the small Vessels, it may easily
and simply be dressed without such Assistance; since, in general all that is
truly necessary in such Cases is, to defend the Wound from the Impressions of
the Air; and yet not so, as to give any material Obstruction to the Discharge
of the Matter, that is to issue from the Wound.

435. If the Blood does not particularly flow out of any considerable Vessel,
but trickles almost equally from every Spot of the Wound, it may very safely be
permitted to bleed, while some Lint is speedily preparing. As soon as the Lint
is ready, so much of it may be introduced into the Wound as will nearly fill
it, without being forced in; which is highly improper, and would be attended
with the same Inconveniences as Tents and Dossils. It should be covered over
with a Compress dipped in sweet Oil, or with the Cerecloth No. 65; though I
prefer the Compress for the earliest Dressings: and the whole Dressing should
be kept on, with a standage of two Fingers Breadth, and of a Length
proportioned to the Size of the Part it is to surround: It should be rolled on
tight enough to secure the Dressings, and yet so moderately, as to bring on no
Inflammation.

This Bandage with these Dressings are to remain on twenty-four or forty-eight
Hours; Wounds being healed the sooner, for being less frequently dressed. At the
second Dressing all the Lint must be removed, which can be done with Ease, and
with reasonable Speed, to the Wounded; and if any of it should stick close, in
Consequence of the clogged and dried Blood, it should be left behind, adding a
little fresh Lint to it; this Dressing in other Respects exactly resembling the
first.

When from the Continuance of this simple Dressing, the Wound is become very
superficial, it is sufficient to apply the Cerecloth, or Plaster, without any
Lint.

Such as have conceived an extraordinary Opinion of any medical Oils,
impregnated with the Virtues of particular Plants, may, if that will increase
their Satisfaction, make Use of the common Oil of Yarrow, of Trefoil, of
Lillies, of Chamomile, of Balsamines, or of red Roses; only being very careful,
that such Oils are not become stale and rank.

436. When the Wound is considerable, it must be expected to inflame before
Suppuration (which, in such a Case, advances more slowly) can ensue; which
Inflammation will necessarily be attended with Pain, with a Fever, and
sometimes with a Raving, or Wandering, too. In such a Situation, a Pultice of
Bread and Milk, with the Addition of a little Oil, that it may not stick too
close, must be applied instead of the Compress or the Plaster: which Pultice
is to be changed, but without uncovering the Wound, thrice and even four times
every Day.

437. Should some pretty considerable Blood-vessel be opened by the Wound,
there must be applied over it a Piece of Agaric of the Oak, No. 67, of which no
Country Place ought to be unprovided. It is to be kept on, by applying a good
deal of Lint over it; covering the whole with a thick Compress, and then with a
Bandage a little tighter than usual. If this should not be sufficient to
prevent the Bleeding from the large Vessel, and the Wound be in the Leg or Arm,
a strong Ligature must be made above the Wound with a Turniquet, which is
formed in a Moment with a Skain of Thread, or of Hemp, that is passed round the
Arm circularly, into the Middle of which is inserted a Piece of Wood or Stick
of an Inch Thickness, and four or five Inches long; so that by turning round
this Piece of Wood, any Tightness or Compression may be effected at Pleasure;
exactly as a Countryman secures a Hogshead, or a Piece of Timber on his Cart,
with a Chain and Ring. But Care must be taken, 1, to dispose the Skain in such
a Manner, that it must always be two Inches wider than the Part it surrounds:
and, 2, not to strain it so tight as to bring on an Inflammation, which might
terminate in a Gangrene.

438. All the boasted Virtues of a Multitude of Ointments are downright
Nonsense or Quackery. Art, strictly considered, does not in the least
contribute to the healing of Wounds; the utmost we can do amounting only to our
removing those Accidents, which are so many Obstacles to their Reunion. On
this Account, if there is any extraneous Body in the Wound, such as Iron, Lead,
Wood, Glass, Bits of Cloth or Linen, they must be extracted, if that can be
very easily done; but, if not, Application must be made to a good Surgeon, who
considers what Measures are to be taken, and then dresses the Wound, as I have
already advised.

Very far from being useful, there are many Ointments that are pernicious on
these Occasions; and the only Cases in which they should be used, are those in
which the Wounds are distinguished with some particular Appearances, which
ought to be removed by particular Applications: But a simple recent Wound, in a
healthy Man, requires no other Treatment but what I have already directed,
besides that of the general Regimen.

Spirituous Applications are commonly hurtful, and can be suitable and proper
but in a few Cases, which Physicians and Surgeons only can distinguish.

When Wounds happen in the Head, instead of the Compress dipped in Oil, or of the
Cerecloth, the Wound should be covered with a Betony Plaster; or, when none is
to be had in time, with a Compress squeezed out of hot Wine.

439. As the following Symptoms, of which we should be most apprehensive, are
such as attend Inflammations, the Means we ought to have Recourse to are those
which are most likely to prevent them; such as Bleeding, the usual Regimen,
moderate Coolers and Glysters.

Should the Wound be very inconsiderable in its Degree, and in its Situation,
it may be sufficient to avoid taking any thing heating; and above all things to
retrench the Use of any strong Drink, and of Flesh-meat.

But when it is considerable, and an Inflammation must be expected, there is a
Necessity for Bleeding; the Patient should be kept in the most quiet and easy
Situation; he should be ordered immediately to a Regimen; and sometimes the
Bleeding also must be repeated. Now all these Means are the more indispensably
necessary, when the Wound has penetrated to some internal Part; in which
Situation, no Remedy is more certain than that of an extremely light Diet. Such
wounded Persons as have been supposed incapable of living many Hours, after
Wounds in the Breast, in the Belly, or in the Kidneys, have been completely
recovered, by living for the Course of several Weeks, on nothing but Barley, or
other farinaceous, mealy Ptisans, without Salt, without Soup, without any
Medicine; and especially without the Use of any Ointments.

440. In the same Proportion that Bleeding, moderately and judiciously
employed, is serviceable, in that very same an Excess of it becomes pernicious.
Great Wounds are generally attended with a considerable Loss of Blood, which
has already exhausted the wounded Person; and the Fever is often a Consequence
of this copious Loss of Blood. Now if under such a Circumstance, Bleeding
should be ordered and performed, the Patient's Strength is totally sunk; the
Humors stagnate and corrupt; a Gangrene supervenes, and he dies miserably, at
the End of two or three Days, of a Series of repeated Bleedings, but not of the
Wound. Notwithstanding the Certainty of this, the Surgeon frequently boasts of
his ten, twelve, or even his fifteen Bleedings; assuring his Hearers of the
insuperable Mortality of the Wound, since the letting out such a Quantity of
Blood could not recover the Patient; when it really was that excessive
artificial Profusion of it, that downright dispatched him. -- The Pleasures of
Love are very mortal Pleasures to the Wounded.

441. The Balsams and vulnerary Plants, which have often been so highly
celebrated for the Cure of Wounds, are very noxious, when taken inwardly;
because the Introduction of them gives or heightens the Fever, which ought to
have been abated.

Of Contusions, or Bruises.
442. A Contusion, which is commonly called a Bruise, is the Effect of the
forcible Impression or Stroke of a Substance not sharp or cutting, on the Body
of a Man, or any Animal; whether such an Impression be violently made on the
Man, as when he is struck by a Stick, or by a Stone thrown at him; or whether
the Man be involuntarily forced against a Post, a Stone, or any hard Substance
by a Fall; or whether, in short, he is squeezed and oppressed betwixt two hard
Bodies, as when his Finger is squeezed betwixt the Door and the Door-Post, or
the whole Body jammed in betwixt any Carriage and the Wall. These Bruises,
however, are still more frequent in the Country than Wounds, and commonly more
dangerous too; and indeed the more so, as we cannot judge so exactly, and so
soon, of the whole Injury that has been incurred; and because all that is
immediately visible of it is often but a small Part of the real Damage
attending it: since it frequently happens tha^ ^o Hurt appears for a few
suc^^sive Days; nor does it become manifest, until it is too late to admit of
an effectual Cure.

443. It is but a few Weeks since a Cooper came to ask my Advice. His Manner of
breathing, his Aspect, the Quickness, Smallness, and Irregularity of his Pulse,
made me apprehensive at once, that some Matter was formed within his Breast.
Nevertheless he still kept up, and went about, working also at some Part of his
Trade. He had fallen in removing some Casks or Hogsheads; and the whole Weight
of his Body had been violently impressed upon the right Side of his Breast.
Notwithstanding this, he was sensible of no Hurt at first; but some Days
afterward he began to feel a dull heavy Pain in that Part, which continued and
brought on a Dufficulty of Breathing, Weakness, broken Sleep and Loss of
Appetite. I ordered him immediately to Stillness and Repose, and advised him to
drink a Ptisan of Barley sweetened with Honey, in a plentiful Quantity. He
regularly obeyed only the latter Part of my Directions: yet on meeting him a
few Days after, he told me he was better. The very same Week, however, I was
informed he had been found dead in his Bed. The Imposthume had undoubtedly
broke, and suffocated him.

444. A young Man, run away with by his Horse, was forced with Violence against
a Stable-Door, without being sensible of any Damage at the Time. But at the
Expiration of twelve Days, he found himself attacked by some such Complaints,
as generally occur at the Beginning of a Fever. This Fever was mistaken for a
putrid one, and he was very improperly treated, for the Fever it really was,
above a Month. In short, it was agreed at a Consultation, that Matter was
collected in the Breast. In Consequence of this he was more properly attended,
and at length happily cured by the Operation of Empyema, after languishing a
whole Year. I have published these two Instances, to demonstrate the great
Danger of neglecting violent Strokes or Bruises; since the first of these
Patients might have escaped Death; and the second a tedious and afflicting
Disorder, if they had taken, immediately after each Accident, the necessary
Preca^^^^^^ (...) its Consequences.

445. Whenever any Part is bruised, one of two things always ensues, and
commonly both happen together; especially if the Contusion is pretty
considerable: Either the small Blood Vessels of the contused Part are broken,
and the Blood they contained is spread about in the adjoining Parts; or else,
without such an Effusion of it, these Vessels have lost their Tone, their
active Force, and no longer contributing to the Circulation, their Contents
stagnate. In each of these Cases, if Nature, either without or with the
Assistance of Art, does not remove the Impediment, an Inflammation comes on,
attended with an imperfect, unkindly Suppuration, with Putrefaction and a
Gangrene; not to mention the Symptoms that arise from the Contusion of some
particular Substance, at a Nerve, a large Vessel, a Bone, etc. Hence we may
also conceive the Danger of a Contusion, happening to any inward Part, from
which the Blood is either internally effused, or the Circulation wholly
obstructed in some vital Organ. This is the Cause of the sudden Death of
Persons after a violent Fall; or of those who have received the violent Force
of heavy descending Bodies on their Heads; or of some violent Strokes, without
any evident external Hurt or Mark.

There have been many Instances of sudden Deaths, after one Blow on the Pit of
the Stomach, which has occasioned a Rupture of the Spleen.

It is in Consequence of Fall occasioning a general slight Contusion, as well
internal as e^^^^^al, that they are sometimes attended with such grievous
Consequences, especially in old Men, where Nature, already enfeebled, is less
able to redress such Disorders. And thus in fact has it been, that many such,
who had before enjoyed a firm State of Health, have immediately lost it after a
Fall (which seemed at first to have affected them little or not at all) and
languished soon after to the Moment of their Death, which such Accidents very
generally accelerate.

446. Different external and internal Remedies are applicable in Contusions.
When the Accident has occured in a slight Degree, and there has been no great
nor general Shock, which might produce an internal Soreness or Contusion,
external Applications may be sufficient. They should consist of such things as
are adapted, first, to attenuate and resolve the effused and stagnant Blood,
which shows itself so apparently; and which, from its manifest Blackness very
soon after the Contusion, becomes successively brown, yellow, and greyish, in
Proportion as the Magnitude of the Suffusion or Settling decreases, till at
last it disappears ^nti^^ly, and the Skin recovers its Color, without the
Blood's having been discharged through the external Surface, as it has been
insensibly and gradually dissolved, and been taken in again by the Vessels: And
secondly, the Medicines should be such as are qualified to restore the Tone,
and to recover the Strength of the affected Vessels.

The best Application is Vinegar, diluted, if very sharp, with twice as much
warm Water; in which Mixture Folds of Linen are to be dipped, within which the
contused Parts are to be involved; and these Folds are to be re-moistened and
re-applied every two Hours on the first Day.

Parsley, Chervil, and Hoaseleek Leaves, lightly pounded, have also been
successfully employed; and these Applications are preferable to Vinegar, when a
Wound is joined to the Bruise. The Pultices, No. 68, may also be used with
Advantage.

447. It has been a common Practice immediately to apply spirituous Liquors,
such as Brandy, Arquebusade and This, Dr. TISSOT informs me, is a Solution of
white Vitriol and some other (...) Wine, and is never used in regular Practice
now. It has its Nam^ (...) ^uthor of the Solution. K.
Alibour Water, and the like; but a long Abuse ought not to be established by
Prescription. These Liquids which coagulate the Blood, instead of resolving it,
are truly pernicious; notwithstanding they are sometimes employed without any
visible Disadvantage, on very slight Occasions. Frequently by determining the
settled Blood toward the Interstices of the Muscles, the fleshy Parts; or
sometimes even by preventing the Effusion, or visible Settling of the Blood,
and fixing it, as it were, within the bruised Vessels, they seem to be well;
though this only arises from their concentring and concealing the Evil, which,
at the End of a few Months, breaks forth again in a very troublesome Shape. Of
this I have seen some miserable Examples, whence it has been abundantly
evinced, that Applications of this Sort should never be admitted; and that
Vinegar should be used instead of them. At the utmost it should only be
allowed, (after there is Reason to suppose all the stagnant Blood resolved and
resorbed into the Circulation) to add a third Part of the Arquebusade Water to
the Vinegar; with an Intention to restore some Strength to the relaxed and
weakened Parts.

448. It is still a more pernicious Practice to apply in Bruises, Plasters
composed of greasy Substances, Rosi^s, Gums, Earths, etc. The most boasted of
these is always hurtful, and there have been many Instances of very slight
Contusions being aggravated into Gangrenes, by such Plasters ignorantly
applied; which Bruises would have been entirely subdued by the Oeconony of
Nature, if left to herself in the Space of four Days.

Those Sacs or Suffusions of coagulated Blood, which are visible under the
Skin, should never be opened, except for some urgent Reason: since however
large they may be, they insensibly disappear and dissipate; instead of which
Termination, by opening them, they sometimes terminate in a dangerous
Ulceration.

449. The internal Treatment of Contusions is exactly the same with that of
Wounds; only that in these Cases the best Drink is the Prescription, No. 1, to
each Pot of which a Dram of Ni^re must be added.

When any Person has got a violent Fall; has lost his Senses, or is become very
stupid; when the Blood starts out of his Nostrils, or his Ears; when he is
greatly oppressed, or his Belly feels very tight and tense, which import an
Effusion of Blood either into the Head, the Breast or the Belly, he must, first
of all, be bled upon the Spot, and all the Means must be recurred to, which
have been mentioned 439, giving the wretched Patient the least possible
Disturbance or Motion; and by all Means avoiding to jog or shake him, with a
Design to bring him to his Senses; which would be directly and effectually
killing him, by causing a further Effusion of Blood. Instead of this the whole
Body should be fomented, with some one of the Decoctions already mentioned: and
when the Violence has been chiefly impressed on the Head, Wine and Water should
be preferred to Vinegar.

Falls attended with Wounds, and even a Fracture of the Skull, and with the
most alarming Symptoms, have been cured by these internal Remedies, and without
any other external Assistance, except the Use of the aromatic Fomentation, No.
68.

A Man from Pully-petit came to consult me some Months ago, concerning his
Father, who had a high Fall out of a Tree. He had been twenty-four Hours
without Feeling or Sense, and without any other Motion than frequent Efforts to
vomit; and Blood had issued both from his Nose and Ears. He had no visible
outward Hurt neither on his Head, nor any other Part; and, very fortunately for
him, they had not as yet exerted the least Effort to relieve him. I immediately
directed a plentiful Bleeding in the Arm; and a large Quantity of Whey
sweetened with Honey to be drank, and to be also injected by Way of Glyster.
This Advice was very punctually observed; and fifteen Days after the Father
came to Lausanne, which is four Leagues from Pully-petit, and told me he was
very well. It is proper, in all considerable Bruises, to open the Patient's
Belly with a mild cooling Purge, such as No. 11, 23, 32, 49. The Prescription
No. 24, and the honeyed Whey are excellent Remedies, from the same Reason.

450. In these Circumstances, Wine, distilled Spirits, and whatever has been
supposed to revive and to rouse, are mortal. For this Reason, People should not
be too impatient, because the Patients remain some time without Sense or
Feeling. The giving of Turpentine is more likely to do Mischief than Good; and
if it has been sometimes serviceable, it must have been in Consequence of its
purging the Patient, who probably then needed to be purged. The Fat of a Whale
(Sperma coeti) Dragon's Blood, Crab's-eyes, and Ointments of whatsoever Sort are
at least useless and dangerous Medicines, if the Case be very hazardous; either
by the Mis^^^ef they do, or the Good they prevent from being done. The proper
Indication is to dilute the Blood, to render it more fluid and disposed to
circulate; and the Medicines just mentioned produce a very contrary Effect.

451. When an aged Person gets a Fall, which is the more dangerous in
Proportion to his Age and Grossness; notwithstanding he should not seem in the
least incommoded by it, if he is sanguine and still somewhat vigorous, he
should part with three or four Ounces of Blood. He should take immediately a
few successive Cups of a lightly aromatic Drink, which should be given him hot;
such, for Instance, as an Infusion of Tea sweetened with Honey, and he should
be advised to move gently about. He must retrench a little from the usual
Quantity of his Food, and accustom himself to very gentle, but very frequent
Exercise.

452. Sprains or Wrenches, which so often happen, produce a Kind of Contusion,
in the Parts adjoining to the sprained Joint. This Contusion is caused by the
violent Friction of the Bone against the neighboring Parts; and as soon as the
Bones are immediately returned into their proper Situation, the Disorder should
be treated as a Contusion. Indeed if the Bones should not of themselves return
into their proper natural Position, Recourse must be had to the Hand of a
Surgeon.

The best Remedy in this Case is absolute Rest and Repose, after applying a
Compress moistened in Vinegar and Water, which is to be renewed and continued,
till the Marks of the Contusion entirely disappear; and there remains not the
smallest Apprehension of an Inflammation. Then indeed, and not before, a little
Brandy or Arquebusade Water, may be added to the Vinegar; and the Part (which
is almost constantly the Foot) should be strengthened and secured for a
considerable Time with a Bandage; as it might otherwise be liable to fresh
Sprains, which would daily more and more enfeeble it; for if this Evil is
overlooked too much in its Infancy, the Part never recovers its full Strength;
and a small Swelling often remains to the End of the Patient's Life.

If the Sprain is very slight and moderate, a Plunging of the Part into cold
Water is excellent; bat if this is not done at once immediately after the
Sprain, or if the Contusion is violent, it is even hurtful.

The Custom of rolling the naked Foot upon some round Body is insufficient,
when the Bones are not perfectly replaced; and hurtful, when the Sprain is
accompanied with a Contusion.

It happens continually almost, that Country People, who encounter such
Accidents, apply themselves either to ignorant or knavish Imposters, who find,
or are determined to find, a Disorder or Dislocation of the Bones, where there
is none; and who, by their violent Manner of handling the Parts, or by the
Plasters they surround them with, bring on a dangerous Inflammation, and
change the Patient's Dread of a small Disorder, into a very grievous Malady.

These are the very Persons who have created, or indeed rather imagined, some
impossible Diseases, such as the Opening, the Splitting of the Stomach, and of
the Kidneys. Such monstrous Words terrify the poor Country People, and dispose
them to be more easily and effectually duped.

Of Ulcers.
453. Whenever Ulcers arise from a general Fault of the Blood, it is impossible
to cure them, without destroying the Cause and Fuel of them It is in fact
imprudent to attempt to heal them up by outward Remedies; and a real Misfortune
to the Patient, if his Assistant effectually heals and closes them.

But, for the greater Part, Ulcers in the Country are the Consequences of some
Wound, Bruise, or Tumor improperly treated; and especially of such as have
been dressed with too sharp, or too spirituous Applications. Rancid Oils are
also one of the Causes, which change the most simple Wounds into obstinate
Ulcers, for which Reason they should be avoided; and Apothecaries should be
careful, when they compound greasy Ointments, to make but little at a Time, and
the oftener, as a very considerable Quantity of any of them becomes tank before
it is all sold; notwithstanding sweet fresh Oil may have been employed in
preparing them.

454. What serves to distinguish Ulcers from Wounds, is the Dryness and
Hardness of the Sides or Borders of Ulcers, and the Quality of the Humor
discharged from them; which, instead of being ripe consistent Matter, is a
Liquid more thin, less white, sometimes yielding a disagreeable Scent, and so
very sharp, that if it touch the adjoining Skin, it produces Redness,
Inflammation, or Pustules there; sometimes a serpiginous, or Ring-worm like
Eruption, and even a further Ulceration.

455. Such Ulcers as are of a long Duration, which spread wide, and discharge
much, prey upon the Patient, and throw him into a slow Fever, which melts and
consumes him. Besides, when an Ulcer is of a long Standing, it is dangerous to
dry it up; and indeed this never should be done, but by substituting in the
Place of one Discharge, that is become almost natural, some other Evacuation,
such as purging from time to time.

We may daily see sudden Deaths, or very tormenting Diseases, ensue the sudden
drying up such Humors and Drains as have been of a long Continuance: and
whenever any Quack (and as many as promise the speedy Cure of such, deserve
that Title) assures the Patient of his curing an inveterate Ulcer in a few
Days, he demonstrates himself to be a very dangerous and ignorant Intermeddler,
who must kill the Patient, if he keeps his Word. Some of these impudent
Impostors make use of the most corrosive Applications, and even arsenical ones;
notwithstanding the most violent Death is generally the Consequence of them.

456. The utmost that Art can effect, with Regard to Ulcers, which do not arise
from any Fault in the Humors, is to change them into Wounds. To this End, the
Hardness and Dryness of the Edges of the Ulcer, and indeed of the whole Ulcer,
must be diminished, and its Inflammation removed. But sometimes the Hardness is
so obstinate, that this cannot be mollified any other Way, than by scarifying
the Edges with a Lancet. But when it may be effected by other Means, let a
Pledget spread with the Ointment No. 69, be applied all over the Ulcer; and
this Pledget be covered again with a Compress of several Folds, moistened in
the Liquid No. 70, which should be renewed three times daily; though it is
sufficient to apply a fresh Pledget only twice.

As I have already affirmed that Ulcers were often the Consequences of sharp
and spirituous Dressings, it is evident such should be abstained from, without
which Abstinence they will prove incurable.

To forward the Cure, salted Food, Spices, and strong Drink should be avoided;
the Quantity of Flesh-meat should be lessened; and the Body be kept open by a
Regimen of Pulls, or Vegetables, and by the habitual Use of Whey sweetened with
Honey.

If the Ulcers are in the Legs, a very common Situation of them, it is of great
Importance, as well as in Wounds of the same Parts, that the Patients should
walk about but little; and yet never stand up without walking. This indeed is
one of these Cases, in which those, who have some Credit and Influence in the
Estimation of the People, should omit nothing to make them thoroughly
comprehend the Necessity of confining themselves, some Days, to undisturbed
Tranquillity and Rest; and they should also convince them, that this Term of
Rest is so far from being lost Time, that it is likely to prove their most
profitable Time of Life. Negligence, in this material Point, changes the
slightest Wounds into Ulcers, and the most trifling Ulcers into obstinate and
incurable ones: insomuch that there is scarcely any Man, who may not observe
some Family in his Neighborhood, reduced to the Hospital This seems just the
same as coming on the Parish, or being received into an Almshouse, here; in
Consequence of such an incurable Disability happening to the poor working
Father of a Family. K.
, from their having been too inattentive to the due Care of some Complaint of
this Sort.

I conclude this Article on Ulcers with repeating, that those which are owing
to some internal Cause; or even such as happen from an external one, in Persons
of a bad Habit of Body, frequently require a more particular Treatment.

Of Frozen Limbs.
457. It is but too common, in very rigorous Winters, for some Persons to be
pierced with so violent a Degree of Cold, that their Hands or Feet, or
sometimes both together, are frozen at once, just like a Piece of Flesh meat
exposed to the Air.

If a Person thus pierced with the Cold, dispose himself to walk about, which
seems so natural and obvious a Means to get warm; and especially, if he
attempts to The Reason of the Fatality of Heat, in these Cases, and of the
Success of an opposite Application (See 459) seems strictly and even
beautifully analogous to what Hippocrates has observed of the Danger, and even
Fatality, of all great and sudden Changes in the human Body, whether from the
Weather or otherwise. Whence this truly great Founder of Physic, when he
observes elsewhere, that Diseases are to be cured by something contrary to
their Causes, very consistently advises, not a direct and violent Contrariety,
but a gradual and regulated one, a Sub-contrariety. K.
warm the Parts that have been frozen, his Case proves irrecoverable.
Intolerable Pains are the Consequence, which Pains are speedily attended with
an incurable Gangrene; and there is no Means left to save the Patient's Life,
but by cutting off the gangrened Limbs.

There was a very late and terrible Example of this, in the Case of an
Inhabitant at Coss^nay, who had both his Hands frozen. Some greasy Ointments
were applied hot to them, the Consequence of which was, the Necessity of
cutting off six of his Fingers.

458. In short, there is but one certain Remedy in such Cases, and this is to
convey the Person affected into some Place where it does not freeze, but where,
however, it is but very moderately hot, and there continually to apply, to the
frozen Parts, Snow, if it be at Hand; and if not, to keep washing them
incessantly, but very gently (since all Friction would at this Juncture prove
dangerous in Ice-water, as the Ice thaws in the Chamber. By this Application
the Patients will be sensible of their Feelings returning very gradually to the
Part) and that they begin to recover their Motion. In this State they may
safely be moved into a Place a little warmer, and drink some Cups of the Potion
No. 13, or of another of the like Quality.

459. Every Person may be a competent Judge of the manifest Danger of
attempting to relieve such Parts by heating them, and of the Use of Ice-water,
by a common, a daily Experience. Frozen Pears, Apples and Radishes, being put
into Water just about to Freeze, recover their former State, and prove quickly
eatable. But if they are put into warm Water, or into a hot Place, Rottenness,
which is one Sort of Grangene, is the immediate Effect. The following Case will
make this right Method of treating them still more intelligible, and
demonstrate its Efficacy.

A Man was traveling to the Distance of six Leagues in very cold Weather, the
Road being covered with Snow and Ice. His Shoes, not being very good, failed
him on his March, so that he walked the three last Leagues barefooted; and
felt, immediately after the first Half-League, sharp Pains in his Legs and
Feet, which increased as he proceeded. He arrived at his Journey's End in a
Manner nearly deprived of his lower Extremities. They set him before a great
Fire, heated a Bed well, and put him into it. His Pains imediately became
intolerable: he was incessantly in the most violent Agitations, and cried out
in the most piercing and affecting Manner. A Physician being sent for in the
Night, found his Toes of a blackish Color, and beginning to lose their
Feeling. His Legs and the upper Part of his Feet, which were excessively
swelled, of a purplish Red, and varied with Spots of a violet Color, were
still sensible of the most excruciating Pains. The Physician ordered in a Pail
of Water from the adjoining River, adding more to it, and some Ice withal. In
this he obliged the Patient to plunge his Legs; they were kept in near an Hour,
and within that Time, the Pains became less violent. After another Hour he
ordered a second cold Bath, from which the Patient perceiving still further
Relief, prolonged it to the Extent of two Hours. During that Time, some Water
was taken out of the Pail, and some Ice and Snow were put into it. Now his
Toes, which had been black, grew red; the violet Spots in his Legs disappeared;
the Swelling abated; the Pains became moderate, and intermitted. The Bath was
nevertheless repeated six Times; after which there remained no other Complaint,
but that of a great Tenderness or extraordinary Sensibility in the Soles of his
Feet, which hindered him from walking. The Parts were afterward bathed with
some aromatic Fomentations; and he drank a Ptisan of Sarsaparilla [one of Elder
Flowers would have answered the same Purpose, and have been less expensive.] On
the eighth Day from his Seizure he was perfectly recovered, and returned home
on Foot on the fifteenth.

460. When cold Weather is extremely severe, and a Person is exposed to it for
a long Time at once, it proves mortal, in Consequence of its congealing the
Blood, and because it forces too great a Proportion of Blood up the Brain; so
that the Patient dies of a Kind of Apoplexy, which is preceeded by a
Sleepiness, In this Circumstance the Traveller, who finds he grows drowsy,
should redouble his Efforts to extricate himself from the eminent Danger he is
exposed to. This Sleep, which he might consider as some Allevation of his
Sufferings, if indulged, would prove his last.

461. The Remedies in such Cases are the same with those directed in frozen
Limbs. The Patient must he conducted to an Apartment rather cold than hot, and
be rubbed with Snow or with Ice-water. There have been many well attested
Instances of this Method: and as such Cases are still more frequent in more
northern Climates, a Bath of the very coldest Water has been found the surest
Remedy.

Since it is known that many People have been revived, who had remained in the
Snow, or had been exposed to the freezing Air during five, or even six
successive Days, and who had discovered no one Mark of Life for several Hours,
the utmost Endeavors should be used for the Recovery of Persons in the like
Circumstances and Situation.

Of Kibes, or Chilblains.
462. These troublesome and smarting Complaints attack the Hands, Feet, Heels,
Ears, Nose and Lips, those of Children especially, and mostly in Winter; when
these extremities are exposed to the sudden Changes from hot to cold, and from
cold to hot Weather. They begin with an Inflation or Kind of Swelling, which,
at first, occasions but little Heat, Pain or Itching. Sometimes they do not
exceed this first State, and go off spontaneously without any Application: But
at other Times, which may be termed the second Degree of the Disorder (whether
it happens from their being neglected, or improperly treated) their Heat,
Redness, Itching and Pain increase considerably; so that the Patient is often
deprived of the free Use of his Fingers by the Pain, Swelling and Numbness: in
which Case the Malady is still aggravated, if effectual Means are not used.

Whenever the Inflammation mounts to a still higher Degree, small Vesications
or Blisters are formed, which are not long without bursting; when they leave a
slight Excoriation, or Rawness, as it were, which speedily ulcerates, and
frequently proves a very deep and obstinate Ulcer, discharging a sharp and
ill-conditioned Matter.

The last and most virulent Degree of Chilblains, which is not infrequent in
the very coldest Countries, though very rare in the temperate ones, is, when
the Inflammation degenerates into a Gangrene.

463. These Tumors are owing to a Fullness and Obstruction of the Vessels of the
Skin, which occurs from this Circumstance, that the Veins, which are more
superficial than the Arteries, being proportionably more affected and
straitened by the Cold, do not carry off all the Blood communicated to them by
the Arteries; and perhaps also the Particles or Atoms of Cold, which are
admitted through the Pores of the Skin, may act upon our Fluids, as it does
upon Water, and occasion a Congelation of them, or a considerable Approach
toward it.

If these Complaints are chiefly felt, which in fact is the Case, rather on the
extreme Parts than on others, it arises from two Causes, the first of which is,
that the Circulation's being weaker at the Extremities than elsewhere, the
Effect of those Causes, that may impair it, must be more considerably felt
there. The second Reason is, because these Parts are more exposed to the
Impressions from without than the others.

They occur most frequently to Children, from their Weakness and the greater
Tenderness, and Sensibility of their Organs, which necessarily increase the
Effect of external Impressions. It is the frequent and strong Alteration from
Heat to Cold, that seems to contribute the most powerfully to the Production of
Chilblains; and this Effect of it is most considerable, when the Heat of the
Air is at the same Time blended with Moisture; whence the extreme and
superficial Parts pass suddenly as it were, out of a hot, into a cold Bath. A
Man sixty Years of Age, who never before was troubled with Kibes, having worn,
for some Hours on a Journey, a Pair of furred Gloves, in which his Hands
sweated, felt them very tender, and found them swelled up with Blood; as the
common Effect of the warm Bath is to soften and relax, and to draw Blood
abundantly to the bathed Parts, whence it renders them more sensible.

This Man, I say, thus circumstanced, was at that Age first attacked with
Chilblains, which proved extremely troublesome; and he was every succeeding
Winter as certainly infested with them, within half an Hour after he left off
his Gloves, and was exposed to a very cold Air.

It is for this Reason, that several Persons are never infested with
Chilblains, but when they use themselves to Muffs, which, we scarcely known in
hot Countries; nor are they very common among the more northern ones, in which
the extraordinary Changes from Cold to Heat are very rare and unusual.

Some People are subject to this troublesome Complaint in the Fall; while
others have it only in the Spring. The Child of a laboring Peasant, who has a
hard Skin, and one inured to all the Impressions of the Seasons and of the
Elements, is, and indeed necessarily must be, less liable to Kibes, than the
Child of a rich Citizen, whose Skin is often cherished, at the Expense of his
Constitution. But even among Children of the same Rank in Life and
Circumstances, who seem pretty much of the same Complexion, and live much in
the same Manner; (whence they might of Course be supposed equally liable to the
same Impressions, and to the like Effects of them) there is, nevertheless, a
very great Difference with respect to their constitutional Propensity to
contract Chilblains. Some are very cruelly tormented with them, from the
setting-in of Autumn, to the very End of the Spring: others have either none an
all, or have them but very slightly, and for a very short Time. This Difference
undoubtedly arises from the different Quality of their Humors, and the Texture
of their whole Surface, but particularly from that of the Skin of their Hands;
though we readily confess it is by no Means easy to determine, with Certainty
and Precision, in what this Difference essentially consists.

Children of a sanguine Complexion and delicate Skin are pretty generally
subject to this Disorder, which is often regarded much too slightly, though it
is really severe enough to engage our Attention more; since, even abstracted
from the sharp Pains which smart these unhappy Children for several Months; it
sometimes gives them a Fever, hinders them from sleeping, and yet confines them
to their Bed, which is very prejudicial to their Constitutions. It also breaks
in upon the Order of their different Duties and Employments; it interrupts
their innocent salutary Pleasures; and sometimes, when they are obliged to earn
their daily Bread by doing some Work or other, it sinks them down to Misery. I
knew a young Man, who from being rendered incapable by Chilblains, of serving
out his Apprenticeship to a Watch-maker, is become a lazy Beggar.

Chilblains which attack the Nose, often leave a Mark that alters the
Physiognomy, the Aspect of the Patient for the Remainder of his Life: and the
Hands of such as have suffered from very obstinate ones, are commonly ever
sensible of their Consequences.

464. With Respect, therefore, to these afflicting Tumors and Ulcerations, we
should, in the first Place, do our utmost to prevent them; and next to exert
our best Endeavors to cure such as we could not prevent.

465. Since they manifestly depend on the Sensibility of the Skin, the Nature
of the Humors, and the Changes of the Weather from Heat to Cold, in order to
prevent them, in the first Place, the Skin must be rendered firmer or less
tender. 2, That vicious Quality of the Temperament, which cantributes to their
Existence, must be corrected; and, 3, the Persons so liable, must guard
themselves as well as possible, against these Changes of the Weather.

Now the Skin of the Hands, as well as that of the whole Body, may be
strengthened by that Habit of washing or bathing in cold Water, which I have
described at large, 384; and in fact, I have never seen Children, who had been
early accustomed and inured to this Habit, as much afflicted with Chilblains as
others. But still a more particular Regard should be had to fortify the Skin of
the Hands, which are more obnoxious to this Disorder than the Feet, by making
Children dip them in cold Water, and keep them for some Moments together in it
every Morning, and every Evening too, before Supper, from the very Beginning of
the Fall. It will give the Children no Sort of Pain, during that Season, to
contract this Habit; and when it is once contracted, it will give them no
Trouble to continue it throughout the Winter, even when the Water is ready to
freeze every where. They may also be habituated to plunge their Feet into cold
Water twice or thrice a Week; and this Method, which might be less adapted for
grown Persons, who had not been accustomed to it, must be without Objection
with respect to such Children, as have been accustomed to it; to whom all its
Consequences must be useful and salutary.

At the same time Care must be taken not to defeat or lessen the Effect of the
cold bathing, by suffering the Bather or Washer, to grow too warm between two
Baths or Dippings; which is also avoiding the too speedy Successions of Heat
and Cold. For this Purpose, 1, the Children must be taught never to warm their
Hands before the Fire at such Times, and still less before the Stoves, which
very probably are one of the principal Causes of Chilblains, that are less
usual in Countries which use no such Stoves, and among those Individuals who
make the least Use of them, where they are. Above all, the Use of Cavettes
(that is, of Seats, or little Stairs, as it were, contrived between the Stove
and Wall) is prejudicial to Children, and even to grown People, upon several
Accounts. 2, They should never accustom themselves to wear Muffs. 3, It would
be also proper they should never use Gloves, unless some particular
Circumstances require it; and I recommend this Abstinence from Gloves,
especially to young Boys: but if any should be allowed them, let the Gloves be
thin and smooth.

466. When Chilblains seem to be nourished by some Fault in the Temperament or
Humors, the Consideration of a Physician becomes necessary, to direct a proper
Method of removing or altering it. I have seen Children from the Age of three,
to that of twelve or thirteen Years, in whom their Chilblains, raw and flead,
as it were, for eight Months of the Year, seemed to be a particular Kind of
Issue, by which Nature freed herself of an inconvenient Superfluity of Humors,
when the Perspiration was diminished by the Abatement of the violent Heats. In
such Cases I have been obliged to carry them through a pretty long Course of
Regimen and Remedies; which, however, being necessarily various from a Variety
of Circumstances, cannot be detailed here. The milder Preparations of Antimony
are often necessary in such Cases; and some Purges conduce in particular ones
to allay and to shorten the Disorder.

467. The first Degree of this Complaint goes off, as I have already said,
without the Aid of Medicine; or should it prove somewhat more obstinate, it may
easily be dissipated by some of the following Remedies. But when they rise to
the second Degree, they must be treated like other Complaints from Congelation,
or Frost-biting (of which they are the first Degree) with cold Water, Ice-water
and Snow.

No other Method or Medicine is nearly as efficacious as very cold Water, so as
to be ready to freeze, in which the Hands are to be dipped and retained for some
Minutes together, and several Times daily. In short it is the only Remedy which
ought to be applied, when the Hands are the Parts affected; when the Patient
has the Courage to bear this Degree of Cold; and when he is under no
Circumstance which may render it prejudicial. It is the only application I have
used for myself, after having been attacked with Chilblains for some Years
past, from having accustomed myself to too warm a Muff.

There ensues a slight Degree of Pain for some Moments after plunging the Hand
into Water, but it diminishes gradually. On taking the Hand out, the fingers
are numbed with the Cold, but they presently grow warm again; and within a
Quarter of an Hour, it is entirely over.

The Hands on being taken out of the Water, are to be well dried, and put into
Skin Gloves; after bathing three or four Times, their Swelling subsides, so
that the Skin wrinkles: but by continuing the cold Bathing, it grows tight and
smooth again; the Cure is completed after using it three or four Days; and, in
general, the Disorder never returns again the same Winter.

The most troublesome raging Itching is certainly assuaged by plunging the
Hands into cold Water.

The Effect of Snow is, perhaps, still more speedy: the Hands are to be gently
and often rubbed with it for a considerable Time; they grow hot, and are of a
very high Red for some Moments, but entire Ease very quickly succeeds.

Nevertheless, a very small Number of Persons, who must have extremely delicate
and sensible Skins, do not experience the Efficacy of this Application. It
seems too active for them; it affects the Skin much like a common blistering
Plaster; and by bringing on a large Flow of Humors there, it increases,
instead of lessening, the Complaint.

468. When this last Reason indeed, or some other Circumstance exists; such as
the Child's Want of Courage, or its Affliction; the monthly Discharges in a
Woman; a violent Cough, habitual Colics; and some other Maladies, which have
been observed to be renewed or aggravated by the Influence of Cold at the
Extremities, do really forbid this very cold Application, some others must be
substituted.

One of the best is to wear Day and Night, without ever putting it off, a Glove
made of any smooth Skin, such as that of a Dog; which seldom fails to
extinguish the Disorder in some Days Time.

When the Feet are affected with Chilblains, Socks of the same Skin should be
worn; and the Patient kept close to his Bed for some Days.

469. When the Disorder is violent, the Use of cold Water prohibited, and the
Gloves just recommended have but a slow Effect, the diseased Parts should be
gently fomented or moistened several Times a Day, with some Decoction, rather
more than warm; which at the same Time should be dissolving and emollient. Such
is that celebrated Decoction of the Scrapings, the Peal of Radishes, whose
Efficacy is still further increased, by adding one sixth Part of Vinegar to the
Decoction.

Another Decoction, of whose great Efficacy I have been a Witness, but which
dies the Hands yellow for a few Days, is the Prescription No. 71. Many others
may be made, of nearly the same Virtues, with all the vulnerary Herbs, and even
with the Faltranc.

Urine, which some boast of in these Cases, from their having used it with
Success; and the Mixture of Urine and Limewater have the like Virtues with the
former Decoctions. Chilblains may also be advantageously washed with Water and
Flower of Mustard, which will concur, in a certain and easy Manner, both to
cleanse and to cure them. E. L.


As soon as the Hands affected are taken out of these Decoctions, they must be
defended from the Air by Gloves.

470. Vapors or Steams are often more efficacious than Decoctions; whence
instead of dipping the Hands into these already mentioned, we may expose them
to their Vapors, with still more Success. That of hot Vinegar is one of the
most powerful Remedies; those of This is, or should be, the same with the
Bitumen Judaicum, formerly kept in the shops; but which is never directed,
except in that strange Medley the Venice Treacle, according to the old
Prescription. The best is found in Egypt, and on the Red Sea: but a different
Sort, from Germany, France, and Swisserland, is now generally substituted here.
K.
Asphalt or of Turpentine have frequently succeeded too. It may be needless to
add that the affected Parts must be defended from the Air, as well after the
Steams as the Decoctions; since it is from this Circumstance of keeping off the
Air, that the Cerecloths are of Service; and hence also the Application of Suet
has sometimes answered.

When the Distemper is subdued by the Use of Bathings of Steams, which make the
Skin suple and soft, then it should be strengthened by washing the Parts with a
little camphorated Brandy, diluted with an equal Quantity of Water.

471. When the Nose is affected with a Chilblain, the Steam of Vinegar, and an
artificial Nose, or Covering for it, made of Dog-skin, are the most effectual
Applications. The same Treatment is equally proper for the Ears and the Chin,
when infested with them. Frequently washing these Parts in cold Water is a good
Preservative from their being attacked.

472. Whenever the Inflammation rises very high, and brings on some Degree of a
Fever, the Patient's usual Quantity of strong Drink and of Flesh-meat must be
lessened; his Body should be kept open by a few Glysters; he should take every
Evening a Dose of Nitre as prescribed No. 20; and if the Fever proves strong,
he should loose some Blood too.

As many are troubled with obstinate Chilblains, should always be denied the
Use of strong Liquor and Flesh.

473. When this Distemper prevails in its third Degree, and the Parts are
ulcerated; besides keeping the Patients strictly to the Regimen of Persons in a
Way of Recovery, and giving them a Purge of Manna, the swelled Parts should be
exposed to the Steams of Vinegar; the Ulcerations should be covered with a
Diapalma Plaster; and the whole Part should be inveloped in a smooth soft
Skin, or in thin Cerecloths.

474. The fourth Degree of this Disease, in which the Parts become gangrenous,
must be prevented by the Method and Medicines which remove an Inflammation; but
if unhappily a Gangrene has already appeared, the Assistance of a Surgeon
proves indispensably necessary.

Of Ruptures.
475. Hernias or Ruptures, which Country People term being bursten, are a
Disorder which sometimes occurs at the very Birth; though more frequently they
are the Effects of violent crying, of a strong forcing Cough, or of repeated
Efforts to vomit in the first Months of Infancy.

They may happen afterward indiscriminately at every Age, either as
Consequences of particular Maladies, or Accidents, or from People's violent
Exertions of their Strength. They happen much oftener to Men than Women; and
the most common Sort, indeed the only one of which I propose to treat, and that
but briefly, is that which consists in the Descent of a Part of the Guts, or of
the Cawl, into the Bag or Cod-piece.

It is not difficult to distinguish this Rupture. When it occurs in little
Children, it is almost ever cured by making them constantly wear a Bandage,
which should be made only of Fustian, with a little Pillow or Pincushion,
stuffed with Linen Rags, Hair or Bran. There should be at least two of these
Bandages, to change them alternately; nor should it ever be applied, but when
the Child is laid down on its Back, and after being well assured that the Gut
or Cawl, which had fallen down, has been safely returned into the Cavity of the
Belly; since without this Precaution it might occasion the worst Consequences.

The good Effect of the Bandage may be still further promoted, by applying upon
the Skin, and within the Plait or Fold of the Groin (under which Place the
Rings, or Passage out of the Belly into the Bag lie) some pretty astringent or
strengthening Plaster, such as that commonly used for Fractures, or that I
have already mentioned, 144. Here we may observe by the Way, that ruptured
Children should never be set on a Horse, nor be carried by any Person on
Horseback, before the Rupture is perfectly cured.

476. In a more advanced Age, a Bandage only of Fustian is not sufficient; one
must be procured with a Plate of Steel, even so as to constrain and incommode
the Wearer a little at first: nevertheless it soon becomes habitual, and is
then no longer inconvenient to him.

477. Ruptures sometimes attain a monstrous Size; and a great Part of the Guts
fall down into the Scrotum or Bag, without any Symptom of an actual Disease.
This Circumstance, nevertheless, is accompanied with very great Inconvenience,
which disables Persons affected with it to work; and whenever the Malady is so
considerable, and of a long Standing too, there are commonly some Obstacles
that prevent a complete Return of the Guts into the Belly. In this State
indeed, the Application of the Bandage or Truss is impracticable, and the
miserable Patients are condemned to carry their grievous Burden for the
Remainder of their Lives; which may however be palliated a little by the Use of
a Suspensory and Bag, adapted to the Size of the Rupture. This Dread of its
increasing Magnitude is a strong Motive for checking the Progress of it, when
it first appears. But there is another still stronger; which is, that Ruptures
expose the Patient to a Symptom frequently mortal. This occurs when that Part
of the Intestines fallen into the Scrotum inflames; when still increasing in
its Bulk, and being extremely compressed, acute Pains come on: for now from the
Increase of the Rupture's Extent, the Passage which gave Way to it is Descent,
cannot admit of its Return or Ascent; the Blood Vessels themselves being
oppressed, the Inflammation increases every Moment; the Communication between
the Stomach and the Fundament is often entirely cut off; so that nothing passes
through, but incessant Vomitings come on [this being the Kind of Miserere, or
Iliac Passion I have mentioned, 320] which are succeeded by the Hickup, Raving,
Swooning, cold Sweats, and Death.

478. This Symptom supervenes in Ruptures, when the Excrements become hard in
that Part of the Guts fallen into the Scrotum; when the Patient is overheated
with Wine, Drams, an inflammatory Diet, etc. or when he has received a Stroke
on the ailing Part, or had a Fall.

479. The best Means and Remedies are, 1, as soon as ever this Symptom or
Accident is manifest, to bleed the Patient very plentifully, as he lies down in
his Bed and upon his Back, with his Head a little raised, and his Legs somewhat
bent, so that his Knees may be erect. This is the Attitude or Posture they
should always preserve as much as possible. When the Malady is not too far
advanced, the first Bleeding often makes a complete Cure; and the Guts return
up as soon as it is over. At other Times this Bleeding is less successful, and
leaves a Necessity for its Repetition.

2, A Glyster must be thrown up consisting of a strong Decoction of the large
white Beet Leaves, with a small Spoonful or Pinch of common Salt, and a Bit of
fresh Butter of the Size of an Egg.

3, Folds of Linen dipped in Ice-water must be applied all over the Tumor, and
constantly renewed every Quarter of an Hour. -- This Remedy, when immediately
applied, has produced the most happy Effects; but if the Symptom has endured
violently more than ten or twelve Hours, it is often too late to apply it; and
then it is better to make Use of Flannels dipped in a warm Decoction of Mallow
and Elder Flowers, shifting them frequently. It has been known however, that
Ice-water, or Ice itself has succeeded as late as the third Day. Pieces of Ice
applied between two Pieces of Linen, directly upon the Rupture, as soon as
possible after its first Appearance, is one of those extraordinary Remedies,
which we should never hesitate to make immediate Use of. We may be certain by
this Application, if the Rupture is simple and not complicated by some
aggravating Cause, to remove speedily, and with very little Pain, a Disorder,
that might be attended with the most dreadful Consequences. But the Continuance
of this Application must he proportioned to the Strength of the Person
ruptured, which may be sufficiently estimated by the Pulse. E. L.


4, When these Endeavors are insufficient, Glysters of Tobacco Smoke must be
tried, which have often redressed and returned Ruptures, when every Thing else
had failed.

5, And lastly, If all these Attempts are fruitless, the Operation must be
resolved on, without losing a Moment's Time; as this local Disease proves
sometimes mortal in the Space of two Days; but for this Operation an excellent
Surgeon is indispensably necessary. The happy Consequence with which I have
ordered it, in a most desperate Case since the first Edition of this Work, on
the sixth Day after a Labor, has convinced me, still more than any former
Observation I had made, that the Trial of it ought never to be omitted, when
other Attempts have been unavailing. It cannot even hasten the Patient's Death,
which must be inevitable without it, but it rather renders that more gentle,
where it might fail to prevent it. When it is performed as Mr. LEVADE effected
it, in the Case I have just referred to, the Pain attending it is very
tolerable and soon over.

I shall not attempt to describe the Operation, as I could not explain myself
sufficiently to instruct an ignorant Surgeon in it; and an excellent and
experienced one must be sufficiently apprized of all I could say concerning it.

A certain Woman in this Place, but now dead, had the great and impudent
Temerity to attempt this Operation, and killed her Patients after the most
excruciating Torments, and an Extirpation, or cutting away, of the Testicle;
which Quacks and ignorant Surgeons always do, but which a good Surgeon never
does in this Operation. This is often the Custom too (in Country Places) of
those Caitiffs, who perform this Operation without the least Necessity; and
mercilessly emasculate a Multitude of Infants; whom Nature, if left to her own
Conduct, or assisted only by a simple Bandage, would have perfectly cured;
instead of which they absolutely kill a great many, and deprive those of their
Virility, who survive their Robbery and Violence. It were religiously to be
wished such Caitiffs were to be duly, that is, severely punished; and it cannot
be too much inculcated into the People, that this Operation (termed the
Bubonocele) in the Manner it is performed by the best Surgeons, is not
necessary, except in the Symptoms and Circumstances I have mentioned, and that
the cutting off the Testicle never is so.

Of Phlegmons or Boils.
480. Every Person knows what Boils are at Sight, which are considerably
painful when large, highly inflamed, or so situated as to incommode the
Motions, or different Positions, of the Body. Whenever their Inflammation is
very considerable; when there are a great many of them at once, and they
prevent the Patients from sleeping, it becomes necessary to enter them into a
cooling Regimen; to throw up some opening Glysters; and to make them drink
plentifully of the Ptisan, No. 2. Sometimes it is also necessary to bleed the
Patient.

Should the Inflammation be very high indeed, a Pultice of Bread and Milk, or
of Sorrel a little boiled and bruised, must be applied to it. But if the
Inflammation is only moderate, a Mucilage Plaster, or one of the simple
Diachylon, may be sufficient. Diachylon with the Gums is more active and
efficacious; but it so greatly augments the Pain of some Persons afflicted with
Boils, that they cannot bear it.

Boils, which often return, signify some Fault in the Temperament, and
frequently one so considerable, that might dispose a Physician to be so far
apprehensive of its Consequences, as to enquire into the Cause, and to attempt
the Extinction of it. But the Detail of this is no Part nor Purpose of the
present Work.

481. The Phlegmon, or Boil, commonly terminates in Suppuration, but a
Suppuration of a singular Kind. It breaks open (...) first on its Top, or the
most pointed Part, when some Drops of a Pus like that of an Abscess, comes out,
after which the Germ, or what is called the Core, of it may be discerned. This
is a purulent Matter or Substance, but so thick and tenacious, that it appears
like a solid Body; which may be drawn out entirely in the Shape of a small
Cylinder, like the Pith of Elder, to the Length of some Lines of an Inch;
sometimes to the Length of a full Inch, and even more. The Emission of this
Core is commonly followed by the Discharge of a certain Quantity, according to
the Size of the Tumor, of liquid Matter, spread throughout the Bottom of it.
As soon as ever this Discharge is made, the Pain goes entirely off; and the
Swelling disappears at the End of a few Days, by continuing to apply the simple
Diachylon, or the Ointment No. 66.

Of Fellons or Whitlows.
482. The Danger of these small Tumors is much greater than is generally
supposed. It is an Inflammation at the Extremity or End of a Finger, which is
often the Effect of a small Quantity of Humor extravasated, or stagnant, in
that Part; whether this has happened in Consequnce of a Bruise, a Sting, or a
Bite. At other times it is evident that it has resulted from no external Cause,
but is the Effect of some inward one.

It is distinguished into many Kinds, according to the Place in which the
Inflammation begins; but the essential Nature of the Malady is always the same,
and requires the same Sort of Remedies. Hence such as are neither Physicians
nor Surgeons, may spare themselves the Trouble of enquiring into the Divisions
of this Distemper; which, though they vary (...) Danger of it, and diversify
the Manner of the Surgeons Operation, yet have no Relation to the general
Treatment of it; the Power and Activity of which must be regulated by the
Violence of the Symptoms.

483. This Disorder begins with a slow heavy Pain, attended by a slight
Pulsation, without Swelling, without Redness, and without Heat; but in a little
Time the Pain, Heat, and Pulsation or Throbbing become intolerable. The Part
grows very large and red; the adjoining Fingers and the whole Hand swelling up.
In some Cases a Kind of red and inflated Fuse or Streak may be observed, which,
beginning at the affected Part, is continued almost to the Elbow; neither is it
unusual for the Patients to complain of a very sharp Pain under the Shoulder;
and sometimes the whole Arm is excessively inflamed and swelled. The Sick have
not a Wink of Sleep, the Fever and other Symptoms quickly increasing. If the
Distemper rises to a violent Degree indeed, a Delirium and Convulsions
supervene.

This Inflammation of the Finger terminates, either in Suppuration, or in a
Gangrene. When the last of these occurs, the Patient is in very great Danger,
if he is not very speedily relieved; and it has proved necessary more than once
to cut off the Arm, for the Preservation of his Life. When Suppuration is
effected, if the Matter lies very deep, and is sharp; or if the Assistance of a
Surgeon has arrived too late, the Bone of the last Phalanx, or Row of Bones of
the Finger, is generally carious and lost. But how gentle soever the Complaint
has been, the Nail is very generally separated and falls off.

484. The internal Treatment in Whitlows, is the same with that in other
inflammatory Distempers. The Patient must enter upon a Regimen more or less
strict, in Proportion to the Degree of the Fever; and if this runs very high,
and the Inflammation be very considerable, there may be a Necessity for several
Bleedings.

The external Treatment consists in allaying the Inflammation; in softening the
Skin; and in procuring a Discharge of the Matter, as soon as it is formed. For
this Purpose,

1, The Finger affected is to be plunged, as soon as the Disorder is manifest,
in Water a little more than warm: the Steam of boiling Water may also be
directed into it; and by doing these things almost constantly for the first
Day, a total Dissipation of the Malady has often been obtained. But unhappily
it has been generally supposed, that such slight Attacks could have but very
slight Consequences, whence they have been neglected until the Disorder has
greatly advanced; in which State Suppuration becomes absolutely necessary.

2, This Suppuration therefore may be forwarded, by continually involving the
Finger, as it were, in a Decoction of Mallow Flowers boiled in Milk, or with a
Cataplasm of Bread and Milk. This may be rendered still more active and
ripening, by adding a few white Lilly Roots, or a little Honey. But this last
must not be applied before the Inflammation is somewhat abated, and Suppuration
begins; before which Term, all sharp Applications are very dangerous. At this
Time, Yeast or Leaven may be advantageously used, which powerfully promotes
Suppuration. The Sorrel Pultice, mentioned 480, is also a very efficacious one.

485. A speedy Discharge of the ripe Matter is of considerable Importance, but
this particularly requires the Attention of the Surgeon; as it is not proper to
wait till the Tumor breaks and discharges of itself; and this the rather, as
from the Skin's proving sometimes extremely hard, the Matter might be inwardly
effused between the Muscles, and upon their Membranes, before it could
penetrate through the Skin. For this Reason, as soon as Matter is suspected to
be formed, a Surgeon should be called in, to determine exactly on the Time,
when an Opening should be made; which had better be performed a little too soon
than too late; and a little too deep, than not deep enough.

When the Orifice has been made, and the Discharge is effected, it is to be
dressed up with the Plaster No. 66, spread upon Linen, or with the Cerecloth;
and these Dressings are to be renewed daily.

486. When the Whitlow is caused by a Humor extravasated very near the Nail,
an expert Surgeon speedily checks its Progress, and cures it effectually by an
Incision which lets out the Humor. Yet, notwithstanding this Operation is in
no wise difficult, all Surgeons are not qualified to perform it, and but too
many have no Idea at all of it.

487. Fungous, or, as it is commonly called, proud Flesh, sometimes appears
during the incarning or healing of the Incision. such may be kept down with
sprinkling a little Minium (red Lead) or burnt Alum over it.

488. If a Caries, a Rottenness of the Bone, should be a Consequence, there is
a Necessity for a Surgeon's Attendance, as much as if there was a Gangrene; for
which Reason I shall add nothing with respect to either of these Symptoms; only
observing, there are three very essential Remedies against the last; viz. the
Bark, No. 14, a Dram of which must be taken every two Hours; Scarifications
throughout the whole gangrened Part; and Fomentations with a Decoction of the
Bark, and the Addition of Spirit of Sulphur. This Medicine is certainly no
cheap one; but a Decoction of other bitter Plants, with the Addition of Spirit
of Salt, may sometimes do instead of it. And here I take leave to insist again
upon it, that in most Cases of gangrened Limbs, it is judicious not to proceed
to an Amputation of the mortified Part, till the Gangrene stops, which may be
known by a very perceivable Circle, (and easily distinguished by the most
ignorant Persons) that marks the Bounds of the Gangrene, and separates the
living from the mortified Parts.

Of Thorns, Splinters, or other pointed Substances piercing into the Skin or
Flesh.
489. It is very common for the Hands, Feet or Legs, to be pierced by the
forcible Intrusion of small pointed Substances, such as Thorns or Prickles,
whether of Roses, Thistles or Chestnuts, or little Splinters of Wood, Bone, etc.

If such Substances are immediately and entirely extracted, the Accident is
generally attended with no bad Consequences; though more certainly to obviate
any such, Compresses of Linen dipped in warm Water may be applied to the Part, or
it may be kept a little while in a warm Bath. But if any such pointed
penetrating Body cannot be directly extracted, or if a Part of it be left
within, it causes an Inflammation, which, in its Progress, soon produces the
same Symptoms as a Whitlow: or if it happens in the Leg, it inflames and forms
a considerable Abscess there.

490. To prevent such Consequences, if the penetrating Substance is still near
the Surface, and an expert Surgeon is at Hand, he must immediately make a small
Incision, and thence extract it. But if the Inflammation were already formed,
this would be useless, and even dangerous.

When the Incision, therefore, is improper, there should be applied to the
affected Part, (after conveying the Steam of some hot Water into it) either
some very emollient Pultices of the Crumb of Bread, Milk and Oil, or some very
emollient unctuous Matter alone, the Fat of a These Creatures perhaps are
fatter in Swisserland, than we often see them here. K.
Hare^ being generally employed in such Cases, and being indeed very effectual
to relax and supple the Skin; and, by thus diminishing its Resistance, to
afford the offensive penetrating Body an Opportunity of springing forth.
Nothing however, but the grossest Prejudice, could make any one imagine, that
this Fat attracted the Splinter, Thorn, or any other obtruded Substance by any
sympathetic Virtue; no other Sympathy in Nature being clearly demonstrated,
except that very common one between wrong Heads, and absurd extravagant
Opinions.

It is absolutely necessary that the injured Part should be kept in the easiest
Posture, and as immovable as possible.

If Suppuration has not been prevented by an immediate Extraction of the
offending Substance, the Abscess should be opened as soon as ever Matter is
formed. I have known very troublesome Events from its being too long delayed.

491. Sometimes the Thorn, after having very painfully penetrated through the
Teguments, the Skin, enters directly into the Fat; upon which the Pain ceases,
and the Patient begins to conclude no sharp prickly Substance had ever been
introduced into the Part; and of course supposes none can remain there.
Nevertheless, some Days after, or, in other Instances, some Weeks, fresh Pains
are excited, to which an Inflammation and Abscess succeed, which are to be
treated as usual, with Emollients, and seasonably opened.

A Patient has been reduced to lose his Hand, in Consequence of a sharp Thorn's
piercing into his Finger; from its having been neglected at first, and
improperly treated afterward.

Of Warts.
492. Warts are sometimes the Effects of a particular Fault in the Blood, which
feeds and extrudes a surprising Quantity of them. This happens to some
Children, from four to ten Years old, and especially to those who feed most
plentifully on Milk or Milk-meats. They may be removed by a moderate Change of
their Diet, and the Pills prescribed No. 18.

But they are more frequently an accidental Disorder of the Skin, arising from
some external Cause.

In this last Case, if they are very troublesome in Consequence of their great
Size, their Situation, or their long standing, they may be destroyed, 1, by
tying them closely with a Silk Thread, or with a strong flaxen one waxed. 2, By
cutting them off with a sharp Scissars or a Bistory, and applying a Plaster of
Diachylon with the Gums over the cut Wart, which brings on a small Suppuration
that may destroy or dissolve the Root of the Wart: and, 3, By drying, or, as it
were, withering them up by some moderately corroding Application, such as that
of the milky Juice of Our Garden Purslain, though a very juicy Herb, cannot
strictly be termed milky. In the hotter Climates where it is wild, and grows
very rankly, they sometimes boil the Leaves and Stalks (besides eating them as
a cooling Salad) and find the whole an insipid mucilaginous Pot-herb. But Dr.
TISSOT observes to me, that its Juice will inflame the Skin; and that some
Writers on Diet, who disapprove it internally, affirm they have known it
productive of bad Effects. Yet none such have ever happened to myself, nor to
many others who have frequently eaten of it. Its Seeds have sometimes been
directed in cooling Emulsions. The Wart Spurge is a very milky and common Herb,
which flowers in Summer here. K.
Purslain, of Fig Leaves, of Chelidonium (Swallow-wort) or of Spurge. But
besides these corroding vegetable Milks being procurable only in Summer, People
who have very delicate thin Skins should not make use of them, as they may
occasion a considerable and painful Swelling. Strong Vinegar, charged with as
much common Salt as it will dissolve, is a very proper Application to them. A
Plaster may also be composed from Sal Ammoniac and some Galbanum, which being
kneaded up well together and applied, seldom fails of destroying them.

The most powerful Corrosives should never be used, without the Direction of a
Surgeon; and even then it is full as prudent not to meddle with them any more
than with actual Cauteries. I have lately seen some very tedious and
troublesome Disorders and Ulcerations of the Kidneys, ensue the Application of
a corrosive Water, by the Advice of a Quack. Cutting them away is a more
certain, a less painful, and a less dangerous Way of removing them.

Wens, if of a pretty considerable Size, and Duration, are incurable by any
Remedy, except Amputation.

Of Corns.
493. The very general or only Causes of Corns, are shoes either too hard and
stiff, or too small.

The whole Cure consists in softening the Corns by repeated Washings and
Soakings of the Feet in pretty hot Water; then in cutting them, when softened,
with a Penknife or Scissars, without wounding the sound Parts (which are the
more sensible, in Proportion as they are more extended than usual) and next in
applying a Leaf of House-leek, of Ground Ivy, or of Purslain dipped in Vinegar,
upon the Part. Instead of these Leaves, if any Person will give himself the
little Trouble of dressing them every Day, he may apply a Plaster of simple
Diachylon, or of Gum Ammoniacum softened in Vinegar.

The Increase or Return of Corns can only be prevented, by avoiding the Causes
that produce them.

CHAPTER XXXI. Of some Cases which require immediate Assistance; such as
Swoonings; Haemorrhages, or involuntary Loss of Blood; Convulsion Fits, and
Suffocations; the sudden Effects of great Fear; of Disorders caused by noxious
Vapors; of Poisons, and of acute Pains. Of Swoonings.
SECT. 494. THERE are many Degrees of Swooning, or fainting away; the slightest
is that in which the Patient constantly perceives and understands, yet without
the Power of speaking. This is called a Fainting, which happens very often to
vapourish Persons, and without any remarkable Alteration of the Pulse.

If the Patient entirely loses Sensation or Feeling, and Understanding, with a
very considerable Sinking of the Pulse, this is called a Syncope, and is the
second Degree of Swooning.

But if this Syncope is so violent, that the Pulse seems totally extinguished;
without any discernible Breathing; with a manifest Coldness of the whole Body;
an^ (...) livid Countenance, it constitutes a third and last Degree, which is
the true Image of Death, that in Effect sometimes attends it, and it is called
an Asphixy, which may signify a total Resolution.

Swoonings result from many different Causes, of which I shall only enumerate
the principal; and these are, 1, Too large a Quantity of Blood. 2, A Defect or
insufficient Proportion of it, and a general Weakness. 3, A Load at and violent
Disorders of the Stomach. 4, Nervous Maladies. 5, The Passions; and, 6, some
Kinds of Diseases.

Of Swoonings occasioned by Excess of Blood.
495. An excessive Quantity of Blood is frequently a Cause of Swooning; and it
may be inferred that it is owing to this Cause, when it attacks sanguine,
hearty and robust Persons; and more especially when it attacks them, after
being combined with any additional or supervening Cause, that suddenly
increased the Motion of the Blood; such as heating Meats or Drinks, Wine,
spirituous Liquors; smaller Drinks, if taken very hot and plentifully, such as
Coffee, Indian Tea, Bawm Tea and the like; a long Exposure to the hot Sun, or
being detained in a very hot Place; much and violent Exercise; over intense and
assiduous Study or Application, or some excessive Passion.

In such Cases, first of all the Patient should be made to smell to, or even to
snuff up, some Vinegar; and his Forehead, his Temples and his Wrists should be
bathed with it; adding an equal Quantity of warm Water, if at Hand. Bathing
them with distilled or spirituous Liquors would be prejudicial in this Kind of
Swooning.

2, The Patient should be made, if possible, to swallow two or three Spoonfuls
of Vinegar, with four or five times as much Water.

3, The Patient's Garters should be tied very tightly above his Knees; as by
this Means a greater Quantity of Blood is retained in the Legs, whence the
Heart may be less overladen with it.

4, If the Fainting proves obstinate, that is, if it continues longer than a
Quarter of an Hour, or degenerates into a Syncope, an Abolition of Feeling and
Understanding, he must be bled in the Arm, which quickly revives him.

5, After the Bleeding the Injection of a Glyster will be highly proper; and
then the Patient should be kept still and calm, only letting him drink every
Half Hour, some Cups of Elder-flower Tea, with the Addition of a little Sugar
and Vinegar.

When Swoonings which result from this Cause occur frequently in the same
Person, he should in order to escape them, pursue the Directions I shall
hereafter mention, 544, when treating of Persons who superabound with Blood.

The very same Cause, or Causes, which occasion these Swoonings, also
frequently produce violent Palpitations, under the same Circumstances; the
Palpitation often preceding or following the Deliquium, or Swooning.

Of Swoonings occasioned by Weakness.
496. If too great a Quantity of Blood, which may be considered as some Excess
of Health, is sometimes the Cause of Swooning, this last is oftener the Effect
of a very contrary Cause, that is, of a Want of Blood, or an Exhaustion of too
much.

This Sort of Swooning happens after great Haemorrhages, or Discharges of
Blood; after sudden or excessive Evacuations, such as one of some Hours
Continuance in a Cholera Morbus, ( 321) or such as are more slow, but of longer
Duration, as for Instance, after an inveterate Dir^^^a, or Purging; excessive
Sweats; a Flood of Urine; such E^cesses as tend to exhaust Nature; obstinate
Wakefulness, a long Inappetency, which, by depriving the Body of its necessary
Sustenance, is attended with the same Consequence as profuse Evacuations.

These different Causes of Swooning should be opposed by the Means and Remedies
adapted to each of them. A Detail of all these would be improper here; but the
Assistances that are necessary at the Time of Swooning are nearly the same for
all Cases of this Class; excepting for that attending a great Loss of Blood, of
which I shall treat hereafter. First of all, the Patients should be laid down
on a Bed, and being covered, should have their Legs and Thighs, their Arms, and
their whole Bodies rubbed pretty strongly with hot Flanels; and no Ligature
should remain on any Part of them.

2, They should have very spirituous things to smell or snuff up, such as the
Carmelite Water, Hungary Water, the Dr. TISSOT informs me, that in Swisserland,
they call volatile ^alt of Vipers, or the volatile Salt of raw Silk Sell d'
Angleterre, of which one Goddard made a Secret, and which he brought into Vogue
the latter End of the last Century. But he justly observes at the same Time,
that on the present Occasion every other volatile Alkali will equally answer
the Purpose; and indeed the Smell of some of them, as the Spirit of Sal
Ammoniac with quick Lime, Eau de Luce. (...) seem more penetrating. K.
English Salt, Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, strong smelling Herbs, such as Rue,
Sage, Rosemary, Mint, Wormwood, and the like.

3, These should be conveyed into their Mouths; and they should be forced, if
possible, to swallow some Drops of Carmelite Water, or of Brandy, or of some
other potable Liquor, mixed with a little Water; while some hot Wine mixed with
Sugar and Cinnamon, which makes one of the best Cordials, is getting ready.

4, A Compress of Flanel, or of some other woollen Stuff, dipped in hot Wine, in
which some aromatic Herb has been steeped, must be applied to the Pit of the
Stomach.

5, If the Swooning seems likely to continue, the Patient must be put into a
well heated Bed, which has before been perfumed with burning Sugar and
Cinnamon; the Frictions of the whole Body with hot Flanels being still
continued.

6, As soon as the Patient, can swallow, he should take some Soup or Broth,
with the Yolk of an Egg; or a little Bread of Biscuit, soaked in the hot spiced
Wine.

7, Lastly, during the whole Time that all other Precautions are taken to
oppose the Cause of the Swooning, Care must be had for some Days to prevent any
Deliquium or Fainting, by giving them often, and but little at a Time, some
light yet strengthening Nourishment, such as Panada made with Soup instead of
Water, new laid Eggs very lightly poached, light roast Meats with sweet Sauce,
Chocolate, Soups of the most nourishing Meats, Jellies, Milk, etc.

497. Those Swoonings, which are the Effect of Bleeding, or of the violent
Operation of some Purge, are to be ranged in this Class.

Such as happen after artificial Bleeding, are generally very moderate,
commonly terminating as soon as the Patient is laid upon the Bed: and Persons
subject to this Kind should be bled lying down, in order to prevent it. But
should the Fainting continue longer than usual, some Vinegar smelt to, and a
little swallowed with some Water, is a very good Remedy.

The Treatment of such Faintings or Swoonings, as are the Consequences of over
violent Vomits or Purges, may be seen hereafter 552.

Of Faintings occasioned by a Load, or Uneasiness, at Stomach.
498. It has been already observed, 308, that Indigestions were sometimes
attended with Swoonings, and indeed such vehement ones, as required speedy and
very active Succor too, such as that of a Vomit. The Indigestion is sometimes
less the Effect of the Quantity, than of the Quality, or the Corruption of the
Food, contained in the Stomach. Thus we see there are some Persons, who are
disordered by eating Eggs, Fish, Craw-Fish, or any fat Meat; being thrown by
them into inexpressible Anguish attended with Swooning too. It may be supposed
to depend on this Cause, when these very Aliments have been lately eaten; and
when it evidently neither depends on the other Causes I have mentioned; nor on
such as I shall soon proceed to enumerate.

We should in Cases of this Sort, excite and revive the Patients as in the
former, by making them receive some very strong Smell, of whatever Kind is at
hand; but the most essential Point to to make them swallow down a large
Quantity of light warm Fluid; which may serve to drown, as it were, the
indigested Matter; which may soften its Acrimony; and either effect the
Discharge of it by vomiting, or force it down into the Chanel of the Intestines.

A light Infusion of Chamomile Flowers, of Tea, of Sage, of Elder-flowers, or
of Carduus Benedictus, operate with much the same Efficacy; though the
Chamomile and Carduus promote the Operation of vomiting rather more powerfully;
which warm Water alone will sometimes sufficiently do.

The Swooning ceases, or at least considerably abates in these Cases, as soon
as ever the Vomiting commences. It frequently happens too, that, during the
Swooning, Nature herself brings on a certain Nausea, a Wambling and sickish
Commotion of the Stomach, that revives or rouses the Patient for a Moment; but
yet not being sufficient to excite an actual Vomiting, it lets him soon sink
down again into this temporary Dissolution, which often continues a pretty
considerable Time; leaving behind it a Sickness at Stomach, Vertigos, and a
Depression and Anxiety, which do not occur in the former Species of this Malady.

Whenever these Swoonings from this Cause are entirely terminated, the Patient
must be kept for some Days to a very light Diet, and take, at the same Time,
every Morning fasting, a Dose of the Powder, No. 38, which relieves and
exonerates the Stomach of whatever noxious Contents might remain in it; and
then restores its natural Strength and Functions.

499. There is another Kind of Swooning, which also results from a Cause in the
Stomach; but which is, nevertheless, very different from this we have just been
treating of; and which requires a very different Kind of Assistance. It arises
from an extraordinary Sensibility of this important Organ, and from a general
Weakness of the Patient.

Those subject to this Malady are valetudinary weakly Persons, who are
disordered from many slight Causes, and whose Stomachs are at once very feeble
and extremely sensible. They have almost continually a little Uneasiness after
a Meal, though they should indulge but a little more than usual: or if they eat
of any Food not quite so easy of Digestion, they have some Quality or Commotion
after it: Nay, should the Weather only be unfavourable, and sometimes without
any perceivable assignable Cause, their Uneasiness terminates in a Swoon.

Patients swooning, from these Causes, have a greater Necessity for much
Tranquillity and Repose, than for any other Remedy; and it might be sufficient
to lay them down on the Bed: But as the Bystanders in such Cases find it
difficult to remain inactive Spectators of Persons in a Swoon, some spirituous
Liquid may be held to their Nose, while their Temples and Wrists are rubbed
with it; and at the same Time a little Wine should be given them. Frictions are
also useful in these Cases.

This Species of Swooning is oftener attended with a little Feverishness than
the others.

Of these Swoonings, which arise from nervous Disorders.
500. This Species of Swooning is almost wholely unknown to those Persons, for
whom this Treatise is chiefly intended. Yet as there are some Citizens who pass
a Part of their Lives in the Country; and some Country People who are unhappily
afflicted with the Ailments of the Inhabitants of large Towns and Cities, it
seemed necessary to treat briefly of them.

By Disorders of the Nerves, I understand in this Place, only that Fault or
Defect in them, which is the Cause of their exciting in the Body, either
irregular Motions, that is, Motions without any external Cause, at least any
perceivable one; and without our Will's consenting to the Production of them:
or such Motions, as are greatly more considerable than they should be, if they
had been proportioned to the Force of the Impression from without. This is very
exactly that State, or Affection termed the Vapors; and by the common People,
the Mother: And as there is no Organ unprovided with Nerves; and none, or
hardly any Function, in which the Nerves have not their Influence; it may be
easily comprehended, that the Vapors being a State or Condition, which arises
from the Nerves exerting irregular involuntary Motions, without any evident
Cause; and all the Functions of the Body depending partly on the Nerves; there
is no one Symptom of other Diseases which the Vapors may not produce or
imitate; and that these Symptoms, for the same Reason, must vary infinitely,
according to those Branches of the Nerves which are disordered. It may also
hence be conceived, why the Vapors of one Person have frequently no
Resemblance to those of another: and why the Vapors of the very same Person,
in one Day, are so very different from those of the next. It is also very
conceivable that the Vapors are a certain, a real Malady; and that Oddity of
the Symptoms, which cannot be accounted for, by People unacquainted with the
animal Economy, has been the Cause of their being considered rather as the
Effect of a depraved Imagination, than as a real Disease. It is very
conceivable, I say, that this surprising Oddity of the Symptoms is a necessary
Effect of the Cause of the Vapors; and that no Person can any more prevent his
being invaded by the Vapors, than he can prevent the Attack of a Fever, or of
the Toothache.

501. A few plain Instances will furnish out a more complete Notion of the
Mechanism, or Nature, of Vapors. An Emetic, a vomiting Medicine, excites the
Act, or rather the Passion, the Convulsion of Vomiting, chiefly by the
Irritation it gives to the Nerves of the Stomach; which Irritation produces a
Spasm, a Contraction of this Organ. Now if in Consequence of this morbid or
defective Texture of the Nerves, which constitutes the Vapors, those of the
Stomach are excited to act with the same Violence, as in Consequence of taking
a Vomit, the Patient will be agitated and worked by violent Efforts to vomit,
as much as if he had really taken one.

If an involuntary unusual Motion in the Nerves, that are distributed through
the Lungs, should constrain and straiten the very little Vesicles, or Bladders,
as it were, which admit the fresh Air at every Respiration, the Patient will
feel a Degree of Suffocation; just as if that Straitening or Contraction of the
Vessels were occasioned by some noxious Steam or Vapor.

Should the Nerves which are distributed throughout the whole Skin, by a
Succession of these irregular morbid Motions, contract themselves, as they may
from external Cold, or by some stimulating Application, Perspiration by the
Pores will be prevented or checked; whence the Humors, which should be
evacuated through the Pores of the Skin, will be thrown upon the Kidneys, and
the Patient will make a great Quantity of thin clear Urine, a Symptom very
common to vapourish People; or it may be diverted to the Glands of the
Intestines, the Guts, and terminates in a watery Diarrhaea, or Looseness, which
frequently proves a very obstinate one.

502. Neither are Swoonings the least usual Symptoms attending the Vapors; and
we may be certain they spring from this Source, when they happen to a Person
subject to the Vapors; and none of the other Causes producing them are
evident, or have lately preceded them.

Such Swoonings, however, are indeed very rarely dangerous, and scarcely
require any medical Assistance. The Patient should be laid upon a Bed; the
fresh Air should he very freely admitted to him; and he should be made to smell
rather to some disagreeable and fetid, than to any fragrant Substance. It is in
such Faintings as these that the Smell of burnt Leather, of Feathers, or of
Paper, have often proved of great Service.

503. Patients also frequently faint away, in Consequence of fasting too long:
or from having eat a little too much; from being confined in too hot a Chamber;
from having seen too much Company; from smelling too over-powering a Scent;
from being too costive; from being too forcibly affected with some Discourse or
Sentiments; and, in a Word from a great Variety of Causes, which might not make
the least Impression on Persons in perfect Health; but which violently operate
upon those vapourish People, because, as I have said, the Fault of their Nerves
consists in their being too vividly, too acutely affected; the Force of their
Sensation being nowise proportioned to the external Cause of it.

As soon as that particular Cause is distinguished from all the rest, which has
occasioned the present Swooning; it is manifest that this Swooning is to be
remedied, by removing that particular Cause of it.

Of Swoonings occasioned by the Passions.
504. There have been some Instances of Persons dying within a Moment, through
excessive Joy. But such Instances are so very rare and sudden, that Assistance
has seldom been sought for on this Occasion. The Case is otherwise with respect
to those produced from Rage, Vexation, and Dread or Horror. I shall treat in a
separate Article of those resulting from great Fear; and shall briefly consider
here such as ensue from Rage, and vehement Grief or Disappointment.

505. Excessive Rage and violent Affliction are sometimes fatal in the
Twinkling of an Eye; though they oftener terminate in fainting only. Excessive
Grief or Chagrin is especially accompanied with this Consequence; and it is
very common to see Persons thus affected, sink into successive Faintings for
several Hours. It is plainly obvious that very little Affiance can be given in
such Cases: it is proper, however, they should smell to strong Vinegar; and
frequently take a few Cups of some hot and temperately cordial Drink, such as
Bawn-Tea, or Lemonade with a little Orange or Lemon Peel.

The calming, asswaging Cordial, that has seemed the most efficacious to me, is
one small Coffee Spoonful of a Mixture of three Parts of the Mineral Anodyne
Liquor of HOFFMAN Our sweet Spirit of Vitriol is a similar, (...) effectual a
Medicine. K.
, and one Part of the spirituous Tincture of Amber, which should be swollowed
in a Spoonful of Water; taking after it a few Cups of such Drinks as I shall
presently direct.

It is not to be supposed that Swoonings or Faintings, from excessive Passions,
can be cured by Nourishment. The physical State or Condition, into which
vehement Grief throws the Body, is that, of all others, in which Nourishment
would be most injurious to it: and as long as the Vehemence of the Affliction
endures, the Sufferer should take nothing but some Spoonfuls of Soup or Broth,
or a few Morsels of some light Meat roasted.

506. When Wrath or Rage has risen to so high a Pitch, that the human Machine,
the Body, entirely exhausted, as it were, by that violent Effort, sinks down at
once into excessive Relaxation, a Fainting sometimes succeeds, and even the
most perilous Degree of it, a Syncope.

It is sufficient, or rather the most that can be done here, to let the Patient
be perfectly still a while in this State; only making him smell to some
Vinegar. But when he is come to himself, he should drink plentifully of hot
Lemonade, and take one or more of the Glysters No. 5.

Sometimes there remain in these Cases Sicknesses at Stomach, Reachings to
vomit, a Bitterness in the Mouth, and some vertiginous Symptoms which seem to
require a Vomit. But such a Medicine must be very carefully avoided, since it
may be attended with the most fatal Consequence: and Lemonade with Glysters
generally and gradually remove these Swoonings. If the Nausea and Sickness at
Stomach continue, the utmost Medicine we should allow besides, would be that of
No. 23, or a few Doses of No. 24.

Of symptomatical Swoonings, or such as happen in the Progress of other
Diseases.
507. Swoonings, which supervene in the Course of other Diseases, never afford
a favorable Prognostic; as they denote Weakness, and Weakness is an Obstacle
to Recovery.

In the Beginning of putrid Diseases, they also denote an Oppression at
Stomach, or a Mass of corrupt Humors; and they cease as soon as an Evacuation
supervenes, whether by Vomit or by Stool.

When they occur at the Beginning of malignant Fevers, they declare the high
Degree of their Malignancy, and the great Diminution of the Patient's natural
Strength.

In each of these Cases Vinegar, used externally and internally, is the best
Remedy during the Exacerbation or Height of the Paroxysm; and Plenty of
Lemon-Juice and Water after it.

508. Swoonings which supervene in Diseases, accompanied with great
Evacuations, are cured like those which are owing to Weakness; and Endeavors
should be used to restrain or moderate the Evacuations.

509. Those who have any inward Abscess or Imposthume are apt to swoon
frequently. They may sometimes be revived a little by Vinegar, but they prove
too frequently mortal.

510. Many Persons have a slighter or a deeper Swooning, at the End of a
violent Fit of an intermitting Fever, or at that of each Exacerbation of a
continual Fever; this constantly shows the Fever has run very high, the
Swooning having been the Consequence of that great Relaxation, which has
succeeded to a very high Tension. A Spoonful or two of light white Wine, with
an equal Quantity of Water, affords all the succor proper in such a Case.

511. Persons subject to frequent Swoonings, should neglect nothing that may
enable them to remove them when known; since the Consequences of them are
always detrimental, except in some Fevers, in which they seem to mark the
Crisis.

Every swooning Fit leaves the Patient in Dejection and Weakness; the
Secretions from the Blood are suspended; the Humors disposed to Stagnation;
Grumosities, or Coagulations, and Obstructions are formed; and if the Motion of
the Blood is totally intercepted, or considerably checked, Polypuses, and these
often incurable, are formed in the Heart, or in the larger Vessels; the
Consequences of which are dreadful, and sometimes give Rise to internal
Aneurisms, which always prove mortal, after long Anxiety and Oppression.

Swoonings which attack old People, without any manifest Cause, always afford
an unfavourable Prognostic.

Of Haemorrhages, or an involuntary Loss of Blood.
512. Haemorrhages of the Nose, supervening in inflammatory Fevers, commonly
prove a favorable Crisis; which Bleeding we should carefully avoid stopping;
except it becomes excessive, and seems to threaten the Patient's Life.

As they scarcely ever happen in very healthy Subjects, but from a superfluous
Abundance of Blood, it is very improper to check them too soon; lest some
internal Stuffings and Obstructions should prove the Consequence.

A Swooning sometimes ensues after the Loss of only a moderate Quantity of
Blood. This Swooning stops the Haemorrhage, and goes off without any further
Assistance, except the Smelling to Vinegar. But in other Cases there is a
Succession of fainting Fits, without the Blood's stopping; while at the same
time slight convulsive Motions and Twitchings ensue, attended with a Raving,
when it becomes really necessary to stop the Bleeding: and indeed, without
waiting till these violent Symptoms appear, the following Signs will
sufficiently direct us, when it is right to stop the Flux of Blood, or to
permit its Continuance -- As long as the Pulse is still pretty full; while the
Heat of the Body is equally extended to the very Extremities; and the
Countenance and Lips preserve their natural Redness, no ill Consequence is to
be apprehended from the Haemorrhage, though it has been very copious, and even
somewhat profuse.

But whenever the Pulse begins to faulter and tremble; when the Countenance and
the Lips grow pale, and the Patient complains of a sickness at Stomach, it is
absolutely necessary to stop the Discharge of Blood. And considering that the
Operation of Remedies does not immediately follow the Exhibition or Application
of them, it is safer to begin a little too early with them, than to delay them,
though ever so little too long.

513. First of all then, tight Bandages, or Ligatures, should be applied round
both Arms, on the Part they are applied over in order to Bleeding; and round
the lower Part of both Thighs, on the gartering Place; and all these are to be
drawn very tight, with on Intention to detain and accumulate the Blood in the
Extremities.

2, In order to increase this Effect, the Legs are to be plunged in warm Water
up to the Knees; for by relaxing the Blood vessels of the Legs and Feet, they
are dilated at the same time, and thence receive, and, in Consequence of the
Ligatures above the Knees, retain the more Blood. If the Water were cold, it
would repel the Blood to the Head; if hot, it would increase the Motion of it;
and, by giving a greater Quickness to the Pulse, would even contribute to
increase the Haemorrhage.

As soon however, as the Haemorrhage is stopped, these Ligatures [on the Thighs]
may be relaxed a little, or one of them be entirely removed; allowing the
others to continue on an Hour or two without touching them: but great
Precaution should be taken not to slacken them entirely, nor all at once.

3, Seven or eight Grains of Nitre, and a Spoonful of Vinegar in half a Glass
of cool Water, should be given to the Patient every half Hour.

4. One Dram of white Vitriol must be dissolved in two common Spoonfuls of
Spring Water; and a Tent of Lint, or Bits of soft fine Linen Dipped in this
Solution, are to be introduced into the Nostrils, horizontally at first, but
afterward to be intruded upwards, and as high as may be, by the Assistance of
a flexible Bit of Wood or Whalebone. But should this Application be
ineffectual, the Mineral Anodyne Liquor of HOFFMAN is certain to succeed: and
in the Country, where it often happens that neither of these Applications are
to be had speedily, Brandy, and even Spirit of Wine, mixed with a third Part
Vinegar, have answered entirely well, of which I have been a Witness.

The Prescription No. 67, which I have already referred to, on the Article of
Wounds may also be serviceable on this Occasion. It must be reduced to Powder,
and conveyed up the Nostrils as high as may be, on the Point or extremity of a
Tent of Lint, which may easily be covered with it. Or a Quill, well charged
with the Powder, may be introduced high into the Nostrils, and its Contents be
strongly blown up from its other Extremity: though after all the former method
is preferable.

5, When the Flux of Blood is totally stopped, the Patient is to be kept as still
and quiet as possible; taking great Care not to extract the Tent which remains
in the Nose; nor to remove the Clots of coagulated Blood which fill up the
Passage. The loosening and removing of these should be effected very gradually
and cautiously; and frequently the Tent does not spring out spontaneously, till
after many Days.

514. I have not, hitherto, said any thing of artificial Bleeding in these
Cases, as I think it at best unserviceable; since, though it may sometimes have
stopped the morbid Loss of Blood, it has at other times increased it. Neither
have I mentioned Anodynes here, whose constant Effect is to determine a larger
Quantity of Blood to the Head.

Applications of cold Water to the Nape of the Neck ought to be wholly disused,
having sometimes been attended with the most embarrassing Consequences.

In all Haemorrhages, all Fluxes of Blood, great Tranquillity, Ligatures, and
the Use of the Drinks No. 2 or 4, are very useful.

515. People who are very liable to frequent Haemorrhages, ought to manage
themselves conformably to the Directions contained in the next Chapter, 544.
They should take very little Supper; avoid all sharp and spirituous Liquors;
Apartments that are over hot; and cover their Heads but very lightly.

When a Patient has for a long time been subject to Haemorrhages, if they
cease, he should retrench from his usual Quantity of Food; accustom himself to
artificial Bleedings at proper Intervals; and take some gentle opening Purges,
especially that of No. 24, and frequently a little Nitre in an Evening.

Of Convulsions.
516. Convulsions are, in general, more terrifying than dangerous; they result
from many and various Causes; and on the Removal or Extirpation of these, their
Cure depends.

In the Fit itself very little is to be done, or even attempted.

As nothing does shorten the Duration, nor even lessen the Violence, of an
epileptic Fit, so nothing at all should be attempted in it; and the rather,
because Means and Medicines often aggravate the Disease. We should confine our
Endeavors solely to the Security of the Patient, by preventing him from giving
himself any violent Strokes; by getting something, if possible, between his
Teeth, such as a small Roller of Linen to prevent his Tongue from being hurt,
or very dangerously squeezed and bruised, in a strong Convulsion.

The only Case which requires immediate Assistance in the Fit, is, when it is
so extremely violent, the Neck so swelled, and the Face so very red, that there
is Room to be apprehensive of an Apolexy, which we should endeavor to obviate,
by drawing eight or ten Ounces of Blood from the Arm.

As this terrible Disease is common in the Country, it is doing a real Service
to the unfortunate Victims of it, to inform them how very dangerous it is to
give themselves blindly up to take all the Medicines, which are cried up to
them in such Cases. If there be any one Disease, which requires a more
attentive, delicate and exquisite Kind of Treatment, it is this very Disease.
Some Species of it are wholly incurable: and such as may be susceptible of a
Cure, require the utmost Care and Consideration of the most enlightened and
most experienced Physicians: while those who pretend to cure all epileptic
Patients with one invariable Medicine, are either Ignorants, or Impostors, and
sometimes both in one.

517. Simple Convulsion Fits, which are not epileptic, are frequently of a long
Continuance, persevering, with very few and short Intervals, for Days and even
for Weeks.

The true genuine Cause should be investigated as strictly as possible, though
nothing should be attempted in the Fit. The Nerves are, during that Term, in so
high a Degree of Tension and Sensibility, that the very Medicines, supposed to
be strongly indicated, often redouble the Storm they were intended to appease.

Thin watery Liquors, moderately imbued with Aromatics, are the least hurtful,
and the most innocent Things that can be given; such as Bawm, Lime-tree, and
Elder-flower Tea. A Ptisan of Liquorice Root only has sometimes answered better
than any other.

Of suffocating or strangling Fits.
518. These Fits (by whatever other Name they may be called) whenever they very
suddenly attack a Person, whose Breathing was easy and natural just before,
depend almost constantly on a Spasm or Contraction of the Nerves, in the
Vesicles of the Lungs; or upon an Infarction, a Stuffing of the same Parts,
produced by viscid clammy Humors.

That Suffocation which arises from a Spasm is not dangerous, it goes off of
itself, or it may be treated like Swoonings owing to the same Cause. See 502.

519. The Suffocation, which is the Effect of a sanguineous Fullness and
Obstruction, may be distinguished by its attacking strong, vigorous, sanguine
Persons, who are great Eaters, using much juicy nutritious Food, and strong
Wine and Liquors, and who frequently eat and inflame themselves; and when the
Fit has come on after any inflaming Cause; when the Pulse is full and strong,
and the Countenance red.

Such are cured, 1, by a very plentiful Discharge of Blood from the Arm, which
is to be repeated if necessary.

2, By the Use of Glysters.

3, By drinking plentifully of the Ptisan No. 1; to each Pot of which, a Dram
of Nitre is to be added; and,

4, By the Vapor of hot Vinegar, continually received by Resspiration or
Breathing. See 55.

520. There is Reason to think that one of these Fits is owing to a Quantity of
tough viscid Humors in the Lungs, when it attacks Persons, whose Temperament,
and whose Manner of living are opposite to those I have just described; such as
valetudinary, weakly, phlegmatic, pituitous, inactive, and squeamish Persons,
who feed badly, or on fat, viscid, and insipid Diet, and who drink much hot
Water, either alone, or in Tea-like Infusions. And these Signs of Suffocation,
resulting from such Causes, are still more probable, if the Fit came on in
rainy Weather, and during a southerly Wind; and when the Pulse is soft and
small, the Visage Pale and hollow.

The most efficacious Treatment we can advise, is, 1, To give every half Hour
half a Cup of the Potion, No. 8, if it can readily be had. 2, To make the
Patient drink very plentifully of the Drink No. 12; and 3, to apply two strong
Blisters to the fleshy Parts of his Legs.

If he was strong and hearty before the Fit, and the Pulse still continues
vigorous, and feels somewhat full withal, the loss of seven or eight Ounces of
Blood is sometimes indispensably necessary. A Glyster has also frequently been
attended with extraordinary good Effects.

Those afflicted with this oppressing Malady are commonly relieved, as soon as
they expectorate, and sometimes even by vomiting a little.

The Medicine No. 25, a Dose of which may be taken every two Hours, with a Cup
of the Ptisan No. 12, often succeeds very well.

But if neither this Medicine, nor the Prescription No. 8 are at Hand, which
may be the Case in Country Places; an Onion of a moderate Size should be
pounded in an Iron or Marble Mortar; upon this, a Glass of Vinegar is to be
poured, and then strongly squeezed out again through a Piece of Linen. An equal
Quantity of Honey is then to be added to it. A Spoonful of this Mixture, whose
remarkable Efficacy I have been a Witness of, is to be given every half Hour.

Of the violent Effects of Fear.
521. Here I shall insert some Directions to prevent the ill Consequences of
great Fear or Terror, which are very prejudicial at every Term of Life, but
chiefly during Infancy.

The general Effects of Terror are a great Straitening and Contraction of all
the small Vessels, and a Repulsion of the Blood into the large and internal
ones. Hence follows the Suppression of Perspiration, the general Seizure or
Oppression, the Trembling, the Palpitations and Anguish, from the Heart and the
Lungs being overcharged with Blood; and sometimes attended with Swoonings,
irremediable Disorders of the Heart, and Death itself: A heavy Drowsiness,
Raving, and a Kind of furious or raging Delirium happen in other Cases, which I
have frequently observed in Children, when the Blood Vessels of the Neck were
swelled or stuffed up; and Convulsions, and even the Epilepsey have come on,
all which have proved the horrible Consequence of a most senseless and wicked
Foolery or Sporting. One half of those Epilepsies which do not depend on such
Causes as might exist before the Child's Birth, are owing to this detestable
Custom; and it cannot be too much inculcated into Children, never to frighten
one another; a Point which Persons, entrusted with their Education, ought to
have the strictest Regard to.

When the Humors that should have passed off by Perspiration, are repelled to
the Intestines, a tedious and very obstinate Looseness is the frequent
Consequence.

522. Our Endeavors should be directed, to re-establish the disordered
Circulation; to restore the obstructed Perspiration; and to allay the Agitation
of the Nerves.

The popular Custom in these Cases has been to give the terrified Patient some
cold Water directly; but when the Fright has been considerable, this is a very
pernicious Custom, and I have seen some terrible Consequences from it.

They should, on the contrary, be conveyed into some very quiet Situation,
leaving there but very few Persons, and such only as they are thoroughly
familiar with. They should take a few Cups of pretty warm Drink, particularly
of an Infusion of Lime-tree Flowers and Bawm. Their Legs should be put into
warm Water, and remain there an Hour, if they will patiently permit it, rubbing
them gently now and then, and giving them every half-quarter of an Hour, a
small Cup of the same Drink. When their Composure and Tranquillity are returned
a little, and their Skin seems to have recovered its wonted and general Warmth,
Care should be taken to dispose them to Sleep, and to perspire plentifully. For
this Purpose they may be allowed a few Spoonfuls of Wine, on putting them into
Bed, with one Cup of the former Infusion; or, which is more certain and
effectual, a few Drops of SYDENHAM's Liquid Laudanum, No. 4; but should not
that be near at hand, a small Dose of Venice Treacle.

523. It sometimes happens that Children do not seem at first extremely
terrified; but the Fright is renewed while they sleep, and with no small
Violence. The Directions I have just given must then be observed, for some
successive Evenings before they are put to Bed.

Their Fright frequently returns about the latter End of the Night, and
agitates them violently every Day. The same Treatment should be continued in
such Cases; and we should endeavor to dispose them to be asleep at the usual
Hour of its Return.

By this very Method I have dissipated the dismal Consequences of Fear on Women
in Childbed, which is so commonly, and often speedily, mor^^l.

If a Suffocation from this Cause is violent, there is sometimes a Necessity
for opening a Vein in the Arm.

These Patients should gradually be inured to an almost continual, but gentle,
Kind of Exercise.

All violent Medicines render those Diseases, which are the Consequences of
great Fear, incurable. A pretty common one is that of an Obstruction of the
Liver, which has been productive of a Jaundice I have seen this actually
verified by great and disagreeable Surprise, attended indeed with much Concern,
in a Person of exquisite Sensations. K.
.

Of Accidents or Symptoms produced by the Vapors of Coal, and of Wine.
524. Not a single Year passes over here, without the Destruction of many
People by the Vapor of Charcoal, or of small Coal, and by the Steam or Vapor
of Wine.

The Symptoms by Coal occur, when La Braise.
small Coal, and especially when Charbon. Dr. TISSOT informs me, their
Difference consists in this, that the Charcoal is prepared from Wood burnt in a
close or stifled Fire; and that the small Coal is made of Wood (and of smaller
Wood) burnt in an open Fire, and extinguished before it is reduced to the State
of a Cinder. He says the latter is smaller, softer, less durable in the Fire,
and the Vapor of it less dangerous than that of Charcoal.
Charcoal is burnt in a Chamber close shut, which is direct Poison to a Person
shut up in it. The sulphurous Oil, which is set at Liberty and diffused by the
Action of Fire, expands itself through the Chamber; while those who are in it
perceive a Disorder and Confusion in their Heads; they contract Virtigos,
Sickness at Stomach, a Weakness, and very unusual Kind of Numbness; become
raving, convulsed and trembling, and if they fail of Presence of Mind, or of
Strength, to get out of the Chamber, they die within a short Time.

I have seen a Woman who had vertiginous Commotions in her Head for two Days,
and almost continual Vomitings, from her having been confined less than six
Minutes in a Chamber (and that notwithstanding both one Window and one Door
were open) in which there was a Chafingdish with some burning Coals. Had the
Room been quite close, she must have perished by it.

This Vapor is narcotic or stupefyi^^ and proves mortal in Consequence of its
producing a sleepy or apoplectic Disorder, though blended, at the same time,
with something convulsive; which sufficiently appears from the Closure of the
Mouth, and the strict Contraction or Locking of the Jaws.

The Condition of the Brain, in the dissected Bodies of Persons thus destroyed,
proves that they die of an Apoplexy; notwistanding it is very probable that
Suffocation is also partly the Cause of their Deaths; as the Lungs have been
found stuffed up with Blood and livid.

It has also been observed in some other Bodies thus destroyed, that Patients
killed by the Vapor of burning Coals, have commonly their whole Bodies swelled
out to one third more than their Magnitude, when living. The Face, Neck, and
Arms are swelled, as if they had been blown up; and the whole human Machine
appears in such a State, as the dead Body of a Person would, who had been
violently strangled; and who had made all possible Resistance for a long time,
before he was overpowered.

525. Such as are sensible of the great Danger they are in, and retreat
seasonably from it, are generally relieved as soon as they get out into the
open Air; or if they have any remaining Uneasiness, a little Water and Vinegar,
or Lemonade, drank hot, affords them speedy Relief. But when they are so far
poisoned, as to have lost their Feeling and Understanding, if there be any
Means of reviving them, such Means consist,

1, In exposing them to a very pure, fresh and open Air.

2, In making them smell to some very penetrating Odor, which is somewhat
stimulating and reviving, such as the volatile Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, the Sea
Note * Page 251.
English Salt; and afterward to surround them, as it were, with the Steam of
Vinegar.

3, In taking some Blood from their Arm.

4, In putting their Legs into warm or hot Water, and chasing them well.

5, In making them swallow, if practicable, much Lemonade, or Water and
Vinegar, with the Addition of Nitre: and,

6, In throwing up some sharp Glysters.

As it is manifest there is something spasmodic in these Cases, it were proper
to be provided with some antispasmodic Remedies, such as the Mineral Anodyne
Liquid of HOFFMAN. Even Opium has sometimes been successfully given here, but
it should be allowed to Physicians only to direct it in such Cases.

A Vomit would be hurtful; and the Reachings to vomit arise only from the
Oppression on the Brain.

It is a common but erroneous Opinion, that if the Coal be suffered to burn a
Minute or so in the open Air or in a Chimney, it is sufficient to prevent any
Danger from the Vapor of it.

Hence it amounts even to a criminal Degree of Imprudence, to sleep in a
Chamber while Charcoal or small Coal is burning in it; and the Number of such
imprudent Persons, as have never awaked after it, is so considerable, and so
generally known too, that the Continuance of this unhappy Custom is astonishing.

526. The Bakers, who make use of much small Coal, often keep great Quantities
of it in their Cellars, which frequently abound so much with the Vapor of it,
that it seizes them violently the Moment they enter into the Cellar. They sink
down at once, deprived of all Sensation, and die if they are not drawn out of
it soon enough to be assisted, according to the Directions I have just given.

One certain Means of preventing such fatal Accidents, is, upon going into the
Cellar, to throw some flaming Paper or Straw into it, and if these continue to
flame out and consume, there is no Reason for dreading the Vapor: but if they
should be extinguished, no Person ought to venture in. But after opening the
Vent-hole, a Bundle of flaming Straw must be set at the Door, which serves to
attract the external Air strongly. Soon after the Experiment of the flaming
Paper must be repeated, and if it goes out, more Straw is to be set on Fire
before the Cellar Door.

527. Small Coal, burnt in an open Fire, is not near so dangerous as Charcoal,
properly so called, the Danger of which arises from this, that in extinguishing
it by the usual Methods, all those sulphurous Particles of it, in which its
Danger consist, are concentred. Nevertheless, small Coal is not entirely
deprived of all its noxious Quality, without some of which it could not
strictly be Coal.

The common Method of throwing some Salt on live Coals, before they are
conveyed into a Chamber: or of casting a Piece of Iron among them, to imbibe
some Part of their deadly narcotic Sulphur, is not without its Utility; though
by no Means sufficient to prevent all Danger from them.

528. When the most dangerous Symptoms from this Cause disappear, and there
remains only some Degree of Weakness, of Numbness, and a little Inappetency, or
Loathing at Stomach, nothing is better than Lemonade with one fourth Part Wine,
half a Cup of which should frequently be taken with a small Crust of Bread.

529. The Vapor which exhales from Wine, and in general from all fermenting
Liquors, such as Beer, Cider, etc. contains something poisonous, which kills in
the like Manner, with the Vapor of Coal; and there is always some Danger in
going into a Cellar, where there is much Wine in the State of Fermentation; if
it has been shut up close for several Hours. There have been many Examples of
Persons struck dead on entering one, and of others who have escaped out of it
with Difficulty.

When such unhappy Accidents occur, Men should not be successively exposed, one
after another, to perish, by endeavoring to fetch out the first who sunk down
upon his Entrance; but the Air should immediately be purified by the Method
already directed, or by discharging some Guns into the Cellar; after which
People may venture in with Precaution. And when the Persons unfortunately
afflicted are brought out, they are to be treated like those, who were affected
with the Coal-Vapour.

I saw a Man about eight Years since, who was not sensible of the Application
of Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, till about an Hour after he was struck down, and who
was entirely freed at last by a plentiful Bleeding; though he had been so
insensible, that it was several Hours before he discovered a very great Wound
he had, which extended from the Middle of his Arm to his Arm-pit; and which was
made by a Hook intended to be used, in Case of a House catching Fire, to assist
Persons in escaping from the Flames.

530. When subterraneous Caves that have been very long shut are opened; or
when deep Wells are cleaned, that have not been emptied for several Years, the
Vapors arising from them produce the same Symptoms I have mentioned, and
require the same Assistance. They are to be cleansed and purified by burning
Sulphur and Salt Petre in them, or Gunpowder, as compounded of both.

531. The offensive Stink of Lamps and of Candles, especially when their Flames
are extinguished, operate like other Vapors, though with less Violence, and
less suddenly. Nevertheless there have been Instances of People killed by the
Fumes of Lamps fed with Nut Oil, which had been extinguished in a close Room.
These last Smells or Fumes prove noxious also, in Consequence of their
Greasiness, which being conveyed, together with the Air, into the Lungs,
prevent their Respiration: And hence we may observe, that Persons of weak
delicate Breasts find themselves quickly oppressed in Chambers or Apartments,
illuminated with many Candles.

The proper Remedies have been already directed 525. The Steam of Vinegar is
very serviceable in such Cases.

Of Poisons.
532. There are a great Number of Poisons, whose Manner of acting is not alike;
and whose ill Effects are to be opposed by different Remedies: but Arsenic, or
Ratsbane, and some particular Plants are the Poisons which are the most
frequently productive of Mischief in Country Places.

533. It is in Consequence of its excessive Acrimony, or violent Heat and
Sharpness, which corrodes or gnaws, that Arsenic destroys by an excessive
inflammation, with a burning Fire as it were, most torturing Pains in the
Mouth, Throat, Stomach, Guts; with rending and often bloody Vomitings and
Stools, Convulsions, Faintings, etc.

The best Remedy of all is pouring down whole Torrents of Milk or, where there
is not Milk, of warm Water. Nothing but a prodigious Quantity of such weak
Liquids can avail such a miserable Patient. If the Cause of the Disorder is
immediately known, after having very speedily taken down a large Quantity of
warm Water, Vomiting may be excited with Oil, or with melted Butter, and by
tickling the Inside of the Throat with a Feather. But when the Poison has
already inflamed the Stomach and the Guts, we must not expect to discharge it
by vomiting. Whatever is healing or emollient, Decoctions of mealy Pulls, of
Barley, of Oatmeal, of Marshmallows, and Butter and Oil are the most suitable.

As soon as ever the tormenting Pains are felt in the Belly, and the Intestines
seem attacked, Glysters of Milk must be very frequently thrown up.

If at the very Beginning of the Attack, the Patient has a strong Pulse, a very
large Bleeding may be considerably serviceable by its delaying the Progress,
and diminishing the Degree of Inflammation.

And even though it should happen that a Patient overcomes the first Violence
of this dreadful Accident, it is too common for him to continue in a languid
State for a long Time, and sometimes for all the Remainder of his Life. The
most certain Method of preventing this Misery, is to live for some Months
solely upon Milk, and some very new laid Eggs just received from the Hen, and
dissolved or blended in the Milk, without boiling them.

534. The Plants which chiefly produce these unhappy Accidents are some Kinds
of Hemlock, whether it be the Leaf or the Root, the Berries of the Bella Donna,
or deadly Nightshade, which Children eat by Mistake for Cherries; some Kind of
Mushrooms; the Seed of the Datura, or the stinking Thorn-apple.

All the Poisons of this Class prove mortal rather from an narcotic, or
stupefying, than from an acrid, or very sharp Quality: Vertigos, Faintings,
Reachings to vomit, and actual Vomitings are the first Symptoms produced by
them.

The Patient should immediately swallow down a large Quantity of Water,
moderately seasoned with Salt, or with Sugar; and then a Vomiting should be
excited as soon as possible by the Prescription No. 34 or 35: or, if neither of
these is very readily procurable, with Radish-seed pounded, to the Quantity of
a Coffee Spoonful, swallowed in warm Water, soon after forcing a Feather or a
Finger into the Patient's Throat, to expedite the Vomiting.

After the Operation of the Vomit, he must continue to take a large Quantity of
Water, sweetened with Honey or Sugar, together with a considerable Quantity of
Vinegar, which is the true Specific, or Antidote, as it were, against these
Poisons: the Intestines must also be emptied by a few Glysters.

Thirty-seven Soldiers having unhappily eaten, instead of Carrots, of the Roots
of the Oenanthe, or Water-hemlock, became all extremely sick; when the Emetic,
No. 34, with the Assistance of Glysters, and very plentiful drinking of warm
Water, saved all but one of them, who died before he could be assisted.

535. If a Person has taken too much Opium, or any Medicine into which it
enters, as Venice Treacle, Methridate, Diascordium, etc. whether by Imprudence,
Mistake, Ignorance, or through any bad Design, he must be bled upon the Spot,
and treated as if he had a sanguine Apoplexy, (See 147) by Reason that Opium in
Effect produces such a one. He should snuff up and inhale the Vapor of Vinegar
plentifully, adding it also liberally to the Water he is to drink.

Of acute Pains.
536. It is not my Intention to treat here of those Pains, that accompany any
evident known Disease, and which should be conducted as relating to such
Diseases; nor of Pains to which infirm valetudinary Persons are habitually
subject; since Experience has informed such of the most effectual Relief for
them: But when a Person sound and hale, finds himself suddenly attacked with
some excessive Pain, in whatever Part it occurs, without knowing either the
Nature, or the Cause of it, they may, till proper Advice can be procured,

1, Part with some Blood, which, by abating the Fullness and Tension, almost
constantly asswages the Pains, at least for some Time: and it may even be
repeated, if, without weakening the Patient much, it has lessened the Violence
of the Pain.

2, The Patient should drink abundantly of some very mild temperate Drink, such
as the Ptisan No. 2, the Almond Emulsion No. 4, or warm Water with a fourth or
fifth Part Milk.

3, Several emollient Glysters should be given.

4, The whole Part that is affected, and the adjoining Parts should be covered
with Cataplasms, or soothed with the emollient Fomentation, No. 9.

5, The warm Bath may also be advantageously used.

6, If, notwithstanding all these Assistances, the Pain should still continue
violent, and the Pulse is neither full nor hard, the grown Patient may take an
Ounce of Syrup of Diacodium, or sixteen Drops of Liquid Laudanum; and when
neither of these are to be had, Une Quartette.
an English Pint of boiling Water must be poured upon three or four Poppy-heaps
with their Seeds, but without the Leaves, and this Decoction is to be drank
like Tea.

537. Persons very subject to frequent Pains, and especially to violent
Head-achs, should abstain from all strong Drink; such Abstinence being often
the only Means of curing them: And People are very often mistaken in supposing
Wine necessary for as many as seem to have a weak Stomach.

CHAPTER XXXII. Of Medicinces taken by Way of Precaution, or Prevention.
SECT. 538. I HAVE pointed out, in some Parts of this Work, the Means of
preventing the bad Effects of several Causes of Diseases; and of prohibiting
the Return of some habitual Disorders. In the present Chapter I shall adjoin
some Observations, on the Use of the principal Remedies, which are employed as
general Preservatives; pretty regularly too at certain stated Times, and almost
always from mere Custom only, without knowing, and often with very little
Consideration, whether they are right or wrong.

Nevertheless, the Use, the Habit of taking Medicines, is certainly no
indifferent Matter: it is ridiculous, dangerous, and even criminal to omit
them, when they are necessary, but not less so to take them when they are not
wanted. A good Medicine taken seasonably, when there is some Disorder, some
Disarrangement in the Body, which would in a short time occasion a Distemper,
has often prevented it. But yet the very same Medicine, when given to a Person
in perfect Health, if it does not directly make him sick, leaves him at the
best in a greater Propensity to the Impressions of Diseases: and there are but
too many Examples of People, who having very unhappily contracted a Habit, a
Disposition to take Physic, have really injured their Health, and impaired
their Constitutions, however naturally strong, by an Abuse of those Materials,
which Providence has given for the Recovery and Re-establishment of it: an
Abuse which, though it should not injure the Health of the Person, would
occasion those Remedies, when he should be really sick, to be less efficacious
and serviceable to him, from their having been familiar to his Constitution;
and thus he becomes deprived of the Assistance he would have received from
them, if taken only in those Times and Circumstances, in which they were
necessary for him.

Of Bleeding.
539. Bleeding is necessary only in these four Cases. 1, When there is too
great a (Quantity of Blood in the Body. 2, When there is any Inflammation, or
an inflammatory Disease. 3, When some Cause supervenes or is about to
supervene, in the Constitution, which would speedily produce an Inflammation,
or some other dangerous Symptoms, if the Vessels were not relaxed by Bleeding.
It is upon this Principle that Patients are bled after Wounds, and after
Bruises; that Bleeding is directed for a pregnant Woman, if she has a violent
Cough; and that Bleeding is performed, by way of Precaution, in several other
Cases. 4, We also advise Bleeding sometimes to assuage an excessive Pain,
though such Pain is not owing to Excess of Blood, nor arises from any inflamed
Blood; but in order to appease and moderate the Pain by Bleeding; and thereby
to obtain Time for destroying the Cause of it by other Remedies. But as these
two last Reasons are in Effect involved or implied in the two first; it may be
very generally concluded, that an Excess of Blood, and an inflamed State of it,
are the only two necessary Motives for Bleeding.

540. An Inflammation of the Blood is known by the Symptoms accompanying those
Diseases, which that Cause produces. Of these I have already spoken, and I have
at the same time regulated the Practice of Bleeding in such Cases. Here I shall
point out those Symptoms and Circumstances, which manifest an Excess of Blood.

The 1st, then, is the general Course and Manner of the Patient's living, while
in Health. If he is a great Eater and indulges in juicy nutritious Food, and
especially on much Fleshmeat; if he drinks rich and nourishing Wine, or other
strong Drink, and at the same time enjoys a good Digestion; if he takes but
little Exercise, sleeps much, and has not been subject to any very considerable
Evacuation, he may well be supposed to abound in Blood. It is very obvious that
all these Causes rarely occur in Country People; if we except only the
Abatement of their Exercise during some Weeks in Winter, which indeed may
contribute to their generating more Blood than they ordinarily do.

The laboring Countryman, for much the greater Part of his Time, lives only
on Bread, Water and Vegetables; Materials but very moderately nourishing, as
one Pound of Bread probably does not make, in the same Body, more Blood than
one Ounce of Flesh, though a general Prejudice seems to have established a
contrary Opinion. The 2d is the total Stopping or long Interruption of some
involuntary Bleeding or Haemorrhage, to which he had been accustomed. 3, A full
and strong Pulse, and Veins visibly filled with Blood, in a Body that is not
lean and thin, and when he is not heated. 4, A florid lively Ruddiness. 5. A
considerable and unusual Numbness; Sleep more profound, of more Duration, and
yet less tranquil and calm, than at other Times; a greater Propensity than
ordinary to be fatigued after moderate Exercise or Work; and a little
Oppression and Heaviness from walking. 6, Palpitations, accompanied sometimes
with very great Dejection, and even with a slight fainting Fit; especially on
being in any hot Place, or after moving about considerably. 7, Vertigos, or
Swimmings of the Head, especially on bowing down and raising it up at once, and
after sleeping. 8, Frequent Pains of the Head, to which the Person was not
formerly subject; and which seem not to arise from any Defect in the
Digestions. 9, An evident Sensation of Heat, pretty generally diffused over the
whole Body. 10, A smarting Sort of Itching all over, from a very little more
Heat than usual. And lastly, frequent Haemorrhages, and these attended with
manifest Relief, and more Vivacity.

People should, notwithstanding, be cautious of supposing an unhealthy Excess
of Blood, from any one of these Symptoms only: many of them must concur; and
they should endeavor to be certain, that even such a Concurrence of them does
not result from a very different Cause, and wholly opposite in Effect to that
of an Excess of Blood.

But when it is certain, from the whole Appearance, that such an Excess does
really exist, then a single, or even a second Bleeding is attended with very
good Effects. Nor is it material, in such Cases, from what Part the Blood is
taken.

541. On the other hand, when these Circumstances do not exist, Bleeding is in
no wise necessary: nor should it ever be practiced in these following
Conditions and Circumstances; except for some particular and very strong
Reasons; of the due Force of which none but Physicians can judge.

First, when the Person is in a very advanced Age, or in very early Infancy. 2,
When he is either naturally of a weakly Constitution, or it has been rendered
such by Sickness, or by some other Accident. 3, When the Pulse is small, soft,
feeble, and intermits, and the Skin is manifestly pale. 4, When the Limbs, the
Extremities of the Body, are often cold, puffed up and soft. 5, When their
Appetites has been very small for a long time; their Food but little
nourishing, and their Perspiration too plentiful, from great Exercise. 6, When
the Stomach has long been disordered, and the Digestion bad, whence very little
Blood could be generated. 7, When the Patient has been considerably emptied,
whether by Haemorrhages, a Looseness, profuse Urine or Sweat: or when the
Crisis of some Distemper has been effected by any one of these Evacuations. 8,
When the Patient has long been afflicted with some depressing Disease; and
troubled with many such Obstructions as prevent the Formation of Blood. 9,
Whenever a Person is exhausted, from whatever Cause. 10, When the Blood is in a
thin, pale, and dissolved State.

542. In all these Cases, and in some others less frequent, a single Bleeding
often precipitates the Patient into an absolutely incurable State, an
irreparable Train of Evils. Mary dismal Examples of it are but too obvious.

Whatever, therefore, be the Situation of the Patient, and however naturally
robust, that Bleeding, which is unnecessary, is noxious. Repeated, re-iterated
Bleedings, weaken and enervate, hasten old Age, diminish the Force of the
Circulation, thence fatten and puff up the Body; and next by weakening, and
lastly by destroying, the Digestions, they lead to a fatal Dropsy. They
disorder the Perspiration by the Skin, and leave the Patient liable to Colds
and Defluxions: They weaken the nervous System, and render Persons subject to
Vapors, to the hypochondriac Disorders, and to all nervous Maladies.

The ill Consequence of a single, though erroneous Bleeding is not immediately
discernible: on the contrary, when it was not performed in such a Quantity, as
to weaken the Patient perceivably, it appears to have been rather beneficial.
Yet I still here insist upon it, that it is not the less true that, when
unnecessary, it is prejudicial; and that People should never bleed, as
sometimes has been done, for mere Whim, or, as it were, for Diversion. It
avails nothing to affirm, that within a few Days after it, they have got more
Blood than they had before it, that is, that they weigh more than at first,
whence they infer the Loss of Blood very speedily repaired. The Fact of their
augmented Weight is admitted; but this very Fact testifies against the real
Benefit of that ^^^^ding; since it is a Proof, that the natural Evacuations of
the Body are less completely made; and that Humors, which ought to be
expelled, are retained in it. There remains the same Quantity of Blood, and
perhaps a little more; but it is not a Blood so well made, so perfectly
elaborated; and this is so very true, that if the thing were otherwise; if some
Days after the Bleeding they had a greater Quantity of the same Kind of Blood,
it would amount to a Demonstration, that more re-iterated Bleedings must
necessarily have brought on an inflammatory Disease, in a Man of a robust Habit
of Body.

543. The Quantity of Blood which a grown Man may part with, by way of
Precaution, is about ten Ounces.

544. Persons so constituted as to breed much Blood, should carefully avoid all
those Causes which tend to augment it, (See 540, No. 1.) and when they are
sensible of the Quantity augmented, they should confine themselves to a light
frugal Diet, on Pulls, Fruits, Bread and Water; they should often Bathe their
Feet in warm Water, taking Night and Morning the Powder No. 20; drink of the
Ptisan No. 1; sleep but very moderately, and take much Exercise. By using these
Precautions they may either prevent any Occasion for Bleeding, or should they
really be obliged to admit of it, they would increase and prolong its good
Effects. These are also the very Means which may remove all the Danger that
might ensue from a Person's omitting to bleed, at the usual Season or Interval,
when the Habit, the Fashion of Bleeding had been inveterately established in
him.

545. We learn with Horror and Astonishment, that some have been bled eighteen,
twenty and even twenty-four times in two Days; and some others, some How
shocking is this! and yet how true in some Countries! I have been most
certainly assured, that Bleeding has been inflicted and repeated in the last
sinking and totally relaxing Stage of a Sea-Scurvy, whose fatal Termination it
doubtless accelerated. This did not happen in our own Fleet; yet we are not as
yet wholly exempt on Shore, from some Abuse of Bleeding, which a few raw
unthinking Operators are apt to consider as a mere Matter of Course. I have in
some other Place stigmatized the Madness of Bleeding in Convulsions, from
manifest Exhaustion and Emptiness, with the Abhorrence it deserves. K.
hundred times, in the Course of some Months. Such Instances irrefragably
demonstrate the continual Ignorance of their Physician or Surgeon; and should
the Patient escape, we ought to admire the inexhaustible Resources of Nature,
that survived so many murderous Incisions.

546. The People entertain a common Notion, which is, that the first time of
bleeding certainly saves the Life of the Patient; but to convince them of the
Falsity of this silly Notion, they need only open their Eyes, and see the very
contrary Fact to this occur but too unhappily every Day; many People dying soon
after their first Bleeding. Were their Opinion right, it would be impossible
that any Person should die of the first Disease that seized him, which yet
daily happens. Now the Extirpation of this absurd Opinion is really become
important, as the Continuance of it is attended with some unhappy Consequences:
their Faith in, their great Dependence on, the extraordinary Virtue of this
first Bleeding makes them willing to omit it, that is, to treasure it up
against a Distemper, from which they shall be in the greatest Danger; and thus
it is deferred as long as the Patient is not extremely bad, in Hopes that if
they can do without it then, they shall keep it for another and more pressing
Occasion. Their present Disease in the Mean time rises to a violent Height; and
then they bleed, but when it is too late, and I have seen Instances of many
Patients, who were permitted to die, that the first Bleeding might be reserved
for a more important Occasion. The only Difference between the first Bleeding,
and any subsequent one is, that the first commonly gives the Patient an
Emotion, which is rather hurtful than salutary.

Of Purges.
547. The Stomach and Bowels are emptied either by Vomiting, or by Stools, the
latter Discharge being much more natural than the first, which is not effected
without a violent Motion, and one indeed to which Nature is repugnant.
Nevertheless, there are some Cases, which really require this artificial
Vomiting; but these excepted (some of which I have already pointed out) we
should rather prefer those Remedies, which empty the Belly by Stool.

548. The Signs which indicate a Necessity for Purging, are, 1, a disagreeable
Taste or Savor of the Mouth in a Morning, and especially a bitter Taste; a soul
furred Tongue and Teeth, disagreeable Eructations or Belchings, Windiness and
Distension.

2, A Want of Appetite, which increases very gradually, without any Fever;
which degenerates into a Disgust or total Aversion to Food; and sometimes
communicates a bad Taste to the very little such Persons do eat.

3, Reachings to vomit in a Morning fasting, and sometimes throughout the Day;
supposing such not to depend on a Woman's Pregnancy, or some other Disorder, in
which Purges would be either useless or hurtful.

4, A Vomiting up of bitter or corrupted Humors.

5, A manifest Sensation of a Weight, or Heaviness in the Stomach, the Loins,
or the Knees.

6, A Want of Strength sometimes attended with Restlessness, ill Humor, or
Peevishness, and Melancholy.

7, Pains of the Stomach, frequent Pains of the Head, or Vertigos; sometimes a
Drowsiness, which increases after Meals.

8, Some Species of Cholics; irregular Stools which are sometimes very great in
Quantity, and too liquid for many Times together; after which an obstinate
Costiveness ensues.

9, A Pulse less regular, and less strong, than what is natural to the Patient,
and which sometimes intermits.

549. When these Symptoms, or some of them, ascertain the Necessity of Purging
a Person, not then attacked by any manifest Disease (for I am not speaking here
of Purges in such Cases) a proper purging Medicine may be given him. The bad
Taste in his Mouth; the continual Belchings; the frequent Reachings to vomit;
the actual Vomitings and Melancholy discover, that the Cause of his Disorder
resides in the Stomach, and show that a Vomit will be of Service to him. But
when these Signs or Symptoms are not evident, the Patient should take such
purging or opening Remedies, as are particularly indicated by the Pains,
whether of the Loins; from the Cholic; or by a Sensation of Weight or Heaviness
in the Knees.

550. But we should abstain from either vomiting or purging, 1, Whenever the
Complaints of the Patients are founded in their Weakness, and their being
already exhausted. 2, When there is a general Dryness of the Habit, a very
considerable Degree of Heat, some Inflammation, or a strong Fever. 3, Whenever
Nature is exerting herself in some other salutary Evacuation; whence purging
must never be attempted in critical Sweats, during the monthly Discharges, nor
daring a Fit of the Gout. 4, Nor in such inveterate Obstructions as Purges
cannot remove, and really do augment. 5, Neither when the nervous System is
considerably weakened.

551. There are other Cases again, in which it may be proper to purge, but not
to give a Vomit. These Cases are, 1. When the Patient abounds too much with
Blood, (See 540) since the Efforts which attend vomiting, greatly augment the
Force of the Circulation; whence the Blood Vessels of the Head and of the
Breast, being extremely distended with Blood, might burst, which must prove
fatal on the Spot, and has repeatedly proved so. 2, For the same Reason they
should not be given to Persons, who are subject to frequent Bleeding from the
Nose, or to coughing up or vomiting of Blood; to Women who are subject to
excessive or unseasonable Discharges of Blood, etc. from the Vagina, the Neck
of the Womb; nor to those who are with Child. 3, Vomits are improper for
ruptured Persons.

552. When any Person has taken too acrid, too sharp, a Vomit, or a Purge,
which operates with excessive Violence; whether this consists in the most
vehement Efforts and Agitations, the Pains, Convulsions or Swoonings, which are
their frequent Consequences; or whether that prodigious Evacuation and
Emptiness their Operation causes, (which is commonly termed a Super-purgation)
and which may hurry the Patient off; Instances of which are but too common
among the lower Class of the People, who much too frequently confide themselves
to the Conduct of ignorant Menslayers: In all such unhappy Accidents, I say, we
should treat these unfortunate Persons, as if they had been actually poisoned
by violent corroding Poisons, (See 533) that is, we should sill them, as it
were, with Draughts of warm Water, Milk, Oil, Barley-Water, Almond-Milk,
emollient Glysters with Milk, and the Yolks of Eggs; and also bleed them
plentifully, if their Pains are excessive, and their Pulses strong and feverish.

The Super purgation, the excessive Discharge is to be stopped, after having
plied the Patient plentifully with diluting Drinks, by giving the calming
anodyne Medicines directed in the Removal of acute Pains, 536, No. 6.

Flanels dipped in hot Water, in which some Venice Treacle is dissolved, are very
serviceable: and should the Evacuations by Stool be excessive, and the Patient
has not a high Fever, and a parching Kind of Heat, a Morsel of the same
Treacle, as large as a Nutmeg, may be dissolved in his Glyster.

But should the Vomiting solely be excessive, without any Purging, the Number
of emollient Glysters with Oil and the Yolk of an Egg, must be increased; and
the Patient should be placed in a warm Bath.

553. Purges frequently repeated, without just and necessary Indications, are
attended with much the same ill Effects as frequent Bleedings. They destroy the
Digestions; the Stomach no longer, or very languidly, exerts it Functions; the
Intestines prove inactive; the Patient becomes liable to very severe Cholics;
the Plight of the Body, deprived of its salutary Nutrition, falls off;
Perspiration is disordered; Defluxions ensue; nervous Maladies come on, with a
general Languor; and the Patient proves old, long before the Number of his
Years have made him so.

Much irreparable Mischief has been done to the Health of Children, by Purges
injudiciously given and repeated. They prevent them from attaining their utmost
natural Strength and frequently contract their due Growth. They ruin their
Teeth; dispose young Girls to future Obstructions; and when they have been
already affected by them, they render them still more obstinate.

It (...) generally received, that Persons who have little or no Appetite need
purging; since this is often very false, and most of those Causes, which lessen
or destroy the Appetite, cannot be removed by purging; though many of them may
be increased by it.

Persons whose Stomachs contain much glairy viscid Matter suppose, they may be
cured by Purges, which seem indeed at first to relieve them; but this proves a
very slight and deceitful Relief. These Humors are owing to that Weakness and
Laxity of the Stomach, which Purges augment; since, notwithstanding they carry
off Part of these viscid Humors generated in it, at the Expiration of a few
Days there is a greater Accumulation of them than before; and thus, by a
Re-iteration of purging Medicines, the Malady soon becomes incurable, and
Health is irrecoverably lost. The real Cure of such Cases is effected by
directly opposite Medicines. Those referred to, or mentioned, 272, are highly
conducive to it.

554. The Custom of taking stomachic Medicines infused in Brandy, Spirit of
Wine, Cherry Water, etc. is always dangerous; for notwithstanding the present
immediate Relief such Infusions afford in some Disorders of the Stomach, they
really by slow Degrees impair and ruin that Organ; and it may be observed, that
as many as accustom themselves to Drams, go off, just like excessive Drinkers,
in Consequence of their having no Digestion; whence they sink into a State of
Depression and Languor, and die dropsical.

555. Either Vomits or Purges may be often beneficially omitted, even when they
have some Appearance of seeming necessary, by abating one Meal a Day for some
Time; by abstaining from the most nourishing Sorts of Food; and especially from
those which are fat; by drinking freely of cool Water, and taking extraordinary
Exercise. The same Regimen also serves to subdue, without the Use of Purges,
the various Complaints which often invade those, who omit taking purging
Medicines, at those Seasons and Intervals, in which they have made it a Custom
to take them.

556. The Medicines, No. 34 and 35, are the most certain Vomits. The Powder,
No. 21, is a good Purge, when the Patient is in no Wise feverish.

The Doses recommended in the Table of Remedies are those, which are proper for
a grown Man of a vigorous Constitution. Nevertheless there are some few, for
whom they may be too weak: in such Circumstances they may be increased by the
Addition of a third or fourth Part of the Dose prescribed. But should they not
operate in that Quantity, we must be careful not to double the Dose, much less
to give a threefold Quantity, which has sometimes been done, and that even
without its Operation, and at the Risque of killing the Patient, which has not
seldom been the Consequence. In Case of such Purging not ensuing, we should
rather give large Draughts of Whey sweetened with Honey, or of warm Water, in a
Pot of which an Ounce, or an Ounce and a half of common Salt must be dissolved;
and this (Quantity is to be taken from Time to Time in small Cups, moving about
with it.

The Fibers of Country People who inhabit the Mountains, and live almost solely
on Milk, are so little susceptible of Sensation, that they must take such large
Doses to purge them, as would kill all the Peasantry in the Valleys. In the
Mountains of Valais there are Men who take twenty, and even twenty-four Grains
of Glass of Antimony for a single Dose; a Grain or two of which were sufficient
to poison ordinary Men.

557. Notwithstanding our Cautions on this important Head, whenever an urgent
Necessity commands it, Purging must be re^^^^^ to at all Times and Seasons: but
when the Season may be safely detected, it were right to decline Purging in the
Extremities of either Heat or Cold; and to take the Purge early in the Morning,
(...) the Medicines may find less Obstruction or Embarassment from the Contents
of the Stomach. Every other Consideration, and Relation to the Stars and the
Moon, is ridiculous, (...) Foundation. The People are particularly averse to
(...) in the Dog Days; and if this were only on Account of the great Heat, it
would be very pardonable: but it is from an astrological Prejudice, which is so
much the more absurd, as the real Dog Days are at thirty six Days Distance from
those commonly reckoned such: and it is a melancholy Reflection, that the
Ignorance of the People should be so gross, in this Respect, in our enlightened
Age; and that they should still imagine the Virtue and Efficacy of Medicines to
depend on what Sign of the Zodiac the Sun is in, or on any particular Quarter
on the Moon. Yet it is certain in this Point, they are so inveterately attached
to this Prejudice, that it is but too common to see Country People die, in
waiting for the Sign or Quarter most favorable to the Operation and effect of
a Medicine, which was truly necessary five or six Days before either of them.
Sometimes too that particular Medicine is given, to which a certain Day is
supposed to be auspicious and favorable, in preference to that which is most
prevalent against the Disease. And thus it is, that an ignorant Almanac Maker
determines on the Lives of the human Race; and contracts the Duration of them
with Impunity.

558. When a Vomit or a Purge is to be taken, the Patient's Body should be
prepared for the Reception of it twenty-four Hours beforehand; by taking very
little Food, and drinking some Glasses of warm Water, or of a light Tea of some
Herbs.

He should not drink after a Vomit, until it begins to work; but then he should
drink very plentifully of warm Water, or a light Infusion of Chamomile Flowers,
which is preferable.

It is usual after Purges, to take some thin Broth or Soup during their
Operation; but warm Water sweetened with Sugar or Honey, or an Infusion of
Succory Flowers, would sometimes be more suitable.

559. As the Stomach suffers, in some Degree, as often as either a Vomit, or a
Purge, is taken, the Patient should be careful how he lives, and orders himself
for some Days after taking them, as well in Regard to the Quantity as Quality
of his Food.

560. I shall say nothing of other Articles taken by Way of Precaution, such as
Soups, Whey, Waters, etc. which are but little used among the People; but
confine myself to this general Remark, that when they take any of these
precautionary Things, they should enter on a Regimen or Way of living, that may
cooperate with them, and contribute to the same Purpose. Whey is commonly taken
to refresh and cool the Body; and while they drink it, they deny themselves
Pulls, Fruits, and Sallads. They eat nothing then, but the best and heartiest
Flesh-meats they can come at; such Vegetables as are used in good Soups, Eggs,
and good Wine; notwithstanding this is to destroy, by high and heating
Aliments, all the attemperating cooling Effects expected from the Whey.

Some Persons propose to cool and attemperate their Blood by Soups and a thin
Diet into which they cram Craw fish, that heat considerably, or Nasturtium,
Cresses which also heat, and thus defeat their own Purpose, Happily in such a
Case, the Error in one Respect often cures that in the other; and these Kinds
of Soup, which are in no Wise cooling, prove very serviceable, in Consequence
of the Cause of the Symptoms, which they were intended to remove, not requiring
any Coolers at all.

The general physical Practice of the Community, which unhappily is but too
much in Fashion, abounds with similar Errors. I will just cite one, because I
have seen its dismal Effects. Many People suppose Pepper cooling, though their
Smell, Taste, and common Sense concur to inform them of the contrary. It is the
very hottest of Spices.

561. The most certain Preservative, and the most attainable too by every Man,
is to avoid all Excess, and especially Excess in eating and in drinking. People
generally eat more than thoroughly consists with Health, or permits them to
attain the utmost Vigor, of which their natural Constitutions are capable. The
Custom is established, and it is difficult to eradicate it: notwithstanding we
should at least resolve not to eat, but through Hunger, and always under a
Subjection to Reason; because, except in a very few Cases, Reason constantly
suggests to us not to eat, when the Stomach has an Aversion to Food. A sober
moderate Person is capable of Labor, I may say, even of excessive Labor of
some Kinds; of which greater Eaters are absolutely incapable. Sobriety of
itself cures such Maladies as are otherwise incurable, and may recover the most
shattered and unhealthy Persons.

CHAPTER XXXIII. Of Mountebanks, Quacks, and Conjurers.
SECT. 562. ONE dreadful Scourge still remains to be treated of, which
occasions a greater Mortality than all the Distempers I have hitherto
described; and which, as long as it continues, will defeat our utmost
Precautions to preserve the Health and Lives of the common People. This, or
rather, these Scourges, for they are very numerous, are Quacks; of which there
are two Species: The Mountebanks, or traveling Quacks, and those pretended
Physicians in Villages and Country-Places, both male and female, known in
Swisserland by the Name of Conjurers, and who very effectually unpeople it.

The first of these, the Mountebanks, without visiting the Sick, or thinking of
their Distempers, sell different Medicines, some of which are for external Use,
and these often do little or no Mischief; but their internal ones are much
oftener pernicious. I have been a Witness of their dreadful Effects, and we are
not visited by one of these wandering Caitiffs, whose Admission into our
Country is not mortally fatal to some of its Inhabitants. They are injurious
also in another Respect, as they carry off great Sums of Money with them, and
levy annually some thousands of Livres, amongst that Order of the People, who
have the least to spare. I have seen, and with a very painful Concern, the poor
Labourer and the Artisan, who have scarcely possessed the common Necessaries of
Life, borrow wherewithal to purchase, and at a dear Price, the Poison that was
to complete their Misery, by increasing their Maladies; and which, where they
escaped with their Lives, has left them in such a languid and inactive State,
as has reduced their whole Family to Beggary.

563. An ignorant, knavish, lying and impudent Fellow will always seduce the
gross and credulous Mass of People, incapable to judge of and estimate any
Thing rightly; and adapted to be the eternal Dupes of such, as are base enough
to endeavor to dazzle their weak Understandings; by which Method these vile
Quacks will certainly defraud them, as long as they are tolerated. But ought
not the Magistrates, the Guardians, the Protectors, the political Fathers of
the People to interpose, and defend them from this Danger, by severely
prohibiting the Entrance of such Pernicious Fellows into a Country, where Men's
Lives are very estimable, and where Money is scarce; since they extinguish the
first, and carry off the last, without the least Possibility of their being in
any wise useful to it. Can such forcible Motives as these suffer our
Magistrates to delay their Expulsion any longer, whom there never was the least
Reason for admitting?

564. It is acknowledged the Conjurers, the residing Conjurers, do not carry
out the current Money of the Country, like the itinerant Quacks; but the Havoc
they make among their Fellow Subjects is without Intermission, whence it must
be very great, as every Day in the Year is marked with many of their Victims.
Without the least Knowledge or Experience, and offensively armed with three or
four Medicines, whose Nature they are as thoroughly ignorant of, as of their
unhappy Patients Diseases; and which Medicines, being all violent ones, are
very certainly so many Swords in the Hands of raging Madmen. Thus armed and
qualified, I say, they aggravate the slightest Disorders, and make those that
are a little more considerable, mortal; but from which the Patients would have
recovered, if left solely to the Conduct of Nature; and, for a still stronger
Reason, if they had confided to the Guidance of her experienced Observers and
Assistants.

565. The Robber who assassinates on the Highway, leaves the Traveller the
Resources of defending himself, and the Chance of being aided by the Arrival of
other Travelers: But the Poisoner, who forces himself into the Confidence of a
sick Person, is a hundred times more dangerous, and as just an object of
Punishment.

The Bands of Highway-men, and their Individuals, that enter into any Country
or District, are described as particularly as possible to the Public. It were
equally to be wished, we had also a List of these physical Impostors and
Ignorants male and female; and that a most exact Description of them, with the
Number, and a brief Summary of their murderous Exploits, were faithfully
published. By this Means the Populace might probably be inspired with such a
wholesome Dread of them, that they would no longer expose their Lives to the
Mercy of such Executioners.

566. But their Blindness, with respect to these two Sorts of maleficient
Beings, is inconceivable. That indeed in Favor of the Mountebank is somewhat
less gross, because, as they are not personally acquainted with him, they may
the more easily credit him with some Part of the Talents and the Knowledge he
arrogates. I shall therefore inform them, and it cannot be repeated too often,
that whatever ostentatious Dress and Figure some of these Impostors make, they
are constantly vile Wretches, who, incapable of earning a Livelihood in an
honest Way, have laid the Foundation of their Subsistence on their own amazing
Stock of Impudence, and that of the weak Credulity of the People; that they
have no scientific Knowledge; that their Titles and Patents are so many
Impositions, and inauthentic; since by a shameful Abuse, such Patents and
Titles are become Articles of Commerce, which are to be obtained at very low
Prices; just like the second-hand laced Cloaks which they purchase at the
Brokers. That their Certificates of Cures are so many Chimeras or Forgeries;
and that in short, if among the prodigious Multitudes of People who take their
Medicines, some of them should recover, which it is almost physically
impossible must not sometimes be the Case, yet it would not be the less
certain, that they are a pernicious destructive Set of Men. A Thrust of a
Rapier into the Breast has saved a Man's Life by seasonably opening an
Imposthume in it, which might otherwise have killed him: and yet internal
penetrating Wounds, with a small Sword, are not the less mortal for one such
extraordinary Consequence. Nor is it even surprising that these Mountebanks
(which is equally applicable to the Conjurers) who kill thousands of People,
whom Nature alone, or assisted by a Physician, would have saved, should now and
then cure a Patient, who had been treated before by the ablest Physicians.
Frequently Patients of that Class, who apply to these Mountebanks and Conjurers
(whether it has been, that they would not submit to the Treatment proper for
their Distempers; or whether the real Physician tired of the intractible
Creatures has discontinued his Advice and Attendance) look out for such
Doctors, as assure them of a speedy Cure, and venture to give them such
Medicines as kill many, and cure one (who has had Constitution enough to
overcome them) a little sooner than a justly reputable Physician would have
done. It is but too easy to procure, in every Parish, such Lists of their
Patients, and of their Feats, as would clearly evince the Truth of whatever has
been said here relating to them.

567. The Credit of this Market, this Fair-hunting Doctor, surrounded by five
or six hundred Peasants, staring and gaping at him, and counting themselves
happy in his condescending to cheat them of their very scarce and necessary
Cash, by selling them, for twenty times more than its real Worth, a Medicine
whose best Quality were to be only a useless one; the Credit, I say, of this
vile yet tolerated Cheat, would quickly vanish, could each of his Auditors be
persuaded, of what is strictly true, that except a little more Tenderness and
Agility of Hand, he knows full as much as his Doctor; and that if he could
assume as much Impudence, he would immediately have as much Ability, would
equally deserve the same Reputation, and to have the same Confidence reposed in
him.

568. Were the Populace capable of reasoning, it were easy to disabuse them in
these Respects; but as it is, their Guardians and Conductors should reason for
them. I have already proved the Absurdity of reposing any Confidence in
Mountebanks, properly so called; and that Reliance some have on the Conjurers
is still more stupid and ridiculous.

The very meanest Trade requires some Instruction: A Man does not commence even
a Cobbler, a Botcher of old Leather, without serving an Appreticeship to it; and
yet no Time has been served, no Instruction has been attended to, by these
Pretenders to the most necessary, useful and elegant Profession. We do not
confide the mending, the cleaning of a Watch to any, who have spent several
Years in considering how a Watch is made; what are the requisites and Causes of
its going right; and the Defects or Impediments that make it go wrong: and yet
the preserving and rectifying the Movements of the most complex, the most
delicate and exquisite, and the most estimable Machine upon Earth, is entrusted
to People who have not the least Notion of its Structure; of the Causes of its
Motions; nor of the Instruments proper to rectify their Deviations.

Let a Soldier discarded from his Regiment for his roguish Tricks, or who is a
Deserter from it, a Bankrupt, a disreputable Ecclesiastic, a drunken Barber, or
a Multitude of such other worthless People, advertise that they mount, set and
fit up all Kinds of Jewels and Trinkets in Perfection; if any of these are not
known; if no Person in the Place has ever seen any of their Work; or if they
cannot produce authentic Testimonials of their Honesty, and their Ability in
their Business, not a single Individual will trust them with two Pennyworth of
false Stones to work upon; in short they must be famished. But if, instead of
professing themselves Jewellers, they post themselves up as Physicians, the
Crowd purchase, at a high Rate, the Pleasure of trusting them with the Care of
their Lives, the remaining Part of which they rarely fail to empoison.

569. The most genuine and excellent Physicians, those extraordinary Men, who,
born with the happiest Talents, began to inform their Understandings from their
earliest Youth; who have afterward carefully qualified themselves by
cultivating every Branch of Physic; who have sacrificed the best and most
pleasurable Days of their Lives, to a regular and assiduous Investigation of
the human Body; of its various Functions; of the Causes that may impair or
embarrass them, and informed themselves of the Qualities and Virtues of every
simple and compound Medicine; who have surmounted the Difficulty and
Loathsomness of living in Hospitals among thousands of Patients; and who have
added the medical Observations of all Ages and Places to their own; these few
and extraordinary Men, I say, still consider themselves as short of that
perfect Ability and consummate Knowledge, which they contemplate and wish for,
as necessary to guarding the precious Depositum of human Life and Health,
confided to their Charge. Nevertheless, we see the same inestimable Treasures,
entrusted to gross and stupid Men, born without Talents; brought up without
Education or Culture; who frequently can scarcely read; who are as profoundly
ignorant of every Subject that has any Relation to Physic, as the Savages of
Asia; who awake only to drink away; who often exercise their horrid Trade
merely to find themselves in strong Liquor, and execute it chiefly when they
are drunk: who, in short, became Physicians, only from their Incapacity to
arrive at any Trade or Attainment! Certainly such a Conduct, in Creatures of
the human Species, must appear very astonishing, and even melancholy, to every
sensible thinking Man; and constitute the highest Degree of Absurdity and
Extravagance.

Should any Person duly qualified enter into an Examination of the Medicines
they use, and compare them with the Situation and Symptoms of the Patients to
whom they give them, he must be struck with Horror; and heartily deplore the
Fate of that unfortunate Part of the human Race, whose Lives, so important to
the Community are committed to the Charge of the most murderous Set of Beings.

570. Some of these Caitiffs however, apprehending the Force and Danger of that
Objection, founded on their Want of Study and Education, have endeavored to
elude it, by infusing and spreading a false, and indeed, an impudent impious
Prejudice among the People, which prevails too much at present; and this is,
that their Talents for Physic are a supernatural Gift, and, of Course, greatly
superior to all human Knowledge, it were going out of my Province to expatiate
on the Indecency, the Sin, and the Irreligion of such Knavery, and incroaching
upon the Rights and perhaps the Duty of the Clergy; but I entreat the Liberty
of observing to this respectable Order of Men, that this Superstition, which is
attended with dreadful Consequences, seems to call for their utmost Attention:
and in general the Expulsion of Superstition is the more to be wished, as a
Mind, imbued with false Prejudices, is less adapted to imbibe a true and
valuable Doctrine. There are some very callous hardened Villains among this
murdering Band, who, with a view to establish their Influence and Revenue as
well upon Fear as upon Hope, have horridly ventured so far as to incline the
Populace to doubt, whether they received their boasted Gift and Power from
Heaven or from Hell! And yet these are the Men who are trusted with the Health
and Lives of many others.

571. One Fact which I have already mentioned, and which it seems impossible to
account for is, that great Earnestness of the Peasant to procure the best
Assistance he can for his sick Cattle. At whatever Distance the Farrier lives,
or some Person who is supposed qualified to be one (for unfortunately there is
not one in Swisserland) if he has considerable Reputation in this way, the
Countryman goes to consult him, or purchases his Visit at any Price. However
expensive the Medicines are, which the Horsedoctor directs, if they are
accounted the best, he procures them for his poor Beast. But if himself, his
Wife or Children fall sick, he either calls in no Assistance nor Medicines; or
contents himself with such as are next at hand, however pernicious they may be,
though nothing the Cheaper on that Account; for certainly the Money, extorted
by some of these physical Conjurers from their Patients, but oftener from their
Heirs, is a very shameful Injustice, and calls loudly for Reformation.

572. In an excellent Memoir or Tract, which will shortly be published on the
Population of Swisserland, we shall find an important and very affecting
Remark, which strictly demonstrates the Havoc made by these immedical
Magicians or Conjurers; and which is this: That in the common Course of Years,
the Proportion between the Numbers and Deaths of the Inhabitants of any one
Place, is not extremely different in City and Country: but when the very same
epidemical Disease attacks the City and the Villages, the Difference is
enormous; and the Number of Deaths of the Inhabitants of the Villages, where
the Conjurer exercises his bloody Dominion, is found, upon Comparison, greatly
more than the Deaths in the City.

I find in the second Volume of the Memoirs of the oeconomical Society of
Berne, for the Year 1762, another Fact equally interesting, which is related by
one of the most intelligent and sagacious Observers, concerned in that Work,
"Pleuresies and Peripneumonies (he says) prevailed at Cottens a la Cote; and
some Peasants died under them, who had consulted the Conjurers, and taken their
heating Medicines; while of those, who pursued a directly opposite Method,
almost every one recovered."

573. But I shall employ myself no longer on this Topic, on which the Love of
my Species alone has prompted me to say thus much; though it deserves to be
considered more in Detail, and is, in Reality, of the greatest Consequence.
None, methinks, could make themselves easy with respect to it so much as
Physicians, if they were conducted only by lucrative Views; since these
Conjurers diminish the Number of those poor People, who sometimes consult the
real Physicians, and with some Care and Trouble, but without the least Profit,
to those Gentlemen. But what good Physician is mean and vile enough to purchase
a few Hours of Ease and Tranqillity at so high, so very odious a Price?

574. Having thus clearly shown the Evils attending this crying Nuisance, I
wish I were able to prescribe an effectual Remedy against it, which I
acknowledge it is far from being easy to do.

The first necessary Point probably was, to publish and demonstrate the great
and public Danger, and to dispose the State to employ their Attention on this
fatal, this mortal Abuse; which, joined to the other Causes of Depopulation,
has a manife^^ Tendency to render Swisserland a Desert.

575. The second, and doubtless the most effectual Means, which I have already
mentioned is, not to admit any traveling Mountebank to enter this Country; and
to set a Mark on all the Conjurers: It may probably also be found convenient,
to inflict corporal Punishment on them; as it has been already adjudged in
different Countries by sovereign Edicts. At the very least they should be
marked with public Infamy, according to the following Custom practiced in a
great City in France. "When any Mountebanks appeared in Montpelier, the
Magistrates had a Power to mount each of them upon a meagre miserable Ass, with
his Head to the Ass's Tail. In this Condition they were led throughout the
whole City, attended with the Shouts and Hooting of the Children and the Mob,
beating them, throwing Filth and Ordure at them, reviling them, and dragging
them all about."

576. A third conducive Means would be the Instructions and Admonitions of the
Clergy on this Subject, to the Peasants in their several Parishes. For this
Conduct of the common People, amounting, in Effect, to Suicide, to Self-murder,
it must be important to convince them of it. But the little Efficacy of the
strongest and repeated Exhortations on so many other Articles, may cause us to
entertain a very reasonable Doubt of their Success on this. Custom seems to
have determined, that there is nothing in our Day, which excludes a Person from
the Title and Appellation of an honest or honorable Man, except it be mere and
convicted Theft; and that for this simple and obvious Reason, that we attach
ourselves more strongly to our Property, than to any thing else. Even Homicide
is esteemed and reputed honorable in many Cases. Can we reasonably expect then
to convince the Multitude, that it is criminal to confide the Care of their
Health to these Poisoners, in Hopes of a Cure of their Disorders? A much
likelier Method of succeeding on this Point would certainly be, to convince the
deluded People, that it will cost them less to be honestly and judiciously
treated, than to suffer under the Hands of these Executioners. The Expectation
of a good and cheap Health-market will be apt to influence them more, than
their Dread of a Crime would.

577. A fourth Means of removing or restraining this Nuisance would be to
expunge, from the Almanacs, all the astrological Rules relating to Physic; as
they continually conduce to preserve and increase some dangerous Prejudices and
Notions in a Science, the smallest Errors in which are sometimes fatal. I had
already reflected on the Multitude of Peasants that have been lost, from
postponing, or mistiming a Bleeding; only because the sovereign Decision of an
Almanac had directed it at some other Time. May it not also be dreaded, to
mention it by the way, that the same Cause, the Almanacs, may prove injurious
to their rural Economy and Management; and that by advising with the Moon,
which has no Influence, and is of no Consequence in Vegetation or other Country
Business, they may be wanting in a due Attention to such other Circumstances
and Regulations, as are of real Importance in them.

578. A fifth concurring Remedy against this popular Evil would be the
Establishment of Hospitals, for the Reception of poor Patients, in the
different Cities and Towns of Swisserland.

There may be a great many easy and concurring Means of erecting and endo^^^ng
such, with very little new Expense; and immense Advantages might result from
them; besides, however considerable the ^xpences might prove, is not the Object
of them of the most interesting, the most important Nature? It is incontestably
our (...) Duty; and it would soon be manifest, that the Performance of it would
be attended with more essential intrinsic Benefit to the Community, than any
other Application of Money could produce. We must either admit, that the
Multitude, the Body of the People is useless to the State, or agree, that Care
should be taken to preserve and continue them, A very respectable Englishman,
who, after a previous and thorough Consideration of this subject, had applied
himself very assiduously and usefully on the Means of increasing the Riches and
the Happiness of his Countrymen, complains, that in England, the very Country
in which there are the most Hospitals, the Poor who are sick are not
sufficiently assisted. What a deplorable Deficience of the necessary Assistance
for such must then be in a Country, that is not provided with a single
Hospital? That Aid from Surgery and Physic, which abounds in Cities, is not
sufficiently diffused into Country Places; and the Peasants are liable to some
simple and moderate Diseases, which, for want of proper Care, degenerate into a
State of Infirmity, that sinks them into premature Death.

579. In fine, if it be found impossible to extinguish these Abuses (for those
arising from Quacks are not the only ones, nor is that Title applied to as many
as really deserves it) beyond all Doubt it would be for the Benefit and Safety
of the Public, upon the whole, entirely to prohibit the Art, the Practice of
Physic itself. When real and good Physicians cannot effect as much Good, as
ignorant ones and Impostors can do Mischief I confess that, in my Speculation
of this Point, I have sometimes thought myself constrained to suppose, that
this is too often the Case, upon the whole: especially if we were to admit,
into the Computation, the contingent. Fallibility of the best and most
experienced Physicians, in such obscure Cases and particular Constitutions as
sometimes occur. K.
, some real Advantages must accrue to the State, and to the whole Species, from
employing none of either. I affirm it, after much Reflection, and from thorough
Conviction, that Anarchy in Medicine is the most dangerous Anarchy. For this
Profession, when loosed from every Restraint, and subjected to no Regulations,
no Laws, is the more cruel Scourge and Affliction, from the incessant Exercise
of it; and should its Anarchy, its Disorders prove irremediable, the Practice
of an Art, become so very noxious, should be prohibited under the severest
Penalties: Or, if the Constitution of any Government was inconsistent with the
Application of so violent a Remedy, they should order public Prayers against
the Mortality of it, to be offered up in all the Churches; as the Custom has
been in other great and general Calamities The great Candor and good Sense of
this Section are self-manifest: and its Importance is so considerable too, that
it may worthily excite all generous Practitioners, and indeed all honest Men,
to contribute the best Informations that occur to them, of the real
Consequences of those innumerable Nostrums and Preparations, that are so
incessantly obtruded on the Public. All their good Effects are certain to be
published, and seldom without Exaggeration, by their Authors, or Proprietors.
It will only rest upon the Friends of Mankind then, to be nearly as industrious
in listening to and publishing their many Failures, and the Fatalities which
must sometimes attend them. Hence a fair State and Balance of their Benefit or
Mischief may finally be presented to the Public. K.
.

580. Another Abuse, less fatal indeed than those already mentioned (but which,
however, has real ill Consequences, and at the best, carries out a great deal
of Money from us, though less at the Expense of the common People, than of
those in easy Circumstances) is that Blindness and Facility, with which many
suffer themselves to be imposed upon, by the pompous Advertisements of some
Catholicon, some universal Remedy, which they purchase at a high Rate, from
some foreign Pretender to a mighty Secret or Nostrum. Persons of a Class or two
above the Populace do not care to run after a Mountebank, from supposing they
should depretiate themselves by mixing with the Herd. Yet if that very Quack,
instead of coming among us, were to reside in some foreign City; if, instead of
posting up his lying Puffs and Pretensions at the Corners of the Streets, he
would get them inserted in the Gazettes, and Newspapers; if, instead of
selling his boasted Remedies in Person, he should establish Shops or Offices
for that Purpose in every City; and finally, if instead of selling them twenty
times above their real Value, he would still double that Price; instead of
having the common People for his Customers, he would take in the wealthy
Citizen, Persons of all Rank, and from almost every Country. For strange as it
seems it is certain, that a Person of such a Condition, who is sensible in
every other respect; and who will scruple to confide his Health to the Conduct
of such Physicians as would be the justest objects of his Confidence, will
venture to take, through a very unaccountable Infatuation, the most dangerous
Medicine, upon the Credit of an imposing Advertisement, published by as
worthless and ignorant a Fellow as the Mountebank whom he despises, because the
latter blows a Horn under his Window; and yet who differs from the former in no
other respects except those I have just pointed out.

581. Scarcely a Year passes, without one or another such advertised and
vaunted Medicine's getting into high Credit; the Ravages of which are more or
less, in Proportion to its being more or less in Vogue. Fortunately, for the
human Species, but few of these Nostrums have attained an equal Reputation with
Ailhaud's Powders, an Inhabitant of Aix in Provence, and unworthy the Name of a
Physician; who has overrun Europe for some Years with a violent Purge, the
Remembrance of which will not be effaced before the Extinction of all its
Victims. I attend now, and have for a long time past, several Patients, whose
Disorders I palliate without Hopes of ever curing them; and who owe their
present melancholy State of Body to nothing but the manifest Consequences of
these Powders; and I have actually seen, very lately, two Persons who have been
cruelly Poisoned by this boasted Remedy of his. A French Physician, as eminent
for his Talents and his Science, as estimable for his personal Character in
other Respects, has published some of the unhappy and tragical Consequences
which the Use of them has occasioned; and were a Collection published of the
same Events from them, in every Place where they have been introduced, the Size
and the Contents of the Volume would make a very terrible one.

582. It is some Comfort, however, that all the other Medicines thus puffed and
vended have not been altogether so fashionable, nor yet quite so dangerous: but
all posted and advertised Medicines should be judged of upon this Principle
(and I do not know a more infallible one in Physics, nor in the Practice of
Physic) that whoever advertises any Medicince, as a universal Remedy for all
Diseases, is an absolute Impostor, such a Remedy being impossible and
contradictory. I shall not here offer to detail such Proofs as may be given of
the Verity of this Proposition: but I freely appeal for it to every sensible
Man, who will reflect a little on the different Causes of Diseases; on the
Opposition of these Causes; and on the Absurdity of attempting to oppose such
various Diseases, and their Causes, by one and the same Remedy.

As many as shall settle their Judgments properly on this Principle, will never
be imposed upon, by the superficial Gloss of those Sophisms contrived to prove,
that all Diseases proceed from one Cause; and that this Cause is so very
tractable, as to yield to one boasted Remedy. They will perceive at once, that
such an Assertion must be founded in the utmost Knavery or Ignorance; and they
will readily discover where the Fallacy lies. Can any one expect to cure a
Dropsy, which arises from too great a Laxity of the Fibers, and too great an
Attenuation or Thinness of the Blood, by the same Medicines that are used to
cure an inflammatory Disease, in which the Fibers are too stiff and tense, and
the Blood too thick and dense? Yet consult the Newspapers and the Posts, and
you will see published in and on all of them, Virtues just as contradictory;
and certainly the Authors of such poisonous Contradictions ought to be legally
punished for them.

583. I heartily wish the Public would attend here to a very natural and
obvious Reflection. I have treated in this Book but of a small Number of
Diseases, most of them acute ones: and I am positive that no competent well
qualified Physician has ever employed fewer Medicines, in the Treatment of the
Deseases themselves. Nevertheless I have prescribed seventy-one, and I do not
see which of them I could retrench, or dispense with the Want of, if I were
obliged to use one less. Can it be supposed then, that any one single Medicine,
compounded or simple, shall cure thirty times as many Diseases as those I have
treated of?

584. I shall add another very important Observation, which doubtless may have
occured to many of my Readers; and it is this, that the different Causes of
Diseases, their different Characters; the Differences which arise from the
necessary Alterations that happen throughout their Progress and Duration; the
Complications of which they are susceptible; the Varieties which result from
the State of different Epidemics, of Seasons, of Sexes, and of many other
Circumstances; that these Diversities, I say, oblige us very often to vary and
change the Medicines; which proves how very ticklish and dangerous it is to
have them directed by Persons, who have such an imperfect Knowledge of them, as
those who are not Physicians must be supposed to have. And the Circumspection
to be used in such Cases ought to be proportioned to the Interest the Assistant
takes in the Preservation of the Patient; and that Love of his Neighbor with
which he is animated.

585. Must not the same Arguments and Reflections unavoidably suggest the
Necessity of an entire Tractibility on the Part of the Patient, and of his
Friends and Assistants? The History of Diseases which have their stated times
of Beginning, of manifesting and displaying themselves; of arriving at, and
continuing in their Height, and of decreasing; do not all these demonstrate the
Necessity of continuing the same Medicines, as long as the Character of the
Distemper is the same; and the Danger of changing them often, only because what
has been given has not afforded immediate Relief? Nothing can injure the
Patient more than this Instability and Caprice. After the Indication which his
Distemper suggests, appears to be well deduced, the Medicine must be chosen
that is likeliest to resist the Cause of it; and it must be continued as long
as no new Symptom or Circumstance supervenes, which requires an Alteration of
it; except it should be evident, that an Error has been incurred in giving it.
But to conclude that a Medicine is useless or insignificant, because it does
not remove or abate the Distemper as speedily, as the Impatience of the Sick
would naturally desire it; and to change it for another, is as unreasonable, as
it would be for a Man to break his Watch because the Hand takes twelve Hours to
make a Revolution round the Dial-plate.

586. Physicians have some Regard to the State of the Urine of sick Persons,
especially in inflammatory Fevers; as the Alterations occurring in it help them
to judge of the Changes that may have been made in the Character and
Consistence of the Humors in the Mass of Blood; and thence may conduce to
determine the Time, in which it will be proper to dispose them to some
Evacuation. But is is gross Ignorance to imagine, and utter Knavery and
Imposture to persuade the Sick, that the mere Inspection of their Urine solely
sufficiently enables others to judge of the Symptoms and Cause of the Disease,
and to direct the best Remedies for it. This Inspection of the Urine can only
be of Use when it is duly inspected; when we consider at the same Time the
exact State, and the very Looks of the Patient; when these are compared with
the Degree of the Symptoms of the Malady; with the other evacuations; and when
the Physician is strictly informed of all external Circumstances, which may be
considered as foreign to the Malady; which may alter or affect the Evacuations,
such as particular Articles of Food, particular Drinks, different Medicines, or
the very Quantity of Drink. Where a Person is not furnished with an exact
Account of these Circumstances, the merr Inspection of the Urine is of no
Service, it suggests no Indication, nor any Expedient; and mere common Sense
sufficiently proves, and it may be boldly affirmed, that whoever orders any
Medicine, without any other Knowledge of the Disease, than what an Inspection
of the Urine affords, is a rank Knave, and the Patient who takes them is a Dupe.

587. And here now any Reader may very naturally ask, Whence can such a
ridiculous Credulity proceed, upon a Subject so essentially interesting to us
as our own Health?

In Answer to this it should be observed, that some Sources, some Causes of it
seem appropriated merely to the People, the Multitude. The first of these is,
the mechanical Impression of Parade and Show upon the Senses. 2, The Prejudice
they have conceived, as I said before, of the Conjurers curing by a
supernatural Gift. 3, The Notion the Country People entertain, that their
Distemper and Disorders are of a Character and Species peculiar to themselves,
and that the Physicians, attending the Rich, know nothing concerning them. 4,
The general Mistake that their employing the Conjurer is much cheaper. 5,
Perhaps a sheepish shame-faced Timidity may be one Motive, at least with some
of them. 6, A Kind of Fear too, that Physicians will consider their Cases with
less Care and Concern, and be likely to treat them more cavalierly; a Fear
which increases that Confidence which the Peasant, and which indeed every Man
has in his Equal, being founded in Equality itself. And 7, The Discourse and
Conversation of such illiterate Empirics being more to their Taste, and more
adapted to their Apprehension.

But it is less easy to account for this blind Confidence, which Persons of a
superior Class (whose Education being considered as much better are regarded as
better Reasoners) repose in these boasted Remedies; and even for some Conjurer
in Vogue. Nevertheless even some of their Motives may be probably assigned.

The first is that great Principle of Seity or Selfness, as it may be called,
innate to Man, which attaching him to the Prolongation of his own Existence,
more than to any other thing in the Universe, keeps his Eyes, his utmost
Attention, continually fixed upon this Object; and compels him to make it the
very Point, the Purpose of all his Advances and Proceedings; notwithstanding it
does not permit him to distinguish the safest Paths to it from the dangerous
ones. This is the surest and shortest Way, says some Collector at the Turnpike,
he pays, passes, and perishes from the Precipices that occur in his Route.

This very Principle is the Source of another Error, which consists in
reposing, involuntarily, a greater Degree of Confidence in those, who flatter
and fall in the most with us in our favorite Opinions. The well apprised
Physician, who foresees the Length and the Danger of a Disease; and who is a
Man of too much Integrity to affirm what he does not think, must, from a
necessary Construction of the human Frame and Mind, be listened to less
favorably, than he who flatters us by saying what we wish. We endeavor to
elongate, to absent ourselves, from the Sentiments, the Judgment of the first;
we smile, from Self-complacency, at those of the last, which in a very little
time are sure of obtaining our Preference.

A third Cause, which results from the same Principle is, that we give
ourselves up the most readily to his Conduct, whose Method seems the least
disagreeable, and flatters our Inclinations the most. The Physician who enjoins
a strict Regimen; who insists upon some Restraints and Self-denials; who
intimates the Necessity of Time and Patience for the Accomplishment of the
Cure, and who expects a thorough Regulation through the Course of it, disgusts
a Patient who has been accustomed to indulge his own Taste and Humor; the
Quack, who never hesitates at complying with it, charms him. The Idea of a long
and somewhat distant Cure, to be obtained at the End of an unpleasant and
unrelaxing Regimen, supposes a very perilous Disease: this Idea disposes the
Patient to Disgust and Melancholy, he cannot submit to it without Pain; and he
embraces, almost unconsciously, merely to avoid this, an opposite System which
presents him only with the Idea of such a Distemper, as will give way to a few
Doses of Simples.

That Propensity to the New and Mavelous, which tyrannizes over so large a
Proportion of our Species, and which has advanced so many absurd Persons and
Things into Reputation, is a fourth and very powerful Motive. An irksome
Satiety, and a Tiresomeness, as it were, from the same Objects, is what our
Nature is apt to be very apprehensive of; though we are incessantly conducted
toward it, by a Perception of some Void, some Emptiness in ourselves, and even
in Society too: But new and extraordinary Sensations rousing us from this
disagreeable State, more effectually than any Thing else, we unthinkingly
abandon ourselves to them, without foreseeing their Consequences.

A fifth Cause arises from seven Eighths of Mankind being managed by, or
following, the other Eighth; and, generally speaking, the Eighth that is so
very forward to manage them, is the least fit and worthy to do it; whence all
must go amiss, and absurd and embarrassing Consequences ensue from the
Condition of Society. A Man of excellent Sense frequently sees only through the
Eyes of a Fool, of an intriguing Fellow, or of a Cheat; in this he judges
wrong, and his Conduct must be so too. A Man of real Merit cannot connect
himself with those who are addicted to caballing; and yet such are the Persons,
who frequently conduct others.

Some other Causes might be annexed to these, but I shall mention only one of
them, which I have already hinted, and the Truth of which I am confirmed in
from several Years Experience; which is, that we generally love those who
reason more absurdly than ourselves, better than those who convince us of our
own weak Reasoning.

I hope the Reflections every Reader will make on these Causes of our ill
Conduct upon this important Head, may contribute to correct or diminish it; and
to destroy those Prejudices whose fatal Effects we may continually observe.

[N. B. The Multitude of all the Objects of this excellent Chapter in this
Metropolis, and doubtless throughout England, were strong Inducements to have
taken a little wholesome Notice of the Impostures of a few of the most
pernicious. But on a second Perusal of this Part of the Original and its
Translation, I thought it impossible (without descending to personal, nominal
Anecdotes about the Vermin) to add any Thing material upon a Subject, which the
Author has with such Energy exhausted. He even seems, by some of his
Descriptions, to have taken Cognizance of a few of our most self-dignified
itinerant Emperics; as these Geniuses find it necessary sometimes to appease
the Public, with a Transportation of themselves. In Truth Dr. TISSOT has, in a
masterly Way, thoroughly dissected and displayed the whole Genus, every Species
of Quacks. And when he comes to account for that Facility, with which Persons
of better Intellects than, and of very different Principles from, such
Caitiffs, first listen to, and finally countenance them, etc. he penetrates
into some of the most latent Weaknesses of the human Mind; sven such as are
often Secrets to their Owners. It is difficult, throughout this Disquisition,
not to admire the Writer; but impossible not to love Man, the ardent
Philanthropist. His Sentiment that -- "A Man of real Merit cannot connect
himself with those who are addicted to caballing," -- is exquisitely just, and
so liberal, that it never entered into the Mind of any disingenuous Man,
however dignified, in any Profession. Persons of the simplest Hearts and purest
Reflections must shrink at every Consciousness of Artifice; and secretly
reproach themselves for each Success, that has redounded to them at the Expense
of Truth.] K.

CHAPTER XXXIV. Containing Questions absolutely necessary to be answered
exactly by the Patient, who consults a Physician.
SECT. 588. GREAT Consideration and Experience are necessary to form a right
Judgment of the State of a Patient, whom the Physician has not personally seen;
even though he should receive the best Information it is possible to give him,
at a Distance from the Patient. But this Difficulty is greatly augmented, or
rather changed into an Impossibility, when his Information is not exact and
sufficient. It has frequently happened to myself, that after having examined
Peasants who came to get Advice for others, I did not venture to prescribe,
because they were not able to give me a sufficient Information, in order to my
being certain of the Distemper. To prevent this great Inconvenience, I subjoin
a List of such Questions as indispensably require clear and direct Answers.

General Question.
What is the Patient's Age? Is he generally a healthy Person? What is his
general Course of Life? How long has he been sick? In what Manner did his
present Sickness begin, or appear? Has he any Fever? Is his Pulse hard or soft?
Has he still tolerable Strength, or is he weak? Does he keep his Bed in the Day
Time, or quit it? Is he in the same Condition throughout the whole Day? Is he
still, or restless? Is he hot, or cold? Has he Pains in the Head, the Throat,
the Breast, the Stomach, the Belly, the Loins, or in the Limbs, the Extremities
of the Body? Is his Tongue dry? does he complain of Thirst? of an ill Taste in
his Mouth? Has he Reachings to Vomit, or an Aversion to Food? Does he go to
stool often or seldom? What Appearance have his Stools, and what is their usual
Quantity? Does he make much Urine? What Appearance has his Urine, as to Color
and Contents? Are they generally much alike, or do they change often? Does he
sweat? Does he expectorate, or cough up? Does he get Sleep? Does he draw his
Breath easily? What Regimen does he observe in his Sickness? What Medicines has
he taken? What Effects have they produced? Has he never had the same Distemper
before?
589. The Diseases of Women and Children are attended with peculiar
Circumstances; so that when Advice is asked for them, Answers must be given,
not only to the preceding Questions, which relate to sick Persons in general;
but also to the following, which regard these particularly.

Questions with respect to Women?
Have they arrived at their monthly Discharges, and are these regular? Are they
pregnant? If so, how long since? Are they in Childbed? Has their Delivery been
happily accomplished? Has the Mother cleansed sufficiently? Has her Milk come
in due Time and Quantity? Does she suckle the Infant herself? Is she subject to
the Whites?
Questions relating to Children.
What is the Child's exact Age? How many Teeth has he cut? Does he cut them
painfully? Is he any-wise ricketty, or subject to Knots or Kernels? Has he had
the Small Pocks? Does the Child void Worms, upwards or downwards? Is his Belly
large, swelled, or hard? Is his Sleep quiet, or otherwise?
590. Besides these general Questions, common in all the Diseases of the
different Sexes and Ages, the Person consulting must also answer to those,
which have a close and direct Relation to the Disease, at that very Time
affecting the Sick.

For Example, in the Quinsey, the Condition of the Throat must be exactly
enquired into. In Diseases of the Breast, an Account must be given of the
Patient's Pains; of his Cough; of the Oppression, and of his Breathing, and
Expectoration. I shall not enter upon a more particular Detail; common Sense
will sufficiently extend this Plan or Specimen to other Diseases; and though
these Questions may seem numerous, it will always be easy to write down their
Answers in as little Room, as the Questions take up here. It were even to be
wished that Persons of every Rank, who occasionally write for medical Advice
and Directions, would observe such a Plan or Succession, in the Body of their
Letters. By this Means they would frequently procure the most satisfactory
Answers; and save themselves the Trouble of writing second Letters, to give a
necessary Explanation of the first.

The Success of Remedies depends, in a very great Measure, on a most exact
Knowledge of the Disease; and that Knowledge on the precise Information of it,
which is laid before the Physician.

TABLE Of the Prescriptions and Medicines, referred to (...) the foregoing
Treatise: Which, with the Notes beneath them, are to be read before the taking,
or Application, of any of the said Medicines.
AS in order to ascertain the Doses of Medicines, I have generally done it by
Pounds, Ounces, Half-Ounces, etc. (...) and as this Method, especially to the
common People, might prove a little too obscure and embarrassing, I have
specified here the exact Weight of Water, contained in such Vessels or liquid
Measures, as are most commonly used in the Country.

The Pound which I mean, throughout all these Prescriptions, is that consisting
of sixteen Ounces. These Ounces contain eight Drachms, each Dram consisting
of three Scruples, and each Scruple of twenty Grains; the medical Scruple of
Paris ^^lely containing twenty-four Grains.

The liquid Measure, the Pot used at Berne, being that I always speak of, may
be estimated, without any material Error, to contain three Pounds and a
Quarter, which is equal to three Pints, and eight common Spoonfuls English
Measure. But the exact Weight of the Water, contained in the Pot of Berne,
being fifty-one Ounces and a Quarter only, it is strictly equal but to three
Pints and six common Spoonfuls English. This however is a Difference of no
Importance, in the usual Drinks or Aliments of the Sick.

The small drinking Glass we talk of, filled so as not to run over, contains
three Ounces and three Quarters. But filled, as we propose it should for the
Sick, is to be estimated only at three Ounces.

The common middle sized Cup, though rather large than little, contains three
Ounces and a Quarter. But as dealt out to the Sick, it should not be estimated,
at the utmost, above three Ounces.

The small Class contains seven common Spoonfuls; so that a Spoonful is
supposed to be equal to half an Ounce.

The small Spoon, or Coffee Spoon, when of its usual Size and Cavity, may
contain thirty Drops, or a few more; but, in the Exhibition of Medicines, it
may be reckoned at thirty Drops. Five or six of these are deemed equal in
Measure, to a common Soup-Spoon.

The Basin or Porrenger, mentioned in the present Treatise, holds, without
running over, the Quantity of five Glasses, which is equivalent to eighteen
Ounces and three Quarters. It may be estimated, however, without a Fraction, at
eighteen Ounces; and a sick Person should never be allowed to take more than a
third Part of this Quantity of Nourishment at any one Time.

The Doses in all the following Prescriptions are adjusted to the Age of an
adult or grown Man, from the Age of eighteen to that of sixty Years. From the
Age of twelve to eighteen, two Thirds of that Dose will generally be
sufficient: and from twelve down to seven Years one half, diminishing this
still lower, in Proportion to the greater Youth of the Patient: so that not
more than one Eighth of the Dose prescribed should be given to an Infant of
some Months old, or under one Year. But it must also be considered, that their
different Constitutions will make a considerable Difference in adjusting their
different Doses. It were to be wishe^ on this Account, that every Person would
carefully observe, whether a strong Dose is necessary to purge him, or if a
small one is sufficient; as Exactness is most important in adjusting the Doses
of such Medicines, as are intended to purge, or to evacuate in any other Manner.

No. 1. Take a Pugil, or a large Pinch between the Thumb and Fingers, of
Elder-flowers; put them into an Earthen-ware Mug or Porrenger, with two Ounces
of Honey, and an Ounce and an half of good Vinegar. Pour upon them three Pints
and one Quarter of boiling Water. Stir it about a little with a Spoon to mix
and dissolve the Honey; then cover up the Mug; and, when the Liquor is cold,
strain it through a linen Cloth.

No. 2. Take two Ounces of whole Barley, cleanse and wash it well in hot Water,
throwing away this Water afterward. Then boil it in five Chopins or English
Piuts of Water, till the Barley bursts and opens. Toward the End of the
boiling, throw in one Dram and a half of Nitre [Salt Petre] strain it through
a Linen Cloth, and then add to it one Ounce and a half of Honey, and one Ounce
of Vinegar. This makes an agreeable Drink; and the Notion of its being windy is
idle; since it is so only to those, with whom Barley does not agree. It may,
where Barley it not procurable, be made from Oats.


No. 3. Take the same Quantity of Barley as before, and instead of Nitre, boil
in it, as soon as the Barley is put in to boil, a Quarter of an Ounce of Cream
of Tartar, Strain it, and add nothing else In those Cases mentioned 241, 262,
280, instead of the Barley, four Ounces of Grass Roots may be boiled in the
same Quantity of Water for half an Hour, with the Cream of Tartar.
to it.

No. 4. Take three Ounces of the freshest sweet Almonds, and one Ounce of Gourd
or Melon Seeds; bruise them in a Mortar, adding to them by little at a Time,
one Pint of Water, then strain it through Linen. Bruise what remains again,
adding gradually to it another Pint of Water; then straining, and adding Water
to the Residue, till full three Pints at least of Water are thus used: after
which it may again be poured upon the bruised Mass, stirred well about, and
then be finally strained off. Half an Ounce of Sugar may safely be bruised with
the Almonds and Seeds at first, though some weakly imagine it too heating; and
delicate Persons may be allowed a little Orange Flower Water with it.

No. 5. Take two Pugils of Mallow Leaves and Flowers, cut them small, and pour
a Pint of boiling Water upon them. After standing some Time strain it, adding
one Ounce of Honey to it. For want of Mallows, which is preferable, a similar
Glyster may be made of the Leaves of Mercury, Pellitory of the Wall, the
Marshmallows, the greater Mallows, from Lettuce, or from Spinach. A few very
particular Constitutions are not to be purged by any Glyster but warm Water
alone; such should receive no other, and the Water should not be very hot.

No. 6. Boil a Pugil of Mallow-flowers, in a Pint of Barley Water for a Glyster.

No. 7. Take three Pints of simple Barley Water, add to it three Ounces of the
Juice of Sow-thistle, or of Groundsel, or of the greater Houseleek, or of
Borage. These Juices are to be procured from the Herbs when fresh and very
young, if possible, by beating them in a Marble Mortar, or for Want of such [or
a wooden Mortar] in an Iron one, and then squeezing out the Juice through a
Linen Bag. It must be left to settle a little in an earthen Vessel, after which
the clear Juice must be decented gently off, and the Sediment be left behind.


No. 8. To one Ounce of Oxymel of Squills, add five Ounces of a strong Infusion
of Elder-flowers.

No. 9. There are many different emollient Applications, which have very nearly
the same Virtues. The following are the most efficacious.

1, Flannels wrung out of a hot Decoction of Mallow-flowers.

2, Small Bags filled with Mallow-flowers, or with those of Mullein, of Elder,
of Camomile, of wild Corn Poppy, and boiled either in Milk, or Water.

3, Pultices of the same Flowers boiled in Milk and Water.

4, Bladders half filled with hot Milk and Water, or with some emollient
Decoction.

5, A Pultice of boiled Bread and Milk, or of Barley or Rice, boiled till
thoroughly soft and tender.

6, In the Pleurisy (See 89) the affected Part may be rubbed sometimes with
Ointment of Marshmallows.

No. 10. To one Ounce of Spirit of Sulphur, and six Ounces of Syrup of Violets,
or for want of the latter, as much Barley Water, of a thicker Consistence than
ordinary. Some Friends, says Dr. TISSOT, whose Judgment I greatly respect, have
thought the Doses of acid Spirit which I direct extremely strong; and doubtless
they are so, if compared with the Doses generally prescribed, and to which I
should have limited myself, if I had not frequently seen their Insufficience.
Experience has taught me to increase them considerably; and, augmenting the
Dose gradually, I now venture to give larger Doses of them than have ever been
done before, and always with much Success; the same Doses which I have advised
in this Work, not being so large as those I frequently prescribe. For this
Reason I entreat those Physicians, who have thought them excessive, to try the
acid Spirits in larger Doses than those commonly ordered; and I am persuaded
they will see Reason to congratulate themselves upon the Effect. Our Author's
French Annotator has a Note against this Acid, which I have omitted; for though
I have given his Note Page 84 [ with the Substance of the immediately preceding
one] to which I have also added some Doubts of my own, from Facts, concerning
the Benefit of Acids in inflammatory Disorders of the Breast; yet with Regard
to the ardent, the putrid, the malignant Fever, and Erisipelas, in which Dr.
TISSOT directs this, I have no Doubt of its Propriety (supposing no insuperable
Disagreement to Acids in the Constitution) and with Respect to their Doses, I
think we may safely rely on our honest Author's Veracity. Dr. FULLER assures
us, a Gentleman's Goachman was recovered from the Bleeding Small Pocks, by
large and repeated Doses of the Oil of Vitriol, in considerable Draughts of
cold Water. K.



No. 11. Take two Ounces of Manna, and half an Ounce of Sedlitz Salt, or for
want of it, as much Epsom Salt; dissolving them in four Ounces of hot Water,
and straining them.

No. 12. Take of Elder-flowers one Pugil, of Hyssop Leaves half as much, Pour
three Pints of boiling Water upon them. After infusing some time strain, and
dissolve three Ounces of Honey in the Infusion.

No. 13. Is only the same Kind of Drink made by omitting the Hyssop, and adding
instead of it as much more Elder-flowers.

No. 14. Let one Ounce of the best Jesuits Bark in fine Powder be divided into
sixteen equal Portions.

No. 15. Take of the Flowers of St. John's Wort, of Elder, and of Melilot, of
each a few Pinches; put them into the Bottom of an Ewer or Vessel containing
five or six English Pints, with half an Ounce of Oil of Turpentine, and fill it
up with boiling Water.

No. 16. Is only the Syrup of the Flowers of wild red Corn Poppy.

No. 17. Is only very clear sweet Whey, in every Pint of which one Ounce of
Honey is to be dissolved.

No. 18. Take of Castile or hard white Soap six Drachms; of Extract of
Dandelion one Dram and a half; of Gum Ammoniacum half a Dram, and with
Syrup of Maidenhair make a Mass of Pills, to be formed into Pills, weighing
three Grains each.

No. 19. Gargarisms may be prepared from a Decoction, or rather an Infusion, of
the Leaves of Periwinkle, or of Red Rose-Leaves, or of Mallows. Two Ounces of
Vinegar and as much Honey must be added to every Pint of it, and the Patient
should gargle with it pretty hot. The deterging, cleansing Gargarism referred
to 112, is a light Infusion of the Tops of Sage, adding two Ounces of Honey to
each Pint of it.

No. 20. Is only one Ounce of powdered Nitre, divided into sixteen equal Doses.

No. 21. Take of Jalap, of Senna, and of Cream of Tartar of each thirty Grains
finely powdered, and let them be very well mixed. This our Author observes,
will work a strong Countryman very well: by which however he does not seem to
mean an Inhabitant of the Mountains in Valais. See P. 277.


No. 22. Take of China Root, and of Sarsaparilla of each one Ounce and a half,
of Sassafras Root, and of the Shavings of Guiacum, otherwise called Lignum
vitae, of each one Ounce. Let the whole be cut very fine. Then put them into a
glazed earthen Vessel; pouring upon them about five Pints of boiling Water. Let
them boil gently for an Hour; then take it from the Fire, and strain it off
through Linen. This is called the Decoction of the Woods, and is often of
different Proportions of these Ingredients, or with the Addition of a few
others. More Water may, after the first boiling, be poured on the same
Ingredients, and be boiled up into a small Decoction for common Drink.

No. 23. Take an Ounce of the Pulp of Tamarinds, half a Dram of Nitre, and
four Ounces of Water; let them boil not more than one Minute, then add two
Ounces of Manna, and when dissolved strain the Mixture off.

No. 24. Is only an Ounce of Cream of Tartar, divided into eight equal Parts.

No. 25. This Prescription is only the Preparation of Kermes Mineral, otherwise
called the Chartrusian Powder. Dr. TISSOT orders but one Grain for a Dose. It
has been directed from one to three.

No. 26. Take three Ounces of the common Burdock Root; boil it for half an
Hour, with half a Dram of Nitre, in three full Pints of Water.

No. 27. Take half a Pinch of the Herbs prescribed No. 9. Article 2, and half
an Ounce of hard white Soap shaved thin. Pour on these one Pint and a half of
boiling Water, and one Glass of Wine, Strain the Liquor and squeeze it strongly
out.

No. 28. Take of the purest Quicksilver one Ounce; of Venice Turpentine half a
Dram, of the Freshest Hog's Lard two Ounces, and let the whole be very well
rubbed together into an Ointment This Ointment should be prepared at the
Apothecaries; the Receipt of it being given here, only because the Proportions
of the Quicksilver and the Lard are not always the same in different Places.
.

No. 29. This Prescription is nothing but the yellow Basilicon.

No. 30. Take of natural and factitious, or artificial Cinnabar, twenty-four
Grains each; of Musk sixteen Grains, and let the whole be reduced into fine
Powder, and very well mixed This Medicine is known by the Name of Cob's Powder;
and as its Reputation is very considerable, I did not choose to omit it; though
I must repeat here what I have said 195 -- That the Cinnabar is probably of
little or no Efficacy; and there are other Medicines that have also much more
than the Musk; which besides is extremely dear for poor People, as the
requisite Doses of it, in very dangerous Cases, would cost ten or twelve
Shillings daily. The Prescription, No. 31, is more effectually than the Musk;
and instead of the useless Cinnabar, the powerful Quicksilver may be given to
the Quantity of forty-five Grains. I have said nothing hitherto in this Work of
the red blossomed Mulberry-Tree, which passes for a real Specific, among some
Persons, in this dreadful Malady. An Account of it may be seen in the first
Volume of the Oeconomical Journal of Berne: It is my Opinion however, that none
of the Instances related there are satisfactory and decisive; its Efficacy
still appearing to me very doubtful.
.

No. 31. Take one Dram of Virginia Snake-root in Powder; of Camphor, and of
Assa-foetida ten Grains each; of Opium one Grain, and with a sufficient
Quantity of Conserve, or Rob of Elder, make a Bolus. When it is preferred to
No. 30, of which Musk is an Ingredient, the Grain of Opium should be omitted,
except once, or at most twice in twenty-four Hours. Two Doses of Quicksilver,
of fifteen Grains each, should be given daily in the Morning, in the Interval
between the other Bolus's.


No. 32 Take three Ounces of Tama^^^ds. Pour on them one Pint of boiling Water,
and after letting them boil a Minute or two, strain the Liquor through a Linen
Cloth.

No. 33. Take seven Grains of Turbith Mineral; and make it into a Pill or Bolus
with a little Crumb of Bread. This Medicine makes the Dogs vomit and slaver
abundantly. It has effected many Cures after the Hydrophobia, the Dread of
Water, was manifest. It must be given three Days successively, and afterward
twice a Week, for fifteen Days.


No. 34. This is nothing but a Prescription of six Grains of Tartar When People
are ignorant of the Strength of the Tartar emetic (which is often various) or
of the Patient's being easy or hard to vomit, a Dose and a half may he
dissolved in a Quart of warm Water, of which he may take a Glass every Quarter
of an Hour, whence the Operation may be forwarded, or otherwise regulated,
according to the Number of Vomits or Stools. This Method, much used in Paris,
seems a safe and eligible one.
emetic.

No. 35. Take thirty-five Grains of Ipecacuana, which, in the very strongest
Constitutions, may be augmented to forty-five, or even to fifty Grains.

No. 36. Prescribes only the common blistering Plaster; and the Note observes,
that very young Infants who have delicate Skins may have Sinapisms applied
instead of Blisters; and made of a little old Leaven, kneaded up with a few
Drops of sharp Vinegar.

No. 37. Take of the Tops of Chamaedrys or Ground-Oak, of the lesser Centaury,
of Wormwood and of Camomile, of each one Pugil. Pour on them three Pints of
boiling Water; and suffering them to infuse until it is cold, strain the Liquor
through a Linen Cloth, pressing it out strongly.

No. 38. Take forty Grains of Rhubarb, and as much Cream of Tartar in Powder,
mixing them well together.

No. 39. Take three Drachms of Cream of Tartar, and one Dram of Ipecacuanna
finely powdered. Rub them well together, and divide them into six equal Part.

No. 40. Take of the simple Mixture one Ounce, of Spirit of Vitriol half an
Ounce, and mix them. The Dose is one or two Tea Spoonfuls in a Cup of the
Patient's common Drink. The simple Mixture is composed of five Ounces of
Treacle Water camphorated, of three Ounces of Spirit of Tartar rectified, and
one Ounce of Spirit of Vitriol. If the Patient has an insuperable Aversion to
the Camphor, it must be omitted, though the Medicine is less efficacious
without it. And if his Thirst is not very considerable, the simple Mixture may
be given alone, without any further Addition of Spirit of Vitriol.

No. 41. Take half a Dram of Virginia Snake root, ten Grains of Camphor, and
make them into a Bolus with Rob of Elder-berries. If the Patient's Stomach
cannot bear so large a Dose of Camphor, he may take it in smaller Doses and
oftener, viz. three Grains every two Hours. If there is a violent Looseness,
Diascordium must be substituted instead of the Rob of Elder-berries.

No. 42. Prescribes only the Theriaca pauperum, or poor Man's Treacle, in the
Dose of a Quarter of an Ounce. The following Composition of it is that chiefly
preferred by our Author. Take equal Parts of round Birthwort Roots, of
Elecampane, of Myrrh, and of Rob or Conserve of Juniper Berries. and make them
into an Electuary of a rather thin, than very stiff Consistence, with Syrup of
Orange-peel.

No. 43. The first of the three Medicines referred to in this Number, is that
already directed, No. 37. The second is as follows.

Take equal Parts of the lesser Centaury, of Wormwood, of Myrrh, all powdered,
and of Conserve of Juniper Berries, making them up into a pretty thick
Consistence with Syrup or Wormwood. The Dose is a Quarter of an Ounce; to be
taken at the same Intervals as the Bark.

For the third Composition -- Take of the Roots of Calamus Aromaticus and
Elecampane well bruised, two Ounces; of the Tops of the lesser Centaury cut
small, a Pugil; of Filings of unrusted Iron two Ounces, of old white Wine three
Pints. Put them all into a wide-necked Bottle, and set (...) upon Embers, or on
a Stove, or by the Chimney, that it may be always kept hot. Let them infuse
twenty-four Hours, shaking them well five or six times; then let the Infusion
settle, and strain it. The Dose is a common Cup every four Hours, four times
daily, and timing it one Hour before Dinner.

No. 44. Take a Quarter of an Ounce of Cream of Tartar, a Pugil of common
Camomile; boil them in twelve Ounces of Water for half an Hour, and strain it
off.

No. 45. Directs only the common Sal Ammoniac, from two Scruples to one Dram
for a Dose. The Note to it adds, that it may be made into a Bolus with Rob of
Elder; and observes, that those feverish Patients, who have a weak delicate
Stomach, do not well admit of this Salt; no more than of several others, which
affect them with great Disorder and Anxiety.

No. 46. The Powder. Take one Pugil of Camomile Flowers, and as much Elder
Flowers, bruising them well; of fine Flour or Starch three Ounces; of Ceruss
and of blue Smalt each half an Ounce. Rub the whole, and mix them well. This
Powder may be applied immediately to the Part.

The Plaster. Take of the Ointment called Nutritum, made with the newest sweet
Oil two Ounces; of white Wax three Quarters of an Ounce, and one Quarter of an
Ounce of blue Smalt. Melt the Wax, then add the Nutritum to it, after the Smalt
finely powdered has been exactly incorporated with it; stirring it about with
an Iron Spatula or Rod, till the whole is well mixed and cold. This is to be
spread smoothly on Linen Cloth.

A Quarter of an Ounce of Smalt may also be mixed exactly with two Ounces of
Butter or Ointment of Lead; to be used occasionally instead of the Plaster.

No. 47. Take an Ounce of Sedlitz, or for want of that, as much Epsom Salt, and
two Ounces of Tamarinds; pour upon them eight Ounces of boiling Water, stirring
them about to dissolve the Tamarinds. Strain it off, and divide it into two
equal Draughts, to be given at the Interval of Half an Hour between the first
and last.

No. 48. Take Sydenham's Liquid Laudanum eighty Drops; of Bawm Water two Ounces
and a half. If the first, or the second, Dose stops or considerably lessens the
Vomiting; this The Medical Editor at Lions justly notes here, that these eighty
Drops are a very strong Dose of Liquid Laudanum; adding that it is scarcely
ever given at Lions in a greater Dose than thirty Drops; and recommending a
Spoonful of Syrup of Lemon Peel to be given with it -- But we must observe here
in answer to this Note, that when Dr. Tissot directs this Mixture in the Iliac
passion 318, Art. 3, to appease the Vomitings, he orders but one Spoonful of
this Mixture to be taken at once, and an Interval of two Hours to be observed
between the first and second Repetition, which reduces each Dose to sixteen
Drops, and which is not to be repeated without Necessity. K.
Medicine should not be further repeated.

No. 49. Dissolve three Ounces of Manna and twenty Grains of Nitre in ^^enty
Ounces, or six Glasses, of sweet Whey.

No. 50. To two Ounces of Syrup of Diacodium, or white Poppy Heads, add an
equal Weight of Elder-flower Water, or, for want of it, of Spring Water.

No. 51. Directs nothing but a Dram of Rhubarb in Powder.

No. 52. Take of Sulphur vivum, or of Flower of Brimstone, one Ounce; of Sal
Ammoniac, one Dram; of fresh Hogs Lard, two Ounces; and mix the whole very
well in a Mortar.

No. 53. Take two Drachms of crude Antimony and as much Nitre, both finely
powdered and very well mixed; dividing the whole into eight equal Doses This
Medicine which often occasions Cholics in some Persons of a weakly Stomach, is
attended with no such inconvenience in strong Country People; and has been
effectual in some Disorders of the Skin, which have baffled other Medicines --
The Remainder of this Note observes the great Efficacy of Antimony in promoting
Perspiration, and the extraordinary Benefit it is of to Horses in different
Cases.
.

No. 54. The Prescriptions No. 54. 55. 56. are calculated against Distempers
which arise from Obstructions, and a Stoppage of the monthly Discharges; which
No. 55 is more particularly intended to remove; those of 54 and 56 are most
convenient, either when the Suppression does not exist, or is not to be much
regarded, though it does. This Medicine may be rendered less unpalatable for
Persons in easy Circumstances, by adding as much Cinnamon instead of Aniseeds;
and though the Quantity of Iron be small, it may be sufficient, if given early
in the Complaint; one, or at the most, two of those Doses daily, being
sufficient for a very young Maiden.
Take of Filings of Iron, not the least rusty, and of Sugar, each one Ounce; of
Aniseeds powdered half an Ounce. After rubbing them very well together, divide
the Powder into twenty-four equal Portions; one of which is to be taken three
times a Day an Hour before eating.

No. 55. Take of Filings of sound Iron two Ounces; of Leaves of Rue, and of
white Hoar-hound one Pugil each; of black Hellebore-root one Quarter of an
Ounce, and infuse the whole in three Pints of Wine in the Manner already
directed, No. 43. The Dose of this is one small Cup three times a Day, an Hour
before eating I choose to repeat here, the more strongly to inculcate so
important a Point; that in Women who have been long ill and languid, our
Endeavors must be directed toward the restoring of the Patient's Health and
Strength, and not to forcing down the Monthly Discharges, which is a very
pernicious Practice. These will return of Course, if the Patient is of a proper
Age, as she grows better. Their Return succeeds the Return of her Health, and
should not, very often cannot, precede it.
.

No. 56. Take two Ounces of Filings of Iron; of Rue Leaves and Aniseeds
powdered, each half an Ounce. Add to them a sufficient Quantity of Honey to
make an Electuary of a good Consistence. The Dose is a Quarter of an Ounce
three times daily.

No. 57. Take of the Extract of the stinking Hemlock, with the purple spotted
Stalk, one Ounce. Form it into Pills weighing two Grains each; adding as much
of the Powder of dry Hemlock Leaves, as the Pills will easily take up. Begin
the Use of this Medicine by giving one Pill Night and Morning. Some Patients
have been so familiarized to it, as to take at length half an Ounce daily. Our
learned and candid Author has a very long Note in this Place, strongly in
Favor of Storck's Extract of Hemlock; in which it is evident he credits the
greater Part of the Cures affirmed by Dr. STORCK to have been effected by it.
He says he made some himself, out not of the right Hemlock, which we think it
very difficult to mistake, from its peculiar rank fetid Smell, and its purple
spotted Stalk. After first taking this himself, he found it mitigated the Pain
of Cancers, but did not cure them. But then addressing himself to Dr. Storck,
and exactly following his Directions in making it, he took of Dr. Storck's
Extract, and of his own, which exactly resembled each other, to the Quantity of
a Dram and a half daily; and finding his Health not in the least impaired by
it; he then gave it to several Patients, curing many scrophulous and cancerous
Cases, and mitigating others, which he supposes were incurable. So that he
seems fully persuaded Dr. STORCK's Extract is always innocent [which in fact,
except in a very few Instances, none of which were fatal, it has been with us]
and he thinks it a Specific in many Cases, to which nothing can be substituted
as an equivalent Remedy; that it should he taken with entire Confidence, and
that it would be absurd to neglect its Continuance.

The Translator of this Work of Dr. TISSOT's has thought it but fair to give
all the Force of this Note here, which must be his own, as his Editor at Lions
seems to entertain a very different Opinion of the Efficacy of this Medicine;
for which Opinion we refer back to his Note, 375, of this Treatise, which the
Reader may compare with this of our Author's. K.




No. 58. Take of the Roots of Grass and of Succory well washed, each one Ounce.
Boil them a Quarter of an Hour in a Pint of Water. Then dissolve in it half an
Ounce of Sedlitz, or of Epsom Salt, and two Ounces of Manna; and strain it off
to drink one Glass of it from half Hour to half Hour, till its Effects are
sufficient. It is to be repeated at the Interval of two or three Days.

No. 59. Is a Cataplasm or Pultice made of Crumb of Bread, with Camomile
Flowers boiled in Milk, and the Addition of some Soap, so that each Pultice may
contain half a Quarter of an Ounce of this last Ingredient. And when the
Circumstances of female Patients have not afforded them that regular
Attendance, which the Repetition of the Pultice requires, as it should be
renewed every three Hours, I have successfully directed the Hemlock Plaster of
the Shops.

No. 60. Take a sufficient Quantity of dry Hemlock Leaves: Secure them properly
between two Pieces of thin Linen Cloth, so as to make a very flexible Sort of
small Mattress, letting it boil few Moments in Water, then squeeze it out and
apply it to the affected Part. It must thus be moistened and heated afresh, and
reapplied every two Hours.

No. 61. Take of the Eyes of the Craw-fish, or of the true white Magnesia, two
Drachms; of Cinnamon powdered four Grains. Rub them very well together, and
divide the whole into eight Doses. One of these is to be given in a Spoonful of
Milk, or of Water, before the Infant sucks.

No. 62. Take of an Extract of Walnuts, made in Water, two Drachms; and
dissolve it in half an Ounce of Cinnamon Water. Fifty Drops a Day of this
Solution is to be given to a Child of two Years old: and after the whole has
been taken, the Child should be purged. This Extract is to be made of the
unripe Nuts, when they are of a proper Growth and Consistence for pickling.

No. 63. Take of Rezin of Jalap two Grains, Rub it a considerable time with
twelve or fifteen Grains of Sugar, and afterward with three or four sweet
Almonds; adding, very gradually, two common Spoonfuls of Water. Then drain it
through clear thin Linen as the Emulsion of Almonds was ordered to be. Lastly,
add a Tea Spoonful of Syrup of Capillaire to it. This is no disagreeable
Draught, and may be given to a Child of two Years old: and if they are older, a
Grain or two more of the Rezin may be allowed. But under two Years old, it is
prudent to purge Children rather with Syrup of Succory, or with Manna.

No. 64. Take of the Ointment called Nutritum one Ounce; the entire Yolk of one
small Egg, or the Half of a large one, and mix them well together. This
Nutritum may be readily made by rubbing very well together, and for some time,
two Drachms of Ceruss [white Lead] half an Ounce of Vinegar, and three Ounces
of common Oil.

No. 65. Melt four Ounces of white Wax; add to it, if made in Winter, two
Spoonfuls of Oil; if in Summer none at all, or at most not above a Spoonful.
Dip in this Slips of Linen Cloth not worn too thin, and let them dry: or spread
it thin and evenly over them.

No. 66. Take of Oil of Roses one Pound; of red Lead half a Pound; of Vinegar
four Ounces. Boil them together, nearly to the Consistence of a Plaster; then
dissolve in the liquid Mass an Ounce and a half of yellow Wax, and two Drachms
of Camphor, stirring the whole about well. Remove it then from the Fire, and
spread it on Sheets or Slips of Paper, of what Size you think most convenient.
The Ointment of Chambauderie, so famous in many Families on the Continent, is
made of a Quarter of a Pound of yellow Wax, of the Plaster of three
Ingredients (very nearly the same with No. 66) of compound Diachylon, and of
common Oil, of each the same Quantity, all melted together, and then stirred
about well, after it is removed from the Fire, till it grows cold. To make a
Sparadrap, or Oil-cloth (which is Linen, covered with, or dipped in an emplastic
Substance or Ointment) it must be melted over again with the Addition of a
little Oil, and applied to the Linen as directed at No. 65.

No. 67. Gather in Autumn, while the fine Weather lasts, the Agaric of the Oak,
which is a Kind of Fungus or Excrescence, issuing from the Wood of that Tree.

It consists at first of four Parts, which present themselves successively. 1,
The outward Rind or Skin, which may be thrown away. 2, That Part immediately
under this Rind, which is the best of all. It is to be beat well with a Hammer,
till it becomes soft and very pliable. This is the only Preparation it
requires, and a Slice of it of a proper Size is to be applied directly over the
bursting, open Blood Vessels. It constringes and brings them close together;
stops the Bleedings; and generally falls off at the End of two Days. 3. The
third Part, adherring to the second, may serve to stop the Bleeding from the
smaller Vessels; and the fourth and last Part may be reduced to Powder, as
conducing to the same Purpose Our Author attests his seeing the happiest
Consequences from this Application, which M. BROSSARD, a very eminent French
Surgeon, first published; and declared his Preference of that Agaric which
sprung from those Parts of the Tree, from whence large Boughs had been lopped.
.

No. 68. Take four Ounces of Crumbs of Bread, a Pugil of Elder-flowers, and the
same Quantity of those of Camomile, and of St. John's Wort. Boil them into a
Pultice in equal Quantities of Vinegar and Water.

If Fomentations should be thought preferable, take the same Herbs, or some
Pugils of the Ingredients for Faltrank: throw them into a Pint and a half of
boiling Water; and let them infuse some Minutes. Then a Pint of Vinegar is to
be added, and Flanels or other woollen Cloths dipped in the Fomentation, and
wrung out, are to be applied to the Part affected.

For the aromatic Fomentations recommended 449, take the Leaves of Betony and
of Rue, Flowers of Rosemary or Lavender, and red Roses, of each a Pugil and a
half. Boil them for a Quarter of an Hour in a Pot with a Cover, with three
Pints of old white Wine. Then strain off, squeezing the Liquor strongly from
the Herbs, and apply it as already directed.

No. 69. Directs only the Plaster of Diapalma. To spread this upon Lint as
directed, 456, it must be melted down again with a little Oil.


No. 70. Directs only a Mixture of two Parts Water, and one Part of Vinegar of
Litharge.

No. 71. Take of the Leaves of Sow-bread, and of Camomile Tops, of each one
Pugil. Put them into an earthen Vessel with half an Ounce of Soap, and as much
Sal Ammoniac, and pour upon them three Pints of boiling Water.

N. B. I conceive all the Notes to this Table, in which I have not mentioned
the Editor at Lions, nor subscribed them, with my initial Letter K, to come
from the Author, having omitted nothing of them, but the Prices.

THE END.

