SIX SERMONS On diverse Subjects, Preached at Weymouth.

By JAMES BLAKE, A. B. Late of Dorchester, deceased.

Job 14.2. "He comes forth like a Flower, and is cut down; he flees also as a
Shadow, and continues not."

Rev. 14.13. "Blessed are the Dead that die in the Lord."

BOSTON: N. E. Printed by J. KNEELAND, next to the Treasurer's Office in
Milk-Street, for J. EDWARDS, in Cornhill. MDCCLXXII.

THE PREFACE.
THE following sermons, comprised in this small treatise, were composed and
preached at Weymouth, by JAMES BLAKE, A. B. of Dorchester, a young gentleman,
who has for some time been reposited in silence; and it is now necessary to
give some reasons why they are made public, and perhaps it may be acceptable to
the reader to see a short character of their author.

He was admitted into Harvard-College, in the fifteenth year of his age, where
he exhibited an eminent example of studiousness and proficiency in learning. He
was free from vice to which many are unhappily addicted, and which is too often
prevalent, in such a society of youth. He was greatly esteemed among his
class-mates, and all the society that were familiar with him. He gained the
good will of his instructors, and was valued by them as one that greatly
ornamented the society. Thus he passed away his time at College, without the
disesteem of any, and commenced Bachelor of arts in the year 1769. From thence
he went to Weymouth, and discharged the office of a Schoolmaster to general
satisfaction; but that being disagreable to his mind, and so great an
impediment to his studies, that he resigned it in about nine months, and
employed himself wholly in the study of divinity, under the instruction of the
Rev. Mr. Smith. He pursued this his favorite study with unwearied assiduity for
a year, and then he began on the important work of the ministry, but not
without great reluctance; for he had determined not to preach until he had
acquired a perfect knowledge in the fundamental parts of religion (which cannot
be done in the small space of a year.) But Mr. Smith being sick, he was many
times urged to supply his place until he recovered, which (after repeated
denials) he did. Thus having made a beginning he continued preaching almost
every sabbath until he died. With respect to his public character, he did not
effect to be ostentatious, and to divert the minds of his hearers, by a flow of
words to little significancy, but his main design was to edify them in the way
of their duty; accordingly his discourses were plain and instructive, his
delivery was easy and agreeable, accompanied with a few natural gestures. With
regard to his private character, he was sober and temperate, friendly and
sociable, and in conversation entertaining and edifying; to these was joined an
even temper and disposition of mind, all which made him very agreeable. He
"persevered in the ways of well doing," 'till he was 21 years old, wanting one
month (which was the 17th day of November 1771) when after a very short
illness, his Lord and master, whose glory he was daily endeavoring to advance,
was pleased to summon him from this sinful earth, to receive the reward of his
early piety. Thus I have given a short character of him, and faintly
delineated, nevertheless worthy of our imitation. And as he has left no issue
to tell posterity their loss, his friends and acquaintance have thought fit to
print the following sermons, that his name may be preserved in remembrance, and
likewise that the kingdom of Christ may be advanced.

Now, Reader, I present these sermons (without any material alteration) to your
perusal. And (after informing you, that they were never studied with a design
to be printed, and probably not wrote with so great accuracy as they would have
been, had he entertained such a thought) I sincerely hope that the divine
blessing may accompany them, and that hereby, those that are dead in trespasses
and sins, and are not as yet savingly interested in Christ, but are proceeding
daily in the broad way to perdition, and who will shortly, without the
sovereign influences of God's grace, be forever excluded the mansions of
blessedness, may have a lasting impression made on their minds, that their
future conduct may be agreeable to the dictates of religion and reason, and that
by their conversation they may abundantly evidence that they are candidates for
future glory. And that those of you who have an interest in the supereminent
joys of the approaching world, may hereby be encouraged to go on cheerfully in
your christian walk, and show forth the virtues of Christ, in each of your
daily actions, that your life may terminate in perfect peace and happiness.

And that we may all not only know our duty, but likewise be diligent in doing
of it; that we may increase daily in grace and in the knowledge of Christ our
Savior, and keep ourselves unspotted from sin; and be circumspect over our
steps, that we may adorn our christian profession; so that when we shall have
served our Maker to his acceptance, whether in the bloom of youth, or in more
advanced life, we may then be admitted to the supercelestial spaces of bliss
and immortality, is the sincere and hearty desire of,

Your Friend, etc.

SERMON I. The heavenly Country.
HEBREWS XI. 16. But now they desire a better Country, that is, an heavenly.


THE whole of this chapter was designed by the inspired author of it, to set
forth the excellency of faith. He begins with a definition of it, Now faith is
the substance of things hoped for, etc. and proceeds to bring various instances
from the old Testament, wherein those ancient Patriarchs were supported and
excited by this divine grace of faith, to do and suffer many excellent things
to the advancement of the glory of God, and in obedience to his commands. It
was this shining virtue that encouraged Abraham, at the command of God, to
leave the place of his nativity, and to sojourn in a strange land, which was
promised him for a future inheritance. Here, with Isaac and Jacob, he dwelt in
tabernacles, as a stranger in the land of promise. These all died in faith, the
apostle tells us, not having received the promises, but having seen them afar
off, and were persuaded that they should afterward be accomplished. But though
these promises were not made good during their life; yet by their ready
obedience to the commands of God, their faith and reliance on his word, and
their confessing that their life on earth was but a pilgrimage, they plainly
declared that they sought a country: Yea, says our text, they desire a better
country, that is, an heavenly. Thus you see what connection the text has with
what goes before. But I shall consider the words as they are in themselves; and
thus they plainly include this

DOCTRINE.
That the saints and people of God, seek after and desire a better country,
even an heavenly one.



This doctrine naturally divides itself into two parts, which I shall handle
distinctly.

I. Heaven is a better country. And,

II. The saints and people of God seek after, and desire it.

1. Heaven is a better country. This I shall attempt to prove by taking a brief
survey of the glories of those unseen mansions, and thereby showing that the
excellency, beauty, and happiness of them, infinitely surpass the most splendid
and prosperous condition which can be enjoyed in this world. But alas! what a
task have I proposed to undertake? What tongue can utter? What pen can
describe? Yea, what imagination can comprehend, the transcendent happiness of
those blessed regions, where God shines forth with unvailed luster, displays
his unclouded majesty, and sheds the beams of his beneficence on all that stand
around? "Neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the
heart of man to conceive, the things which God has prepared for them that love
him." To describe, or even to conceive those joys, were a task more suited to
the capacities of those glorious angels who reside in those blissful seats,
than for an inhabitant of this lower world.

When we have enlarged our conceptions of their utmost bounds, and taken in all
that our narrow understandings can comprehend, still our ideas fall infinitely
short of the truth; still there remains behind, (...) unfathomable portion, of
which we can ha^ no adequate conception, until we arrive (...) those blissful
abodes. Even St. Paul, w^ was caught up into the third heavens, ^ favored with
a view of paradise, he^ there such unspeakable words, and behe^ there such
transcendent glories, as when (...) came down to earth again, it was impossib^
for him to utter. But though we cannot (...) present fully comprehend those
things, a^ though it were a faulty curiosity to pry to minutely into the divine
mysteries, or (...) pretend to be wise above what is written yet as we hope
through Christ's merits (...) arrive at length to this state of felicity, it is
very suitable for us to consider it, and acquai^ ourselves with it, so far as
God in his word has been pleased to discover it to us. An^ this is what with
humble reverence I attemp^ at this time, under the guidance of God's holy word,
and I hope, by the assistance o^ his holy Spirit. "For the things of God
knows no man but the Spirit of God, and he to whom the spirit shall reveal
them."

Heaven, then, is far superior to this world* as it is a state of perfect
knowledge, perfe^ purity, and perfect happiness.

1. Heaven is a state of perfect knowledge. Here on earth, as the apostle
says, "w^ know but in part," our knowledge of things ^s obscure and imperfect,
"but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is imperfect shall be
done away." Here, in this world, we are unavoidably ignorant of many things,
some are too sublime for our comprehension, some are too distant for our ^each,
and many so rare as not to fall under our observation. We labor under many
prejudices and false conceptions, even of such things as daily occur to us, and
of which we think we have a perfect knowledge. And (...) for things sublime and
spiritual, such as are not gross enough to fall under our senses, we either
know nothing about them, or our knowledge of them is very obscure. But in that
our happy state, when we shall have bid adieu to these our clayey tabernacles,
and shall be divested of our gross corporeal senses, we shall behold all things
by immediate intuition. We shall have nothing to clog and confine our
researches, but our enlarged capacities shall be able fully to comprehend such
things as now appear dark and unintelligible. Particularly we shall then be
blessed with the vision of God, and shall be able perfectly to comprehend his
infinite nature and perfections. "Now we for him but through a glass darkly, but
then face to face." The scripture assures us that "we shall then with open face
behold the glory of God, and shall see him as he is." 1 John 3.2. Here "w^ walk
by faith and not by sight." But the^ our faith shall be swallowed up in vision,
and our hope superseded by fruition. Here w^ see God only by reflection, as it
were, from hi^ works, but there we shall have an immediate and direct view of
him, "and shall know him even as we are known." Again, how many intricacies and
mysteries do we daily behold in God's providence, which we cannot now reconcile
with his all-holy and perfect nature, and his concern for the good of man? But
in our heavenly state, all these perplexing difficulties will be unfolded and
made plain to us; we shall then be enabled to view the whole chain of
providence together, to discover the connection of it is several parts, and
their dependence upon each other, and perceive that every part, however dubious
it might appear alone, is conducive to the good of the whole, and the carrying
on of the grand design. There we shall see and acknowledge that it was only our
blindness and ignorance that made us imagine any inconsistencies in the divine
conduct.

Moreover, it is probable that we shall still know and remember our friends and
relatives, whose company we took pleasure in whilst on earth: For the soul will
retain all it is former ideas and impressions, and the delights of conversation
will still be continued to us; at least so much of the knowledge of our former
state, as is consistent with the purity of the place, and our happiness there,
shall remain with us in those heavenly mansions. From all this we learn that
heaven is a better country than the earth, in this respect, that the knowledge
of glorified spirits so far exceeds the ignorance of mortal men.

2. Heaven is a state of perfect purity and holiness. "There shall in no wise
enter into it any thing that defiles, or that works abomination, or that
makes a lie," as we read in the 21st chapter of the Revelations, the 27th
verse. In this world all godly men do mortify their earthly and corrupt
affections, and do their utmost to subdue all their perverse appetites, and
root out all evil inclinations. But still there remain some imperfections and
blemishes in the best of men. But when they enter the heavenly world, they
shall be freed from every taint of sin, they shall be "cleansed from all
fil^ness of flesh and spirit," and shall be pure and perfect like the angels of
God, or as the apostle says, like God himself. There, those longings and
breathings after pure and spotless holiness, which they had in this life, shall
be fully gratified. There, there will be nothing to incline or tempt them to
any sin or impurity: But every thing will be agreeable to the pure natures and
desires of the inhabitants. There, the flesh will no longer sway them to sin,
nor the world intrude on their divine employments. There, satan shall be
disarmed of his darts, he shall be rendered incapable of tempting any more; and
the destroyer himself shall be destroyed. Wherefore,

3. Heaven is a state of perfect joy and happiness. This is the peculiar
characteristic of heaven, but cannot be conceived, much less described, by us
in our present state; we are only certified of this in general (and this is
sufficient to excite our zealous endeavors to obtain it) that this happiness
is great beyond comprehension, that it is free from all allay and interruption,
that it will be suited to our capacities, and satisfactory to our desires.

But let us take a more particular view of what may be supposed to constitute
the happiness of the blessed inhabitants of heaven.

1. They shall be freed from all those evils which attend them here. Men in
this life are liable to numberless evils and casualties, fears and torments,
which often render life itself a scene of misery and sorrow. But those that
shall be counted worthy to enter into that world shall be delivered from all
those annoyances. There, "all sickness and death, sorrow and sighing, shall
flee away," and uninterrupted peace, joy and satisfaction, shall come in their
stead. This is admirably described by St. John, the favorite apostle of our
Lord, who was favored with a vision of this heaven of happiness, this new
Jerusalem, whilst here on earth, Revelations 21. chap. 2, 3, and 4 verses. "And
I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God, out of heaven,
prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. And I heard a great voice out of
heaven, saying, behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell
with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them,
and be their God. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there
shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any
more pain: For the former things are passed away." It was "sin that brought
death into the world and all our woes" and afflictions: Wherefore when sin is
thoroughly purged away, (as it will be before we enter upon the joys of heaven)
all the dismal train of diseases, pains, and death, shall depart with it. So
there will be nothing to allay our happiness, nothing to molest or discompose
us in our tranquil pleasures.

2. Another constituent of the happiness of heaven will be, the enjoyment of
God, the adoration of him, and the execution of his pleasure. If good men take
pleasure in worshipping God here on earth, and in rendering praises and
thanksgivings to his name, how much more when they shall have dropped this vile
flesh, and are admitted to adore him in his more immediate presence? In this
imperfect state it is impossible for us to conceive or describe the pleasure
and happiness which all the glorified saints will receive in the enjoyment of
God. Doubtless it will be exceeding great, and worthy the bounteous author of
it to bestow. The performance of the divine will, and the celebration of God's
goodness and kindness in man's redemption and salvation, will be inconceivably
pleasant to the grateful saints of God. And this pleasure will be heightened and
increased, by recounting to each other the divine mercies, by worshipping God
in company, and singing social hallelujahs to him.

This brings me to consider the third ingredient of the happiness of heaven,
namely,

3. The conversation of angels and spirits of just men made perfect. Man is by
nature formed for society. He is so constituted as to receive satisfaction and
pleasure, from conversation with his fellow creatures. Especially, the saints
and people of God here on earth, reap not only much advantage, but great
delight and pleasure, from their communion and converse with each other. It is
a pleasing entertainment to the true disciples of Jesus, to confer together on
holy matters, and jointly to exalt and magnify the glory of God for those
manifestations of his love and kindness, which are discovered to us in this our
limited state. But how much greater will the mutual pleasure of their
conversation be, when they are enabled to behold, at one view, the whole grand
scheme of grace, and to recount to each other the mighty and undeserved
benefits resulting therefrom? How will they admire God's love, and gratefully
bless his name together? This is heaven! This is happiness! Here they will have
nothing to interrupt them; no intrusions of the ungodly, no avocations of the
world, to disturb them; but they will spend a happy eternity, in mutual
fellowship and communion. And this commerce will not only be maintained by them
with one another, but also with the holy angels, those ministering spirits, who
have interested themselves in man's welfare, and who will now by their divine
conversation, augment their joy and happiness. But that we may have a more
perfect idea of the happiness of the saints in heaven, let us consider,

4. That after the resurrection and final judgment, the bodies as well as the
souls of the righteous shall participate in the heavenly bliss. Their bodies, I
say; not such vile and corruptible bodies as they are laid in the grave, but
they will then undergo a most glorious change. We learn from the apostle Paul,
that when Christ shall come, "he shall change our vile body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body." Phil. 3.21. Flesh and blood, says the
apostle, cannot inherit the kingdom of God. Our bodies in their present gross
and mortal state, are not susceptible of that happiness, which is to be enjoyed
in the presence of God; the effulgence of God's glorious presence will be too
bright and dazzling for mortal eyes. We cannot in these bodies see God's face
and live. But at the resurrection, the bodies of saints will be so altered as
to be made capable of enjoying a pure, and neverfading felicity, with God their
Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier. This change of the body to be raised, is
thus set forth by the apostle, 1 Cor. 15.42. It is sown in corruption, it is
raised in incorruption: It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory: It is
sown in weakness, it is raised in power: It is sown a natural body, it is
raised a spiritual body. That is, it shall be so purified and refined from all
the dregs of matter, that it will deserve the denomination of a spirit, rather
than of an ordinary body. These bodies of ours are liable to accidents and
diseases, to corruption and decay; but at the resurrection, "this corruptible
must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality." They shall
be freed from every destructive quality, and shall be rendered active and
vigorous, so as to be no impediment to the free operation of the soul. Agreeable
to which our Savior says, that the saints at the resurrection, shall be as the
angels of God in heaven. Mat. 22.30. The bodies of the righteous being thus
refined, and their souls purified from all the remainders of sin, they shall be
admitted to dwell with the Lord both in soul and in body for ever. And,

5. The happiness which they shall there enjoy, shall be full and satisfactory;
which cannot be said of any earthly happiness.

Here in this world we constantly imagine ourselves destitute of something,
which we esteem requisite to our complete felicity; and (...) creates
uneasiness and discontent. But in heaven our whole capacities of enjoyment will
be filled, and every desire will be satisfied. And though there will be degree
of glory and rewards in heaven, (as may b^ argued from many places of
scripture) yet this does not hinder but that each one's happiness shall be
perfect. For every one will be happy according to their several capacities of
enjoyment. So that nothing shall be wanting to any one to constitute the
greatest happiness which he is capable of enjoying. A difference of rewards is
evident hence, Holiness is a qualification, yea, and a necessary ingredient of
happiness. Wherefore as there are different degrees of holiness in this life,
so there must of necessity be different degrees of happiness in the next.
Moreover, the felicity of any state will be greatly increased, by a person's
entering upon it from a state of adversity and unhappiness. The comparing their
former with their present state, much enhances the value of the latter.
Wherefore such saints as have been persecuted and hardly used o^ ^th, will more
sensibly feel the vastness and worth of the heavenly enjoyments. Mat. 5.12.
Blessed are ye, says our Savior, when men shall revile you, and persecute you;
rejoice, and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven. But this
difference does not hinder (as I said before) but that the happiness of all
shall be complete, and proportioned to their desires and capacities.

6. and lastly. To crown all that has been said, of the happiness of the just,
in the kingdom of heaven, let us consider that this happiness shall be eternal.
The felicity which they shall enjoy in God's presence, shall never have an end.
Whence it is so frequently called in scripture by the name of eternal life, and
everlasting life; (instances of which are numberless.) This is necessary to the
perfection of the heavenly felicity. If the saints there were in continual
apprehension of having an end put to their happiness, how would it damp their
joys, and lessen their pleasure? But on the contrary, it adds a new relish to
their enjoyments to be ascertained that they will be immutable, and
interminable, that they will endure for myriads of ages, and then, be no nearer
ending than at first. We cannot now form to ourselves an adequate idea of this
endless duration. Our finite understandings cannot comprehend infinity. But
that the heavenly rewards are perpetual, and without end, is abundantly evident
from the word of God. St. Peter assures the saints to whom he wrote, that there
is an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved
in heaven for them. 1 Pet. 1.4. The things which are seen, and which we now
enjoy, are temporal and vanishing; but the things which are not seen, and which
shall succeed this transitory state, are never-ending and eternal* Thus I have
given you some faint description of the matchless glories, and unparalleled
happiness of the heavenly kingdom: But how weak are all descriptions compared
with the joys themselves! The representation which I have made of them, bears
but a faint resemblance of the reality. I have endeavored, a^ far as my
reason, and the word of God would conduct me, to decypher this happiness to
you^ And what I have said is sufficient to call forth our strongest desires and
most zealous endeavors, to attain these glorious rewards. That which is beyond
the comprehension of our present faculties, we must patiently leave, until God
shall see fit, of his abundant grace, and through the merits of Christ, to call
us (after we have done o^ utmost to qualify ourselves) to the possession of
those transcendent enjoyments. We shall then doubtless be ready to say, as the
Queen of Sheba to King Solomon, Behold the half was not told us! The glories
and excellencies, which we now behold, far exceed the utmost that we ever heard
or conceived of them.

I now proceed according to my first proposed design briefly to consider the
second part of the doctrine contained in the text, namely,

II. That the saints and people of God desire, and strive after heaven, that
better country. But now they desire a better country, that is, an heavenly.
This life they esteem but a pilgrimage, or journey to another. They find
nothing in this world worthy to engage their supreme affections: Nothing that
is able to satisfy the desires of a rational and immortal soul. They look down
on all these worldly vanities with indifference, and soar aloft to those
blessed regions of glory, where are transcendent rewards prepared for them.
Thus they desire and seek after heaven.

1. As their thoughts and conversation center in that blessed place. The
pleasures of a virtuous course, the pleasures to be found in the service of
God, and the glorious end of their godly race, are continually in their
thoughts. They are constantly meditating on heaven, and the rewards that God
has there prepared for them that love him. Heaven is the object of their
contemplations, and it is this that influences them, in all their actions. So
that "their conversation is in heaven," whilst they dwell here on earth. All
their words and speeches evidently manifest their heavenly temper, and show
their ardent love to God, and their pious endeavors to please him. From these
they derive a most sublime and god-like pleasure; living in a consciousness of
the favor of God here, and a comforting and well-grounded hope of his
approbation in the world to come.

2. The desires and affections of the godly are aimed at heaven. God and Christ
are the objects of their love, they therefore often ardently wish to depart
hence, that they may be with Christ which is far the best of all; with that
mighty saint and holy apostle Paul, they know that when their earthly house of
this tabernacle shall be dissolved, they have a building with God, an house not
made with hands eternal in the heavens. And therefore for this they groan
earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with their house which is from heaven.
2 Cor. 5.12. They are willing, and choose rather to be absent from the body, to
cast off this vile body with all it is sinful instigations, with all it is pains
and sorrows, miseries and disquiets, and to be present with the Lord, to behold
his glory, and worship in his presence through eternal ages. Though they enjoy
here the blessings of a composed mind, and peaceful conscience, yet they feel
that their happiness on earth is incomplete. Though to them, to live be Christ,
yet to die will be still greater gain. This causes them to despise all earth's
unsatisfying enjoyments, and excite their longings and breathings after heaven.

3. Not only their thoughts and affections are placed on heaven, but all their
actions likewise are ordered with a view to the obtaining of those glorious
rewards. This is the principle of their conduct, this the spring from whence
their actions flow, and the object at which they aim. Those who are thus
heavenly disposed, will be careful "to deny ungodliness, and every worldly
lust, and to live soberly, righteously and godly, in this present evil world,"
knowing that these are necessary qualifications for their admittance into
heaven. It is not a vain and fruitless wishing to enjoy heaven, nor a bare
assent to the truths of the gospel, that will procure an entrance into those
blissful mansions. But all that hope for admittance there, must be careful to
live a godly life, and to practice all those duties that are required in the
gospel, as evidences of their being in a state of justification and salvation.
Belief is in order to practice, and the one is vain without the other. All
therefore who are truly pious, and who sincerely strive after heaven, are
careful so to order their conversation here, as to be qualified for happiness
hereafter. And thus must all do, that desire to be godly. Thus I have shown,
that it is the character of the saints, to desire and strive after heaven. All
that now remains for me to do, is to draw some useful and practical inferences
from the whole.

Inference 1st. Hence we see the vanity of this world, and it is insufficiency
to make us happy. Though a man be possessed of all the good things of this
life: Though he have attained to the highest pitch of affluence, and is
dignified with all the honor and power his ambition could crave: Though he
have riches unnumbered, and all worldly pleasures at his command; yet with
these only, how far is he from happiness? There still remains some void in his
breast, some desire which these things are not able to satisfy. Besides, these
outward things are fading and transitory, they vanish like a shadow and leave
no trace behind them. And though they should be continued to a man as long as his
frail and brittle life lasts, yet how short is that? What a poor compensation
will these fleeting and unsatisfactory pleasures make for the loss of happiness
to all eternity? It becomes us therefore to draw off our affections from the
things of this world, and place them on heaven; to look upon this life as a
journey to another; to be indifferent to the things of earth, and to show by
all our actions that we are aiming at a better country, even a heavenly one.

2. The consideration of those bright and glorious rewards, prepared for the
just in heaven, should excite our thankfulness, and draw forth our praises to
God, for such unmerited goodness.

We by our sins have subjected ourselves to the curse of God's broken law, and
it had been no breach of justice in him, to have permitted the eternal
punishment, annexed to the violation of it, to have fallen upon us. But blessed
be his name, he has not left us to our own ruin; he has promised us pardon upon
our repentance; the assistance of his Spirit upon our weak endeavors; and
eternal life upon our perseverance in goodness. Herein is love, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us, and gave his Son to die for us, to procure for
us the pardon of our sins, and to open to us the gates of heaven. O let God's
love and mercy to us, enkindle our love to him: And let us manifest our
gratitude, by our praises and thanksgivings; and not only so, but by embracing
those offers of grace, by performing the will of God, and laying hold on
eternal life.

3. This thought, that there is a crown of glory prepared in heaven for the
godly, which God the righteous judge will shortly bestow upon them, should
serve to support them under all the pressures and calamities of life.

Though their circumstances be low in the world, though they be destitute of
the comfortable enjoyments in this life, though they be exercised with pains
and afflictions, and though suffer persecution from the ungodly, yet let them
consider that they shall shortly be freed from them, that they shall soon be
admitted to the rewards of their sufferings, and the happiness of heaven, which
will even be augmented by them. With these thoughts let them comfort
themselves, and possess their souls in patience. For I reckon, says the
apostle, that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us. Those who die in the Lord
shall rest in their labors. The grave will be to the godly a place of quiet:
There the wicked cease from troubling: There the weary are at rest. There the
prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the oppressor. The small
and the great are there, and the servant is free from his master, as Job
elegantly expresses it, 3d chap. 17, 18, and 19 verses. Surely then they have
no reason to complain or to be impatient under the evils of this life, since
they will be so very short, and will be followed with such great and
inconceivable rewards. Especially when the apostle tells them, that "these
light afflictions, which are but for a moment, shall work for them a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory." 2 Cor. 4.17. By thus quietly submitting
to the troubles and crosses of life, we imitate our blessed master, "who for
the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame." But
to proceed,

4. From what has been said, of the purity and holiness of heaven, we learn the
necessity of our being holy here, in order to our being happy there. Such as
are pure in heart, and only such, shall inherit the kingdom of God. "Without
holiness, says the apostle, no man shall see the Lord." Wherefore if we ever
would get to heaven, we must, through the aids of the divine Spirit, renounce all
our carnal affections, subdue all our depraved appetites and inclinations,
mortify all our lusts and corruptions, and cleanse ourselves from all
impurities of thought, word and deed. This, in the very nature of the thing, is
requisite to make us capable of enjoying the happiness of heaven. For if we
should suppose a wicked man to be admitted into heaven, in the temper with
which he left the earth, with all his grovelling desires, and carnal affections
about him; heaven itself would be no heaven to him. He would have no relish for
the sublime and spiritual joys of that place. He would take no pleasure in the
fellowship of God, whose nature is so opposite to his. And the society of the
just would afford him no delight: For they being sanctified, and purified from
all filthiness, their conversation and employment will be wholly about things
pure and spiritual, and so will afford no satisfaction to the impure desires,
and carnal propensions of a wicked man. In fine, he would find there nothing
suited to his depraved taste, nothing to gratify his corrupt inclinations, and
so he would properly be in hell, though in the mansions of the blessed. Thus we
see it is not so much the place itself, as the temper of the inhabitants, that
constitutes the happiness of heaven. So that if we ever expect to enjoy
happiness in heaven, we must acquire a heavenly temper here below: The latter
is both a natural, and moral qualification for the former; a natural, as it
fits us for enjoying this happiness, and a moral, as it is required by God as a
condition of our being admitted to it.

5. This doctrine affords us ample encouragement, to zeal and faithfulness in
the service of God. There is an ample reward offered to them that do well, no
less than an eternity of happiness. This will be conferred on all the true
servants of Christ; and such as have most distinguished themselves in serving
God and doing good, to their brethren, shall be blessed with a more
distinguishing reward. Wherefore let us with a holy emulation, strive to outvie
each other in our religious course. Let us struggle, and strive with all our
might, diligently to do God's will, that great may be our reward in heaven.
More especially let us do all the good we can to the souls of men, let us do
our utmost to procure the salvation of our brethren; resting assured, that
after the resurrection, They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and
ever. Dan. 12.3.

Finally. Let us (as we have heard that the people of God do) long and seek
after this heavenly country. Let us soar above the trifling pleasures of this
world, and fix our minds on heaven the habitation of God. Let us always keep
heaven in our eye; let our supreme affections be placed on this; and let all
our actions tend to this. Let us improve the price put into our hands. Let us
seize the present opportunity, and lay hold on eternal life: Let us live as
those that expect a future bliss: Let us consecrate our lives, our faculties,
and all that we are (...), to the service of our Creator, and the ^ful author
of our happiness. And then when Christ shall adjudge to every one his due
reward, we shall be admitted into his presence, where is fullness of joy, and
shall be seated at his right hand, where dwell pleasures for evermore. Where
our happiness shall be complete, and shall perpetually endure, without
intermission and without end.

Thus, my Brethren, I have given you the first fruits of my labors. Since you
are at present by a particular providence of God destitute of a teacher; I
thought it my indispensible duty, no longer to decline your repeated
importunities, but to supply the place of your sick pastor, that you might as
usual worship God in his house, in a social manner. I entreat you to hear and
judge with candor and christian charity, in consideration of my youthful age.
My will is good to edify and save your souls, however deficient my abilities
may be. I beg your earnest prayers for me at the throne of divine grace, that
God would afford me his merciful aid and assistance, that I may increase in
grace, as well as in learning; that from these weak and faint beginnings, I may
rise to greater and greater perfection, and may be qualified for eminent
usefulness in that sacred and important office in which I have now engaged* ^ay
God grant that I may be an inst^ (...) in his hands of converting sinners, edi^
^g saints, and promoting his cause and kingdom in the world. And that I may
have the spirit of holiness dwelling in me, that whilst I preach to others I my
self may not be a castaway.

SERMON II. The Necessity of Grace in order to our Salvation.
EPHESIANS II. 8. For by Grace are ye saved, through Faith; and that not of
yourselves: it is the Gift of God.


THERE is no question of so great importance for a rational and immortal soul
to ask, as that of the Jailor, "What shall I (...) to be saved?" This is the
grand study, and enquiry of every pious and understanding man; being that, on
the right resolving of which an eternity of happiness depends. It was to clear
up this important point, that the Son of God himself came down from heaven; and
by his doctrines, precepts, and example, pointed out the only effectual way,
whereby mankind can escape the pollutions of the world, and attain the regions
of eternal bliss. And in order to the instruction of after ages, he has left
behind him the sacred records of his will, written by holy men under the
direction and inspiration of his blessed Spirit, that none might be ignorant of
the way of salvation, wrought out and revealed by him. "Thus has Christ Jesus
abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light by the gospel."
Mankind being sinners, there appears no way to unassisted reason, whereby God
can, consistent with the honor of his perfections and laws, overlook their
transgressions, and receive them into favor and happiness with himself. But in
consulting the gospel revelation, how are we surprised to find, that God has in
infinite wisdom contrived, and in infinite mercy revealed and executed a plan
of grace, whereby all his glorious attributes shine unsullied, and yet mankind
is put into a capacity of obtaining eternal salvation.? For "God so loved the
world as to send his only begotten Son," etc. This is an undeserved favor. The
free gift of God -- as is declared by the apostle in the text. By grace are ye
saved, etc.

The apostle begins this chapter by showing the Ephesians what a deplorable
situation they were in, before they were quickened by divine grace. He describes
them as "dead in trespasses and sins -- walking according to the course of this
world, and according to the prince of the power of the air -- having their
conversation in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and
of the mind -- and being by nature children of wrath." " But" proceeds the
apostle, "God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us,
even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ, has
raised us up, and has made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus."
So that it was owing to the free grace of God alone, that they were renewed in
the temper of their minds, and from a state of exposedness to the divine wrath,
and eternal death, were brought into a state of salvation. This is more fully
declared in the text, wherein we are told, that the salvation of believers is
of the free grace of God, and that the qualification herefor on their part, is
faith in Jesus Christ. From the words I shall attempt these three things.

I. To show that it is of the free grace of God alone that any are saved. II.
That this salvation is obtained only through faith in Jesus Christ. And, III.
Show how or in what sense this faith is said to be the gift of God.
1. I am to show that it is of the free grace of God alone that any are saved.
By grace are ye saved, etc. It was the unconstrained benevolence of the divine
nature, that published the tenders of mercy, and made eternal life obtainable
by us. It is a free and unsollicited favor, to which God had no extraneous
motives or excitements, nothing but his benevolence and good will. "He first
loved us," and that when by sin we had rebelled against him. We being sinners
and could do nothing to call forth the divine mercy, there was nothing in us
but our misery to move his pity and compassion. Our justification therefore and
salvation is often called by St. Paul, "the free gift." Which seems at first
sight in some measure to oppose or interfere with this, are the satisfaction of
Christ, and the doings of our own? But neither of these destroy the freeness of
God's grace in our salvation. For,

1. Though it is granted that Christ made full atonement for our offenses, and
so paid down our ransom for us, yet nevertheless it is of the free grace of God
that we are justified and saved. For it was God himself that provided a Savior
for us. From motives of love and kindness only, he gave this unspeakable gift
of a redeemer to the world, that thereby he might show mercy to us consistent
with the honor of his perfections. So that the mediation of Christ, and all
that he did and suffered for us, is to be considered only as the means made use
of by God in executing his scheme of mercy, and not as the motive that prompted
him to show mercy to man: It is not the cause, but the fruit and consequence of
the exertion of his free and undeserved grace and favor toward us. It is thus
that the scriptures represent the matter. "In this was manifested the love of
God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world,
that we might live through him." "Christ who knew no sin was" by the gracious
appointment of God "made sin for us," the chastisement of our peace was on him,
and by his stripes we are healed. God was in no way obliged to provide a surety
to bear the punishment of our sins, and discharge our debts for us; neither was
he obliged, when a redeemer freely offered himself to suffer for us, to accept
of his sufferings as satisfaction for our offenses. So that the mission of
Christ was of free grace, his undertaking the office of mediator was of free
grace, and God's accepting his merits and sufferings for the justification of
believers, is likewise of free grace. Hence as the apostle says, we are
"justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ;
whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the
forbearance of God: -- That he might be just, and the justifier of him that
believes in Jesus." Romans 3.24, 25, and 26. So far then is the satisfaction and
meritorious sufferings of Christ from infringing the free grace of God in our
justification, that it is the greatest instance of his free and undeserved love
toward us. "Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and
sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins." 1 John 4.10.

2. Neither is the free grace of God any ways lessened, by any works of
holiness performed by men, to qualify themselves for the saving gift. The
apostle Paul is very earnest in affirming and proving that no man can be
justified by any deeds of his own, done in conformity to the law. If indeed any
man had fully answered the demands of the law, so as to stand justified and
uncondemned, when that is made the standard of judgment, then "the reward would
justly be reckoned, not of grace but of debt:" He might claim the reward as his
due. But this is not the case. There is no one but has transgressed the law,
and so subjected himself to it is curse. For the law is very strict and
peremptory in pronouncing "every one cursed that continues not in all things
that are written in the book of the law to do them." But as many as are under
the law and expect justification by it, are under the curse. For, says the
apostle, "all are gone out of the way -- there is none righteous, no not one."
Agreeable to which says the wise man, "There is not a just man upon earth that
does good and sins not." Since therefore all mankind have rendered but a
very imperfect obedience to the divine law, and consequently are under the
curse of it, they cannot be justified by it. For the law cannot condemn a man
as a transgressor, and at the same time vindicate him as righteous. So that it
must be by the free grace of God, through the redemption of Jesus Christ, that
any man is justified and saved; since all that we do merits no reward, but
leaves us still debtors to the law. Not by works of righteousness that we have
done, says the apostle, but according to his mercy be saved us, by the washing
of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost; which he shed on us abundantly
through Jesus Christ our Savior; that, being justified by his grace, we should
be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. Titus 3.5, 6, 7. It would
reflect highly o^ the divine wisdom in consulting a redeemer, and would destroy
the necessity of any mediator, to suppose that we by any works of ours, could
claim the divine acceptance. For "if righteousness comes by the law, then
Christ is dead in vain." "Then faith is made void, and the promise made of none
effect." For the promise of justification to those that believed in Christ, and
depended on his righteousness alone herefor, would be vain and useless, could
we be justified by the law, in consequence of any deeds of ours done is
conformity to it. But since it is impossible that any should make void the
promises or designs of God, it is evident, that it is of the free and abundant
grace of God alone that any of the sinful children of men are justified and
saved. Indeed it is not only on account of our being debtors to the law, that
we an saved by grace, but the same divine grace would be exercised in our
salvation were we free from the law. For suppose a man should render perfect
obedience to the divine law, and not transgress it, in one single point, yet
still he would merit nothing; and having done no more than his duty, separa^
from the divine promise, he would (...) entitled to no reward. Justification
indeed be might claim as his due: For he being really righteous, deserves to be
esteemed and vindicated as righteous. Wherefore though such a one could not be
looked upon as guilty in the sight of God, and consequently not liable to
punishment; yet separate from the promise of God, who has connected
justification with salvation, and has said that "whom he justifies, them he
also will glorify," separate from this I say, he would not be entitled to
eternal life in heaven. If then the bestowment of eternal happiness on man
would be of grace, even if he perfectly answered the demands of the law, what
superabounding grace is exerted in saving any, when "all have sinned and come
short of the glory of God?" But I proceed to consider,

II. The grand qualification requisite in those who shall obtain salvation. By
grace are ye saved through faith." It is only through faith therefore that
salvation is obtained. In the justification of a person by which he is put into
a state of salvation, there are three things requisite, grace, Christ and
faith. The free grace of God is the prime or impulsive cause of man's
salvation; the righteousness of Christ is the sole meritorious cause; and faith
in him, is the qualification required in those that receive this salvation, and
is that by which alone the righteousness of Christ is imputed to any for
justification.

Faith, in the simple notion of it, is an assen, or persuasion of the mind
relating to any truth upon the testimony of others. The object of christian
faith is the revealed word of God, especially the gospel of Christ and his
apostles. It is, as the apostle phrases it, "the belief of the truth as it is
in Jesus." But all that believe Christ and his gospel, are not possessed of
saving faith. When our Savior preached to the Jews at Bethany, "many of the
chief rulers believed on him:" But they still remained in a state of
condemnation, and loved the praise of men more than the praise of God. John
12.43. And such is the faith of many professing christians at this day. It is
historical and speculative only; it is the result of education, rather than a
serious and pious confidence in the testimony of God, and does but faintly
affect their hearts, and influence their actions. It may rather be said of
them, that they do not disbelieve the gospel, or do not concern themselves
about it, whether it be true or not, than that they have a positive belief of
it, or a firm persuasion of the truth of those important matters contained in
it. But he who is the subject of saving faith, has a realizing and affecting
view of spiritual things. He receives the truths of the gospel, "not as the
word of man but as the word of God," and relies on Christ alone for salvation.
The eyes of his understanding being enlightened, he is enabled to view divine
truths in their spirituality and importance, as what intimately concern him,
and ought suitably to affect him. The natural product of this faith is love to
God, and delight in his worship and obedience. It is a faith that works by
love, and purifies the heart. It is a faith that overcomes the world; so as
that the subject of it is not conformed unto this evil world, but is
transformed by the renewing of the holy Ghost, and created anew in Christ Jesus
unto good works. For whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, says the
apostle John, is born of God: And whosoever is born of God sins not, does
not allow himself in known transgressions, but keeps himself, and is careful
to conform his conversation to the example of Christ, and the precepts of the
gospel.

Thus the true christian faith, or that faith which justifies and saves, is
such a firm and realizing persuasion of the truth of the gospel, as powerfully
influences the heart and affections, and disposes to a cheerful compliance with
all the divine commands. Such was the faith of Abraham, the father of the
faithful, who "by faith, when he was called to go out unto a place which he
should afterward receive for an inheritance, obeyed." And such was the faith
of all the ancient Patriarchs, as the apostle to the Hebrews shows at large; --
and this is the faith which the apostle James shows to be necessary to our
justification. We are not justified by a dead and unactive faith, but by such a
faith as is a lively and powerful principle of holy actions, as exerts and
evidences itself by good works, as is declared in the 2d chapter of St. James's
epistle. St. Paul likewise assures us, that all, whatever their belief is, "who
obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of his
power." 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Works of obedience then, or the blessed fruits of faith,
are the best and only sure evidence by which the faith of God's elect, may be
discerned from the faith of such as remain in an unjustified state. And that
faith in this view of it, is the condition on which the saving benefits of
Christ's mediation are conferred upon us, or the qualification required in
order to our being justified before God, and admitted to eternal life, is
evident from scripture, and from the nature of the thing. John 3.36. He that
believes on the Son has everlasting life; but he that believes not the Son,
shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides on him. In the Greek it is,
"he that obeys not the Son," without which none does truly and savingly
believe. It is necessary that men's hearts should be purified by faith, before
they can be fitted for the holy enjoyments of heaven. By faith they realize
things not seen, conquer the world in their affections, and look supremely at
God and heaven: -- It is through faith then that any are saved. But here lest
we mistake, it is necessary that we make a proper distinction. Though believers
only are justified and saved; yet their believing is not the meritorious cause
of their salvation. It is not for the sake of any thing that the person is or
has, that he is acquitted from guilt, and admitted into favor and happiness
with God: But the reward proceeds wholly from the free grace of God, and is
conferred solely on account, or in consideration of the righteousness wrought
out by Jesus Christ. Faith is to be understood as subordinate to these. For if
we rely on our faith as that in the sole virtue of which we shall be justified
and saved, or as the consideration entitling us to these, we do as truly make
void the grace of God, and the death of Christ, as if we relied on the merit of
our works to save us. Unerring wisdom has seen fit to constitute his plan of
mercy, as that the saving benefits of redemption should be conferred only on
such as believe on him; not because their faith has any merit or tendency in
itself to procure these benefits; but because it is most suitable to the honor
of his majesty, to confer them on such as believe on, and trust in, the
proffered Savior, rather than on such as despise and reject him. "Without
faith it is impossible to please God." "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and
thou shall be saved." I proceed now to consider the

IIId and last thing proposed from the text, viz. To show how, or in what sense
this faith is said truly and properly to be the gift of God. But here by the
way, I would just remark, that this last part of the text is expressed somewhat
ambiguously (as well in the original as in our translation) and accordingly
expositors differ in their interpretation of it. Some [as Poole, Clarius, etc.]
refer the last words, "it is the gift of God," to the whole preceding
sentence: "By grace ye are saved," etc. -- and so understand it, that salvation
is the gift of God. -- Others again [as Henry, Grotius, Burkitt, etc.] refer it
to the substantive immediately foregoing, and suppose that what the apostle
designed to affirm, was, that the faith through which we are saved, is the gift
of God. I shall prefer the latter sense as it is the common acceptance, and as
it is agreeable to what this same apostle, who is the best interpreter of his
own meaning, says in another place, Phil. 1.29. "Unto you it is given, to
believe on him." So that what I have to enquire into is, how this faith by
which we are justified and saved, is the gift of God; or in what sense it is
properly said to be the gift of God? To this I answer --

1. Negatively. Faith is not so the gift of God, as to prevent or set aside the
necessity of all endeavors of our own to obtain it. It is very plain from the
whole tenor of scripture, from the exhortations, commands, promises and
threatenings, which are found in almost every page, especially of the new
Testament. It is very evident from these, I say, and will appear so to every
one, that peruses them, with a careful and impartial eye, that we are not to
sit idle and indulge ourselves in sin, 'till God shall see fit to inspire us
with this saving virtue; but that we are to be up and doing, exercing ourselves
and faculties in the use of those means, which God has appointed to fit us, for
the bestowment of his grace and spirit, and by which alone he ordinarily
communicates them. -- Why else are we so often called upon to believe, repent,
etc. and threatened with aggravated damnation if we comply not? Why does he not
rather say to us, as to the Israelites at the red, sea, " Stand still, and see
the salvation of the Lord?" This were more proper and suitable language to be
addressed to us, if there is nothing for us to do preparatory to, or in
concurrence with, the saving work of the Spirit in our souls, than that which
we find in the new Testament, "Repent and believe the gospel -- and he that
believes not shall be damned -- He that has ears to hear, let him hear --
Consider the mighty works and miracles wrought among you, and be persuaded by
them to believe on me, otherwise it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon,
for Sodom and Gomorrha, in the day of judgment, than for you -- strive to enter
into the strait gate;" and innumerable other texts of like import. When the
Jailor in consternation besought Paul and Silas, what he should do to be saved,
they did not tell him that he had nothing to do but sit still, 'till God should
work faith in him; but their answer was, "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and
thou shall be saved." So when Simon the sorcerer by his avaritious and
mercenary disposition proved himself to be "in the gall of bitterness, and bond
of iniquity." The apostle in order that he might be extricated from this woeful
state, does not advise him to ^dolence and inactivity, and a contempt of the
instituted means, as of no avail with God; but he directs him to "repent of
this his wickedness, and to pray to God, if perhaps the thought of his heart
might be forgiven him." Let us now see whether the apostles in this respect
taught any thing different from what their great Lord and master taught before
them. In the 6th chapter of John at the 27th verse, we find our blessed Savior
exhorting the people to "labor for the meat that endures unto everlasting
life." On which some of his surrounding audience propose to him this question,
"What shall we do that we may work the works of God?" Jesus answered, "This is
the work of God," or this is the work which God requires of you, "that ye
believe on him whom he has sent." Now if God in the bestowment of faith
supersedes all human exertions, why does Christ mention it as a work required
of them? Why does he not rather say, This is what God requires of you, that you
wait in carnal indolence and sloth, 'till you receive the irresistible impulse
of the spirit of grace begetting faith in your hearts? Thus it appears
according to the doctrine of Christ and his apostles, that it is not only the
duty of holy and regenerated persons, to attend ^ the means of grace in order
to the increasing their faith, but that it is also the duty of such as are not
as yet subjects of saving faith, ^ be zealous and industrious in the use of the
same instituted means, in order to the beg^ting this faith in them. "Of his own
w^ begat he us, with the word of truth." The we cannot by our own strength
conve^ ourselves, or work a saving faith in o^ souls, is an established
undoubted truth. I^ is to God's grace and not to themselves the any are
indebted for this blessed work. B^ though without Christ we can do nothing, y^
with him we can. "I can do all things, ^ says the apostle, "through Christ
strength^ning me." The operation and assistance ^ the spirit with us, the
scripture makes an argument why we should work out our salvation, namely,
because it is God that works in us both to will and to do of his own good
pleasure. And this is sufficient encouragement for us to work, since we know
that o^ labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. But faith, say you, is the
gift of God. -- Very true. -- But how is this gift conferred? Or in what way is
it communicated to us? The apostle will resolve this question for us, "Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God." We are considered by God as
moral and accountable agents, as beings endued with understanding and will; and
God requires that we make use of our rational faculties in matters of religion
and faith. Otherwise what need have we of any written revelation at all, if the
belief of divine truths is wrought in us wholly by the more compendious way of
divine illumination? Particularly, of what use are the many miracles wrought in
confirmation of christianity, if not to convince us by rational evidence? It is
on these that Christ himself rests the ground of our faith on him. "If I do not
the works of my father, says he, believe me not; but if I do, though ye believe
not me, believe the works; that ye may know and believe that the father is in
me, and I in him." John 10.37, 38. Why is it so frequently recorded of the
apostles that they reasoned with their hearers, proving from the scriptures,
etc. that Jesus was the Christ, if faith is wrought in us by the Spirit without
the use of our own faculties and powers? If we are not to apply our diligence
to reading and hearing the word, and to weigh in our minds the proofs offered
for our rational conviction, the multitude of miracles wrought by Christ and
his apostles, were to no end, and the works themselves, as well as the records
of them, are wholly superfluous. But this cannot be. Besides, if there is
nothing lest for us to do, how do we incur so great gui^ by not believing? And
how shall we qui^ God of injustice, when he says, "He that believes not shall
be damned?" If there is nothing required of us, we cannot certainly merit
eternal punishment for doing nothing.

Moreover, that we may farther see the consistency between human endeavors,
and the assertion in the text, let us consider, that God is said in scripture
to be the giver, not only of faith, but of every good and perfect gift. Our
corn and wine, and whole bodily sustenance, are as truly the gifts of God, as
faith and other spiritual gifts. But as God does not in the ordinary course of
his providence, confer these temporal gifts, but through human industry in the
use of the means adapted to obtaining them, so also it is with the gifts of the
spirit. They are not ordinarily conferred but only on such as are industrious
to refrain from sin, and to please God in the ways of his appointment. Not but
that God sometimes is "found of them that seek him not," as well in the
obtaining of spiritual as of temporal favors. Thus it was with St. Paul, and
many others in his day, and perhaps some in our's too. But as both scripture
and experience abundantly testify, that this is not the ordinary way of God's
dealing with men, we have no right or reason to expect the spiritual gifts of
God, without the use of our own faculties and endeavors. Nay this would be as
absurd, as for a man who is desirous of getting an estate, to fit still and
wait for some extraordinary interposition of providence in his favor. As some
have been wrought upon, and converted by God, exclusive of all previous
endeavors, or wishes of their own, so some have grown rich exclusive of their
own pains and foresight: And both of them are extraordinary, and out of the
common course of God's dealings with men. But I proceed in the

2d Place, to show, positively, how this faith by which any are justified and
saved, is truly and properly the gift of God. This I shall do in two or three
particulars. And,

1. It is God that gave the object of faith, viz. Christ and his gospel. He who
delights in the good and happiness of his creatures, so soon as man had fallen
and forfeited his favor, was pleased of his free and unsollicited benevolence,
to enter into a new covenant with him, and constitute a mediator, through whom
he might be just and yet the justifier of those that should believe in him. An
early promise of this God gave to Adam, immediately after the fall, "that the
seed of the woman should bruise the serpent's head* This glorious Advocate and
Redeemer (...) shadowed out by many types and figure under the mosaic
dispensation, and was prophetically described by the prophets of the old
Testament, under the inspiration of the Spirit of God. At last when the fullness
o^ time came, the Messiah appeared on earth, and by his meritorious sufferings
he purge away our sins on the cross, and by the stri^ and holy obedience of his
life, perfectly answered the demands of the law; that so "the righteousness of
God might be by faith in Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them the
believe." Moreover, it is God that dictated and revealed the gospel, which
contains the doctrines of the christian faith, and the duti^ of the christian
life.

All this was done without any concurrence, solicitation or endeavors, on the
part of man. As God therefore gave Christ, and his gospel, to be believed by
man, he may truly and justly be said, to be the giver of the christian faith.

2. God is the giver of faith, as he is the author of those arguments which
were designed to convince and persuade the natural reason of men. God not only
sent his Son to publish the glad tidings of salvation, but he also accompanied
his mission, with such glorious proofs and attestations as render all men
inexcusable who do not believe on him. Thus, by a voice from heaven, the
mansion of his glory, he declared him to be his "beloved Son in whom he was
well pleased." The Savior through the whole course of his ministry, wrought by
his divine power many great, signal and evident miracles, to confirm the faith
of his disciples, and that all men might have sufficient evidence to believe on
him: And to these he himself frequently appeals for the truth of his divine
mission. And after his ascension his apostles were enabled, by the effusion of
the holy Spirit on them, to work miracles in his name, for the conviction of
the world: "God himself bearing witness to the truth of their preaching, both
with signs and wonders, and diverse miracles, and gifts of the holy Ghost." But
the greatest outward testimony, which the Spirit of God has given of the truth
(...) Christ's mission, is, his resurrection from the dead. By this "he was
declared to be the Son of God with power." St. Paul, in his sermon at Athens,
having mentioned the important article of a future judgment by Jesus Christ,
gives this as the confirmation of it, "whereof he has given assurance unto all
men, in that he has raised him from the dead." In the original it is, "given
faith to all men." Acts 17.31. Thus God is the giver of faith, as he gives
those means and arguments by which faith, as a rational conviction, is wrought
in the soul.

3dly and lastly. Faith is the gift of God, more especially in respect to the
Spirit of God, by which this faith is produced in the heart, and without the
inward efficacy and operation of which, it never becomes an abiding and
effectual persuasion and principle of holiness in any person. It is the Spirit
of God that works in us the work of faith with power; and not the mere
exertion of our natural faculties, which being depraved and disabled by sin,
are insufficient for this work. But then the method ordinarily made use of by
the spirit of holiness in working faith in the hearts of men, is not immediate
inspiration, or a mere supernatural and irresistible impulse, in which man is
wholly and entirely passive; but a proper improving and directing these
faculties we already possess, concurring with them, and propounding proper
means and motives to them. The spirit does not implant in our minds any new
faculties or powers which we had not before, neither does it infuse into them
any new truths, besides them contained in the holy Bible, which is a perfect
rule of faith and manners. But by the Spirit of God ou^ understandings are
strengthened, and the truths of the gospel proposed to them in a new and
striking light. "The eyes of our understandings being enlightened, that we may
know what is the hope of his calling," etc. By the Spirit, the arguments or
evidence of the christian faith are propounded, and our minds held fixed and
intent on the consideration of them: The prejudices of our minds against the
gospel are removed, our lusts and passions suppressed, and our minds freed from
the wrong bias they induce. By the Spirit our faculties, though not materially
changed, are refined, purified, and freed from that deprevation which sin has
brought upon them.

It is by such means as these, generally, that the Spirit of holiness works
faith in the hearts of men, and not by such an irresistible impulse as
supercedes the use of our own faculties and endeavors. We cannot, on the one
hand, by our own strength alone, produce a saving faith in our hearts, or
change in our souls; the influence and operation of the holy Spirit (which by
the promise of God will not be withheld from our sincere endeavors and
requests) is absolutely requisite: And on the other hand, the concurrence of
our own powers and endeavors, is so necessary as to render us absolutely
inexcusable, if we remain destitute of this saving grace. The we see that faith
is truly and properly ^ gift of God, and yet we are justly condem^ ed, if we
die in an impenitent and unbel^ ing state.

Nothing therefore now remains for me ^ do, but that after the example of
Christ ^ his apostles, I earnestly persuade and exh^ you to repent and believe
the gospel. Fa^ is the root of all the other graces, which ^ flourish or decay,
according to the streng^ or weakness of this. It is of infinite imp^ tance
therefore, that our faith be firm ^ well established. In order whereto consid^
seriously, and weigh in your minds those arguments which God himself makes use
^ for your conviction. Carefully study and attend to the word of God, with
desire to discover the truth, and resolution to embrace it. Ponder and search
out all those traces of the Deity, which shine so conspicuous, both in his
works, and in his word. Be much in prayer to God, and diligent in your
attendance on all those means and ordinances, which he has appointed for the
begetting and increasing of faith in you.

Perhaps there will still lie in some of your minds, an objection of this fore:
To what purpose is it for me to strive, and why do you exhort me to all these
duties, since all ^ ^n do is of no avail, unless God concur with ^e, and grant
me faith after all? The truth of the assertion I allow, but not of the
consequence. For consider an instance somewhat parallel. Those of you that are
husbandmen, why do you take so much pains to plough and manure your fields, and
sow your grain? Your labor will all be vain and fruitless, unless God concur
with your endeavors, grant you refreshing showers, and the warm influences of
the heavens, to draw forth, quicken and mature the seed you sow. But was this
ever considered by any as a good reason, why he should sit still and not labor
at all? Do you not all industriously pursue the means suited to your desired
end, and leave the event to providence? And with reason; for though you cannot
ensure the success of your labors, yet this you are pretty well assured of,
that without your labor and industry in the means, you will not obtain what
you seek. But though you all think your labor and industry reasonable in this
instance, yet herein you act with much less certainty of success, than in that
I am persuading you to. For God never promised that he that plougheth and
sows should inevitably reap the fruit of his labors; but he has promised the
assistance of his holy Spirit, to all such as sincerely ask it of him, with
earnest des^ to do his will. "Ask and ye shall receive ^ seek and ye shall
find," etc. Faith is no^ only represented in scripture, as a gift of God, and
work of his Spirit, and so promised as a blessing and privilege under the
gospel; but it is also commanded us as a duty, which shows the necessity of o^
endeavors. Therefore I say, come unto Christ, weary and heavy laden with the
burden of your sins, and rely on him for salvation. Endeavor daily to increase
and strengthen your faith in him, and more and more to evidence it, by works of
obedience and holiness, knowing that be that believes ^ not, is not condemned;
but he that believes not, is condemned already, because he has not believed
in the name of the only begotten Son of God. John 3. 18.

SERMON III. The Christian Life is a Life of Faith.
2 CORINTHIANS V. 7. For we walk by Faith, not by Sight.


THE creatures of God are of two kinds, material and immaterial, or body and
spirit; some of the superior ranks of creatures are, so far as we can judge,
like the great Creator himself, pure spirit, without any mixture or conjunction
of matter.

But the things with which we are chiefly conversant here on earth, are
material objects, destitute of any incorporeal substance. Man is a compound of
both. He is the bond of union between the two worlds of body and spirit: An
immaterial soul, being in him^ by some inconceivable bands, connected with a
material body. How unimbodied spirits perceive and know things, we cannot
determine. But we, while we exist in these bodies, derive through them our most
perfect knowledge of external things. We see, hear, and feel the objects around
us, and thereby come to the infallible knowledge of, their existence, and these
ideas being communicated to the mind, the immaterial soul can reflect on them,
and judge and reason about them. But as to such things as are of a spiritual
nature, and so fall not under the cognizance of our bodily senses, or things
that are at such a distance as to be beyond the reach of sight and sense, our
knowledge of them is less distinct and certain: They are not the objects of
sense, but of faith, which is a somewhat less degree of evidence than that of
sense. When we see any thing plainly existing before our eyes, we do not say we
believe that such a thing is, but we know it, because we have the greatest and
surest evidence of it that we can possibly have of any thing. But when we
determine concerning any thing of a spiritual nature, or any thing that exists
or is translated beyond the reach of our senses, our evidence or knowledge of
this is called faith, and we say that we believe that it exists, or is so and
so. And this evidence of faith arises not from ocular demonstration (for then
it would not be faith, but fight): But it arises from the moral probability or
certainty of the thing, or else from the testimony of some other person or
persons. And so that the certainty of the thing to be believed is greater and
more infallible, according as the moral evidence of it, or the reasons drawn
from the thing, are more convincing, or as the person on whose testimony ^e
receive it, is more credible and able to give a certain account. It is thus
that the apostle defines faith, making a distinction between it and fight;
faith is not the evidence of things seen, but "the evidence of things not
seen." Heb. 11.1. It is also called "the substance, or confident expectation of
things hoped for:" Which must evidently mean things future and invisible; for
"hope that is seen is not hope: For what a man sees, why does he yet hope for?
But, we have hope for that we see not." Having thus shown what is the evident
meaning of the apostle, in his description of the christian walk in the text,
which is by faith, not by fight; we will proceed to a more distinct
consideration of the words. In which I shall attempt to show the four following
things, viz.

I. To prove the truth of the proposition, that christians walk by faith, and
not by sight.

II. To show the reasons why we may suppose it was so ordered by God, or the
superior advantange of such a constitution to any other.

III. Show that such a representation of the christian walk, does not weaken
the ground^ of our faith, or the certainty we have of spiritual things.

IV. That it is both our duty and interest to walk by faith, and not by sight.

1. I am to show, that the christian life is a life of faith, or that
christians in this world walk by faith and not by sight.

All who direct their walk chiefly with respect to God and the things of
another world, which are beyond the ken of our bodily senses, (as all true
christians do) are properly said to direct their walk by faith. For unless they
have a full persuasion of these things by faith, they have no evidence of them
at all; and so it is highly absurd, as well as impossible in the nature of
things, that they should make these the aim and end of our conduct. For who
would take pains to please a being of whose existence they doubted? Especially
if this command thwarted their natural, though corrupt inclinations. Or who
would deny himself any present enjoyments or satisfactions, for the sake of any
invisible good, unless he was fully persuaded in his mind that there were such
goods? But ^s it is the character of all true christians so to do, it is
evident that they firmly and on good grounds believe these, though they see
them not. Like the Patriarchs of old, they live and "die in faith, not having
yet received the promises, but having seen them afar off by an eye of faith,
they are persuaded of them, and embrace them, and so confess that they are but
strangers and pilgrims on earth." Even in respect of God, though wherever we
turn our eyes we behold his footsteps, the marks and traces of his infinite
wisdom, power and goodness, which furnish us with undeniable evidence of his
existence; yet still this is the evidence of faith and not of sight: For "no
man has seen God at any time." The supreme Jehovah, "who only has
immortality, dwells in the light which no man can approach unto, whom no man
has seen or can see. "None can see his face and live" in these bodies. "Oh
that I knew where I might find him, says Job, that I might come even to his
seat! -- Behold I go forward, but he is not there; and backward, but I cannot
perceive him: On the left hand, where he does work, but I cannot behold him: He
hides himself on the right hand that I cannot see him. But he knows the w^
that I take; therefore am I troubled at hi^ presence; when I consider, I am
afraid of him." "God has made all nations ^ men," says St. Paul, and endued
them with noble faculties and powers of soul, not that they might behold God
with their bodily eyes, but "that they should seek the Lord if happily they might
feel after him and find him, though he be not far from every one ^ us; for in
him we live, and move, and ha^ our being;" as even the heathens have believed
and testified. Acts 17. 27. The though God being a Spirit is not the object of
sight, yet being discernible and clear ^ the eye of faith, believers walk as
seeing him who is invisible. The apostles indeed an^ their cotemporaries, had
the happiness to see the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the image of the invisible
God, in person, or with the eye of sense; but christians in after ages know^
him only by faith, or the evidences of hi^ word and spirit. "Whom having not
seen, we love; in whom though now we see him not, yet believing, we rejoice with
joy unspeakable and full of glory." And thus it is likewise with regard to
future joys, and future torments. The enjoyments of heaven and spiritual
enjoyments, and the punishments o^ hell are the torments of the spirits of the
wicked. "Neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, either the things which God has
prepared for them that love him, or for them that ^e him. But God has revealed
them unto us by his spirit." But though the glories of the heavenly world are
too dazzling, and too distant for mortal eyes, yet christians in this life have
a full assurance of hope, and realize them to their view by faith, and so live
under the constant influence of them. None of us have ever seen the mansions of
glory love, or place of God's wrath beneath; but notwithstanding this, we
firmly believe, and ^ fully persuaded that there are such scenes ^r places,
from the dictates of our own minds and consciences, from the reasonableness and
necessity of the thing, but more especially from the express word, the promises
and threatenings of an unchangeable God that cannot lie. So likewise those past
things which the scriptures reveal to us, though we saw them not transacted,
yet by faith we are fully persuaded and convinced of them. -- "Through faith,
says the apostle, we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God,
so that the things which are seen were not made of things that do appear." We
were none of us present at the making of the world. We saw not the beauteous
frame of nature spring into existence at the all prevailing fiat of God. We f^
not light arise and darkness glide away, ^ the divine command. We beheld not ^
earth and planets rounded and pushed in motion by the Almighty's hand, and the
s^ and stars fixed in their several stations in the heavens. But though we saw
not when God stretched out the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth,
yet we are fully sati^fied and believe, that the worlds were fram^ by the word
of God, and were not produce^ from things which do now appear. We never saw the
miracles performed by Christ ^ how he expelled the most inveterate disea^ with
a word, and made universal nature obedient to his sovereign beck. But having
sufficient evidence of these things, both external and internal, we are
unquestionably convinced of the truth of them, and of the holy scriptures in
general, which are the rule of our faith. Thus we see that the christian in
respect to the ground, the evidence, and the end of his course walks by faith
and not by fight. Very properly therefore is he denominated a believer, in
contradistinction to those who walk according to the course of this world, who
are sensualists, directing their course by sight and sense, and not by faith,
the evidence of things not seen.

II. I am to consider the reasonableness of it, that christians in this life
should walk by faith and not by sight; and what advantages such a constitution
of things has above any other.

Some will think thus. The evidence of sense is certainly a stronger degree of
assurance and more solid ground of assent, than the evidence of faith. Since
then the things of God and another world are indisputably of the utmost
importance to us; why has not God made them matters of sensible and ocular
demonstration, that every one might see and know them to be true? Why are we
not made to behold the invisible things of God directly and sensibly, and not
by re^ction from the things which are made? That so all might be influenced by
them, and walk by sight to the kingdom of heaven. To all such bold censurers of
the ways of God I would answer, that the disadvantages attending such an
appointment (...) they would mark out, would inevitably be much greater, than
the supposed advantages of it. For, not to argue from the wisdom of God, who
does all things for the best, nor from the nature of man, who (as I have said
in the beginning of this discourse) cannot whilst he is incorporated in flesh,
view spiritual things by immediate intuition. To wave these arguments, I say,
making the objects of christian faith to become matters of sensible evidence,
would be attended with these two plain bad consequences. It would wholly
destroy the virtue of faith, and would hinder this life ^ being properly a
probationary state. It would make faith of no value. For suppose every man in
this life was admitted to a view of the heavenly mansions, and saw with hi^
eyes the internal glories of that blissful place, the chosen people of God
enjoying happiness unconceived in his beatific presence, and blessed with the
gracious smiles of their redeemer's love, happy in themselves and happy in each
other: And suppose also that the gates of darkness were unbared, and the
horrors of the bottomless pit unfolded to our view: Suppose we could convey
ourselves to this dismal place, and with our bodily senses see the dreadful
torments, and hear the horr^ cries and groans of the damned; or suppose we
could for one moment feel these tormenting pains: We should certainly in this
case be convinced of these things by irresistible evidence, and there would be
no room left for the exercise of faith. For what virtue would it be in any one
to believe these things, when he had felt such sensible convictions of them?
The best faith that could be exercised under such circumstances by man, would
have no more virtue in it scarcely, than that of the devils, who believe and
tremble; for faith in this case would not be virue but necessity, where then
would be the distinction between the believer and unbeliever, good and bad,
righteous and wicked? All would be unavoidably excited by the natural principle
of self-preservation to endeavor to fly from the pains which they saw or felt,
and to seek God, without any holiness perhaps or love to him in their hearts.
And such a forced obedience as this, would certainly be of no value in the
sight of God, who requires the whole heart. Thus there would be no room for
trial and probation in this life; no place for the exercise of an holy and
divine faith, or pure and unconstrained acts of obedience, but all would be
violently and irresistibly compelled. The same may be said of the other objects
of the christian faith, as of future rewards and punishments: If they were the
objects of sight and sense, they could not properly be the objects of faith,
and so not fitted to our state on earth. When Thomas, one of the apostles,
would not be convinced of the truth of Christ's resurrection without the
evidence of sense, our Savior condescended to grant him such conviction, but
did not pronounce him blessed, because his faith, after having seen and felt
the Lord, was necessary, and he could (...) but believe. "Because thou have
seen, the have believed: But blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have
believed." Thus (...) see how reasonable and necessary it is, the the christian
life on earth should be a life ^ faith, and not of the irresistible evidence o^
sense; that whilst we are absent in the body we should only believe and expect,
that w^ may wait the time with earnest expectation and desire when we shall
come to be present with the Lord, and may see and enjoy (...) blissful
presence. I am,

III. To show that the evidence of faith (...) sufficient evidence; or that the
grounds of our faith are not weakened by such a representation as has been
given.

We have sufficient assurance of the truths of religion, though the objects of
it are not visible to sense. When we look on the beauteous frame of nature, and
see how far it exceeds in dignity and greatness, harmony and majesty, the most
excellent works of human skill; when we see all things not only created, but
governed and conducted in the greatest wisdom; when we open the bible and see a
more exact description of the Deity there; when we meditate on the contrivance
and accomplishment of the glorious plan of redemption, which could possibly be
the work of none but God; when we behold and consider these things, I say, we
are, I about not, as fully satisfied of the existence of a Deity, as if he made
himself visible to our bodily eyes: That none but David's fool, who wilfully
shuts his eyes, can even say in his heart, there is no God. The many things
revealed to us in the word of God, and the truth of revelation itself, though
they are matters of faith, yet we may be fully and beyond all doubt convinced
of the truth of them. For if we have all the demonstration of the truth of any
thing to be proved by moral evidence, which the case and circumstances of the
thing will admit of, and all the evidence and assurance we could have received,
supposing the thing was true, we have no more reason to doubt it, than to
dispute the existence of any sensible object, when we see it with our eyes.
This is the case with matters of divine revelation. We believe them because we
have all the evidence of them that they are capable of. We receive them on no
less evidence than the testimony of God himself that cannot lie: Who to
convince us has foretold many things that we have seen are since fulfilled; who
has wrought many miracles to confirm our faith, accounts of which have been
delivered down to us by the incontested and concurring report of credible
witnesses, even the inspired writers* ^ who have not only confirmed their
testimony ^ with miracles of their own, but have seal^ it with their blood.
Christ Jesus has been declared to be the son of God with power, ^ by his
resurrection from the dead. All these confirmations have been given that our
faith of divine things may be rational, and fixed (...) solid grounds. And all
such as have experienced the power of Christ's resurrection, and of the gospel
truths on their souls, as have been raised thereby from the death of sin to
newness of life, have still more abundant proofs of the truth of religion. Thus
we see that though christians walk by faith and not by sight, yet they are not
without sufficient certainty, but have light and evidence enough to dispel all
doubt, and by the concurrence of divine grace, to work in them what the apostle
calls a full assurance of faith. I proceed to say,

IV. and lastly. It is the duty and interest of all christians to walk by faith
and not by sight, or to direct their course by the things which they believe,
and not by things of sense. They are chiefly to regard and look not at the
things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the things
which are seen are temporal. It is their duty not only to believe these things
and rely upon them as true, but also to think and act agreeable to such a
belief. That is they are always to bear on their minds, a sense of the reality
and infinite importance of those things, how nearly themselves are concerned in
them, and how certainly their future state will be determined by their present
belief of them and care about them. They ought seriously and frequently to
meditate on the being and perfections of God, his universal presence and
providence; to read and study his word of truth, and to resign themselves to
his disposal, with faith unfeigned: They are daily to walk more humbly and
closely with God, and to pray him through Jesus Christ to increase and
strengthen their faith, and to make it more and more influential and operative
in their lives. It is the duty of all that profess themselves christians, to
neglect the things of sight and sense, in comparison of future and invisible
things; to rise above the world, and the vanities of it; to free their souls
from an undue attachment to the vain and fleeting joys of time and sense, and
to set their affections on things of a heavenly nature, the service and glory
of God, the unseen pleasures of immortality, and joys beyond the grave. Thus
should they demonstrate by the whole tenor of their conversation, that they
prefer heaven to earth, the pleasures of holiness and religion, to the
transient enjoyments of this world. This is to walk by faith and not by sight:
And this is the character of every true christian. Every true believ^ therefore
needs no other proof but the testimony of his own heart and life, to evidence
the truth of what the apostle asserts in the name of true christians, We walk
by faith not by sight. And as it is our duty thus to walk, so it also our
interest and happiness^ Many are the advantages that will accrue ^ us herefrom.
Hereby we shall be convince^ of the vanity of this world and things of sight
that they subserve not our main interest, no^ suffice to our solid and lasting
felicity. Hereby we shall be fortified against the evils and afflictions that
attend us here. Whilst by an eye of faith we behold, and rely on, thi^ not
seen, we shall look upon this world as a place of short sojourn, and all the
trials and troubles we meet with in it, but as gales to waft us onward toward
our heavenly state or as remidies to purify and prepare us for it. We shall
know that the greatest afflictions and sorrows we can possibly be called to
encounter here on earth, "are not worthy to be compared with the glory that
shall hereafter be revealed in us. Moreover, if our life has been a walk of
faith and not of sight, we shall hereby be armed against the fear of death. If
we have attained to a full assurance of faith and hope, we shall know with the
apostle, "that when the earthly house of this tabernacle shall be dissolved, we
have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens."
"Therefore," says the apostle in the verses preceding and following the text,
"we are always confident, knowing that whilst we are at home in the body, we
are absent from the Lord: (For we walk by faith, not by sight) we are
confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be
present with the Lord. Wherefore we labor, that whether we are present or
absent, we may be accepted of him." True faith purifies the heart, Acts 15.9.
and so qualifies the subject of it to enjoy pure and spiritual happiness at
God's right hand: A happiness refined from all al^ys of sin and sense, and
conferred as the reward only of believers, who through faith and patience
inherit the promises. If therefore we strengthen in us, and conduct ourselves
by, this great principle of the christian life; if we bring the distant scenes
of futurity near to us by holy contemplation, fix on our thoughts the certainty
and importance of them, and make them as if they were actually present before
our eyes; if we walk and live by faith, as the men of this world do by sense,
and are as serious and earnest in the pursuit of the things of it, as they are
of their sensual gratifications and enjoyments, we shall doubtless at last
through the grace of God, "receive the end of our faith, even the salvation of
our souls."

Thus we see that it is both the duty and happiness of christians to walk by
faith, and not by fight; to look at things not seen, and not at things seen, to
set their affections on things above, and not on things on the earth, and so to
conduct themselves by that faith by which the just shall live, by an unshaken
belief in God, in Christ, and the things of another world, that their faith may
not be vain, and their hope also vain; but that they may believe to the saving
of their souls.

Having thus shown that the christian life on earth is necessarily a life of
faith and not of vision, that this is the wise appointment of God, who hereby
gives all due encouragement to faith and holiness, and has afforded us
sufficient grounds for a confident persuasion, and that we ought accordingly to
make our faith in God, and his word and promises, the chief directory of our
christian walk. I shall proceed to make application of the whole, and so
conclude.

APPLICATION.
From what has been said we see the reason why sensual and worldly men are so
blind and averse to the future concerns of their souls. It is because these
things are matters of faith, and not objects of sight; and their minds are so
sensualized, as not to relish any thing of a spiritual nature, nor pursue any
thing that does not affect their senses. The world and the things of it have
engrossed the whole of their affections and thoughts; and whilst these possess
the sovereignty of the soul, they exclude from it all desires and
contemplations of a serious and heavenly nature. Therefore, says the apostle,
"Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world; for if any man
love the world, the love of the father is not in him." The carnal man walks
only by sight, and knows not how to direct his course by faith of things not
seen. The concerns of a future state appear at a great distance, to him that is
used to contemplate only on present things; at so great a distance that he
believes them not, or which amounts to the same thing, regards them not. Thus
"the carnal mind" (or, as the apostle expresses it in another place, "the
friendship of the world) is enmity with God." We ought therefore to "take
diligent heed lest there be in any of us an evil heart of unbelief, in
departing from the living God." Though we see not now either the glories or the
horrors of the invisible world; yet since God that cannot lie, has promised the
o^ and threatened the other, and since we know that he is not slack concerning
his promises, w^ are no less certain of them, and ought no less to by
influenced by them, than if we sa^ them. "Ye therefore beloved, seeing y^ know
these things, beware lest ye be led away with the error of the wicked," and
slight the joys above.

Hence also we see the unreasonableness of all such as disbelieve the things of
God and another world, because they have not seen them. For it is impossible in
the nature of the thing that they should see these things whilst they dwell in
bodies of flesh. Spirit and spiritual things being of too subtle and refined a
nature to be discerned by our gross corporeal organs. Besides if they could be
made to see them, still it would be to no end. God having already done enough
to convince the reason of every intelligent man who attends to the thing
without prejudice. For if a man obstinately stands out against all the
arguments and means of conviction which God has given, if he refuses to hear
Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his apostles; if he will not hearken to the
dictates of his own mind, nor the suggestions of the holy Spirit; we have the
reason of the thing, as well as the word of God to assure us, that he would not
truly and steadfastly believe, though one of the blessed inhabitants of Heaven
should be deputed to declare to him in the language of glory, the being and
will of God; or the one should arise from the dead, arrayed in all the ghastly
terrors of the pit, should proclaim the dreadful condemnation of obstinate
unbelievers. He would doubtless be ^artled and convinced for the time; but
while the same prejudices and lusts were suffered to predominate, which hindered
his belief before, he would not sincerely and savingly believe, so as to direct
his walk by faith and not by sight.

We see likewise the wisdom and goodness of God, who has given sufficient
evidence of religious truths, for the satisfaction of every one who is not
prepossest, and bias'd by his passions and lusts; and has moreover promised to
assist and conduct such in their search after truth. God has not thought ^it so
far to humor the infidelity of men as to give them a sight of future things,
since this would have no good effect to procure a saving faith, or to draw men
to obedience by the generous motives of love and gratitude, but only to produce
a constrained compliance, which would be of no value ^ the sight of God, who
requires a voluntary and reasonable service. "I love them, f^ he, that love me,
and those that seek (...) early shall find me"

Moreover, we learn from what has be^ discoursed on this subject, that faith is
^ militant virtue, which has no place in heaven^ On earth christians walk by
faith, and not by sight: But in heaven their faith shall ^ swallowed up in
perfect vision. Here o^ earth we know but in part; but when the which is
perfect is come, then that which i^ in part shall be done away. We now s^
through a glass darkly, but then face to face^ We now see God only with an eye
of faith, but when we shall be admitted to the blessed sight and enjoyment of
him in heaven, we shall see him as he is, and know him even as we are known, by
immediate intuition, if we have faith here on earth, and direct our course by
it, and not by things seen, we may be confident that e're long we shall have
sight; that we shall be admitted to see and enjoy those glories, which in this
life we only believe and hope for.

Again, we learn the necessity of our exercising faith in things not seen. This
is the very foundation of all religion. "Without faith it is impossible to
please God: For he ^at comes to God must believe that he is, ^d that he is a
rewarder of them that dili^tly seek him." Unless we thus believe ^e existence
of God, and the future rewards ^f them that seek him, we can do nothing at
(...) in religion. For how can we strive to ^se God, when we suppose there is
none? (...) how can we act with a view to secure our ^ture happiness, unless we
are first convinced (...) there is a happiness prepared by God in ^e future
world? But there is no need, I ^esume, to exhort you to believe these ^ings, as
I am not speaking to infidels; but ^re is more necessity that I advise you to
^e to it that your faith be rational and well grounded. And in order to this,
we must be very serious and thoughtful in the things of another world; that we
always keep them in our view, and never lose sight of them by the pursuit of
sensitive and worldly things. It is requisite that we remove from our minds all
vicious prejudices, and wishes to the contrary; and especially that we examine
the motives of credibility, and the reasons and arguments on which the truths
of christianity are established; otherwise our belief of them, will be the mere
result of fancy or education, and not a rational and firm assent. We ought not
to take up our faith at a venture, and believe without knowing why; but we
ought so far as we have opportunity and ability therefore, impartially to
examine i^ the grounds and evidences of our religion that we may be fully
satisfied ourselves, a^ "may be ready always to give an answer t^ every man
that asks us a reason of the hop^ that is in us, with meekness and fear," as
the apostle commands. Faith, that precious gi^ of God, is not conferred on such
as shun the light, and reject or neglect the evidences and confirmations of
religious truths, but on humble and modest searchers after truth, o^ such as
with pious meekness, and with a mind^ free from prejudice search into the
grounds and evidences on which a belief of christian truths is founded. Whoever
applies his unbias'd mind to such an enquiry, will find abundant evidence for
his own conviction. And unless our faith is thus settled on the firm basis of
reason and evidence, it will doubtless be weak and waving at the best. For if
we believe only upon trust from others, though we may have the good fortune to
believe what is true, yet as we believe it not because it is true, our faith
will not be fixed on a foundation firm enough to brave the assaults of
temptation, and the strong persuasions of sense and the world. We shall be
influenced by the important concerns of another world in proportion to our
conviction of the reality of them. Whilst therefore our belief of them is
uncertain, the enticements of the world and pleasures of sense, will have an
easy conquest over us; and we shall be tempted to prefer a small certain good,
to an uncertain one though much greater. And this is doubtless the cause of most
or all that sensuality and worldly-mindedness which is so prevalent in the
world. For none surely but a mad man would deliberately com^it any action, when
he was indubitably convinced that he plunged himself into an inevitable and
eternal hell which he saw before his ^es; but if they are not thereby
convinced, they will be led away by the deceitfulness of sin. This is the
tendency and consequence of a belief not well founded, or rather of unbelief.

But if our faith be established on such dear and undeniable evidence, as shall
give full satisfaction to our minds, it will render invisible objects as real
and evident, as sense does visible ones. And being armed with this impenetrable
shield of faith, we shall by God's grace be able to quench all the fiery darts
of the wicked one, to bear up against the storms of temptation, and allurements
of the world without, and the tide of corrupt nature within, and so to fight
the good fight of faith, and lay hold on eternal life. "For this is the victory
that overcomes the world, even our faith." We see then how necessary it is,
that o^ faith in the invisible things of God, and the important truths of the
christian religion, be firm and established, and that we daily increase it more
and more, 'till it is changed into perfect assurance and vision. To this end it
is necessary that we add to our own endeavors, hearty and earnest prayers to
almighty God, that he would lend us the gracious aids of his Spirit, to subdue
our losts, those powerful adversaries to a true and lively faith, to accompany
us in our researches, and enlighten our minds in the knowledge of Christ, to
free us from the corrupt sway of prejudice, and open our hearts to receive and
embrace the truth as it is in Jesus. Thus shall we attain to a full assurance
of faith, and confident hopes of immortality and blessedness, which we ought
always to strive to acquire and maintain. But it is necessary not only that our
understandings assent to religious truths, but that they also descend into our
hearts, and regulate our lives. We ought therefore under the influence of God's
grace, to maintain a constant vigilance and strict caution, not only that we
continue in the faith of the gospel, but that our lives and conversations, and
all our actions be consentaneous thereto.

Under a steady confidence in the word and promises of God, it becomes us to
show ^th our faith by our practice, and to walk in all holy conversation and
godliness as in^enced by the faith and consideration of the world to come.
"For, beloved, seeing ^e look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found
of him in peace, without spot, ^d blameless." Lastly, let us with joy and
resignation continue our walk of faith, and patiently wait that happy time,
when our faith shall cease and be swallowed up in vision. We know that we shall
e're long he brought to death and the grave, and that a short life of true
faith will terminate in an endless life of glory. Let us strive therefore to
glorify God in our lives, and wait all the days of our appointed time, till our
happy change comes.

I shall conclude with the words of a pious and eminent divine, DODDRIDGE's
Fam. Expos.
who by his learned expositions and other doctrinal and practical works, has
greatly served the cause of religion and christianity in the world. "Let us
contemplate the feeble structure of this earthly tabernacle, which gives so
many tokens of it is near and approaching dissolution; this tabernacle in which
we groan under such a variety of burdens; and let us comfort ourselves with
the prospect of a speedy deliverance; that so while the outward man perishes,
the inward man may be renewed day by day. What though we have death before us in
a certain prospect, and know we must soon be absent from the body? If we are
true christians we have the most express assurance, not only that the time will
come when we shall inhabit a building of God, an house not made with hands
eternal in the heavens; but that we shall immediately be present with the Lord,
with that blessed Redeemer whom not having seen we love. How much more shall we
love him, how much more shall we rejoice in him, when we are blessed with his
presence, and behold his glory."

SERMON IV. The Duty of every Christian.
JOHN XIII. 17. If ye know these Things, happy are ye if ye do them.


THE christian religion is partly speculative, and partly practical. In the
gospel which contains this religion, are conveyed the clearest instructions,
and most important doctrines, which serve not only to gratify the inquisitive
mind, but to edify the christian, and direct the immortal soul. Herein we are
instructed, much more plainly than natural reason could inform us, concerning
the being and nature of the Deity, his perfections and designs, his providence
and government over us, and all things. In the word of God are discovered to us
our primitive, our present, and our future state. Here we learn, that man was
created in the ima^ of God, perfect and upright, but that h^ soon broke the
divine command which wa^ the test of his obedience, and the conformity to
which, was the condition of his remaining in his happy paradisi^cal state: That
by this breach of the divine law, he lost the divine image, forfeited God's
favor, and exposed himself to his eternal displeasure. But instead of our
being doomed to suffer irretrievably that eternal death which is annexed to the
breach of God's law, the gospel brings us glad tidings of great joy. By this we
are informed that God of his infinite mercy, and unconstrained goodness, has
deigned to send his own son, from the glorious mansions of bliss, where he
shone coeternal with the father, to this our polluted world, to ransom us from
sin and destruction, to bear the punishment of our sins, and thereby render
man's salvation consistent with God's unerring justice. In the gospel
revelation, the plan of grace, the method of executing it, the benefits
resulting therefrom, and the terms on which we are to receive them are laid
before us, and proposed to our study and acquaintance. Here it is that we are
to learn our duty. Here are laid down the most excellent rules and most
important precepts for the direction of our conduct. And it is our incumbent
and indispensable duty to study these rules, and by a diligent inquiry, to
inform ourselves in whatever our great Creator, Lawgiver and Redeemer, requires
of us. But we are not to rest here. We are not only to search out what our duty
is, but must seriously and diligently set about the practice of it. Knowledge
is absolutely requisite in order to practice, but in vain and useless without
it. Useless did I say? Nay, it is an aggravation of our guilt; for "he that
knows his master's will, and yet does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes." One design of our Savior's appearing on earth, was to instruct men
in the doctrines and duties of religion; for without such instruction they
could not partake of the benefits of his redemption. This instruction he gave
both by example and precept. But he often inculcates it upon us, that we rest
not in the bare speculative knowledge of our duty, but that we be careful to
reduce it to practice. "Learn of me," says he, and not only so, but "if ye love
me keep my commandments."

And here, in the text, he promises the reward of happiness to those that not
only know, but do what is commanded them. "If ye know these things, etc." In
this our Savior takes occasion from a particular instance, to settle a general
maxim, viz that religion consists mainly in practice, to which, nevertheless,
knowledge is a pre-requisite. In the preceding verses we are told, that Christ
though Lord of glory, condescended to the low and servile office of washing his
disciples feet, thereby to testify his love to his disciples, to give them an
example of humility and serviceableness, and to figure to them that spiritual
washing which was necessary in order to their being cleansed from the filth,
and pollution of sin, and being made partakers of his holiness. This service
being performed, Christ inquires of them whether they knew the meaning of what
he had done. On which he takes occasion to explain it to them, and to exhort
them to the like deeds of charity and condescension, one toward another.
Whence he establishes this general conclusion, "if ye know these things," this
duty of humility and the other christian graces and virtues which I have taught
you, "happy are are ye if ye do them." -- Though these words primarily refer to
this particular duty, of condescending to low and mean services, for the ben
fit of our brethren, yet as they may well be extended to the whole of religion,
I shall consider them in this enlarged view. In which sense these three
propositions are either expressed or implied in them, viz.

I. The knowledge of God's will, and our duty, is absolutely necessary in order
to our performing it.

II. The knowledge of christianity is vain and insignificant, if not attended
with practice. And,

III. The practice of religion, or doing what we know to be our duty, is the
way, and the only way to happiness. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye
do them.

1. The knowledge of God's will, and our duty, is absolutely necessary in order
to our performing it.

This is implied in the text, "if ye know these things," which supposes that we
must know them, before we can do them. Pemberton.
"All true religion begins with the understanding, from thence descends into
the heart, and regulates our life and conversation." Unless we first learn what
things are to be done by us, and what not, we cannot know when we do them, nor
when we neglect them. We may sometimes perhaps, through accident, do those
things which God requires of us, but then, since we do them not from a
conviction, that such things are our duty, since we do not perform them from
love to God, and from a design to glorify him, we do not do our duty, even
whilst we perform those very acts, which are required of us by God as duties.
So that there must be knowledge prior to practice, in order to our performing
any religious acts aright. Accordingly the apostle exhorts christians to search
the scriptures, to let the word of God dwell in them richly, and to grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of their Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Would we be
sincerely religious, and true disciples of Christ, we must acquaint ourselves
with all the duties that are to be practiced by us. We must study the
scriptures with diligence and care, and use all necessary means, to find out
the true meaning of them. We must hear them explained from the pulpit, and
diligently improve all the means of knowledge, which God has been graciously
pleased to grant us. We must add to these, our own strictest inquiry and
meditation, and pray for the divine assistance with us in our researches. But
not only are the duties themselves to be sought out, but we must also consider
and know the obligations we are under to perform these duties. We must consider
God as our righteous sovereign and lawgiver; must consider ourselves as his
dependent creatures, indebted to him for life, preservation, and redemption. We
are obliged to render obedience to him, not only because he is supremely ex^ted
above us, and so in himself infinitely worthy of our obedience; but we are also
obliged to it, from principles of gratitude, because he has been pleased
through Christ to accept of, and reward our sincere services when performed
aright. By thus acquainting ourselves with the obligations we are under, to do
the will of God, we shall have ^resh inducements to practice it.

We must likewise, previously to our performing the duties of christianity,
acquaint ourselves with the manner in which they are to be done. The
principles, the ends and designs from which we ought to act in religion, must
be duly settled in our minds. Love to God, and a desire to please him, must be
the chief springs of our conduct; and the divine glory the end at which we are
to aim. But whilst I mention these as the principles from which we ought to
act, I do not mean to set aside all views to our own happiness, in religion.
That is made by God himself, a motive of our conduct. And whilst we serve God
from the principles already mentioned, we unavoidably pursue our grand and
truest interest. That christian knowledge which we are required to obtain,
likewise includes the knowledge of our own weakness, and natural inability of
ourselves, to perform the duties of christianity aright. We must settle it in
our minds, that it is by the concurrent operations of the divine spirit that we
are assisted to perform the divine will in an acceptable manner. It is very
necessary for us to know, that whatever (...) do, merits nothing of God; that
it is by his grace we are enabled to do our duty; and that it is through the
merits of Christ, and not for our own worthiness, that our deeds are accepted
of him: This is that knowledge that is necessary to the christian; this is that
instruction in righteousness, in which he is required to make continual
advances, that he may be perfect and thoroughly furnished unto every good work.
Not that every true christian is firmly established in every point of duty:
There are some actions of lesser importance in religion, concerning which he is
sometimes in doubt, whether they be required by God or not. But all true
christians will be desirous to be instructed i^ the duties of religion, and
zealous to get what light they can, concerning the necessity, lawfulness, or
sinfulness of any action. They will be careful to search into the methods of
rendering themselves and their conduct acceptable to God, and their obligations
to it. They will be convinced of the necessity of the divine assistance, and
the imputation of Christ's merits in order hereunto. Nor will they rest
satisfied with the bare knowledge of these things, but they will en^ge their
whole hearts and strength in the practice of those things, which they find upon
the most careful enquiry, to be their duty. For they consider,

II. That the bare knowledge of christianity is vain, and insignificant, if not
attended with a suitable practice. The doing the will of God is so essential to
the true knowledge of it, that the scriptures will hardly allow it to be called
knowledge, unless it have an influence on our lives. For says the apostle,
"Hereby we know that we do know him, if we keep his commandments. He that says
I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not
in him." 1 John 2.3, 4. The Psalmist also makes the practice of duty a proof of
our understanding it aright. "A good understanding have all they that do his
commandments." Psalm 111.10. Notwithstanding the intimate and indissoluble
connection there ought to be between the knowledge and practice of religion,
yet we often see them unnaturally se^ated. -- Some study religion only as a
science, that they may appear learned, and know how to converse upon divine
subjects. They will often take upon them to determine with a dogmatical air the
most abstruse doctrines in religion, and condemn those who they pretend are
ignorant or erroneous in them; whilst they neglect the precepts of religion,
and feel nothing of their influence.

Others there are that take up religion merely for fashion's sake. These will
sometimes read the scriptures, that they may be able to quote them on common
occasions (...) they attend on the public worship, because it is the custom;
and thus they learn something of the history of the bible, (and the doctrines
of christianity) without endeavoring to conform their lives to it. There are
others again who make use of religion for worldly designs, to acquire the
credit of men, to get an estate, etc. These are obliged to understand something
of religion, that they may know how to keep up the appearance of it: But they
comply with the injunctions of it no farther than is necessary to answer their
selfish designs. All these have a form of godliness, but deny the power of it;
they know these things, but do them not. But the bare knowing of these things,
will not be any advantage to them. For their knowledge will not recommend them
to the favor of God. They come under the character of those whom our Savior
speaks of, "who call him, Lord, Lord, but do not ^e things which he says." Let
us hear the curse that will be denounced against such. Matt. 7.22. "Not every
one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but
he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. Many will say unto me in
that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in ^y name cast
out devils, and done many ^ndrous works? And then will I profess unto them, I
never knew you, depart from ^e ye workers of iniquity." Though they knew Christ
in their head, yet as they knew him not in their heart, Christ never knew them.
There is not a place in the bible where the favor of God, or the gift of God,
which is eternal life, are promised upon a mere speculative knowledge of him.
And as this knowledge cannot procure the divine favor, nor future happiness, so
neither can it procure true peace and satisfaction of mind in this life. That
consciousness of the divine favor here, and assurance of his approbation
hereafter, which fills those that are truly godly with joy and comfort, are
unknown to the win pretender to religion. He is a stranger to the pleasures of
a virtuous course, and that comforting self-approbation which attends the mere
exercise of acts of piety and benevolence. The knowledge of God which he has
will not qualify him for the enjoyment of him in the next life. For though we
must acquaint ourselves with God here, in order to be happy with him eternally,
yet this acquaintance must be not only in the understanding, but also in the
heart and life. For "without holiness no man shall see the Lord." Nay so far
will the bare knowledge of God's requirements be from benefiting us, that it
will make us the more aggravatedly guilty, and consequently more deplorably
miserable. He that conforms not to an unknown law, has some excuse for his
neglect; but if we sin against the light we have no cloak for our sin. "To him
that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin." James 4.17. God
will forgive such transgressions of his law as proceed from unavoidable
ignorance; but will severely punish all wilful violations of a known duty. For,
says our Savior, "that servant that knew his Lord's will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes:
For "unto whomsoever much is given, of him much shall be required." The
misimprovement of the knowledge we have been favored with, will of itself
necessarily aggravate our future torment. For nothing will more sensibly
torment and ^ing us in the other world, than this cutting reflection, that we
wilfully rendered ourselves miserable, when we know better, and had the means of
happiness in our power. "For if we sin wilfully, says the apostle, after
having received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice
for sin; but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation,
which shall devour the adversaries." So far then is the bare speculative
knowledge of religion from being an advantage to us, that it will deprive us of
solid comfort and happiness here, and increase our condemnation in the coming
world. But,

III. The practice of religion, or doing what we know to be our duty, is the
way, and the only way to happiness. If ye know these things, etc. The text
don't say, if ye know these things, happy are ye; but happy are ye if ye know
and do them. Such as diligently improve all the opportunities, that God has put
into their hands of gaining the knowledge of him and their duty. Such as in
good earnest set about the discovery of their duty, with prayers to God for his
assistance, and resolution by divine grace to act agreeable to what they shall
find to be their duty: Such as in all respects, and at all times, endeavor to
conform their temper and behavior to what by the most diligent study, appears
to them to be the will of God; and that with pleasure and delight; with a view
to please and glorify God, as well as to obey him, and with a special reference
to Jesus Christ: Such will be happy, happy in the blessing and favor of God
here on earth -- happy in their own minds, and the approving testimony of their
own consciences -- and happy in the complete enjoyment of God throughout
eternity. Both the divine promise and the nature of things, entitles them to
happiness in each of these respects.

1. They are happy in the favor and blessing of God here on earth. This the
apostle James declares, "Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only,
deceiving yourselves. For whosoever looks into the perfect law of liberty,
and continues therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the
work, this man shall be blessed in his deed." Such shall be blessed with the
enjoyment of worldly good things, so far as God sees to be most for his glory,
and best for them. "The Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will
he withhold from them." A confluence of earthly enjoyments oftentimes proves a
snare to men; wherefore God often sees it best that his faithful servants
should not possess them. But even if they are destitute of these, and
overwhelmed in afflictions, still God is merciful to them, extends his grace
and favor toward them, sanctifies his afflictive dispensations to them, and
so makes all things work together for their good. Those that sincerely
endeavor, to conform their minds and actions to the will of God, enjoy his
favor and smiles here on earth; whereas they that know their duty, and are not
careful to do it, are objects of his wrath and displeasure. "For not the
hearers of the law are just before God, but the doers of the law shall be
justified." Romans 2.13. Thus the sincere christian who uses all possible means
to know his duty, and applies his whole strength to do it, is blessed and
approved of God on earth, and is conscious of pleasing him. And on this account
chiefly it is, that

2. He is happy in the peace of his own mind, and the approbation of his
conscience. There is nothing that affords a more pleasing satisfaction to the
mind of man than a consciousness of having done his duty. The ^se of this will
support him under all the ^osses and insults which the doing of his duty will
expose him to, from the difficulty of the undertaking, or the malice of
enemies. Though difficulties apparently insurmountable oppose themselves in his
way, though he incur the hatred, and draw upon him the slander and ridicule of
men, yet the consideration that he is engaged in what is his duty, and
consequently pleasing to God, will afford him comfort and satisfaction of mind,
and carry him through all attending difficulties in an inconceivable manner.
Whereas on the contrary, nothing so troubles and disquiets a man's mind, as the
consciousness that what he is doing is displeasing to God, and so a violation
of his duty to him. Our actions considered only in themselves, and in relation
to this life, necessarily afford either satisfaction or dissatisfaction,
according as they are conformable to the will of God or not. But more
especially do they so, if we take into consideration those future rewards and
punishments, which are the certain consequents of them. These hopes of the
divine approbation and reward hereafter, which men enjoy upon doing their duty;
and that dread of future vengeance which attends the neglect and violation of
it, greatly increase the serenity and joy of the active servants of Christ, and
the grief and uneasiness of the vain professors of his gospel. To be happy in
one's own mind, is the greatest happiness that can be enjoyed on this side
heaven; and the way which our Savior points out to us in the text, is the only
way to secure this, viz. to learn and do our duty. But, moreover,

3. Such as not only know, but do the will of God, will be happy in the eternal
enjoyment of him. We are told by the inspired Psalmist, Psalm. 103.18. "The
mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him;
to such as keep his covenant, and to those that remember his commandments to do
them." Not to such as barely remember his commandments, but to such as remember
them to do them. This is the account which the bible gives us of the matter,
from one end of it to the other. "If thou do well, shall thou not be
accepted?" says God to Cain. And in the last chapter of the revelations Christ
says, "Behold I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to give to every man
according as his work shall be. -- Blessed are they that do his commandments,
that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the
gates into the city." If a man attend to the doctrine of Christ, and gain the
knowledge of it, without governing his life by it, his hopes of heaven are vain
and groundless, built as it were upon the sand. The difference of the hopes of
him that performs his duty, and of him that negligently hears it, is thus
admirably expressed by our Savior: "Whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and
does them, I will liken to a wise man that built his house upon a rock; and the
rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that
house, and it fell not, for it was founded on a rock: And every one that hears
these sayings of mine and does them not, shall be likened to a foolish man,
that built his house upon the sand; and the rain descended, etc. and it fell,
and great was the fall of it." The hopes of him who has a practical knowledge
of christianity, shall brave the utmost efforts of malice, shall firmly stand
the storms of affliction, and floods of persecution: While the hopes of him
whose knowledge is theoretical or speculative only, shall fail and sink under
the least trial. Though it is not on account of what we do that eternal life is
conferred on us (for it is the meritorious obedience and sufferings of Christ
that have opened heaven to us) yet without our performing the duties of
christianity, or unless we exercise that faith and repentance, and show forth
that sincere obedience, which the gospel requires, we cannot be saved. For
knowledge alone will not fit us for heaven. It is a conformity to God in heart
and actions, that renders us like him, and so capable of enjoying him. Dr.
TILLOTSON.
"If a man had the understanding of an angel, says a great divine, he might for
all that be a devil, for he that commits sin is of the devil, and whatever
knowledge such a man may have, he is of a devilish temper and disposition. But
every one that does righteousness is born of God. By this we are like God, and
only by our likeness to him, do we become capable of the sight and enjoyment of
him; therefore every man that hopes to be happy, by the blessed sight of God in
the next life, must endeavor after holiness in this. So says the apostle,
every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself even as he is pure."
Thus we see that the practice of religion is the way, and the only way to
happiness in this, and the future life; which is what I was last to show. I
shall now make a short improvement of the whole, and so conclude. And,

1. Since knowledge is so necessary in religion, how thankful should we be to
God that he has granted us the means of knowledge? The holy scriptures are
profitable for doctrine, and for instruction in righteousness; and these God
has graciously given into our hands, translated into our own language, and made
intelligible to us by the expositions of persons skilled in the original
tongues. So that we need not make that inquiry, "Who shall ascend into heaven?
i. e. to bring Christ down from above. Or who shall descend into the depths? i
e. to bring up Christ again from the dead. For behold, the word is nigh thee,
even in thy mouth, and in thy heart." How thankful should we be, that we are
allowed the free use of those sacred writings, wherein are contained the
doctrines and precepts of salvation? That they are not prohibited the lowest of
the people, nor locked up from them in an unknown tongue, as in some popish
countries, but that we have been taught from our infancy to read, and to study
them, and to hear the explanations of them. How thankful ought we to be for
sabbath opportunities? For the provision God has made in his church of a
standing ministry, whereby the truths of the gospel are proposed, and his
precepts inculcated on our minds; wherein by his ambassadors, Christ himself
beseeches us to be reconciled to God, and calls upon us to repent, turn, and
live. What praises and thanksgivings should we render to God, for the spirit of
grace, whereby if we sincerely a^m at doing our duty, our minds will be
enlightened in the knowledge of Christ, and we led into all truth. For, says
Christ, "if any man be desirous to do his will, he shall know of the doctrine
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." Whereas "if the gospel be
hid from any, it is hid to them that are lost; in whom the god of this world
has b^inded the minds of them that believe not, lest the light of the glorious
gospel of Christ, should shine unto them." So that if any man searches the
scriptures with an honest heart, and with sincere desires to learn and do the
will of God, God will graciously assist him, and by the illuminations of his
spirit, lead him into the knowledge of all necessary truth. "The meek will he
guide in judgment; and the meek will he teach his way." The goodness of God in
this respect calls for our sincere and unfeigned thanks.

2. How inexcuseable shall we be if we do not improve those means of knowledge,
in study and in practice? The heathen, who were never favored with the light
of revelation as we are, will by a plea of ignorance, receive at least a
mitigation of their punishment. But we cannot exculpate ourselves by pleading
ignorance at the ba^ of God. For since God has put us into a capacity of
learning our duty; though we should neglect the means of knowledge, and remain
as ignorant of the divine will as the heathen world, yet our ignorance would
not serve for our excuse, at the great day. For God offers instruction to us if
we will receive it, but we wilfully oppose it. And the breach of duties of
which we are wilfully ignorant, is equally as blameworthy as the breach of,
duties which we knew to be commanded by God. Wherefore when I say that the
knowledge of duties unperformed, will aggravate our punishment, let none think
to alleviate his condemnation by obstinately persisting in ignorance of his
duty. For the obstinate neglect of learning his duty, will render him as guilty
in the sight of God, and consequently as miserable, as the not performing his
duty when known. Wherefore we see how destitute we are of all excuse, if we do
not make use of those means which God has graciously favored us with, and by
divine grace, learn and practice what is required of us. God has done his part
toward instructing us. He has granted us his word, and offers us his spirit,
to enlighten our understandings, and lead us in the way of truth. Whom then
have we to blame but ourselves, if we at last suffer the aggravated
condemnation of those who have chosen darkness rather than light, because their
deeds were evil? Since then we cannot be acquitted upon a plea of ignorance,
for our own nonconformity to the divine will; what excuse shall we offer?
Shall we plead our natural weakness and inability to perform the duties
required of us? Neither will this pretense stand us in stead. For though our
natural imbecility and impotence is great, yet God has promised us his spirit
to help our infirmities, if we sincerely ask it of him, and are desirous to
practice his will. If to our sincere endeavors we add our earnest prayers for
assistance, his strength will be sufficient for us; and through his
strengthening ^s we can do all things. "Does any man lack wisdom" to direct, or
strength to assist him in the way of his duty, "Let him ask it of God, who
gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him."
But, it follows, "let him ask in faith, nothing wavering." Our Savior declares
that God is more ready to grant his holy Spirit to those that thus ask, than
earthly parents are to give portions to their children. So that neither the
plea of ignorance nor inability will serve to excuse us at the bar of God, for
our neglecting the duties of religion. But if from principles of love to God
and faith in Christ, we sincerely and cheerfully endeavor, to perform whatever
we can find to be our duty, our obedience though mixed with many imperfecions,
will through the merits of Christ be accepted and rewarded. And this is the
only way wherein we can be acquitted, in the day of the revelation of the
righteous judgment of God, when he shall render to every man according to his
works, and according to the fruit of his doings.

Finally, since we here see the road to happiness marked out to us, let us all
be persuaded to pursue it. Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin that does
most easily beset us, and run with patience the race set before us. Let us be
zealous and resolute in discharging the duties of christianity, that we may
become the approved servants of Christ. Let no difficulties discourage us, no
dangers affright us from performing our duty; if we are the disciples of
Christ, we must imitate him as in other things, so in bearing the cross.
"Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself," etc. We must expect to
meet with many crosses, difficulties, and disappointments in our christian
warfare. But considering the end of our faith, the prize of victory, and him
under whose banner we serve, let us cloth ourselves with the whole armor of
God, and with undaunted fortitude fight the good fight of faith, looking unto
Jesus the captain of our salvation, who himself for the joy that was set before
him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is now set down at the right
hand of the throne of God. Thus we also, if we resolutely persevere in the way
of our duty, shall under the darkest clouds of affliction, enjoy the enli^ening
smiles of God, and the heavenly consolation of his spirit, shall possess our
souls in patience, and have our minds serene and ^ruffled by the storms of
adversity. Nothing external shall be able to discompose the internal quiet and
happiness of our souls, arising from a consciousness of having done, and still
doing our duty, and from the pleaing and well grounded hopes, of the divine
approbation in the world to come. Thus having walked worthy of our profession,
having been not only attentive hearers and diligent readers, but ready and
careful do^rs of God's word, when we draw toward the end of our christian
course, we shall each one be able in the, calm, but assured language of
preparation, to say with that holy apostle, and faithful servant of Christ, St.
Paul -- "I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand:
I have fought a good fight; I have finished my course: I have kept the faith:
Henceforth there is ^id up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous judge, shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but unto all
them also that love his appearing." The consideration that they have kept the
faith, and have conscientiously performed to their best abilities, all that
they could learn to be their duty, will smooth their dying pillow, will make
their (...) from life calm and easy, and their state joyful and happy. For
since they have served their Creator faithfully in life, they will then have
this joyful sentence pronounced from their approving judge, "Well done, good
and faithful servants, enter ye into the joy of your Lord." May God grant, that
we may all so learn and do his will here on earth, that we may stand in this
happy lot at that day, through Jesus Christ our worthy Redeemer; to whom with God
the Creator, and the holy Spirit the Sanctifier, be rendered praise,
thanksgiving and glory, now and forever. AMEN.

SERMON V. The Times of Heathenism were Times of Ignorance.
ACTS XVII. 36. And the Times of this Ignorance God winked at; but now
commands all Men every where to repent.


THESE words are part of St. Paul's famous sermon at Athens, when bro't to
answer for himself before the court of Areopagus. Athens was at this time famed
throughout the world for learning and arts, which flourished here in the
greatest perfection and luster, and which rendered this city the mistress of
Greece and of the world, and the resort of all learned men for several ages,
'till Rome rivalled her and eclipsed her glory. But however eminent the
Athenians were for human knowledge, the holy apostle found the city wholly
given to idolatry, which showed their gross ignorance in divine and heavenly
things. To reclaim them from their idols to the service of the living God, in
the design and tendency of this discourse of the apostle, which we find in the
text and context. From the 18th verse we learn that the apostle had been
disputing with some of their philosophers and wise men, particularly of the
epicurean and stoic sects. The former of whom, though they did not deny a God,
yet they made him an idle and useless being, for they held the world to be made
and governed by chance, that God took no cognizance of the affairs of men, and
that the pleasures of the world constituted the supreme happiness of man. Thus
their principles tended directly to the dishonor of God, and the uncontroled
indulgence of all manner of vice and immorality. The latter sect, the stoics,
allowed both the being and providence of God, but supposed him to be of a
corporeal substance, and that his hands were tied up by the rigid and
inflexible laws of fate: And their fancied wise men, who had wholly eradicated
their passions, they profanely extolled as equal to God himself. These men it
was that opposed Paul with their false notions and sophistic reasonings, and
carried him before the abovenamed ^ourt, there demanding his farther
explanation. This was probably done from an itching curiosity of hearing some
new notions or opinions; for it is said ver. 21. that "all the Athenians and
strangers which were there, spent their time in nothing else, but either to
tell or to hear some new things." These being a pagan and idolatrous people,
and consequently not knowing the holy scriptures, the apostle does not reason
with them from the scriptures as he did oftentimes with the Jews, but confutes
their absurd and idolatrous notions from their own principles, from the reason
and nature of things. But first to obviate a prejudice they had conceived
against him as a letter-forth of strange gods, he tells them that the God he
preached unto them they already ignorantly worshipped, as appeared by an altar
they had amongst them inscribed "to the unknown God." That his design therefore
was only to instruct them in his nature and perfections, and the way to render
their conduct acceptable to him. Those things he proves and elucidates from
God's making the world, and preserving all things in being, so that "in him we
live, move, and have our being." And he cites [a passage from Aratus] one of
their own poets, affirming that we are all the offspring of God. Since then God
is allowed to be the God of the spirits of all flesh, and since he gives to
all life and breath and all things, the apostle infers that he cannot be like
to gold or silver, or stone graven by the art of man, nor that he dwells in
temples made with hands, or that he was worshipped by their oblations as though
be needed any thing, or was fed by the fumes of their incense and sacrifices,
as they absurdly and fondly imagined. And lest they should plead the authority
of their own religion, and their desires of trusting their salvation on the
same footing that their fathers for so many ages had, the apostle tells them in
the text, that though God had hitherto connived at their ignorant systems of
devotion and ways of worship, yet that he had now revealed a new dispensation
of his grace, wherein he abolished all sacrifices but that of Christ, who had
now appeared in the end of the world to take away sin by one sacrifice of
himself; and wherein all men were invited to repent of all their former sins
and miscarriages, and accept the salvation offered by Jesus Christ. And the
times of this ignorance God winked at, etc. Because he has appointed a day,
etc. Thus we see how admirably this sermon was adapted to con^ince and persuade
these learned heathen, who were wise and understanding men, and had carried
natural and moral erudition to a very high pitch, and who consequently were
able to comprehend and relish these sublime reasonings, had they attended to
them without prejudice or prepossession. Accordingly, though many resisted the
evidence and spirit with which the apostle spoke, there were many likewise, as
we learn from the subsequent narration, that were convinced hereby, and
converted to the christian ^aith; one of which belonged to the council before
which St. Paul was summoned.

From those words which I have selected from this sermon of the apostle for my
text, there arise three propositions which demand (...) distinct consideration,
viz.

I. The times of heathenism were times of ignorance.

II. God winked at these times of ignorance, without bearing any public
testimony against the corruptions of them, until the ^ming of Christ. And,

III. The grand design of the gospel revelation is to call men to repentance.

1. The times of heathenism were times of great ignorance and error. Though the
polite arts and sciences flourished in great perfection among several of the
gentile nations, they were so deficient in divine knowledge, that there were
scarce any traces of the true religion to be found among them. Dr. MAYHEW,
Sermon second to young Men.
"In many countries, as Persia, Chalde^, Egypt, Greece and Italy, these arts
and sciences (as one expresses it) had been carried to a surprising degree of
perfection. The poet's numbers were harmonious, and his song sublime. The
musician almost enchanted wild beasts, and the woods which they haunted, as
well as savage men. The orator thundered and lightened, and at pleasure either
raised or allayed a storm in the breasts of his auditors. The noblest piles and
structures arose under the hands of the architect. The canvass was taught to
glow with life, borrowed from the painter's pencil; and brass and marble to
breath under the chizzel of the statuary: While the astronomer surveyed and
measured the heavens; even those heavens which declare the glory of God. But
notwithstanding all these improvements, these wonderful efforts of human genius
and industry, the world by wisdom knew not God. Even in those ages and those
places, where human literature was in ^'s highest perfection; if we look into
the doctrines and practices of the most enlightened men among them, we shall
find that divine and spiritual knowledge was at a very low ebb. "They were vain
in their imaginations, and their foolish hearts was darkened." The generality of
them formed very gross conceptions, and labored under very perni^ous mistakes
concerning God; which being the foundation of all religion, the whole
superstructure must likewise be very faulty and erroneous. How did they people
heaven and earth with a multitude of deities, and pay their senseless
adorations and offer sacrifices to gods of their own creation; though few of
them went so far as wholly to deny the existence of any God, (for to do this
they must first deny their reason and senses, since they could not open their
eyes without discovering the footsteps of the Deity in the works of his
creative and providential power. Their reason left to itself, however corrupt,
would still lead them to the knowledge of a God. Though therefore they could
not but own his existence) yet their gross and unworthy apprehensions of him
dishonor him as much or more than the total denial of him would have done: For
there was scarce any manner of vice or lewdness practiced on earth, but they
ascribed to their gods. No wonder therefore if they in imitation of their
deities, indulged themselves in all manner of vicious and immoral practices.
Not but that there were some exceptions. There were a few choice and enlightened
spirits even in these dark ages, who in a great measure broke through these mists
of ignorance, and entertained more just and worthy notions of the supreme
being. Thus Socrates, Plato, and some others, seem to have reasoned well on the
unity of the divine nature and moral duties. But even these, however just their
ideas and conceptions were, conformed in their practices to the corruptions of
the times. And as the opinions generally entertained of the Deity, were very
gross and inadequate, their knowledge of the way of rendering themselves and
their conduct acceptable to him, must be equally false and erroneous. They seem
to have trusted almost wholly in external rites, prayers, hymns, sacrifices,
etc. without those internal devotions of the soul and those spiritual
sacrifices which the blessed Jesus has taught us, and shown to be so worthy of
God, who being himself a Spirit, demands a spiritual service of his rational
creatures. They had only the dim light of nature to direct their conduct, and
point out the rules of duty to them: Which though it might lead them to the
knowledge of the chief moral duties, yet these did but feebly influence their
hearts and ^ves; because they had not that clear knowledge of them, nor those
encouragements ^d obligations to practice them, which we have under the gospel.
The mere beauty and amiableness of virtue in itself, and the rewards it carries
along with it, could not have that efficacy against the corrupt inclinations,
lusts and prejudices of men, as when accompanied with the assurance of the
divine presence here, and acceptance in the coming world. When therefore we
behold the great prevalence of iniquity, even under all the motives and
encouragements which the gospel affords to a holy life, we cannot wonder if the
heathen world, while distitute of these encouragements, was more generally
corrupted and sunk in the depths of vice, error and superstition. Moreover the
gentile world before it was enlightened by the gospel of Christ, was not only
vastly defective in the knowledge of God, and in the knowledge, and
consequently the practice of religion and holiness, but they know little of
themselves, their condition here, the design of their creation, and the cause
of that corruption so prevalent in the world. The most discerning of them seem
to have been sensible in general that there was something wrong in the nature
of man, that he could not come out of the hands of a merciful Creator, as we
now find him, prone to sin, subject to a thousand unhappy casualties, diseases.
and calamities; and after a short life of hur^y and d^q^tude, to be cut down
and ^n away by death. These things appeared paradoxes to them, they not knowing
that man was created innocent and happy, not subject to diseases nor death, had
not he by his own unhappy fall, brought death upon himself, attended with a
long and dismal train of evils, pains, and miseries.

In fine (for I must not enlarge here) The heathen were ignorant in regard to a
future state. Some of them (as Epicurus and his followers) wholly denied the
soul's immortality and future existence. But the greatest part of them had some
dark and confused notions of a future state of rewards and punishments, which
they might derive partly from tradition, and partly from a sense of the justice
and holiness of the Deity, and the unequal distribution of pleasure and pain in
this world. But what wild notions did they entertain of heaven and hell, of the
elysian fields and internal regions! When we read these fictions and fancies in
their poets, one would be ready to imagine that their design was rather to
ridicule and burlesque, than describe a future state. So ignorant were they of
that life and immortality which are now brought to light by the gospel. They
nevertheless, many of them, entertained strong hopes, not far short of
assurance, that there was a happiness prepared for good men after death.
[Witness Pythagoras, Plato, Socrates, Cicero, etc.] But as to the resurrection
of the body, they seem not to have had the least imagination or suspicion of
any such thing: But supposed that at it is dissolution by death it wholly ceased
for ever. They had no conjecture that these bodies of ours, which are now so
frail and brittle, though after death they be corrupted and dissolved; yet
shall ever long be called from their dusty bed, reanimated by the power of God,
and so refined and spiritualized as never again to be subject to dissolution or
decay.

Thus ignorant was the heathen world. In such an impenetrable darkness were we
of the Gentiles involved, until the dayspring from high visited us; until the
light of the glorious gospel shone upon us, and with it is refulgent beams
scattered these clouds of ignorance and error, and brought to light these
future glorious scenes of joy, and things invisible to mortal sight. "Blessed
be God therefore, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to
his abundant mercy" has not left us to grope in the thick darkness of
heathenism, void of hope and void of comfort, but "has begotten us again unto a
lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an
inheritance incorruptible, undefiled and that fades not away, reserved in
heaven for us, who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation,
ready to be revealed in the last times; wherein we greatly rejoice." 1 Pet.
1.3, 5. I proceed to say,

II. God winked at the ignorance and corruption of these times, without bearing
any public testimony against them, except (...) the general indications of his
providence, until the coming of Christ. We read not of any prophe^s ^ent to
instruct them, or to convert them from the error of their ways, nor of any
particular signal manifestations of the divine judgments against them, either
to punish them for their wickedness, or reclaim them from their errors, except
in a few single cities or individuals, until after Christ appeared on earth,
and commissioned his apostles to go and teach all nations what is the true and
acceptable way of the Lord. God beheld the generality of the world sunk in sin
and idolatry for so many ages with apparent unconcern, and seemingly connived
at their ways, until the fullness of time came, until the Messiah appeared to
destroy the dominions of sin and satan, and established his own kingdom in the
world. This the apostle Paul declares not only in the text but more fully in
his sermon to the men of Lystra, Acts 14 where he tells them that he was now
sent "to preach to them that they should turn from their vanities unto the
living God, who made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all things therein; who
in times past suffered all nations to walk in their own ways; nevertheless he
left not himself without witness, in that he did them good, and gave them rain
from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with food and gladness."
Here we see exemplified the goodness, patience and forbearance of the great
Father of mercies, who makes his sun to rise, and his rain to fall on the evil
as well as the good. Notwithstanding their ignorance was in a great measure
wilful, notwithstanding their prejudices and perverseness which hindered them
from attending to the intimation of the divine will in his works of creation
and providence, notwithstanding they acted in general contrary to the
suggestions of their consciences, or that law of God which was written in their
hearts; notwithstanding these things, I say, God bore with them from age to
age, granted them temporal favors in abundance, and after a long succession of
years and of mercies, sent his own son to enlighten and reform them, and
receive them into covenant with himself. "These things have thou done, says
God, and I have kept silence." Sometimes indeed God testified his displeasure
against their wicked ways, by displaying his judgments against some particular
cities, which had filled up the measure of their iniquities. Thus we read of
the frequent denunciations of God's wrath against Egypt, Babylon, Tire and
Sidon, etc. Upon their not attending to which, God utterly destroyed them, for
an example to present and after ages.

But as long as they maintained any thing of natural virtue, humanity, and
probity amongst them, God winked at their many enormities, because they enjoyed
but a small degree of light. For which reason also he has declared that their
case shall be more tolerable at the judgment, than that of those who have
sinned against the clear light of the gospel. Here is a demonstration of the
mercy and compassion of God to the heathen world. Though God was always equally
an enemy to sin, yet as he saw not fit then to instruct them by a revelation
from heaven, he passed by their corruptions in doctrine and worship, and in
compassion to their ignorance, withheld his judgments from them. They had not
any particular call to repentance, nor any direct encouragement to forgiveness
upon their renouncing and forsaking their sins. Upon these considerations God
winked at the impenitency of these dark ages, but now under the gospel,
commands all men every where to repent, and threatens the signal manifestations
of his vengeance against all such as refuse to comply with the gracious
invitation.

Or we may consider the text in another light. We may consider God's winking at
the heathen in their ignorance and corruption, as the just judgment of God
against them for their notorious wickedness and detestable idolatry. Had they
acted agreeable to the best light they had, and appeared honestly desirous of
farther degrees of knowledge for the sake of performing the divine will in a
more perfect manner, God would doubtless have dispatched some of his servants
to them, as he often did to his people Israel, to enlighten their minds in the
knowledge of the truth, and declare to them more explicitly what is that good
and acceptable thing which the Lord required of them. But when God saw them so
little desirous of instruction, so obstinate in their prejudices, and firmly
attached to their errors and vices, he gave them up to their own blindness of
mind and hardness of heart, and suffered them to go on in their ways, without
reclaiming them by any express messages from heaven. We may imagine God so
displeased with them for their flagrant immoralities and violations of the law
of nature, as to pronounce concerning them as he did of the rebellious Jews by
the prophet Isaiah, "go and tell this people, hear ye indeed, but understand
not, and see ye indeed but perceive not: Make the heart of this people fat, and
make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and
hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert and be
healed." This prejudice and perverseness of the Jews, our blessed Savior
himself gives as the reason (and cites this very text) why he did not instruct
them more plainly, during his abode on the earth, in things pertaining to the
kingdom of heaven, but chose to declare them only by way of fiction and
parable, to be more fully explained by his apostles after his ascension.

And why may not this be supposed to be the case with the gentile world? It
seems to be agreeable to the account which St. Paul gives of them in his first
chapter to the Romans, where he says, that "the invisible things of God, even
his eternal power and godhead, are clearly seen by the work of creation; so
that they are without excuse: Because that when they knew God, they glorified
him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations,
and [so] their foolish hearts was darkened. Professing themselves to be wise
they became fools; and changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an
image, etc. And so, as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God
gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not
convenient. Because that knowing the judgment of God thus far, that they who
commit such things are worthy of death, they not only did the same, but had
pleasure also in them that did them."

Thus did God for many ages overlook the corruptions of the heathen world;
while he chose out the posterity of Abraham for his own peculiar people, to
whom he might more plainly reveal himself, that they might be a generation to
seek him, and a seed to serve him; and that the worship of the true God might
never wholly cease among men, 'till Christ the lamb slain from the foundation
of the world, appeared on earth, who gave himself a ransom for all, and who
commanded his apostles to go and preach the gospel to every creature, heathen
as well as jew, that whosoever believed on him, forsook his sins, and conformed
his life to his instructions, might be saved by him. This blessed gospel is
what by the grace of God we are favored with, and the tenor of which we are
next to contemplate. I proceed therefore to my

III. Proposition, which is, that the grand design of the gospel revelation is
to call men to repentance. "But now commands all men every where to repent.
The glad news of salvation by Christ was ushered in by John baptist his
forerunner, who preached the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins;
and cried in the wilderness of Judea, "repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is
at hand." i. e. the dispensation of the gospel and kingdom of the Messiah is
soon to be established in the world, repent ye therefore and reform your lives,
that ye may become the worthy subjects of his kingdom. Our blessed Savior
himself being initiated into his office as it were by baptism, began his public
preaching with "repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." Mat. 4.17. And
when he sent forth the twelve with instructions to publish his gospel to the
world, they knowing the general scope and tenor of the doctrines of their
divine master, "went out and preached that men should repent." For Christ
himself, when he came into Galilee "preaching the gospel of the kingdom of
God," did it in these words, "the time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is
at hand: " Repent ye and believe the gospel." These two words, repent and
believe, comprehend in brief all that the gospel requires of us. But the world,
before Christ, being overwhelmed and sunk in the lowest abyss of ignorance and
idolatry, as we have just now seen, it was necessary that they should repent of
all their former sins, and so obtain the forgiveness of them, before they could
properly embrace the gospel, and receive the saving benefits of it. For the
first step that a vicious man can take toward a godly reformation, and such a
thorough change of life as the gospel requires, is to be truly sensible of, and
sorry for his sins, and so to repent of, and forsake them. Accordingly, "God
has highly exalted Christ Jesus by his right hand, to be a prince and a
savior to give repentance and forgiveness of sins." And the apostle in his
name testified not only to Jews, but also to the Greeks, repentance toward God
as well as says in the Lord Jesus Christ. "It is indeed a faithful saying, and
worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners, to save them from the error and corruption of their ways, to excite
them to repent and to invite them to accept salvation through him. Had mankind
been so holy and guiltless as not to stand in need of forgiveness, there had
been no necessity of the gospel revelation to call and encourage them to
repent; there had been no occasion for the descent of the son of God from the
heaven of glory, to suffer and die, to purchase pardon for penitent
transgressors. But since all mankind had corrupted his way, and there was none
righteous, no not one: Since not only the Heathens who sat in darkness, but the
Jews also who were favored with a revelation from God, had shamefully
perverted and violated the divine law; it was requisite in order to save
mankind from perishing eternally, that there should be some other way appointed
for their salvation, besides the rigid condition of the covenant of works.

To answer this gracious end, Christ came to earth, "whom God has set forth to
be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for
the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God." And
through him "the grace of God, which brings salvation, has appeared unto all
men, teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously and godly in this present world; looking for that blessed
hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ;
who gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquities, and purify
unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works." This is what God the
Lord requires of us under this new dispensation of his grace. For this, Christ
has enlightened us with the light of his glorious gospel, has purchased
forgiveness by his sufferings, and has promised us his holy Spirit to assist us
to forsake our sins and subdue our lusts; and on our complying with these his
gracious designs, has promised us pardon and acceptance with God, whose favor
is life, and whose loving kindness is better than life.

Repentance then we see is a duty indispensably incumbent on all who hope to
obtain salvation through Jesus Christ, it therefore deserves a more large and
ample consideration. I shall therefore under this head attempt to show these
several things. 1st. What is implied in true repentance. 2dly. The universality
of the call and obligation to it. 3dly. The absolute necessity of it. And,
4thly. The motives and encouragements given to it in the gospel. But, I shall
conclude at present with one or two reflections on what has been already
considered. And,

1. How thankful ought we to be to God, for granting us the light and
privileges of the glorious gospel of the blessed Jesus, and thereby dispelling
the ignorance of heathenism, and calling us out of darkness into mavelous
light. The greater the darkness is from which we are delivered, the greater in
proportion ought our gratitude to be. We have seen what gross ignorance and
error the heathen world before Christ was involved in; "The gentiles, says the
apostle, walk in the vanity of their minds, having the understanding darkened,
being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them,
because of the blindness of their hearts." It was almost impossible for them
amidst such thick and palpable darkness, to discern the right way and walk in
it. Being thus blinded and deluded in their minds, it was easy for satan the
prince of darkness, to lead them captive at his pleasure. But yet methinks, it
would not be proper for us, ignorant as we are of the doings and designs of the
almighty, utterly to exclude them from heaven, and peremptorily to deny the
possibility of the salvation of any of them. The scripture no where that I know
of, authorizes any such determination; and if we have no ground for it here,
certainly that charity which the gospel so frequently inculcates, does not
require us thus to judge. There were a few even in the dark ages of heathenism,
who seem to have been raised up as glorious lights in the world; and who shone
the brighter, for daring to appear advocates for virtue, when the generality of
mankind were sunk in sin and vice.

These glorious few seem not only to have had pretty just notions of God and
religion, but to have been sincerely desirous to please him, to have taken
great pains to subdue their appetites and passions, and to cultivate the
virtues of a good life. Now there seems to be no absurdity in supposing that a
righteous and good God should in some measure grant to such the divine
influences of his spirit, to implant in them a principle of holiness, and so
far reveal Christ to them, as is necessary to their salvation through him, as
well as to such as lived under the jewish dispensation. It is said of
Cornelius, while he was yet a heathen, "that he was a devout man, and one that
feared God, that his prayers were heard, and that his alms were had in
remembrance before him." And being possessed of these good qualities, he was
dictated by a vision where to go and learn Christ. On which occurrence the
apostle Peter, to whom he was sent, makes this observation, "of a truth I
perceive that God is no respecter of persons; but in every nation, he that
fears God and works righteousness, is accepted with him." Acts 10.4. But
whether it shall please God to admit any of the heathen to eternal happiness or
not, as it does not intimately concern us, and as he has not thought fit
expressly to reveal it to us, so it becomes us not to be peremtory on either
hand, but to rest gratefully satisfied with that measure of light and knowledge
which we are favored with, and to leave the rest to God, "who will have mercy
on whom he will have mercy," assured that he who has no pleasure in the death
or punishment of any, will extend his mercy and loving kindness so far, and no
farther, than shall be consistent with equity and justice, and the support and
honor of his moral government. But be this as it may. This we are abundantly
affored of, that we under the gospel are put into a capacity of obtaining
eternal life: That this eternal life and the way to it are revealed to us with
sufficient clearness; that God is ready to assist our feeble but upright
endeavors after it; that we may, and many of us doubtless shall be admitted
through Christ's merits to the blessed presence and enjoyment of God in heaven.
What unfeigned and unbounded thanks are due from us to God, for this
unspeakable gift! That the sun of righteousness has arisen upon us, and
scattered with his gladsome beams the mists of heathen ignorance! That the
dayspring from on high has visited us and diffused the blessings of light, life
and joy among us.

How should our tongues be exercised with repeated nosannas to God! How should
our hearts be affected and earth resound with our praises to the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with the joyful sound of salvation by
Christ; who has revealed to us those mysteries which have been hid from ages
and generations of the world, and has brought to our ears those glad tidings of
great joy, which many prophets, wise men and princes desired to see and hear,
but might not! If we have the least sense of gratitude in our bosoms, or any
relish for divine and spiritual blessings, we cannot but be affected with love
and thankfulness to God for these inestimable favors. But,

2. We are bound not only to be thankful to God for the gospel, but to comply
with the merciful design of it, which we have heard is to call men to
repentance. It is by this means alone that we can demonstrate to ourselves and
others, that we are truly thankful. If we reject the gospel and live in the
practice of those immoralities and vices which blackened the heathen world, we
give an undeniable evidence that we are not truly thankful for that gospel
which reproves those deeds, and commands us to repent of and forsake them.

Such as thus go on in sin, whatever professions of thankfulness they make,
would doubtless be glad that God had never so clearly revealed his will and
their duty to them, and the necessity of their compliance with it. "For he that
does evil hates the light, neither comes he to the light, lest his deeds
should be reproved."

Let us therefore show forth our love and gratitude to God by forsaking our
sins and cleaning unto him. And may God almighty assist us by his grace hereto.
May he "create us anew in Christ Jesus unto good works," and grant us the aids
of his Spirit, to subdue our sinful affections, to fortify us against
temptation, and lead us in the paths of truth and righteousness for his name
sake. AMEN.

SERMON VI. The Nature and Necessity of true Repentance.
ACTS XVII. 30. And the Times of this Ignorance God winked at; but now
commands all Men every where to repent.


IN my former discourse I showed 1. That the times of heathenism were times of
ignorance, o^ that the gentile world before Christ was dark and unenlightned.
They were ^osly ignorant of the existence, nature, and perfections of the
Deity, of the way of wor^ip agreeable to him, of their duty toward (...), their
fellow creatures and themselves, and the natural consequence of their ignorance
was a universal corruption and dep^vity of manners. They were at a loss how to
account for the origin and prevalence of sin and evil, how they first came into
the world, and why all mankind were still liable to sin, to afflictions,
diseases and death. Their notions of a future state were very erroneous and
chimerical, full of doubt and uncertainty: And of the resurrection, they
entertained not the least suspicion. They knew not how to sue for pardon and
the divine favor, nor in what way, or in what name, it was possible for them to
be reconciled to a just and holy God. They seem to have been sensible that a
mediator was necessary, which made them address their supplications to Demons,
Angels, departed Heroes, and other inferior Deities. For these, by some of the
wisest of them, were worshipped only as intercessors for them to the supreme
God; though the ignorant vulgar seem generally to have made them the ultimate
objects of their adoration. ^. I showed in the former discourse that God winked
at these times of general ignorance and corruption; and bore with them without
any particular visitation or express revelation of his will, 'till the coming
of Christ. This I told you might be understood either as a manifestation of the
patience of God, in that he kept silence and did not cut them off in their
frequent and enormous vices; or of his mercy, in that he pitied their
ignorance; and passed by their faults because the light they were favored with
was but small; or of his justice, whereby he was induced by reason of this
walking so contrary to the light of nature, and the dictates of their own
consciences, to give them over to blindness of mind, and hardness of heart, to
commit all iniquity with greediness. But though God as it were connived at the
ignorance and impenitency of those times, yet now under the gospel he
peremptorily and expressly "commands all men every where to repent." -- For I
showed thirdly, that the grand design of the gospel revelation is to call men
to repentance. Under this last head I told you I should endeavor to show four
several things; to which I now proceed, viz.

I. What is implied in true repentance. II. The universality of the call and
obligation to it. III. The absolute necessity of it. And, IV. The motives and
encouragements the gospel gives to it.
In the first place I am to show wherein true repentance consists, or what is
implied in it. Here I shall very briefly mention several things which a sincere
repentance toward God necessarily includes in it, though all of them perhaps
are not felt in equal degrees by every true penitent. And if any should choose
to call some of the things I shall mention, preparatories to true repentance,
or concomitants with it, and others of them the blessed fruits and effects of
it, rather than parts of repentance itself, I will not contend; but only affirm
that wherever true repentance is, there are found (in a greater or lesser
degree) the following things: 1. A sense of sin and guilt. None can truly
repent of his sins till he is sensible that he is a sinner. He must be brought
to a sense of the great evil and heinous nature of sin, and of his exposedness
thereby to the wrath and curse of God; he must see the necessity there is of
breaking off his sins by repentance in order to his obtaining favor and
acceptance with the Almighty; otherwise he cannot exercise a sincere and godly
repentance. For whilst he thinks himself innocent, or is ^ot convinced of his
aggravated guilt, he sees nothing that he has to repent of. It is not such as
are self-righteous, that by the enabling grace of God are brought to a true
repentance, but such as know themselves to be sinners, such as have so thorough
and humiliating conviction of their own vileness, such as are of a broken heart
and contrite spirit on account of their transgressions of the holy law of God,
and are clothed with that self-abasing ornament of humility, which is in the
sight of God of great price.

This is admirably exemplified by our Savior in the story of the conceited
Pharisee and convinced Publican, who entered the temple together to pay their
devotions to God. Whilst the one boasts of his virtues to claim the divine
acceptance, the other sensible of his unworthiness not only to receive the
favor of God, but even to lift up his eyes to heaven, smites on his breast,
and exclaims, "Lord, be merciful to me a sinner." He being thus convinced of
his sinfulness and guilt, was in a proper disposition of mind to receive the
pardon and favor of God; and accordingly "he went down to his house justified
rather than the other." He that is duly sensible of the great need he stands in
of the divine forgiveness, of his own unworthiness of it, and of the necessity
of the merits and mediation of Christ in order to it, cannot but be sorry that
he has bro't himself into such a woeful state by sin; and will be excited to the
strongest desires and endeavors to forsake his sins, and please God, whose
displeasure he has incurred by sinning: And such a one has ample encouragement
to expect the assistance and acceptance of God, who with such a sacrifice is
well pleased." "For thus says the high and lofty One who inhabiteth eternity,
whose name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, and with him also that
is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to
revive the heart of the contrite ones. I have seen his ways, and will heal him,
peace, peace to him," etc. Isa. 57.15.

2. True repentance implies in it not only a convicted sense of our manifold
sin and guilt, but a humble acknowledgment of them before God. He that covers
his sins shall not prosper, but whosoever confesses and forsakes them shall have
mercy." And "if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." So that we cannot truly
repent of our sins, so as to obtain mercy and forgiveness, without penitent
confession of them. I acknowledge my transgressions, says David; and my sin is
ever before me. It is necessary that we confess in general, that we have sinned
and done that which is not right, that we have in many instances broken God's
holy law, and acted contrary to those obligations of duty and gratitude we were
under to him; that hereby we have justly incensed him against us, and exposed
ourselves to his wrath, and the sad effects of his displeasure. And not only
so, but when we fall into any great or presumptuous sins, we ought particularly
to recount and confess them before God, with their several aggravations, and
with a contrition in some measure proportioned to the guilt of them. Whereas a
general confession only, (if sincere) will be accepted for those many sins
which we cannot particularly call to remembrance, for our sins of ignorance and
infirmity, and the daily imperfections of our best services. And our
confessions both general and particular, must be accompanied with hearty
desires and earnest prayers for forgiveness. Thus David prays particularly,
"Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O my God; and in general, "cleanse thou me
from secret faults." God requires confession of us not to inform him, (for he
is perfectly accquainted with all our thoughts and ways) but for our own good,
to impress on our hearts a humiliating sense of our sins, and to show forth our
penitent disposition of mind. Such a disposition as will fit us for receiving
pardon from God, "who looks upon man, as Elihu says, and if any say, I have
sinned and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not: He will
deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light."
Job 33.27, 28.

3. Our confession must be accompanied with shame and sorrow for our sins, such
a sorrow as shall produce hatred and abhorrence of them, otherwise we shall not
be sincere in our confessions, and in our purposes of amendment. For he that
confesses a fault is always supposed to be convinced of it. And he that is
convinced that he has done amiss, cannot but be ashamed of it. Thus Ezra
lamented, and confessing before God the sins of the land, says, "O my God, I am
ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God; for our iniquities are
increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up unto the heavens." So
Jeremiah 3.25. "We lie down in our shame, and our confusion covers us, for we
have sinned against the Lord." Evangelical repentance is also attended with
great grief and sorrow for sin. I will declare mine iniquity, says the
Psalmist, and be sorry for my sin. The sincere penitent mourns and sorrows for
his sins, not only because he has by them subjected himself to the wrath of God
and pains of hell. For a sinner that is actuated by a mere legal principle, who
continues to love sin and is resolved to go on in it, may yet like Judas, be
filled with sorrow and remorse, on account of the great mischief and
intolerable misery which he has brought upon himself. Such sorrow, such
repentance as this, shall be exercised by the damned in hell, and consequently
is not in itself that gracious affection of soul which recommends to the favor
of God. But sorrow for sin, which is the concomitant of true repentance, is of
a more ingenious nature. It proceeds chiefly (though not wholly excluding the
other principle) from love and gratitude toward God, and a conciousness of
having acted unworthily toward him who is his Creator and constant Benefactor,
and who has sent his own son to ransom him from sin and destruction. He is
grieved for having acted unworthy of a rational creature, for having deformed
and defiled his own soul, reflected dishonor on God, and disobeyed his
righteous laws. This is that "godly sorrow" that "works repentance to
salvation not to be repented of." He who thus sincerely laments his sin, and
sorrows after a godly sort, who weeps and grieves more bitterly, the greater
his sin and folly has been, will be led to hate sin and loathe himself on
account of it. And not only so, but --

4. He whose grief and repentance for his sins is sincere, will firmly resolve
to forsake them for the future, and cleave unto God. And unless this is the
happy effect of it, his repentance is not genuine, but only that reluctance and
uneasiness which naturally arises in the mind of man, from a consciousness of
having done wrong, and a fear of punishment. Without a firm and vigorous
resolution, nothing can be done toward repentance and a change of life. When a
sinner is brought to reflect on his past life, and sees how guilty he has been;
when he is convinced of the evil and danger of his former courses, and that the
only safe way for him is to forsake his sin and return to God and his duty;
however strongly he is determined in his mind upon the expediency of
repentance, yet unless there is a fixed determination or resolution of the will
also, true repentance will not ensue. For though it is necessary that the
determination of the judgment should go before the resolution of the will, yet
the one does not always imply the other. Many men have been fully convinced of
the fitness and necessity of a change of life, who yet for want of a steadfast
resolution to turn from their sins, have gone on in them and died in a state of
impenitence. Nothing but a strong and determinate resolution will enable a man
to stem the torrent of vicious custom, to conquer his own sinful inclinations,
and the strength of inveterate habits, and to withstand the powerful assaults
of temptation. Weak and feeble purposes of amendment will not do this. Such as
only faintly wish and intend to repent and reform, will be easily swayed to
sin: Whereas he who upon mature deliberation and sincere desires to glorify God
in his life, has taken up a firm resolution to cease from sin and go on in a
way of duty, will doubtless be able, by help of divine grace, to keep his
resolution. For resolution fixes a man's spirit, like an immovable rock, which
when the rains descend and floods assail it, abides firm against all
impressions. By virtue of such a resolution as this, David could rise in
defiance against all that would tempt him to sin, saying, "depart from me, ye
evil doers, for I will keep the commandments of my God." -- Thus we see how
necessary a part holy resolution is, of true repentance. Again,

5. That christian repentance which the gospel requires, includes in it, a
repairing to Christ, relying on his merits alone for forgiveness, and casting
the guilty soul before him to be washed in his blood, and cleansed from all
sin. Faith in Christ, and trust in him for acceptance, is the root and
foundation of all the christian graces; and destitute of this principle, they
are not evangelical graces, but mere moral acts, such as may be exercised by
Pagans as well as Christians. An Infidel, Heathen, or Jew, may be heartily
grieved and sorry for his sins, and resolve to forsake them; and in consequence
of this may turn from his allowed vicious courses, and cultivate in general the
moral virtues of a good life. But this repentance, though it be commendable and
praise worthy in him, yet being destitute of faith in Christ, it is not
evangelical repentance which is required of us under the christian
dispensation. Weary and heavy-laden sinners, who labor under a burdensome
sense of their sins, are commanded in the gospel, not only to repent of and
forsake them, but to come to Christ for pardon, that so being eased of the
heavy load, they may find rest for their souls. Christ Jesus, who gave himself
a ransom for all, who was delivered up to death for our offenses, and rose
again for our justification, has by his obedience and sufferings made a
complete atonement and satisfaction for sin. In consequence of which God has
highly exalted him by his right hand, to give repentance and remission of sins.
"Through him therefore is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins: And by him
all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be
justified by the law of Moses." Thus as the forgiveness of sins is conferred
only through Christ, and as repentance is in order to forgiveness, it is
necessary that our repentance should have a particular reference to Christ; or
that a gospel penitent should exercise faith in him, by whom we receive the
atonement.

6. That repentance which is sincere and genuine, necessarily implies in it, or
at least produces, actual reformation and change of life; a forsaking of sin,
and practice of virtue and piety. It has been already shown that repentance
includes in it a deep and hearty sorrow for sin, with a disposition of mind,
and a resolution of will to turn from it. But this, if we stop here, is not
true repentance. Repentance signifies a change, not only of disposition but of
practice; not only a resolution to walk in the way of duty, but an actual
performing such a resolution, so far as opportunity is granted for it. In
affairs of common life, by repenting we frequently mean no more than a sorrow
for any past action, which upon reflection we find to have been wrong, and to
wish that we had done otherwise. But this though it is implied in gospel
repentance, does not come up to the full notion of it, neither is it what is
most essential to it. For what avails the most poignant sorrows and
compunction, unless it works repentance, or a thorough change of heart and
life? How can grief or remorse alone, either please God or profit us? Sorrow in
itself is only pain and misery. There cannot therefore be a greater affront and
indignity offered to God, who delights in the happiness of his creatures, than
to suppose that he takes a cruel pleasure in the misery of men; or that he
delights to see them involved in tears, and laboring under trouble of mind and
remorse of conscience for their sins, any further than as this conduces to the
reformation and happiness of the persons thus affected. Our grieving and taking
on cannot affect the almighty, nor move his compassion toward us, whilst we
continue in sin: Neither does he count himself glorified by pain or melancholy;
but " herein is my father glorified, says our Savior, that ye bring forth much
fruit." What persons feel a more painful sorrow and contrition for sin, than
such as are sunk into the depths of despair? Yet who are farther from true
repentance? If grief and affliction of soul for having sinned were all that
constituted gospel repentance, the devil himself might become a true penitent:
For he, when he feelst he just vengeance of God, cannot but condemn himself,
and grieve that ever he rebelled against him: But as he remains the same devil
still, retains the same malignant temper, and continues the same course of
wickedness and rebellion, he is at the farthest remove possible from true
repentance. Thus we see, that grief and sorrow are of no advantage, any farther
than as they are productive of a real repentance and reformation. So that if we
would determine what is godly sorrow and what not, we must judge of it, not
from the degree of affliction in it, but from the real effects of it in heart
and life. For he is most truly sorry for his sin, that reflects upon it with
detestation, and absolutely shuns and forsakes it. The gospel repentance is
called repentance from dead works;" not only for them, but from them. The grace
of God by Christ Jesus, was not revealed to the world to inflict torment and
misery on men, or to make them sad and melancholy, but to subdue sin in them
and under them, to teach and direct them to "deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly, in the world." When John
baptist came preaching the baptism of repentance, and when many people were
baptized by him, and confessed their sins, he lets them know that this alone
was not sufficient, but that it was necessary that they should also bring forth
fruits meet for repentance. A good tree will infallibly bring forth good fruit.
However humbly and penitently therefore we have confessed our sins, however
deeply we have been affected with sorrow and anguish for them, however vile we
have esteemed ourselves on account of them, and however strongly we have
determined to forsake them, yet if we do not actually cease the indulgence of
them, and practice the virtues of a holy life, when time and opportunity is
granted herefor, we may be assured beyond all doubt, that we have not yet
exercised that true repentance toward God which the gospel requires of us.
Every true penitent becomes thenceforward a new creature. He is "created anew
in Christ Jesus unto good works," By the assistance of the divine Spirit, "he
puts off the old man which is corrupt, and puts on the new," repentance being
necessarily connected or concomitant with regeneration and conversion. "Repent
ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out." I proceed
to say,

7. Restitution is a necessary branch or effect of sincere repentance. It is a
dictate of natural reason as well as of religion, that whenever any wrong or
injury is done to another, a full restitution or satisfaction ought (so far as
can be) to be made to the party injured. As to our trespasses against God, we
can make no adequate compensation for them. All we can do in respect of God, is
humbly to confess our faults, to be heartily sorry for them, and do better for
the future. Though this does not come up to the notion of restitution or
satisfaction, yet God is graciously pleased through Christ to accept it as
such, when performed sincerely and from the heart. But besides the wrong done
to God and ourselves; in many of our sins we likewise injure our fellow-men. In
this case we may and ought to make reparation. If we have by our example,
influence, or enticements, drawn any into sin, and thereby endangered their
precious souls, we are bound so far as we can, to reclaim them from their
vices, and promote their salvation. Or in whatever other way we have injured
any person, whether by fraud or violence; whether the wrong affects his body,
estate or reputation; we are obliged to restore what we have unjustly detained
from him, or otherwise make satisfaction, according as the case and
circumstances require. And unless we do thus, we do not sincerely repent of the
sin. For he that is truly penitent and sorry for his sin, will heartily wish he
had not done it, and so will be careful so far as he can to undo it by making
restitution. Whilst a man wilfully neglects making reparation for any act of
injustice, oppression, desamation, etc. he continues in the sin; and whilst he
continues in the sin, and does not forsake it, the guilt of it shall not be
washed away. [Non dimittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum.] The
scriptures mention restitution as a necessary part of repentance, and an
indispensible condition of pardon. Thus Ezekiel 33.14, etc. -- "When I say unto
the wicked, thou shall surely die: If he turn from his sin and do that which is
lawful and right; if the wicked restore the pledge, give again that which he
has robbed, and walk in the statutes of life without committing iniquity; none
of his sins that he has committed shall be mentioned unto him; he shall surely
live, he shall not die."

8. That our repentance be sincere, and effectual to procure the pardon of our
sins, it is necessary that we forgive the offenses of others against us. That
this is a necessary concomitant of true repentance, I prove thus. The divine
forgiveness is often promised us on our sincere repentance: "Repent and be
converted that your sins may be blotted out." "If the wicked turn, he shall
live, etc. But our Savior expressly declares, that "if we forgive not men their
trespasses, neither will our heavenly father forgive us." Consequently that
repentance to which the promise of pardon is annexed, must include in it,
forgiveness of others. Indeed the practice of all the duties of christianity,
so far as by God's grace we are able, is, as I have already shown, comprehended
in true repentance. But this duty of forgiving others is more particularly
insisted on in the gospel, as of peculiar efficacy in order to our obtaining
pardon of God. If we forgive men their trespasses, and not otherwise, God will
forgive us all those sins which we have utterly forsaken and renounced. And
this is a very just and equitable requisition.

For if God is ready to forgive us our hei^ous and aggravated transgressions
upon our penitently asking it of him, how can we in conscience or gratitude
refuse to overlook the slight and inconsiderable offenses of others against us?
When we read the story of the servant who being freely forgiven by his Lord a
vast debt of ten thousand talents, yet refused to forgive or have patience with
his needy and supplicating fellow servants for the small sum of one hundred
pence, but ^elentlesly consigned him to prison and mis^ry; the conscience of
every one cannot ^ut subscribe to the justice of the sentence of his being
delivered to the tormentors, until ^e should make satisfaction for the whole
debt. "So likewise shall my heavenly father do unto you, says Christ, if ye
from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses." If
therefore we would evidence our repentance to be true and unfeigned, such as
shall avail with God through Christ for our pardon, we must "be kind one to
another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, when as God for Christ's sake
has forgiven us."

Lastly. That our repentance be effectual to our final salvation, it is
necessary that we not only change our lives at first, and turn from sin to God,
but that we continue in such a course to the end. "He that continues to the
end shall be saved; but if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in
him." There are many who by some awakening call either in the word or
providence of God, are brought (...) danger of their state, to mourn (...) ^ns,
and alter or amend their lives (...) ^ntinue for some time to all appearance
sincerely religious. But these good impressions being worn off by time, they
relapse into their former state of inactivity and wickedness, and show by their
after-conduct that their former repentance was not established on a good and
lasting principle. Now the repentance of such as thus afterward fall away (if
it may be called repentance) will not avail to their final happiness. All their
former strivings and sorrows will not answer for their admission into heaven.
For says God, "when I say to the righteous, thou shall surely live; if he
trust to his own righteousness [and turn aside] and commit iniquity; all his
righteousness shall not be remembered; but for his iniquity that he has
committed, he shall die for it." So that a constant and steady progress in
virtue is essential to that repentance unto salvation, which the gospel
requires. And by this it is distinguished from that repentance which is vain
and unavailing.

Thus I have considered the several things which are either contained in true
repentance or accompany it, or else flow from it. They are a sense of sins,
confession of them with shame and sorrow, resolution against them, applying to
Christ for forgiveness, an actual reformation in heart and life, restitution,
forgiveness, and persistance in virtue and godliness. Before I proceed to the
next head, I would just make one remark. Though each of these I have mentioned
(as parts of true repentance) are necessary, yet they are not equally
discernible in every gospel-penitent. Such as have had the happiness of a
religious education, whose infant minds have had the principles of christianity
instilled into them, and who have been brought up in the nurture and admonition
of the Lord, though in their repentance they mourn for their sins and
imperfections, yet not having been guilty of any notorious transgressions,
their sorrow will not be equal in degree to that of others: And as the general
tenor of their actions has always been outwardly conformed to the rules of
religion, the change that is made in them will not be so conspicuous and
evident to themselves and others, as in those that are reformed from a course
of profligancy and vice. But though the repentance and renovation of such is
more silent and insensible, yet it is necessary that they as well as all others
should repent and be renewed in the temper of their minds, before they can be
so conformed to the image of God as to enjoy happiness with him. For "God
commands all men every where to repent." I proceed therefore to consider, as
I proposed,

II. The universality of the call and obligation to repentance. Before Christ,
the revelation of God's will, and the invitation to repentance for the
remission of sins, was made only to the Jews. Many prophets were sent forth by
the almighty, commanding and exhorting them to repent and turn from their evil
ways, with promises that hereupon they should live and not die. But since the
preaching of the gospel, the true religion is not as before, confined to any
one nation or country, "but in every nation he that fears God and works
righteousness is accepted of him." God has now graciously fulfilled his promise
made by his prophets to call the gentile world to the faith. "Is he the God of
the Jews only? Is he not also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also."
Every man every where, who hears the blessed sound of the gospel, is now called
upon to repent. Even the greatest sinners have encouragement here. For "it is a
faithful saying -- that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, even
the chief." And just before his entrance into glory, he gave orders to his
apostles, "that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name
among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem, who were the chief of sinners, the
despisers and crucifiers of our blessed Lord. But not only great and notorious
transgressors, but such also as have led more regular and moral lives, are
commanded to repent. For as all men have sinned and therefore stand in need of
forgiveness, so all are invited to accept of it on gospel terms. Even the
righteous or such as have already turned their feet into the way of God's
testimonies, though the general tenor of their actions being right, they have
not need like the sinner to turn wholly about, and change their course, yet
they ought frequently to renew their repentance. Though the loud calls in
scripture to repent and turn, are directed chiefly to sinners, and though that
repentance which I have described, implying a thorough change, can in the
extent of it be applied only to them, yet there is a repentance which is
required of such as are already true penitents and believers. For since none
can arrive to a state of impeccability or sinless perfection in this life, the
grace of God in the gospel would be insufficient to the salvation of any, if it
provided not for the pardon of sins committed after the first repentance as
well as before. The best of men, the most eminent saints, will sometimes
notwithstanding their utmost caution, fall into sin, and fail in the exact
performance of their duty; and while any are under the guilt of any sin, they
are exposed to the wrath and curse of God: It is necessary therefore that they
recover themselves, and be renewed again unto repentance in order to their
being restored to the favor of God. They must mourn for their remaining
imperfections; and whenever they are surprised into sin, must penitently ask
forgiveness through Christ, and be excited to greater caution and vigilance in
their future conduct. Thus all men, good and bad, high and low, bond and free,
are called to repentance, and so invited to the benefits of the gospel
redemption. For with God "there is no respect of persons, -- there is neither
Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free; but Christ is all and in all." -- I am,

III. To show the necessity of repentance. And this, as there needs not much to
be said to make it evident, so I shall not be long upon it. Without it we
cannot be pardoned. For God is holy, and cannot be reconciled to sin. His
nature is opposite to it, and his laws were designed to restrain men from it
But to forgive sin without repentance and amendment, is the direct way to
encourage the practice of it, and destroy the honor and reverence due to those
laws which so severely forbid it. We cannot enjoy happiness in the communion of
God, until we become like him, or he like us. But God is unchangeable.
Consequently we must forsake our sins, and become in some degree holy as God is
holy, before we can be happy with him. Nay, should God, contrary to his nature
and word, forgive our sins though indulged and unrepented of, and admit us into
his beatific presence, still we could not forgive ourselves. Conscience, that
inexorable Judge which God has placed in our breast, will not free us from the
sting of guilt, till we have repented and reformed. And so long as a sense of
guilt remained, we could not be happy. Thus in the nature of things, happiness
and impenitency are absolutely incompatible with each other. This is farther
evident from the word of God. Sinners or "the unrighteous cannot inherit the
kingdom of God." "The wicked shall go away into everlasting punishment." "God
is angry with the wicked every day: If he turn not he will whet his sword, and
his mischief shall return upon his own head." "Except ye repent ye shall all
likewise perish." "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God:" But
"without holiness no man shall see the Lord." Every man who consults the word
of God, who sees there the woeful end of the impenitent sinner, and the glorious
happiness of the pardoned saint, cannot but be sensible of the importance and
necessity of repentance. And since the present life is known to be the only
time allotted for it, one would think it impossible that any should be so
unwise as to neglect or delay it. But this being unhappily the case, we will
consider in the

IV. and last place, the motives and encouragements to repentance which the
gospel affords. The impenitency of the heathen was winked at by God, because
they had little or no encouragement to it. But this is not the case under the
gospel. Here we find God declaring himself "not willing any should perish, but
that all should come to repentance." And that for this very reason "he is
long-suffering to usward," "that the goodness of God may lead us to
repentance." Here we have the promise of pardon and remission, on our sincerely
and truly repenting of our sins; and a promise of the divine assistance herein,
and not only so, but we are assured that there is a crown of glory that fades
not away, reserved in heaven for us. The great and manifold blessings of
redemption, the divine blessing and fellowship of the spirit here, and the
enjoyment of God throughout eternity, are promised to such as forsake their
sins, subdue their lusts, and are renewed in the spirit of their minds after
the image of him that created them. But if we refuse to hearken to the gracious
calls of God to repentance and a holy life, and obstinately go on in sin "after
our hard and impenitent hearts, we treasure up to ourselves wrath against the
day of wrath, and the revelation of the righteous judgment of God; who will
render to every man according to his deeds: to them who by patient continuance
in well doing seek for glory and honor and immortality, eternal life." Having
therefore those promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God."

Let us consider that whilst we go on in a state of impenitency, we counteract
the gracious designs of God in the gospel revevelation. In vain has God
provided a redeemer for us to deliver us from sin and death: In vain as to us
has Christ died to purchase pardon and justification for sinful man, and
thereby to reconcile him to an offended God: In vain has God enlightened us
with the knowledge of his will, and the terms on which we may procure his
favor; if we stand out against his exhortations and calls, and are wilfully
bent on our own destruction. Nay it will be the unspeakable aggravation of our
future doom, that the grace of God bringing salvation has appeared to us, but
we have hardened our hearts against God, and refused compliance with it. --
Though God winked at the impenitency of the heathen in the times of ignorance,
he will not wink at it in professed christians under the light of the gospel;
but will assuredly execute his threatened vengeance on all that now daringly
continue in sin. "Now consider this ye that forget God, left he tear you in
pieces and there be none to deliver." Romans 16.25, 26, 27.

"Now to him that is of power to stablish you according to the gospel, and the
preaching of Jesus Christ (according to the revelation of the mystery, which
was kept secret since the world began, but now is made manifest, and by the
scriptures of the prophets according to the commandment of the everlasting God,
made known to all nations for the obedience of faith: To God only wise, be
glory through Jesus Christ, for ever.

AMEN.
His Character from Messiu'rs FLEET's Evening Post.
DIED at the Rev. Mr. Smith's at Weymouth, the 17th instant, James Blake, B. A.
and was this day decently interred at Dorchester, the place of his nativity.
Early in life he discovered a love for virtue and a thirst for knowledge. His
rising genius induced his friends to give him a liberal education at Harvard
College. He made a most rapid progress in the arts and sciences, and as a
universal scholar was equal perhaps to any of his standing. Intense application
to his studies, impaired his health, and from an extreme aversion to distress
his friends with his complaints, he concealed his difficulties, 'till an
inflammation seated on his stomach, which removed him from this world in the
bloom and verdure of life. Being soon ripe for heaven, heaven claimed him as
it is due. For some months past he had preached in this and the neighboring
towns, occasionally, to the universal approbation of his hearers, and the best
judges have acknowledged his discourses from the pulpit were the works of a
very masterly and eloquent pen. He appeared ever to be influenced by the
example of his divine Lord and Master, in whose service he had engaged, and for
the advancement of whose interest and kingdom in the world he was most
eminently accomplished. His undissembled piety, the amiableness of his temper,
his modesty, innocence and innoffensiveness, which appeared through the whole
of his life and conversation, endeared him to people of all characters. The
young, to whom his death is a striking monitor, and a most sensible
illustration of this humbling truth, that every man at his best estate is
altogether vanity, may from hence be convinced that early piety has it is
attractive charms, and that the only way to lasting fame and immortal glory is
through the temple of virtue. No youth has lived more universally beloved, or
died more universally lamented.

-- "What though short thy Date!
"Virtue, not rolling Suns, the Mind matures.
"That Life is long, which answers Life's great End;
"The Time that bears no Fruit, deserves no Name;
"The Man of Wisdom is the Man of Years;
"In hoary Youth Methusalems may die."

