Mr. Backus's SERMON At the Ordination of Mr. ASA HUNT.

Evangelical Ministers described, and distinguished from Legalists.

A SERMON, The Substance of which was delivered October 30. 1771. AT THE
ORDINATION of Mr. ASA HUNT, To the PASTORAL CHARGE of the Third BAPTIST-CHURCH
in Middleborough.

[Published at their REQUEST.] By ISAAC BACKUS, PASTOR of the First CHURCH of
that Denomination in said TOWN.

Blessed is the People that know the joyful Sound.

Psa. lxxxix. 15. BOSTON: Printed for, and Sold by PHILIP FREEMAN, in
Union-Street. 1772.

AN Ordination SERMON.
2 CORINTHIANS III 6. Who also has made us able Ministers of the
New Testament; not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for the Letter kills,
but the Spirit gives Life.


THE office of a minister of Christ, as it is a most weighty, so it is as
trying a lot as any that mortals were ever employed in. They are made a
spectacle unto the world, to angels and to men: All eyes are upon them, and if
they are faithful they will be hated and envied by many. Thus is has been in
all ages. The great apostle of the Gentiles, though one of the most faithful
and exemplary men that ever lived, was traduced in the famous church of
Corinth, as a whiffling and inconsistent person, not to be regarded; and though
rational beings must ever allow, that a wise man may alter his purpose for good
seasons, yet the apostle's doing so, and not coming to them as he had proposed,
is caught. hold of to support these slanders. Their evil in so doing is
plainly exposed in the first chapter of this epistle; where we may also note,
that the absurdity and wickedness that many practice to this day, of connecting
the gospel itself with the character of it is preachers, is as old as the
apostles time; for, because Paul had acquainted them with his design of
visiting them, but had not done it, deceitful men not only insinuated that he
was a false man, but that his preaching was so too; yea and nay, inconsistency
and nonsense not to be regarded, as if the weakness or iniquity of men were any
argument against the truth of God! This conduct is a glaring proof of what all
men are naturally inclined to (...), namely, that they are rebels against
heaven; for it is a maxim with subjects, That their King can do no wrong;
thereby imputing the evils that are done, to his ministers and servants:
Whereas in the case before us, the KING of heaven is blasphemed, his gospel and
his service slighted, under the covert of the hypocrisy of others. And all
those who can make the weakness or evils of teachers or professors an excuse
for their own neglect of religion, are in some measure guilty of this madness;
for let men be ever so imperfect or false, Christ and his gospel is eternal
truth; therefore all those that do not receive the same, implicitly say, We
will not have this man to reign over us.

As there curring to the evils of others to excuse our own neglect, is a false
way, so it often happens with those who go therein, that what they allege
against others is not true; which was the case here And after a just
vindication of the apostle and his companion, he begins this chapter with
asking the Corinthians, if there was any need of epistles of commendation to or
from that church in their behalf, since the saving effects of their ministry
remained in indelible characters, written in their hearts by the Spirit of the
living God? Where teachers are not known, they need epistles of commendation to
introduce them, which is an apostolic custom, and which many in our day have
not sufficiently regarded, Acts 18.27. But when persons have experienced the
saving power of their preaching, that gives a greater confirmation of their
divine mission, than human letters can do. However, though the apostle improves
this evidence to silence gainsayers, he would not have any think that they had
any sufficiency in themselves for this work; no, not so much as to think any
thing as of themselves: Not to regulate their thoughts, or form any just
conclusions. But says he, All our sufficiency is of God, who also has made us
able ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter but of the spirit; for
the letter kills, but the spirit gives life. In which words you naturally
observe, who it is that makes gospel ministers, the subject of their ministry,
and the effect of it: Each of which I shall endeavor briefly to explain and
improve on this occasion, as assistance may be granted.

I. You observe, it is God that makes able ministers. This perhaps none will
deny; but the grand question is. How he does it? I answer, First, he does it by
making them new creatures. This is so essential to the very nature of their
work, and so plainly revealed in the scripture, that if it were not for the
prejudices of education and carnal interest, if would be needless to stand to
prove it. For,

1. A principal part of their work is to labor to reconcile sinners to God;
and to imagine any one to be fit for that work, who is not (...) reconciled
himself, is one of the firstborn of absurdities. All know that the more gifted
or crafty an enemy is, the more he is to be avoided and guarded against,
instead of being encrusted with our most weighty affairs: And what in it short
of blasphemy, to pretend that the most High will do so! Our apostle says, All
things are of God, who has reconviled us unto himself by Jesus Christ, and
has given to us the ministry of reconriliation, chap. 5.18. This is God's
order; he first reconciles the person, makes him a new creature, as in the
preceding verse, and then grace him the ministry of reconciliation.

2. The (...) of their work is spiritual; and how can carnal men perform it?
Our Lord assured a master in Israel that, Except a man be born again, he cannot
see the kingdom of God: And If he cannot see it, how can he act In it as he
ought? The natural man receives not, neither can be know the things of the
Spirit of God, and for this reason, because they are spiritually discerned, 1
Cor. 2.14. Reason will teach us that, Simple ideas are only to be got by those
impressions objects themselves make on our minds, by the proper inlets
appointed to each fort; and if they are not received this way, all the words in
the world, made use of to define, or explain any of their names, will never be
able to produce in us the idea it stands for. As for instance, the true idea of
light and colors cannot be had but by perceiving them with our sight; without
which an ingenious blind man could get no nearer the idea of scarlet, than that
It was like the sound of a trumpet. LOCKE's essay on understanding. 6.3. chap.
7. S. 11.
And revelation informs us, that the way by which the spirit of truth guides
his people into all truth, is by receiving of the things of Christ, and showing
the same unto them, John 16.13, 14. The vail remains on men's hearts until the
spirit takes it away, and gives them with open face to behold the divine glory,
whereby they are changed into the same image, context ver. 14 -- 18.

Ministers are to comfort others by the comfort where with they themselves are
comforted of God, 2 Cor. 1.4. They are to lead others in a way they are
acquainted with, and ought to be able to say, We speak that we know, and
testify that we have seen. Experimental knowledge is so necessary that even our
great high Priest himself, though he were a son, yet learned he obedience by
the things that he suffered; and being tempted, he was able to succor them
that are tempted. I would illustrate this point by a familiar instance: We are
not far from Cape-God, which is well known to be a dangerous coast for seamen,
so that it is an established custom for all that go round it to take a pilot.
Now suppose a man of good sense, who had seen exact charts of every point, rock
or quick-sand upon the coast, and had all the intelligence that books or men
could give him about them, yet had never seen them himself; who will venture
round the Cape with such a pilot? Don't each one rather give in to the old
maxim, that, nothing teaches like experience? Yet in the case before us many
are so far from allowing it, that we have masters in our Israel, who would take
it as an affront to be asked, whether they had experienced the new birth or not?

3. No man can act from any higher principle than self, until he is born from
above; yet as surely as Christ speaks true, no man can be his disciple, (how
much less his minister?) except he deny himself, and take up his cross and
follow Christ. Men may, and often do, deny one lust to gratify another; may
cross luxury to gratify covetousness, or cross covetousness to indulge luxury
or ambition: Yea, may in some sense cross all these to establish
self-righteousness; yet still they get no higher than self; they do not deny
self, therefore such cannot be fit to be Christ's ministers; for his ministers
preach not themselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and themselves the church's
servants for Jesus sake. And the way they are brought to this is, God who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in their hearts, to
give the light of the knowledge of his glory. This, and this only can and does
give them to act from more noble principles, than self-seeking and
self-righteousness: It enables them to preach by faith, and in their conduct to
look to things unseen, which are eternal, 2 Cor. 4.5, 6.13.18. Hence,

4. All allow the ministers work to be very great and difficult, in which they
have special need of divine help; and to those whom Christ sends, he says, Lo,
I am with you; and they are to be strong in the grace that is in him: But how
can that be without union with him, even as the branch has with the vine?
Without which he assures us that we can do nothing; and the words before our
text tell us that all our sufficiency is of God. How far he may gird those who
know him not for particular purposes, I leave; but how can any soul plead for
promised assistance without faith, for how shall they call on him in whom they
have not believed? Romans 10.14.

Therefore since men must be reconciled themselves, before they can heartily
seek for others reconciliation to God; since it is necessary to be spiritually
taught in order to teach others spiritual things, and to be supernaturally
enlightened in order to act above self, and to have acquaintance with, and a
trust in Christ, in order to plead his promised assistance; how clear is the
evidence that he makes men new creatures in order to make them his ministers?
If any should allege Judas against this, I would only ask, whether they think
his example was for imitation, or for warning? If they think for imitation,
then how many traiters must we have? If for warning, then let us take it, and
beware of such men. And by the way I would have them remember that Judas's
commission was limited to the national church; the pure gospel commission was
given to the eleven, after Judas was gone to his own place, Mat. 10.5, 6. and
28.16, 10. If to evade all this any will say, we cannot know who are born again
and who not. I reply, that our Lord has told us, that we shall know them, and
how we shall know them, Mat. 7.15, 16. -- Luke 6.44, 45. And if men do not
believe him, still he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself.

I therefore proceed to observe, that he makes ministers by giving special
gifts for that work. I am as far as any man from supposing that renewing grace,
is the only qualification necessary for a gospel minister. When our Lord
ascended on high he gave gifts unto men, among which were gifts for Pastors and
Teachers, Ephesians. 4.8, 11. Special gists both to understand, and to communicate
divine things to the instruction and edification of others; and the command is,
As every man has received the gift, even so minister, etc. Let the gift be
received by more public or more private means, there is no limitation as to
that, but every man that God has given the gift to, be commands them to improve
the same as good stewards of his manifold grace; and by his Spirit he teaches
them their duty in this respect, as I have more largely shown elsewhere.
Discourse on an internal call to preach the gospel.


Once more, God makes able ministers, by teaching and inclining his people to
call and set apart to public office those whom he has prepared therefore. As he
has commanded each one to improve the gifts that are given to him, so he has
granted to his people an unalienable right to judge of such matters, for
ministers are not lords over their faith, but helpers of their joy; and Paul
himself says, to the church of Corinth, I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I
say. And another church is commended by their glorious Head, because they had
tried them that said they were apostles and were not, and had found them liars,
Rev. 2.2.

There has been much contention both formerly and lately about the succession
of ministers, and of ministerial authority; but I think Dr. Owen, in the last
century, has stated this matter to good purpose: Says he, The office of the
ministry for the continuation of the church state, and administration of all
ordinances of worship unto the end of the world, is sufficiently secured, (1.)
By the law, constitution and appointment, of our Lord Jesus Christ, erecting
that office, and giving warrants for it is continuance to the consummation of
all things, Mat. 28.20. Ephesians. 4.13. (2.) By his continuance according unto his
promise to communicate spiritual gifts unto men, for the ministerial
edification of the church. That this he does so continue to do, that it is the
principal external evidence of his abiding in the discharge of his mediatory
office. (3.) On the duty of believers, or of the church, which is to choose,
call, and solemnly set apart unto the office of the ministry, such as the Lord
Christ, by his Spirit, has made meet for it, according unto the rule of his
word. And those who plead for the continuation of a successive ministry,
without respect unto these things, without resolving both the authority and
office of it unto them, do but erect a dead image, or embrace a dead carcass,
instead of the living and life giving institutions of Christ. They take away
the living creature, and set up a skin stuffed with straw. Dr. OWEN, on the
original of evangelical churches, p. 164, 165.
We come,

II. To consider the subject of their ministry, which in our text is described
both negatively and positively. They are ministers not of the letter but of the
spirit; and to explain the letter, the law written and engraven in stones is
named, the tenor of which is, If a man do them, he shall live in them; but
cursed is every one that does them not, Levi. 18. 5. Gal. 3.10, 12. which is
therefore here called, the ministration of death, because no man upon earth
does those precepts, the penalty then is the certain consequence. This is the
letter; but from the apostles mentioning that which is done away, and that
which is abolished, it appears that the ceremonial law is also included, which,
though a shadow of good things to come; yet the letter of it enjoined a
multitude of offerings and works to be done by that people, enforced with
terrible penalties on those who did them not. Indeed the whole ministry of
Moses is intended, which was very glorious, and shined with great luster in the
manner of giving the law, and in the many tokens that were given of his being
taught and owned of God in his ministrations, yet when Moses was read by the
Jews, the vail was so upon their hearts, that they could not steadfastly look to
the and of that which is abolished. They stuck in what the letter required of
them, without beholding the perfect fulfillment both of the moral and
ceremonial law in the great Messiah: Which leads us to consider the spirit
which gives life; which is here also called the new testament. This cannot
mean merely that part of the bible that is so called in distinction from the
rest; for the apostles made abundant use of the old testament in their
ministry, and drew evangelical instructions from all parts of it; and they
expressly declare to us that those scriptures were all given by divine
inspiration, for our learning and admonition, on whom the ends of the world are
come, 1 Cor. 10.11. Romans 15.4. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. It is well known that the word
testament means the same as a will, whereby a person orders his affairs, and
disposes of his interest as he thinks best; so here it plainly means what is
called the new covenant, in distinction from the old. When the great Creator
had formed the world and all that is therein, he was pleased to crown man with
glory and honor, and set him over the works of his hands, and to make known to
him his will, and the tenor on which he should enjoy his estate and happiness,
even perfect obedience to his law and that transgression should strip him of
life, and all. Man sinned and ruined himself and his posterity: Therefore since
the first Adam is thus fallen, all things are put into the hands of the second
Adam, who is the Lord from heaven; and who will subdue all things unto himself,
yea will swallow up death in victory. Psa. 8.5, 6. 1 Cor. 15, 45 -- 54. Heb.
2.7 -- 9.

Some notice of this great deliverer was given to our first parents soon after
the fall, under the name of the seed of the woman who should bruise the
serpent's head. And he was further promised to Abraham, that in his feed all
the families of the earth should be blessed. This new testament way of
salvation is clearly opened in the gospel, which discovers how Christ was made
of a woman, of Abraham's seed, and by his obedience and sufferings in our
stead, has procured a perfect righteousness which is unto all and upon all them
that believe; which therefore is here called, the ministration of
righteousness, ver. 9. In consequence of which the holy Spirit is given to take
away the vail from men's hearts, and give them with open face as in a glass to
behold the glory of the Lord, whereby they are changed into his image. From all
which it appears that, by the New Testament, and the spirit that gives life,
is intended the way of justification by Christ's righteousness, and of
regeneration and sanctification by the power of the holy Ghost; which may well
be said to give life, as the one delivers from the law-sentence of death, and
the other from the power of corruption which is spiritual death, and enables
the soul to live unto God. This leads us,

III. To consider the effect of the gospel ministry. The letter kills, but
the spirit gives life. The letter kills when it comes with light and power
upon the mind, by laying open the corruption and contrariety of the heart to
God, and fixing the just sentence of death in the conscience whereby all the
hopes they have built on the life of their own hands, give up the ghost. Thus
our apostle says, "Sin revived and I died; but when the letter had killed him,
the Spirit of God revealed his Son in him, and drew his soul to a marriage
union to Him who is raised from the dead, that he might serve in newness of
spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter, Romans 7.4, -- 10. But where the
letter only is preached, it kills, as it takes life and courage from men,
because the law requires what it gives no strength to perform, and the soul
sinks in dejection and despair, or tries to quit the thoughts of these things
for fear thereof; or else, supposing such teaching to be right, people go on in
a round of duties with a name to live while they are dead, and the blind lead
the blind, until both fall into eternal death.

From hence, my Brethren, we may learn, 1. The vast importance of the gospel
ministry. Nothing less than the affairs of life and death are concerned
therein; not such a transitory one as we have here; no, it is nothing less than
the eternal life, or eternal death of precious souls. If ministers are enabled
to be faithful, they may be instrumental of the life of many; of saving
themselves, and those that hear them, 1 Timothy 4.16. But if otherwise, they know
not how much mischief they may do; how many blind souls they may lead to
destruction, nor how many righteous ones they may make sad. O my fathers and
brethren in the ministry, how should these things rouse us all up! How should
they move us all to search our hearts and ways, and cause each one to exert
himself in his station, not counting his life dear unto himself, so that he
might finish his course with joy, and the ministry he has received to testify
the gospel of the grace of God! And did christians view these things as they
ought, how careful would it make them concerning those whom they received into
the ministry? And also to pray for their ministers more, and to trust them less
than many do. Who is sufficient for these things? Surely none are of
themselves; and yet if persons have received benefit by any instrument, how
prone are they to expect the like again without looking to the great fountain
of all good? Did christians more clearly view these things as they are, they
would be engaged to commit their ministers and themselves too more earnestly
unto Him who is all in all to his people. The great apostle of the Gentiles,
notwithstanding all his gists and seize, seemed as if he could not write
one epistle without stirring up the saints to this duty, saying, Brethren, pray
for us; pray for us that the word of the Lord may have free course and be
glorified; striving together with me in your prayers, etc. And surely there is
great encouragement so to do, for when God appears in his glory to build up
Zion, he will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer,
Psa. 102.17.

2. Hence see the great importance of ever keeping law and gospel in their
distinct place, since one kills, and the other gives life. The law is good if
we use it lawfully. It Is proper use is to show us what we ought to be, and in
that light to convince us that we are not such, for by the law is the knowledge
of sin; but if it is made use of to teach souls how to obtain the divine favor,
or how to obtain eternal life, it is then put out of it is proper place. Though
we hear nany cry out, what! must we teach sinners no duty till they are
converted? yes, by all means; teach them their indispensable obligation to keep
the whole law, and that they are bound over to answer for every neglect of it,
at the great tribunal. -- This many conceit is too strict, and often plead for
an abatement of the law, like the unjust steward, who for a hundred would write
fifty or four score. But what is this abatement? Is it like Ezekiel's hearers,
to come before God as his people, and with their mouth to show much love, while
their heart goes after their coveteousness? The sum of the law is to love God
with all our hearts, and our neighbors as ourselves; and Jesus said, This do
and thou shall live. But the lawyer, willing to justify himself, left God out
of the question and said, Who is my neighbor? This is a notable abatement
indeed! In trying rebels, for the judge to leave the King out of the question,
and only try how they had behaved to each other! Yet how poorly does he make
out even in this way? For by the instance of a man that fell among thieves, our
Lord shows that a Samaritan (with whom they would have no dealings) discovered
such love to a proper object of compassion, as both their Priest and Levite did
not, Luke 10.29 -- 37. So have I known some who would quote that summary of the
divine requirement in Mica. 6.8. and evidently rise no higher in their notion
of doing justly, than just dealing toward men; as if robbing God of his just
due, which is all the heart, all the soul, strength and mind, did not demand
satisfaction! Yea, and how often is it now found, that many who profess to walk
humbly with God in the forms of religion, yet pay little regard to answering
their just engagements to men, or to show mercy to those who stand in need?

If we come to a review of this text, we may see that the Lord had commenced an
action against Israel for their ingratitude and disobedience, and called the
mountains and hills to be judges of their stupid conduct. They soon saw they
could not stand the trial, and enquired how they should make up the matter;
whether he would not be pleased if they brought large offerings, or a multitude
of them? And if irrational victims would not do, whether human ones would not
please him? And they talk of offering the fruit of their body for the sin of
their soul. The answer is, he has showed thee O man what is good, and what
does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly? etc. He had showed them in the
foregoing chapter, that out of Bethlehem HE should come forth that is to be
ruler in Israel, whose goings forth have been from everlasting; and that, this
man shall be the peace. God requires no more than his just due, and this
God-man, and he only can pay it. He only has opened a way for righteous ess and
peace to kifs each other in the sinner's salvation.

Some imagine that by letter, the literal meaning of scripture is intended; and
by spirit some mystical meaning that is hid under it; and from hence they call
the word, a dead lever; but how greatly do such unstake the text? The letter
kills, and certainly that which actively kills others cannot be a dead thing
itself. The gospel is as plainly written as the law, and our Lord's constant
method of repelling satan was by what is written; and when the tempter tried to
ensnare him in the same way, he did not depart from it to mystical meanings,
but produced another text which detected his perversion of that. A great
variety of improvements may be made of all parts of scripture, while one
consistent meaning runs through the whole; and those who venture to depart from
that, know not what delusions they may run into.

We always need the spirit to enlighten our minds to understand the scriptures,
but the rule is the same in the dark as in the light, and is the same in itself
before we understand its use, as when we are best skilled therein; though
without the light we cannot see it, and without being taught we cannot use it
aright; what the Spirit does, is to give us light, skill and strength to use it
as we ought. I know it is pleaded, that the scriptures know nothing of
particular persons and cases now, and that this want must be supplied by the
Spirit, which therefore they would have to be a rule superior to the word. To
which I reply, that the best laws of any state know nothing of the names and
particular circumstances of thousands that are under them; yet when those laws
are well understood, and duly applied, they serve well to settle the various
cases that occur; or if in some cases they fail, it is because human laws are
imperfect; but the divine laws are not so; they are perfect, and therefore are
sufficient thoroughly to furnish the man of God unto all good works. 2 Timothy
3.16, 17. And the meek he will guide in judgment, and the meek he will teach
his way; but to pretend that we have a rule within us that leads us in any
respect contrary to God's written word, discovers a temper as contrary to true
meekness, as it would do for a judge to assume a power to dispense with the
king's laws, or to make new ones as the turn suited.

Those holy men that God employed to publish the New Testament as well as the
old, he gave demonstration to the world of their divine authority so to do, and
confirmed the word with signs following, Mar. 16.20. How great then must be
their delusion, if any imagine that the divine Spirit in them will teach them
to judge or act contrary to what he formerly moved holy men to write! Yet are
there not some even in this concourse of people (for I mean to speak plainly)
that profess to be so spiritual as not externally to regard some of the plain
commands of Christ, who at the same time depend not on a righteousness wrought
without them, but on what is wrought within them? But if we depend upon any
inward frames or exercises as the matter of our justification and acceptance
with God, we as really build upon the letter as any formalist in the world; all
the difference lies in the mode of doing; for the letter is do and live, and
the doing it requires is love to God and man, and a behavior agreeable thereto,
and who does not know that love has it is seat within? So that inward doings are
as plainly the letter as any thing that is outward, and to depend upon either
of them is directly contrary to believing on Him that justifies the ungodly.

The law requires a right temper and behavior, and says, I will if they will,
but gives no such thing; the gospel reveals Christ's righteousness, and gives
the Spirit to write the law in our hearts with this tenor, I will and they
shall, Gal. 3.10 -- 14. Heb. 8.10. In the oldness of the letter the promise is
always predicated upon something good in the creature; but the newness of the
Spirit rests the promise entirely upon the merits of the Savior, and the truth
of the promiser; and hence arises that important distinction, which the apostle
insists so much upon, between debt and grace, wages and gift, Romans 4.4, 5, 19.
and 6.23. Heb. 11.11. And here I would observe, that many greatly mistake
themselves about holding to salvation by grace. Because the blessings they hope
to receive are of infinitely greater value than their doings, therefore they
suppose they hold to grace and not debt. But could Adam it he had stood, or can
any angel in heaven now, suppose that there is any thing like an equal value
between their best obedience and most devout service, and eternal life? Surely
no. Well then, according to this notion, all the favors bestowed by the Creator
on men or angels, is all not debt but grace, and the apostles long talk of a
distinction between them was all either impertinence or imposition! But if men
would duly consider, they may know, that by the laws of men, where there is a
fair promise made of a particular sum upon a certain condition, if the
condition is fulfilled, the law will oblige the promiser to pay the sum, let it
be ever so much greater than the value of the condition that is performed. Debt
is to pay what is engaged; and do not all know that a gift to the needy and
miserable is quite another thing? And if any should come to beg for help, and
yet should so forget themselves as to dictate to others how much to give, and
also claim it as their right, instead of humbly asking for it as a free favor;
would not men soon discern the difference? How much more will not the searcher
of hearts do it?

Perhaps men blind themselves in our day concerning this matter, as much under
the word faith, as in any way whatever. When the word is used about human
affairs, it is as easily understood as other words, but in religion scarce any
are more controverted; and what can be the cause of it but it is being turned
from it is proper meaning?

Assent to a report that comes with proper evidence of its truth, is the plain
nature of faith, the influence the report has upon us is the effect or exercise
of faith; but it is supposed by multitudes, that devils and hypocrites affent
to the same truths the saint does, and therefore that something more belongs to
the nature of the saint's faith than assent to truth; but I humbly conceive
that this is a great mistake. The devils, and sometimes wicked men, believe
that there is one God that will punish sinners, so as to make them tremble; yet
there are two parts of truth on which our salvation turns that they never have
assented to: One is, that the condemning sentence against them is just; the
other is, that God can find in his heart to save those who have nothing of
their own but sin. The evidence of these truths shine as clear in the
scriptures, as the sun does in the firmament; but we have our Lord's own
testimony that, Every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to
the light, lest his deeds should be reproved: And this is their condemnation,
John 3.19, 20. Yet we have many masters since Nicodemus's day who will dare to
deny what our Lord here asserts. They allow it to be so with many, but not with
every one; the natural consequence of which is, for them to suppose it unjust,
for those who have some good ideas and dispositions, not to have a better claim
to salvation than others; and from hence proceed the exclamations we often
hear, against the doctrine of sovereign grace, as making God unjust, a
respecter of persons, etc. Whereas if it were truly believed that we are every
one condemned by a righteous sentence, there could be no room to complain of
injustice if all were executed, nor to doubt of its being entirely of grace if
any were pardoned. And how absurd is it to imagine that God will pardon any one
soul till it comes to own his justice? For without that they can never be truly
reconciled to his government, nor he honored in their salvation. And if so,
then how absurd are all those notions (of which our world is full) that sinners
in general believe the gospel to be true, but that they have a great deal to do
in order to get its blessings applied to them! For all doings before
reconciliation are a putting off for the present, and if they believed they
were justly condemned, how could they bear with delay lest the door should be
shut against them forever. And if they believed that God speaks the truth when
he proclaims pardon to the chief of sinners, what duties could they do before
they received his testimony, and set to their seal that he is true?

If a man that is under sentence of death should slip from his confinement, and
do ever so much in hopes of being again received as a good subject, don't all
men know that his doings can never be true obedience to the authority that
condemned him, till that authority either reverses the sentence, or grants him
a pardon? And now let us see what sort of faith those people have, who are not
ready to come to Christ now, yet say they are striving for if, and hope to
obtain it hereafter. Why indeed they believe there is a dangerous sentence out
against them, and they fear they should stand a poor chance to come as they
are, but they hope by and by to get ready for a re-hearing, and hope then to
make it appear that the Judge was mistaken in his sentence, and that though
they had been drawn into some very disagreable things, yet that they are now so
well disposed, that they ought to be received to mercy! These are notable
notions of faith, of justice, and of grace! O sinner, be not deceived! All such
attempts will succeed no better than the wife of Jereboam did, in feigning
herself to be another person, 1 Kings 14.5 -- 14.

Thus I think it plainly appears that no unrenewed soul truly believes that God
is either just or gracious, nor ever will by all the power of moral suasion;
nothing can produce this faith but that creating power that in the beginning
said, "Let there be light, and there was light:" First, the light of the law
which kills all the sinner's vain hopes; and then the light of the gospel,
which opens the true door of hope through Him who has fulfilled the law. Our
natural attachment to our doings, the apostle compares to a woman's being
wedded to an husband, whose authority is binding upon her as long as they both
live; and he observes that it would be adultery for her to marry another before
her first husband was dead; from whence he shows that we cannot be married to
Christ until the law is dead to us, and we to that; and in explaining his
meaning he is very careful to secure the honor of the law, that it is holy,
just and good; but when a surety has fully answered for a debt or crime, that
action is dead to the debtor or criminal, so that a just law cannot hurt him
for it, any more than the dead can hurt the living; hence this death or
dissolution of the marriage tie between us and the law, is by the body of
Christ. His bearing our sins in his own body on the tree, took away the power
of the law to condemn us, and a view of our sins, and of him who atoned for
them, turns the heart from sin and from seeking life by our doings, to trust in
and unite our hearts with Him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring
forth fruit unto God: Our life is still to be directed by the same law of love
to God and man, only it is changed into other hands, we are under law to Christ
our new husband. And it is well known that when a woman is married the law must
come upon her husband for all her debts, and that she is to look to him for all
she wants, and to be under his government: So here we are to serve him in
newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter.

The oldness of the letter promises life upon doing, but gives no strength to
do; the newness of the spirit says, as thy days is thy strength shall be; come
boldly to the throne of grace for help in time of need. The oldness of the
letter gives no encouragement to come only upon our doing, and sets a flaming
sword in the way of the guilty; but the newness of the spirit directs us to
take all our encouragement to come, from the merits, compassion, intercession
and promise of our husband, who has engaged justice and faithfulness to forgive
the guilty, and to cleanse the filthy. Heb. 4.14 -- 16. 1. John. 1.9. The
oldness of the letter suspends our hope doubtfully upon our obedience; the
newness of the spirit fixes it as an anchor sure and steadfast upon what is
within the vail. Heb. 6.19. Upon the whole, that teaching which enjoins duty
upon us as the condition of our obtaining favor of God, be that duty called
repentance, faith, or whatever it may, is legality; that which would abate the
law to bring it down to our ability is injustice; that which tends to release
us from our obligation, till almighty grace appears for our deliverance, is
licentiousness; but that teaching which opens the holy nature and authority of
God's law over us, showing how we are all condemned thereby, and then the help
there is freely proclaimed to every one in Jesus Christ, and the fullness there
is in him to enable the believer to perfect holiness in the fear of God, is
evangelical; therefore let each soul take heed what he hears.

The copiousness of this subject has carried me so far, that I must hasten to a
close with a short Address.

First, To you, my Brother, who art this day to take the solemn Charge of this
flock. The satisfaction we have gained of your being qualified in a good
measure, and called of God into this work, gives sensible pleasure, and I can
heartily bid you welcome into these labors of Christ's vineyard, and hope we
may be mutual helpers to each other. I doubt not but the charge of souls has
sometimes appeared to you an insupportable weight; it is indeed too heavy for
men or angels to go through of themselves; but ever remember, that the
government of Zion is upon Christ's shoulders, and you are to be strong in the
grace that is in him. I have endeavored, as I have been enabled, plainly to
lay before you the true nature of preaching the gospel, and may you be enabled
to be faithful therein unto the death, and receive a crown of life through
Jesus Christ our Lord!

Secondly, To this dear Church of Christ. Brethren, we rejoice with you this
day, to see things so comfortably settled among you after your sore trials, and
that you are like to enjoy the stated ministrations of the divine word and
ordinances again: These are favors greatly to be prized and thankfully to be
improved; though I hope you will never forget the sensible experience you have
had of the uncertainty of their continuance; and so that you ought always to
live with an entire dependence on the great Head of the church, both for the
continuance of these means, and also for a blessing on the use of them.

And permit me my Brethren to lay before both officers and members, three
points of truth, which I earnestly request you to keep always in mind; which
are, 1. That a visible church state with it is order and government, is not an
invention of men, but the appointment of God. Therefore, 2. That those who
rightly join therein, join themselves to Him, who is both able and faithful to
carry them through all that he calls them to do or suffer in his cause. Hence,
3. There can never be any just excuse for one soul to desert this cause while
HE remain what HE is.


These are such self-evident truths that it might seem an affront to your
understandings to stand long to prove them, yet through our darkness they are
so often forgotten, and that forgetfulness is productive of so many mischiefs,
that I presume you will not deem it unseasonable thus to stir up your pure
minds by way of remembrance. A due regard to these points would prevent what
has often happened, of persons joining with a church in its prosperity, and
deserting it in adversity, being sond of comfort, but backward to do their
duty. And a just view of these truths would prevent persons joining to the
church when they do not to the Lord. We read when Ananias and his wife were
struck dead for their deceit, that of the rest durst no man join himself to
them; but believers were the more added to the Lord, Acts 5.13, 14. Viewing
things in this light would keep people from trusting their religion to their
minister, without seeing with their own eyes, on the one hand; or on the other,
rising in resentment against them because they will not do for gods. Paul says,
we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may
be of God, and not of us; and who was ever so stupid as to think a vessel could
seed them without new supplies, or to quarrel with it because they found it
empty; would they not rather carry it to the store that it might be filled
again? Well, my Brethren, if you will do so with your ministers, it will learn
you the true difference, between having a man's person in admiration because of
advantage, and esteeming him highly in love for his works sake. Again, if we
are truly joined to the Lord, we have a friend at hand to open our griefs to,
and to roll our burdens upon, which may keep us from the error of many, who
being burdened with their brother, whisper it to this, that and the other,
instead of acting according to divine rule with him. Prove. 25.9. Matt. 18.15 --
17. If we viewed Him who walks in the midst of his churches, with eyes like a
flame of fire, how would it keep us from complaining of our brethren, without
being faithful to them? Since he has given clear direction therein, how
churches are to be faithful to their members, and members to churches, that
have strayed, so as either to recover them, or to clear our selves of them, if
they will not be reformed. In short, when these truths are duly remembered they
will make ministers faithful to their people, and people faithful to their
ministers, for their obligations are mutual; and the right performance of every
duty toward each other, is serving the Lord Christ; and when ministers view how
they owe their all to Him, how gladly will they spend and be spent in his
cause? And the same view will make people as glad to discharge their duty
toward their ministers, and toward each other. Therefore, let us hold fast
the profession of our faith without wavering (for he is faithful that promised)
and let us consider one another to provoke unto love, and to good works; not
forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the manner of some is; but
exhorting one another, and so much the more, as ye see the day approaching!

AMEN.
Lately Published by the same Author, and to be Sold by Phillip Freeman, in
Union-Street.
I. GOspel Comforts under heavy Tidings, with some Memoirs of Mrs. Elizabeth
Backus. II. The Doctrine of sovereign Grace vindicated; and also the Constancy
and Duty of holding forth, divine Sovereignty and Man's Impotency, while yet we
address their Consciences with the Warnings of Truth, and Calls of the Gospel.
And his other Works.

