THE VOTES and PROCEEDINGS OF THE FREEHOLDERS and other INHABITANTS OF THE Town
of BOSTON, In Town Meeting assembled, ACCORDING TO LAW.

[ Published by Order of the Town.]

To which is prefixed, As Introductory, an attested Copy of a Vote of the Town
at a preceding Meeting.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY EDES AND GILL, IN QUEEN STREET, AND T. AND J. FLEET, IN
CORNHILL.

At a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of Boston,
duly warned, and legally assembled, in Faneuil-Hall, on Wednesday the 28th of
October, 1772; and from thence continued by Adjournments to Monday the 2d of
November following.
It was moved, That a Committee of Correspondence be appointed, to consist of
Twenty-one Persons, "to state the Rights of the Colonists, and of this Province
in particular, as Men, as Christians, and as Subjects,; to Communicate and
Publish the same to the several Towns in this Province, and to the World, as
the Sense of this Town, with the Infringements and Violations thereof that have
been, or from Time to Time may be made; also requesting of each Town a free
Communication of their Sentiments on this Subject."

Whereupon the following Gentlemen were nominated and appointed for the
Purposes aforesaid, to make Report to the Town as soon as may be, viz. The Hon.
James Otis, Esquire Mr. Samuel Adams, Dr. Joseph Warren, Dr. Benjamin Church, Mr.
William Dennie, Mr. William Greenleaf, Joseph Greenleaf, Esquire Dr. Thomas Young,
Mr. William Powell, Mr. Nathaniel Appleton, Mr. Oliver Wendell, Mr. John
Sweetser, Josiah Quincy, Esquire Capt. John Bradford, Richard Boynton, Esquire Captain
William Mackay, Major Nathaniel Barber, Deacon Caleb Davis, Mr. Alexander Hill,
Mr. William Molineux, and Mr. Robert Pierpont.

A true Copy, Attest. WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

At a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of BOSTON,
duly warned and assembled in Faneuil-Hall according to Law, on Friday the 20th
of November, 1772; then and there to receive and act upon the Report of a
Committee appointed at a former Meeting on the 2d of the same Month, and such
other Things as might properly come under the Consideration of the Town. The
Honorable JOHN HANCOCK, Esquire Being unanimously chosen Moderator, The Chairman of
said Committee acquainted him that he was ready to make Report, and read the
same as follows.
THE Committee appointed by the Town the second Instant "to state the Rights of
the Colonists and of this Province in particular, as Men, as Christians, and as
Subjects; to communicate and publish the same to the several Towns in this
Province and to the World, as the Sense of this Town, with the Infringements
and Violations thereof that have been, or from Time to Time may be made. Also
requesting of each Town a free Communication of their Sentiments on this
Subject," -- beg Leave to report.

First, A State of the Rights of the Colonists and of this Province in
particular. Secondly, A List of the Infringements and Violations of those
Rights. Thirdly, A Letter of Correspondence with the other Towns.
I. Natural Rights of the Colonists as Men.
Among the natural Rights of the Colonists are these: First, a Right to Life;
secondly, to Liberty; thirdly, to Property; together with the Right to support
and defend them in the best Manner they can. These are evident Branches of,
rather than Deductions from the Duty of Self-Preservation, commonly called the
first Law of Nature.

All Men have a Right to remain in a State of Nature as long as they please:
And in Case of intolerable Oppression, civil or religious, to leave the
Society they belong to, and enter into another.

When Men enter into Society, it is by voluntary Consent; and they have a Right
to demand and insist upon the Performance of such Conditions and previous
Limitations as form an equitable original Compact.

Every natural Right, not expressly given up, or from the Nature of a social
Compact necessarily ceded, remains.

All positive and civil Laws, should conform as far as possible, to the Law of
natural Reason and Equity.

As neither Reason requires, nor Religion permits the contrary, every Man
living in or out of a State of civil Society, has a Right peaceably and quietly
to worship GOD, according to the Dictates of his Conscience.

" Just and true Liberty, equal and impartial Liberty" in Matters spiritual and
temporal, is a Thing that all Men are clearly entitled to, by the eternal and
immutable Laws of GOD and Nature, as well as by the Law of Nations, and all
well grounded municipal Laws, which must have their Foundation in the former.

In Regard to Religion, mutual Toleration in the different Professions thereof,
is what all good and candid Minds in all Ages have ever practiced: and both by
Precept and Example inculcated on Mankind: And it is now generally agreed among
Christians, that this Spirit of Toleration, in the fullest Extent consistent,
with the Being of Civil Society, "is the chief characteristical Mark of the
true Church." See Lock's Letters on Toleration.
Insomuch that Mr. Lock has asserted, and proved beyond the Possibility of
Contradiction on any solid Ground, that such Toleration ought to be extended to
all whose Doctrines are not subversive of Society. The only Sects which he
thinks ought to be, and which by all wise Laws are excluded from such
Toleration, are those who teach Doctrines subversive of the civil Government
under which they live. The Roman Catholics or Papists are excluded, by Reason
of such Doctrines as these, "that Princes excommunicated may be deposed, and
those they call Heretics may be destroyed without Mercy; besides their
recognizing the Pope in so absolute a Manner, in Subversion of Government, by
introducing as far as possible into the States, under whose Protection they
enjoy Life, Liberty and Property, that Solecism in Politics, Imperium in
Imperio A Government within a Government.
, leading directly to the worst Anarchy and Confusion, civil Discord, War and
Bloodshed.

The natural Liberty of Man, by entering into Society, is abridg'd or
restrained so far only as is necessary for the great End of Society, the best
Good of the Whole.

In the State of Nature, every Man is, under GOD, Judge, and sole Judge, of his
own Rights, and of the Injuries done him: By entering into Society, he agrees
to an Arbiter or indifferent Judge between him and his Neighbors; but he no
more renounces his original Right, than by taking a Cause out of the ordinary
Course of Law, and leaving the Decision to Referces or indifferent Arbitrators.
In the last Case he must pay the Referces for Time and Trouble; he should also
be willing to pay his just Quota for the Support of Government, the Law and the
Constitution; the End of which is to furnish indifferent and impartial Judges
in all Cases that may happen, whether civil, ecclesiastical, marine or military.

"The natural Liberty of Man is to be free from any superior Power on Earth,
and not to be under the Will or legislative Authority of Man; but only to have
the Law of Nature for his Rule." Lock on Government.


In the State of Nature, Men may, as the Patriarchs did, employ hired Servants
for the Defense of their Lives, Liberties and Property; and they should pay
them reasonable Wages. Government was instituted for the Purposes of common
Defense; and those who hold the Reins of Government have an equitable natural
Right to an honorable Support from the same Principle "that the Labourer is
worthy of his Hire": But then the same Community which they serve, ought to be
the Assessors of their Pay: Governors have no Right to seek and take what they
please; by this, instead of being content with the Station assigned them, that
of honorable Servants of the Society, they would soon become absolute Masters,
Despots and Tyrants. Hence as a private Man has a Right to say, what Wages he
will give in his private Affairs, so has a Community to determine what they
will give and grant of their Substance, for the Administration of public
Affairs. And in both Cases, more are ready generally to offer their Service at
the proposed and stipulated Price, than are able and willing to perform their
Duty.

In short, it is the greatest Absurdity to suppose it in the Power of one or
any Number of Men, at the entering into Society, to renounce their essential
natural Rights, or the Means of preserving those Rights; when the grand End of
civil Government from the very Nature of its Institution, is for the Support,
Protection and Defense of those very Rights: The principal of which as is
before observed, are Life, Liberty and Property. If Men through Fear, Fraud or
Mistake, should in Terms renounce or give up any essential natural Right, the
eternal Law of Reason and the grand End of Society, would absolutely vacate
such Renunciation; the Right to Freedom being the Gift of GOD ALMIGHTY, it is
not in the Power of Man to alienate this Gift, and voluntarily become a Slave.

II. The Rights of the Colonists as Christians.
These may be best understood by reading and carefully studying the Institutes
of the great Lawgiver and Head of the Christian Church: which are to be found
clearly written and promulgated in the New Testament.

By the Act of the British Parliament commonly called the Toleration Act, every
Subject in England, except Papists, etc. was restored to, and re-established
in, his natural Right to worship GOD according to the Dictates of his own
Conscience. And by the Charter of this Province, it is granted, ordained and
established (that is declared as an original Right) that there shall be Liberty
of Conscience allowed in the Worship of GOD, to all Christians except Papists,
inhabiting, or which shall Inhabit or be resident within said Province or
Territory. See 1 Wm. and Mary, St. 2. C. 18. and Massachusetts Charter.
Magna Charta itself is in Substance but a constrained Declaration, or
Proclamation and Promulgation, in the Name of King, Lords and Commons, of the
Sense the latter had, of their original, inherent, indefeasible natural Rights;
Lord Coke's Inst. Blackstone's Commentaries, V. t. pa. 122. the Bill of Rights
and the Act of Settlement.
as also those of free Citizens equally perdurable with the other. That great
Author, that great Jurists and even that Court Writer Mr. Justies Blackstone
holds, that this Recognition was justly obtained of King John Sword in Hand.
And peradventure, it must be one Day Sword in Hand again rescued and preserved
from total Destruction and Oblivion.

III. The Rights of the Colonists as Subjects.
A Common wealth or State is a Body politic or civil Society of Men, united
together to promote their natural Safety, and prosperity, by Means of their
Union See Lock and Vatel.


The absolute Rights of Englishmen, and all Freemen in or out of civil,
Society, are principally, personal Security, personal Liberty and private
Property.

All Persons born in the British American Colonies, are, by the Laws of GOD and
Nature, and by the common Law of England, exculsive of all Charters from the
Crown, well entitled, and by Acts of the British Parliament are declared to be
entitled, to all the natural, essential, inherent and inseparable Rights,
Liberties and Privileges of Subjects born in Great Britain, or within the
Realm. Among those Rights are the following; which no Man, or Body of Men,
consistently with their own Rights as Men and Citizens, or Members of Society,
can for themselves give up, or take away from others.

First, "The first fundamental positive Law of all Common wealths or States, is
the establishing the Legislative Power: As the first fundamental natural Law
also, which is to govern even the Legislative Power itself, is the Preservation
of the Society." Lock on Government. Salu^ Populi suprema Lex esto.


Secondly, The Legislative has no Right to absolute arbitrary Power over the
Lives and Fortunes of the People: Nor can Mortals assume a Prerogative, not
only too high for Men, but for Angels; and therefore reserved for the Exercise
of the Deity alone.

"The Legislative cannot justly assume to itself a Power to rule by extempore
arbitrary Decrees; but it is bound to see that Justice is dispensed, and that
the Rights of the Subjects be decided, by promulgated, standing and known Laws,
and authorized independent Judges;" that is, Independent as far as possible, of
Prince and People. " There should be one Rule of Justice for Rich and Poor; for
the Favorite at Court, and the Countryman at the Plough." Lock.


Thirdly, The Supreme Power cannot justly take from any Man, any Part of his
Property without his Consent, in Person or by his Representative.

These are some of the first Principles of natural Law and Justice, and the
great Barriers of all Free States, and of the British Constitution in
particular. It is utterly irreconcilable to these Principles, and to many
other fundamental Maxims of the common Law, common Sense and Reason, that a
British House of Commons, should have a Right, at Pleasure, to give and grant
the Property of the Colonists. That these Colonists are well entitled to all
the essential Rights, Liberties and Privileges of Men and Freemen, born in
Britain, is manifest, not only from the Colony Charters in general, but Acts of
the British Parliament. The Statute of the 13th of Geo. 2. c. 7. naturalizes
even Foreigners after seven Years Residence. The Words of the
Massachusetts-Charter are these, "And further our Will and Pleasure is, and we
do hereby for Us, our Heirs and Successors, grant, establish and ordain, that
all and every of the Subjects of Us, our Heirs and Successors, which shall go
to and inhabit within our said Province or Territory and every of their
Children which shall happen to be born there, or on the Seas in going thither,
or returning from thence, shall have and enjoy all Liberties and Immunities of
free and natural Subjects within any of the Dominions of Us, our Heirs and
Successors, to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes whatsoever, as if they
and every of them were born within this our Realm of England." Now what Liberty
can there be, where Property is taken away without Consent? Can it be said with
any Color of Truth and Justice, that this Continent of three Thousand Miles in
Length, and of a Breadth as yet unexplored, in which however, it is supposed,
there are five Millions of People, has the least Voice, Vote, or Influence in
the Decisions of the British Parliament? Have they, all together, any more
Right or Power to return a single Member to that House of Commons, who have,
not inadvertently, but deliberately assumed a Power to dispose of their Lives,
See the Act of the last Session relating to the King's Dock-Yards.
Liberties and Properties, than to choose an Emperor of China! Had the Colonists
a Right to return Members to the British Parliament, it would only be hurtful;
as from their local Situation and Circumstances, it is impossible they should
be ever truly and properly represented there. The Inhabitants of this Country,
in all Probability, in a few Years, will be more numerous, than those of Great
Britain and Ireland together: Yet it is absurdly expected, by the Promoters of
the present Measures, that these, with their Posterity to all Generations,
should be easy, while their Property shall be disposed of by a House of Commons
at Three Thousand Miles distance from them; and who cannot be supposed to have
the least Care or Concern for their real Interest: Who have not only no natural
Care for their Interest, but must be in effect bribed against it; as every
Burden they lay on the Colonists is so much saved or gained to themselves.
Hitherto many of the Colonists have been free from Quit Rents; but if the
Breath of a British House of Commons, can originate an Act for taking away all
our Money, our Lands will go next; or be subject to Rack Rents from haughty and
relentless Landlords who will ride at case, while we are trodden in the Dirt.
The Colonists have been branded with the odious Names of Traitors and Rebels
only for complaining of their Grievances: How long such Treatment will, or
ought to be born, is submitted.

A List of Infringements and Violations of Rights.
WE cannot help thinking, that an Enumeration of some of the most open
Infringements of our Rights, will by every candid Person be judged sufficient
to justify whatever Measures have been already taken, or may be thought proper
to be taken, in order to obtain a Redress of the Grievances under which we
labor. Among many others, we humbly conceive, that the following will not fail
to excite the Attention of all who consider themselves interested in the
Happiness and Freedom of Mankind in general, and of this Continent and Province
in particular.

1st. The British Parliament have assumed the Powers of Legislation for the
Colonists in all Cases whatsoever, without obtaining the Consent of the
Inhabitants, which is ever essentially necessary to the rightful Establishment
of such a Legislative.

2dly. They have exerted that assumed Power, in raising a Revenue in the
Colonies without their Consent; thereby depriving them of that Right which
every Man has to keep his own Earnings in his own Hands until he shall, in
Person, or by his Representative, think fit to part with the Whole or any
Portion of it. This Infringement is the more extraordinary, when we consider
the laudable Care which the British House of Commons have taken, to reserve
entirely and absolutely to themselves the Powers of giving and granting Money.
They not only insist on originating every Money Bill in their own House, but
will not even allow the House of Lords to make an Amendment in these Bills. So
tenacious are they of this Privilege, so jealous of any Infringement of the
sole and absolute Right the People have to dispose of their own Money. And what
renders this Infringement the more grievous is, that what of our Earnings still
remains in our Hands is in a great measure deprived of it is Value, so long as
the British Parliament continue to claim and exercise this Power of taxing us;
for we cannot justly call that our Property, which others may, when they please
take away from us against our Will.

In this respect we are treated with less Decency and Regard than the Romans
showed even to the Provinces which they had conquered. They only determined
upon the Sum which each should furnish, and left every Province to raise it in
the Manner most easy and convenient to themselves.

3dly. A Number of new Officers, unknown in the Charter of this Province, have
been appointed to superintend this Revenue; whereas by our Charter, the Great
and General Court or Assembly of this Province, has the sole Right of
appointing all Civil Officers, excepting only such Officers, the election and
constitution of whom is, in said Charter, expressly excepted; among whom these
Officers are not included.

4thly. These Officers are by their Commissions invested with Powers altogether
unconstitutional, and entirely destructive to that Security which we have a
right to enjoy; and to the last degree dangerous, not only to our property, but
to our lives: For the Commissioners of his Majesty's Customs in America, or any
three of them, are by their Commission empowered, "by writing under their hands
and seals to constitute and appoint inferior Officers in all and singular the
Port within the Limits of their Commissions." Each of these petty officers so
made is entrusted with Power more absolute and arbitrary than ought to be
lodged in the hands of any Man or Body of Men whatsoever; for in the Commssion
aforementioned, his Majesty gives and grants unto his said Commissioners, or
any three of them, and to all and every the Collectors, Deputy-Collectors,
Ministers, Servants, and all other Officers serving and attending in all and
every the Ports and other Places within the Limits of their Commission, full
Power and Authority, from time to time, at their or any of their Wills and
Pleasures, as well by Night as by Day, to enter and go on board any Ship, Boat,
or other Vessel, riding, lying, or being within, or coming into, any Port,
Harbor, Creek or Haven, within the limits of their Commission; and also in the
daytime to go into any House, Shop, Cellar, or any other Place, where any
Goods, Wares or Merchandises lie concealed, or are suspected to lie concealed,
whereof the customs and other duties, have not been, or shall not be, duly paid
and truly satisfied, answered or paid unto the Collectors, Deputy-Collectors,
Ministers, Servants, and other Officers respectively, or otherwise agreed for;
and the said House, Shop, Warehouse, Cellar, and other Place to search and
survey, and all and every the Boxes, Trunks, Chests and Packs then and there
found to break open."

Thus our Houses, and even our Bed-Chambers, are exposed to be ransacked, our
Boxes, Trunks and Chests broke open, ravaged and plundered, by Wretches, whom
no prudent Man would venture to employ even as menial Servants; whenever they
are pleased to say they suspect there are in the House, Wares, etc. for which
the Duties have not been paid. Flagrant instances of the wanton exercise of
this Power, have frequently happened in this and other seaport Towns. By this
we are cut off from that domestic security which renders the Lives of the most
unhappy in some measure agreeable. These Officers may under color of Law and
the cloak of a general warrant, break through the sacred Rights of the Domicil,
ransack Men's Houses, destroy their Securities, carry off their Property, and
with little Danger to themselves commit the most horrid Murders.

And we complain of it as a further Grievance, that notwithstanding by the
Charter of this Province, the Governor and the Great and General Court or
Assembly of this province or Territory, for the time being, shall have full
power and authority, from time to time, to make, ordain and establish all
manner of wholesome and reasonable Laws, Orders, Statutes, and Ordinances,
Directions and Instructions, and that if the same shall not within the term of
three years after presenting the same to his Majesty in Privy Council be
disallowed, they shall be and continue in full force and effect, until the same
shall be repealed by the Great and General Assembly of this province: Yet the
Parliament of Great Britain have rendered, or attempted to render, null and
void, a Law of this province, made and passed in the Reign of his late Majesty
George the First, entitled, "An Act stating the Fees of the Custom-House
Officers within this province," and by mere dint of power, in violation of the
Charter aforesaid, established other and exorbitant Fees, for the same
Officers; any Law, of the province, to the contrary notwithstanding.

5thly. Fleets and Armies have been introduced to support these
unconstitutional Officers in collecting and managing this unconstitutional
Revenue; and Troops have been quartered in this Metropolis for that purpose.
Introducing and quartering Standing Armies in a free Country in times of Peace,
without the consent of the People either by themselves or by their
Representatives, is, and always has been deemed, a violation of their Rights as
Freemen; and of the Charter or Compact made between the King of Great Britain
and the People of this Province, whereby all the Rights of British Subjects are
confirmed to us.

6thly. The Revenue arising from this Tax unconstitutionally laid, and
committed to the management of Persons arbitrarily appointed and supported by
an armed Force quartered in a free City, has been in part applied to the most
destructive purposes. It is absolutely necessary in a mixed Government, like
that of this Province, that a due proportion or balance of Power should be
established among the several Branches of the Legislative. Our Ancestors
received from King William and Queen Mary a Charter, by which it was understood
by both Parties in the contract, that such a proportion or balance was fixed;
and therefore every thing which renders any one Branch of the Legislative more
independent of the other two than it was originally designed, is an alteration
of the Constitution as settled by the Charter; and as it has been, until the
establishment of this Revenue, the constant practice of the general Assembly to
provide for the support of Government, so it is an essential part of our
Constitution, as it is a necessary means of preserving an Equilibrium, without
which we cannot continue a free State.

In particular it has always been held, that the dependence of the Governor of
this Province upon the General Assembly for his support, was necessary for the
preservation of this Equilibrium; nevertheless his Majesty has been pleased to
apply Fifteen Hundred Pounds Sterling annually, out of the American Revenue,
for the support of the Governor of this Province independent of the Assembly;
whereby the ancient connection between him and this People is weakened, the
Confidence in the Governor lessened, the Equilibrium destroyed, and the
Constitution essentially altered.

And we look upon it highly probable, from the best intelligence we have been
able to obtain, that not only our Governor and Lieutenant Governor, but the
Judges of the Superior Court of Judicature, as also the King's Attorney and
Solicitor General are to receive their Support from this grievous tribute. This
will, if accomplished, complete our Slavery: For if Taxes are to be raised from
us by the Parliament of Great Britain without our consent, and the Men on whose
opinions and decisions our Properties, Liberties, and Lives, in a great measure
depend, receive their Support from the Revenues arising from these Taxes, we
cannot, when we think on the depravity of mankind, avoid looking with horror on
the danger to which we are exposed! The British Parliament have shown their
wisdom in making the Judges there as independent as possible both on the Prince
and People, both for place and support: But our Judges hold their commissions
only during pleasure; the granting them Salaries out of this Revenue is
rendering them dependent on the Crown for their support. The King, upon his
first accession to the Throne, for giving the last Hand to the independency of
the Judges in England, not only upon himself but his successors, by
recommending and consenting to an Act of Parliament, by which the Judges are
continued in office, notwithstanding the demise of the King, which vacates all
other Commission, was applauded by the whole Nation. How alarming therefore
must it be to the inhabitants of this province, to find so wide a difference
made between the subjects in Britain and America, as the rendering the Judges
here altogether dependent on the Crown for their support.

7thly. We find ourselves greatly oppressed by Instructions sent to our
Governor from the Court of Great Britain; whereby the first branch of our
legislature is made merely a ministerial Engine. And the Province has already
felt such effects from these instructions, as we think, justly entitle us to
say, that they threaten an entire destruction of our Liberties; and must soon,
if not checked, render every branch of our government a useless burden upon
the people. We shall point out some of the alarming effects of these
instructions which have already taken place.

In consequence of instructions, the Governor has called and adjourned our
General Assemblies to a place highly inconvenient to the Members and greatly
disadvantageous to the interest of the province, even against his own declared
Intention.

In consequence of instructions, the Assembly has been prorogued from time to
time, when the important concerns of the Province required their meeting.

In obedience to instructions the General Assembly was Anno 1768 dissolved by
Governor Bernard, because they would not consent to rescind the Resolution of a
former House, and thereby sacrisice the Rights of their Constituents.

By an Instruction, the honorable his Majesty's Council are forbid to meet and
transact matters of public concern as a council of advice to the Governor,
unless called by the Governor; and if they should from a zealous regard to the
Interest of the province so meet at any time, the Governor is ordered to
negative them at the next Election of Counselors. And although by the Charter
of this province the Great and General Court have full power and authority to
impose Taxes upon the Estates and persons of all and every the proprietors and
inhabitants of this province, yet the Governor has been forbidden to give his
consent to an act imposing a Tax for the necessary support of government,
unless such persons as were pointed out in the said instruction, were exempted
from paying their just proportion of said Tax.

His Excellency has also pleaded instructions for giving up the provincial
Fortress, Castle William, into the hands of Troops, over whom he had declared
he had no control (and that at a time when they were menacing the slaughter of
the inhabitants of the town, and our streets were stained with the blood which
they had barbarously shed.) Thus our Governor, appointed and paid from
Great Britain with Money forced from us, is made an instrument of totally
preventing, or at least of rendering futile, every attempt of the other two
branches of our Legislative in favor of a distressed and wronged people: And
lest the complaints naturally occasioned by such oppression should excite
compassion in the royal Breast, and induce his Majesty seriously to set about
relieving us from the cruel Bondage and Insults which we, his loyal Subjects,
have so long suffered, the Governor is forbidden to consent to the payment of
an Agent to represent our grievances at the Court of Great Britain, unless he,
the Governor, consent to his Election; and we very well know what the Man must
be to whose appointment a Governor, in such circumstances, will consent.

While we are mentioning the Infringements of the Rights of this Colony in
particular by means of Instructions, we cannot help calling to remembrance the
late unexampled Suspension of the Legislative of a Sister Colony, New York, by
force of an Instruction, until they should comply with an arbitrary act of the
British Parliament, for quartering Troops, designed, by military execution, to
enforce the raising of a tribute.

8thly. The extending the power of the Courts of Vice-Admiralty to so enormous
a degree, as deprives the people in the colonies, in a great measure, of their
inestimable right to trials by Juries; which has ever been justly considered as
the grand Bulwark and Security of English property.

This alone is sufficient to rouse our jealousy: And we are again obliged to
take notice of the remarkable contrast, which the British parliament have been
pleased to exhibit between the Subjects in Great Britain and the Colonies. In
the same Statute, by which they give up to the decision of one dependent
interested Judge of Admiralty the estates and properties of the Colonists, they
expressly guard the estates and properties of the People of Great Britain; For
all forfeitures and penalties inflicted by the statute of the fourth of George
the third, or any other Act of Parliament relative to the Trade of the
Colonies, may be sued for in any Court of Admiralty in the Colonies; but all
penalties and forfeitures which shall be incurred in Great Britain, may be sued
for in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record in Westminster, or in the Court of
Exchequer in Scotland, respectively. Thus our Birthrights are taken from us;
and that too with every mark of indignity, insult and contempt. We may be
harrassed and dragged from one part of the Continent to the other (which some
of our Brethren here and in the country towns already have been) and finally be
deprived of our whole property, by the arbitrary determination of one biassed,
capricious Judge of the Admiralty.

9thly. The restraining us from erecting Slitting-Mills for manufacturing our
Iron the natural produce of this Country, is an Infringement of that Right with
which God and Nature have invested us, to make use of our skill and industry in
procuring the necessaries and conveniences of Life. And we look upon the
Restraint laid upon the Manufacture and Transportation of Hats to be altogether
unreasonable and grievous. Although by the Charter all Havens, Rivers, Ports,
Waters, etc. are expresely granted the Inhabitants of the Province and their
Successors, to their only proper use and behoof forever, yet the British
Parliament passed an act, whereby they restrain us from carrying our Wool, the
produce of our own Farms, even over a Ferry; whereby the Inhabitants have often
been put to the expense of carrying a Bag of Wool near an hundred miles by
land, when passing over a River or Water of one quarter of a mile, of which the
province are the absolute proprictors, would have prevented all that trouble.

10thly. The Act passed in the last Session of the British Parliament,
entitled. An Act for the better preserving his Majesty's Dock-Yards,
Magazines, Ships, Ammunition and Stores, is, as we apprehend, a violent
Infringemen of our Rights. By this Act, any one of us may be taken from his
Family, and carried to any part of Great Britain, there to be tried, whenever
it shall be pretended that he has been concerned in burning or otherwise
destroying any Boat or Vessel, or any Materials for building. etc. any naval or
victualling Store, etc. belonging to his Majesty. For by this Act all Persons
in the Realm, or in any of the Places thereto belonging (under which
Denomination we know the Colonies are meant to be included) may be indicted or
tried either in any County or Shire within this Realm, in like manner and form
as if the Offense had been committed in said County, as his Majesty and his
Successors may deem most expedient. Thus we are not only deprived of our grand
Right to Trial by our Peers in the Viciuity, but any person suspected, or
pretended to be suspected, may be hurried to Great Britain, to take his Trial
in any County the King or his Successors shall please to direct; where,
innocent or guilty, he is in great danger of being condomned; and whether
condemned or acquitted, he will probably be ruined by the Expense attending the
Trial, and his long Absence from his Family and Business; and we have the
strongest reason to apprehend that we shall soon experience the fatal Effects
of this Act, as about the Year 1769, the British Parliament passed Resovles for
taking up a number of persons in the Colonies and carrying them to
Great Britain for trial, pretending that they were authorized so to do by a
Statute passed in the Reign of Henry the Eighth in which they say the Colonies
were included, although the Act was passed long before any Colonies were
settled, or even in contemplation.

11thly As our Ancestors came over to this Country that they might not only
enjoy their civil but their religious Rights, and particularly desired to be
freed from the Prelates, who in those times cruelly persecuted all who differed
in sentiment from the established Church; we cannot see without concern, the
various attempts which have been made, and are now making, to establish an
American Episcopate. Our Episcopal brethren of the Colonies do enjoy, and
nightfully ought over to enjoy, the free exercise of their Religion; but as an
American Episcopate is by no means essential to that free exercise of their
Religion, we cannot help fearing that they who are so warmly contending for
such an Establishment, have Views altogether inconsistent with the universal
and peaceful enjoyment of our Christian privileges: And doing or attempting to
do any thing which has even the remotest tendency to endanger this Enjoyment,
is justly looked upon a great Grievance, and also an Infringement of our
Rights; which is not barely to exercise, but peaceably and securely to enjoy,
that Liberty with which CHRIST has made us free.

And we are further of Opinion, that no Power on Earth can justly give either
temporal or spiritual Jurisdiction within this Province, except the Great and
General Court. We think therefore that every design for establishing the
Jurisdiction of a Bishop in this Province, is a design both against our civil
and religious Rights: And we are well informed, that the more candid and
judicious of our Brethren of the Church of England in this and the other
Colonies, both Clergy and Laity, conceive of the establishing an American
Episcopate both unnecessary and unreasonable.

12thly. Another Grievance under which we labor is, The frequent Alteration of
the Bounds of the Colonies by Decisions before the King and Council,
explanatory of former Grants and Charters. This not only subjects Men to live
under a Constitution to which they have not consented, which in itself is a
great Grievance; but morevover under Color, that the Right of Soil is affected
by such Declarations, some Governors, or Ministers, or both in Conjunction,
have pretended to grant in Consequence of a Mandamus many Thousands of Acres of
vacant and appropriated Lands near a Century past, and rendered valuable by the
Labors of the present Cultivators and their Ancestors. There are very notable
Instances of Settlers, who having first purchased the Soil of the Natives, have
at considerable Expense obtained Confirmations of Title from this Province;
and, on being transferred to the Jurisdiction of the Province of New Hampshire,
have been put to the Trouble and Cost of a new Grant or Confirmation from
thence; and after all this, there has been a third Declaration of the Royal
Will, that they should thenceforth be considered as pertaining to the Province
of New York. The Troubles, Expenses and Dangers which Hundreds have been put to
on such Occasions, cannot here be recited; but so much may be said, that they
have been most cruelly harrassed, and even threatened with a military Force, to
dragoon them into a Compliance with the most unreasonable Demands.

A LETTER of Correspondence, to the other Towns.
BOSTON, November 20, 1772. GENTLEMEN,
WE, the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of Boston, in Town-Meeting duly
assembled, according to Law, apprehending there is abundant Reason to be
alarmed that the Plan of Despotism, which the Enemies of our invaluable Rights
have concerted, is rapidly hastening to a completion, can no longer conceal our
impatience under a constant, unremitted, uniform Aim to inslave us, or conside
in an Administration which threatens us with certain and inevitable
destruction. But, when in Addition to the repeated Inroads made upon the Rights
and Liberties of the Colonists, and of those in this Province in particular, we
reflect on the late extraordinary Measure in affixing Stipends, or Salaries
from the Crown to the Offices of the Judges of the Superior Court of
Judicature, making them not only entirely independent of the People, whose
Lives and Fortunes are so much in their Power, but absolutely dependent on the
Crown, (which may hereafter be worn by a Tyrant) both for their Appointment and
Support, we cannot but be extremely alarmed at the mischievous Tendency of this
Innovation; which, in our Opinion is directly contrary to the Spirit of the
British Constitution, pregnant with innumerable Evils, and has a direct
Tendency to deprive us of every thing valuable as Men, as Christians, and as
Subjects, entitled, by the Royal Charter, to all the Rights, Liberties and
Privileges of native Britons. Such being the critical State of this Province,
we think it our Duty on this truly distressing Occasion, to ask you, What can
withstand the Attacks of mere Power? What campreserve the Liberties of the
Subject, when the Barriers of the Constitution are taken away? The Town of
Boston, consulting on the Matter abovementioned, thought proper to make
Application to the Governor by a Committee; requesting his Excellency to
communicate such Intelligence as he might have received, relative to the Report
of the Judges having their Support independent of the Grants of this Province,
a Copy of which you have herewith in Paper No. 1. See Appendix, No.1.
To which we received as Answer the Paper No. 2. See Appendix, No. 2.
The Town on further Deliberation, thought it advisable to refer the Matter to
the Great and General Assembly; and accordingly in a second Address No. 3. See
Appendix, No. 3.
they requested his Excellency that the General Court might convene at the Time
to which they then stood prorogued; to which the Town received the Reply as in
No. 4. See Appendix, No. 4.
in which we are acquainted with his Intentions further to prorogue the General
Assembly, which has since taken Place. Thus, Gentlemen, it is evident his
Excellency declines giving the least Satisfaction as to the Matter in Request.
The Affair being of public Concernment, the Town of Boston thought it necessary
to consult with their Brethren throughout the Province; and for this Purpose
appointed a Committee, to communicate with our Fellow Sufferers, respecting
this recent Instance of Oppression, as well as the many other Violations of our
Rights under which we have groaned for several Years past -- This committee
have briefly recapitulated the sense we have of our invaluable Rights as Men,
as Christians, and as Subjects; and wherein we conceive those Rights to have
been violated, which we are desirous may be laid before your Town, that the
Subject may be weighed as its Importance requires, and the collected wisdom of
the whole People, as far as possible, be obtained, on a deliberation of such
great and lasting moment as to Involve in it the Fate of all our Posterity. --
Great Pains has been taken to persuade the British Administration to think,
that the good People of this Province in general are quiet and undisturbed at
the late Measures: and that any Uneasiness that appears, arises only from a few
factious designing and disaffected Men. This renders it the more necessary,
that the sense of the People should be explicitly declared. -- A free
Communication of your Sentiments to this Town, of our common Danger, is
earnestly solicited and will be gratefully received. If you concur with us in
Opinion, that our Rights are properly stated, and that, the several Acts of
Parliament, and Measures of Administration, pointed out by us, are subversive
of these Rights, you will doubtless think it of the untmost Importance that we
stand firm as one Man, to recover and support them; and to take such Measures,
by directing our Representatives, or otherwise, as your Wisdom and Fortitude
shall dictate, to rescue from impending Ruin our happy and glorious
Constitution. But if it should be the general Voice of this Province, that the
Rights, as we have stated them, do not belong to us; or, that the several
Measures of Administration in the British Court, are no Violations of these
Rights; or, that if they are thus violated or infringed, they are not worth
contending for, or resolutely mantaining; -- should this be the general Voice
of the Province, we must be resigned to our wretched Fate; but shall forever
lament the Extinction of that generous Ardor for Civil and Religious Liberty,
which in the Face of every Danger, and even Death itself, induced our Fathers,
to forsake the Bosom of their Native Country, and begin a Settlement on bare
Creation. -- But we trust this cannot be the Case: We are sure your Wisdom,
your Regard to Yourselves and the rising Generation, cannot suffer you to doze,
or set supinely indifferent, on the brink of Destruction, while the Iron Hand
of Oppression is daily tearing the the choicest Fruit from the fair Tree of
Liberty, planted by our worthy Predecessors, at the Expense of their Treasure,
and abundantly watered with their Blood. -- It is an observation of an eminent
Patriot, that a People long inurded to Hardships, loose by Degrees the very
notions of Liberty; they look upon themselves, as Creatures at Mercy, and that
all Impositions laid on, by Superior Hands, are legal and obligatory. -- But
thank Heaven this is not yet verified in America! We have yet some Share of
public Virtue remaining: We are not afraid of Poverty, but disdain Slavery. --
The Fate of Nations is so precarious, and Revolutions in States so often take
Place at an unexpected Moment, when the Hand of Power, by Fraud or Flattery,
has secured every Avenue of Retreat, and the Minds of the Subject debased to
its Purpose, that it becomes every Well-Wisher to his Country, while it has any
Remains of Freedom, to keep an Eagle Eye upon every Inovation and Stretch of
Power, in those that have the Rule over us. A recent Instance of this we have
in the late Revolutions in Sweden; by which the Prince, once subject to the
Laws of the State, has been able of a sudden, to declare himself an absolute
Monarch. The Sweeds were once a free, martial and valiant People: Their Minds
are now so debased, that they even rejoice at being subject to the Caprice and
arbitrary Power of a Tyrant, and kiss their Chains. It makes us shudder to
think, the late Measures of Administration may be productive of the like
Catastophe; which Heaven forbid! -- Let us consider Brethren, we are struggling
for our best Birth Rights and Inheritance; which being infringed, renders all
our Blessings precarious in their Enjoyments, and consequently trifling in
their Value. Let us disappoint the Men, who are raising themselves on the Ruin
of this Country. Let us convince every Invader of our Freedom, that we will be
as free, as the Constitution our Fathers recognized, will justify.

The foregoing Report was (...) read distinctly, and amended in the Meeting.
And then the Question was put, Whether the same be accepted (...) in the
Affirmative, Nem. Con.

A true Copy, Attest. WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

Upon a Motion made, Voted, That the foregoing Proceeding be attested by the
Town Clerk, and printed in a Pamphlet; and that the Committee be desired to
dispose of Six Hundred Copies thereof to the Selectmen of the Towns in the
Province, and such other Gentlemen as they shall think fit.

Voted, That the Town Clerk be directed to sign the foregoing Letter, and
forward as many of the same to the Selectmen of each Town in this Province, as
the Committee shall judge proper, and direct.

A true Copy, Attest.WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

APPENDIX.
(No. 1.) The MESSAGE of the Town of BOSTON to the GOVERNOR.
May it please your Excellency,
THE Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of Boston, legally assembled
in Faneuil-Hall, beg Leave to acquaint your Excellency, that a Report has
prevailed, which they have reason to apprehend is well grounded, that Stipends
are affixed to the Offices of the Judges of the Superior Court of Judicature,
etc. of this Province, whereby they are become Independent of the Grants of the
General Assembly for their Support; contrary to ancient and invariable Usage.
This Report has spread an Alarm among all considerate persons who have heard of
it in Town and Country; being viewed, as tending rapidly to complete the System
of their Slavery; which originated in the House of Commons of Great Britain,
assuming a Power and Authority, to give and grant the Moneys of the Colonists
without their Consent, and aginst their repeated Remonstrances. And, as the
Judges hold their Places during Pleasure, this Establishment appears big with
fatal Evils, so obvious that it is needless to trespass on your Excellency's
Time in mentioning them.

It is therefore the humble and earnest Request of the Town, that your
Excellency would be pleased to inform them, Whether you have received any such
Advice, relating to a Matter so deeply interesting to the Inhabitants of this
Province, which gives you Assurance that such an Establishment has been, or is
likely, to be made.

(No. II.) The GOVERNOR's ANSWER to the foregoing MESSAGE.
GENTLEMEN,
IT is by no Means proper for me to say before the Inhabitants of any Town
whatsoever, in Consequence of their Votes and Proceedings in a Town-Meeting,
any Part of my Correspondence as Governor of the Province, or to acquaint them
whether I have or have not received any Advices relating to the public Affairs
of the Government. This Reason alone, if your Address to me had been in other
Respects unexceptionable, would have been sufficient to restrain me from
complying with your Desire.

I shall always be ready to gratify the Inhabitants of the Town of Boston, upon
every regular Application to me on Business of public Concernment to the Town,
as far as I shall have it in my Power consistent with Fidelity to the Trust
which his Majesty had reposed in me.

T. HUTCHINSON.
Province-House, 30 Oct. 1772.
To the Inhabitants of the Town of Boston in Town-Meeting assembled at
Faneuil-Hall.
(No. III.) The PETITION of the TOWN to the GOVERNOR.
The PETITION of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of Boston,
legally assembled by Adjournment in Faneuil-Hall, on Friday October 30, 1772.
Humbly shows,
THAT your Petitioners are still greatly alarmed at the Report which has been
prevalent of late, viz. That Stipends are affixed to the Offices of the Judges
of the Superior Court of Judicature of this Province, by Order of the Crown,
for their Support.

Such an Establishment is contrary, not only to the plain and obvious Sense of
the Charter of this Province, but also to some of the fundamental Principles of
the Common Law; to the Benefit of which, all British Subjects, wherever
dispersed throughout the British Empire, are indubitably entitled.

Such a Jealousy have the Subjects of England for their Rights, Liberties and
Privileges, and so tender a Regard has been shown to them by his Majesty, that
notwithstanding the Provision made at the Revolution, that the Judges of the
King's Superior Courts of Law there, should hold their Commissions, not at
Pleasure, but during good Behavior, and since that Time for their Support. His
Majesty, among other the first Acts of his Reign, was graciously pleased to
recommend it to Parliament, and an Act passed, that their Commissions should
not cease at the Demise of the King; whereby every thing possible in human
Wisdom seems to have been done, to establish an Impartiality in their Decisions
not only between Subject and Subject, but between the Crown and the Subject. --
Of now much greater Importance must it be to preserve from the least
supposeable Bias, the Judges of a Court, invested by the Laws of this Province,
which have been approved of by Majesty, with Powers as fully and amply to all
Intents and Purposes whatsoever, as the Courts of King's Bench, Common Pleas
and Exchequer, within his Majesty's Kingdom of England have, or ought to have?

Your Excellency will allow your Petitioners, with due Submission to repeat,
that this Establishment appears to them pregnant with such fatal Evils, as that
the most distant thought of its taking Effect, fills their Minds with Dread and
Horror.

These Sir, are the Sentiments and Apprehensions of this Metropolis: Expressed
however, with due Defference to the Sentiments of the Province, with which your
Petitioners are anxiously sollicitous of being made acquainted.

It is therefore their earnest and humble Request, that your Excellency would
be pleased to allow the General Assembly to meet at the Time to which it now
stands prorogued; in order, that in that Constitutional Body, with whom it is
to inquire into Grievances and Redress them, the joint Wisdom of the Province
may be employed, in deliberating Province may be employed, in deliberating and
determining on a Matter so important and alarming.

(No. IV.) The GOVERNOR's ANSWER to the foregoing PETITION.
GENTLEMEN,
THE Royal Charter reserves to the Governor full Power and Authority, from time
to time, as he shall judge necessary, to adjourn, prorogue and dissolve the
General Assembly.

In the Exercise of this Power, both as to Time and Place, I have always been
governed by a Regard to his Majesty's Service and to the Interest of the
Province.

It did not appear to me necessary for those Purpose that the Assembly should
meet at the Time to which it now stands prorogued, and, before I was informed
of your Address, I had determined to prorogue it to a further Time.

The Reasons which you have advanced have not altered my Opinion.

If, notwithstanding, in Compliance with your Petition, I should alter my
Determination and meet the Assembly, contrary to my own Judgment, at such Time
as you judge necessary, I should, in Effect, yield to you the Exercise of that
Part of the Prerogative, and should be unable to justify my Conduct to the
King.

There would, moreover, be danger of encouraging the Inhabitants of the other
Towns in the Province to assemble, from time to time, in order to consider of
the Necessity or Expediency of a Session of the General Assembly, or to debate
and transact other Matters which the Law that authorizes Towns to assemble does
not make the Business of a Town-Meeting.

T. HUTCHINSON.
Province-House, Nov. 2. 1772.
To the Inhabitants of the Town of Boston in Town-Meeting assembled at
Faneuil-Hall.
This Reply having been read several Times and duly considered; it was moved,
and the Question accordingly put -- Whether the same be Satisfactory to the
Town, which passed in the Negative, Nem. Con.

And thereupon RESOLVED as the Opinion of the Inhabitants of this Town, That
they have, ever had, and ought to have, a Right to Petition the King or his
Representative for the Redress of such Grievances as they feel, or for
preventing of such as they have Reason to apprehend; and to Communicate their
Sentiments to other Towns.

Attest. WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.


