Mr. Lemuel Hedge's SERMON ON SINGING.

The Duty and Manner of Singing in Christian Churches, considered and
illustrated; IN A SERMON PREACHED AT A SINGING LECTURE IN WARWICK, JANUARY
29th, 1772.

By LEMUEL HEDGE, A. M. Pastor of the CHURCH there.

Published at the Request of the Singers.

Is any merry? let him sing Psalms,

JAMES 5.13. I will sing with the Spirit, and I will sing with the
Understanding also.

1. Cor. 14.15. BOSTON: PRINTED BY RICHARD DRAPER. MDCCLXXII.

THE Duty and Manner of Singing in Christian Churches, considered and
illustrated.
JOB 38th Chap. 7th Verse. When the Morning Stars sang together, and all the
Sons of GOD shouted for Joy.


HOLY Job, though he is said to be perfect and upright, one that feared God, and
avoided that which is evil; though he was a pattern of patience, and manifested
great resignation to the divine will, under the most grievous and uncommon
trials; yet the hand of God did sometimes so sorely press him, and he was so
scorched with the vehement heat of the furnace of affliction into which he was
cast, that like Moses, he spoke unadvisedly with his lips. He murmurs at the
dispensations of divine Providence toward him, and is ready to charge God with
severity in his dealings with him. For this, his friends had sharply reproved
him, and Elihu in an especial manner had spoken very closely and pertinently to
him, in order to convince him of the justice and equity of the divine conduct,
and to silence his murmurings, and bring him to acquiesce in God's providential
dealings with him: But all to little purpose; still Job is uneasy and
unsatisfied; till at last God himself speaks to him out of the whirlwind, and
closely pressed him with many serious and weighty questions in this, and the
following chapter.

The first question that God put to him, to humble him and show him his
ignorance, was concerning the creation of the world, and who it was that gave
it its regular form and structure, v. 4 -- 7 "Where wast thou when I laid the
foundations of the earth? declare, if thou have understanding. Who has laid
the measures thereof, if thou know? or who has stretched the line upon it?
Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the corner stone
thereof?" At the laying of which cornerstone, "the morning stars sang
together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy." It is the eternal Jehovah
that is here posing a mortal worm with these questions; and (as we might justly
expect) the language is sublime, the expressions lofty, and the sentiments well
adapted to strike conviction into a repining sufferer, murmuring at the
all-wise conduct of his Maker: q. d. O Job, you pretend to have a mighty
insight into the counsels of God; you have made a great figure among the
children of the East; thou set up for an oracle and do pretend to censure
the justice and equity of the divine proceedings -- now only tell me where thou
wast when the foundations of the earth were laid, declare how it came to be so
finely framed, so firmly fixed, so exactly proportioned, and so advantageously
situated: If you are so wise and understanding in the government of the world
as you pretend to be, you doubtless know something about the formation of this
noble fabric: and I demand of you to tell me where you was, when at the first
appearance of this glorious structure, the "morning stars" struck their
harmonious notes, and with perfect concord chanted the most melodious songs, in
praise to its great Creator. Was you then present, to hear the shouts of joy
among the sons of God, and in what a rapturous manner they applauded the work,
and adored the Workman? Was your ear charmed with the heavenly music? and did
you join your feeble voice, with the shouting miriads that extolled my name
upon that occasion?

Thus does God query with Job. on purpose to bring him to a sense of his folly,
in finding fault with His providence in governing the world, seeing he was not
present at the formation of it. And since God did not consult with him in
making the world, and yet it is well made; he need not expect that God should
consult with him about the government of the world, and yet it shall be well
governed: And therefore it became him and all others, cheerfully to acquiesce
in the wisdom of divine providence, and not to murmur at any of its proceedings.

Thus you see the connection of the text with the context, and what was the
design of God therein -- You see, the morning stars, (by which we are
undoubtedly to understand the angels) are bro't in singing praise to God at the
laying of the foundations of the earth; which supposes that they had an
existence, before the earth was regularly formed and fashioned, or otherwise
they could not sing together upon that occasion. Moses has told us Genesis i. x.
that "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth," -- the angels
doubtless are included in the creation of the former; and being formed to sing
their Maker's praise, they early began that blessed work, for which they are
here called morning stars: and carefully observing the hand of God forming and
fashioning this terraqueous globe, and making it a suitable habitation for man,
and knowing, perhaps, that their and our Creator would "rejoice in the
habitable parts of the earth, and his delight would be with the sons of men;"
as they saw matter, so they wanted not a disposition for praising God, and
giving to him the glory due to his great name therefore.

The latter part of the verse, in which it is said, all the sons of God shouted
for joy, I suppose to be only exegetical of the former: And what is designed by
the whole verse is, to show, that the angelic tribes were so struck with a
sense of the infinite majesty and power of God in rearing the stately structure
of the world, that they all with one accord expressed their joy, and glorified
God by offering to Him their melodious songs of praise and thanksgiving.

To sing praises to God, is the delightful employment of Heaven; and not only
angels, but men are capable of bearing a part in it: And therefore it becomes
them, in imitation of the blessed spirits above, to learn to tune their voices
in a manner suitable to offer praises to their maker -- and while they are in
this world, to begin that blessed work, which we hope to be forever employed
in, when we come to Heaven.

Under the direction of this text, I shall attempt the following things -- viz.

I. To show that singing praises to God, is a duty which He requires of all his
rational creatures, of men as well as of angels.

II. Say something as to the manner of performing this duty: -- and then
conclude with addresses suited to the occasion.

I. I am to show that singing praises to God, is a duty which He requires of
all his rational creatures, of men as well as of angels. -- Every rational
creature that has understanding enough to consider and contemplate the works of
God, and observe His perfections and attributes displayed in all the divine
operations, are under moral obligations to praise and glorify Him therefore.
Indeed the very design of God in forming reasonable creatures, and discovering
his perfections to them, was not only that He might communicate happiness to
them, but also that they might glorify Him; i. e. adore and praise Him for his
perfections: For whosoever offers praise, glorifieth me, says God, Ps. 50.23.
There is something of the divine attributes discovered in all the works of God,
whether of creation, providence, or grace: And according as God discovers
himself to his creatures, so should their acknowledgments of Him, be. And not
to acknowledge God according to the discoveries he makes of his perfections
unto us, is a degree of atheism itself: It is in a sense to deny that He is
possessed of those perfections, or worthy to be praised for them. Every being
ought to be acknowledged by others, according to the discoveries that are made
of It to others; otherwise It is denied by them: This is reasonable and sit in
the very nature of things. And since the supreme Being in his works has
discovered, unlimited power, unsearchable wisdom, boundless goodness, spotless
holiness, and inflexible justice, every reasonable creature is in duty bound to
praise Him for these his perfections, according to the discoveries he has, or
might have had of them.

The Psalmist says, Psalm cxlv. ^^.
All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord, i. e. they all even the inanimate
parts of the creation furnish rational intelligences with matter for praising
Him. In this sense "the heavens declare his glory, and the firmament shows
forth his handy work." And the "sun and moon, and all the stars of light,"
praise Him: They do it, by exciting angels and men to that blessed work; and
furnishing them with abundant matter for it. And when inanimate things, such as
the sun and moon and stars, are said to praise God; it intimates that there is
much excellency in the works of God, that if they could speak, they would
declare and show forth his praise; even as when the disciples of Christ
rejoiced and praised God with a loud voice, for all the mighty works which they
had seen, saying, Luke xix. ^^.
Blessed be the King that comes in the name of the Lord: Peace in heaven and
glory in the highest; the envious Pharisees did not like such music, and said
to Christ, "rebuke thy disciples:" But Christ answered, "I tell you that if
these should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out." So here,
if angels and men will not sing praise to God, for the works of creation,
providence and grace; rather than God should not have the glory thereof, the
sun and moon and stars, would all break out into joyful songs of praises to him.

You see, at the creation of the world, the blessed angels were "hymning the
eternal Father," adoring his power, wisdom and goodness, which were therein
displayed: so at the first appearance of the new creation, when Christ Jesus,
the cornerstone thereof was laid, then did these "morning stars" again sing
together, "and all the sons of God shouted for joy." No sooner was it known in
heaven, that the eternally begotten of the Father, appeared in a mortal form,
but an angel is ordered with swiftest wing to convey the news thereof to the
humble shepherds, who were with earnest expectation "waiting for the
consolation of Israel." These glad tidings of salvation were ushered in, by an
anthem of praise from the heavenly host; for suddenly there was with the angel
a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God and saying, Glory to God in the
highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men. Luke ii. 13, 14.


Thus we see that as at the birth of the old, so also of the new creation, the
blessed angels tuned their harps to praise their Creator. And it is well worthy
to be remarked here, that although neither the first creation of our world, nor
the redemption of it by Jesus Christ, was designed particularly for the benefit
of the angels, but for men only, yet these disinterested and benevolent spirits
rejoiced in it, and praised God for it. This is worthy of our imitation: and
let us learn from them, to bless and praise God for his goodness to others, as
well as to ourselves. The exercise of such benevolence and good will in us,
will be doing God's will on earth, as it is done heaven: and as in such a
temper we approach near the inhabitants of the heavenly world; so we shall be
sharers with them in their happiness, and partakers with them in their joys.

Singing praises to God, was not designed to be the employment of angels only,
but is a duty also incumbent upon man. God has given him a voice, and the
faculty of speech, which he is bound to employ in praising and glorifying his
Maker: Hence it is, that God has made singing a part of his worship; and he
expects and requires of every one, that they worship him in that way, according
to their ability and the capacity God has given them. We must "enter into his
gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise." And we are commanded
to sing unto the Lord with the voice of a Psalm Psalm xcviii. 5.
; and often, to praise him with our voices, and to sing praises unto Him.
Although singing be a token of joy, it is nevertheless a duty incumbent on us at
all times; for we are commanded to "rejoice evermore," and to "rejoice in the
Lord at all times"; nor can our circumstances be so afflictive, but that we
have occasion of singing praise to God: For how distressing soever our estate
may be, yet there are many favors and mercies shown to us which demand our
praises. And the pious Psalmist resolves, Psalm ci. 1.
I will sing of mercy and of judgment, unto thee O Lord will I sing.

Singing praises to God was a very sublime and solemn part of public worship,
under the Old Testament dispensation: And our Savior has recommended it to all
christians by his own example, who, we find "sung an hymn," after he had
instituted the sacrament of the Lord's supper. And God has been pleased to
testify his acceptance and approbation of this part of his worship under the
New Testament dispensation, by miraculous operations in favor of those that
were e^naged in this duty. When Paul and Silas were cast into prison -- "at
midnight they prayed and sang praises unto God;" and he testified his
acceptance of their worship, by causing a great earthquake which shook the
foundations of the prison, opened the doors, and loosed the bands of the
prisoners Acts 16.
. And this very instance, one would think should be enough to silence all
objectors, and convince every one that singing is an acceptable duty to God;
otherwise He would never have given such an evidence of his being well-pleased
with it. Moreover, the apostles of our Lord frequently enjoin it upon
christians as an incumbent duty, to "teach and admonish one another, in psalms,
hymns and spiritual songs, singing with grace in their hearts to the Lord."

Thus you see that this duty is in itself reasonable and fit: It is highly
proper that God should be praised by all his reasonable creatures; and when
they have a voice and capacity for it, they are under moral obligations to
perform it. And we cannot suppose, but that the neglect of it in such as might
perform it gracefully and acceptably (if they took due pains) is a criminal
omission. It is a duty recommended to us by the greatest examples, and enjoined
by the greatest Authority. We have the example of the holy angels, who were
early engaged in this heavenly work -- we have the example of the Old Testament
Church -- of Christ and his apostles -- as well as many express precepts to
enforce it upon us. Nay, There is scarce a book in all the scriptures, but what
recommends this as a duty incumbent on us: And good men in all ages of the
Church, have taken pains to promote it.

It may be added, from the experience of many good Authors, that where psalmody
is most used, those churches are generally the most filled: -- It has a great
influence upon the minds of most people, especially youth, and keeps them from
many vices on the Lord's Day, and at other times, which were it not for the
charms of music, they would readily run into. God is daily communicating his
mercy, benefits, and grace unto us; and we are bound to bring unto Him our
tribute of praise and thanksgiving: And to sing praises, is by Him accepted, as
the highest part of divine worship, and in it we approach the nearest to the
worship of the heavenly hosts. Prayer, indeed, is a great duty, and fitted to a
state of trial and probation: But when that state is over, prayer will cease;
but singing of God's praises never will. It will be the main Employment of men,
as well as of angels, as soon as we get to heaven. Therefore, as the Apostle 1
Cor. xlii.
prefers Charity, before all other christain graces, because it never fails;
so may we prefer singing before all other christian duties, because it will
never be laid aside -- a whole eternity will be employed in singing anthems of
praise to God and to the Lamb.

Thus much with regard to the Duty of singing. I proceed,

II. To say something of the manner, in which it ought to be performed -- And
here the example of the Angels is for our imitation -- the morning stars sang
together.

This implies,

1. Their union and agreement among themselves, to offer up their praises to
God. They did not sing as scattered individuals, here one, and there another;
but combined together, and sang in concert. It adds much to the beauty of
music, and makes it most melodious, to have the united voices of a multitude,
harmonizing together in the song. God has made men, as well as angels, sociable
creatures, and he expects and requires that they unite together in offering up
their praises to Him: And as it is good for them to dwell, so to sing together
in unity. And we should all be united in our hearts, in this part of his
worship; and as many of us as can, should unite our voices, that with one heart
and with one voice, we may glorify God.

Indeed, it is not every one, let him take never so much pains with himself,
that can modulate his voice so as to be able to sing in concert with others.
Every one has his proper gift of God: And some have a talent this way, others
have not. But it is to be feared that many that have a talent for singing,
improve it not; but let it lie by wholly neglected. Such, will have but a poor
account to give of themselves when an enquiry is made, how they have improved
the talents committed to them, for their Lord's glory. But where there is the
want of a talent, there should be no want of a disposition and good will that
God should be worshipped in this manner. They should not look upon it, as an
indifferent and needless thing for men to learn to sing God's praises
harmoniously; but should help it forward and do all they can to encourage
others, in that, which they have not an ability for themselves; and in this
way, show their good will to the praises of God; and then they would have this
to comfort them, that "where there is a willing mind it is accepted according
to what a man has, and not according to what he has not." -- But the conduct
of some in the world, with regard to this affair, has been such as gives too
much reason to suspect, whether they have any desire that God's praises should
be sung in christian assemblies, or not -- or at least, they are no friends to
regular, and harmonious singing, and care not in how barbarous a manner this
part of worship is performed: Hence it is that they oppose all endeavors to
retrieve the credit of our church-musick, and rescue it from that degeneracy
and decay into which it was unhappily fallen. If we are to worship God at all
in this way, (as I hope no one will scruple) why should we not worship him as
well as we are able? And why should we not follow on toward perfection in this
divine art, as well as in any other? If we sing his praises in the best manner
we are able, after our greatest improvement, we do not do it too well, nor even
then, in a manner adequate to what his perfections demand -- we come infinitely
short of what is his just due. But it may be some alleviation of our sorrow
that we can praise Him no better, to consider, that He is, in a more perfect
manner praised by the angels in heaven. It certainly concerns us to wish well
to his praises, and do all we can to encourage the singing of them. -- Let us
all be united, in a thing so laudable -- a matter so interesting to Religion --
to the glory of God, and the credit of his worship. The more united we are, the
better melody shall we make, both in our hearts and with our voices -- the
nearer shall we approach to the worship of angels, and the more acceptable to
God will our praises be. But

2. That we may be able to sing together, it is necessary for us to get a good
acquaintance with the Rules of singing; and be able to distinguish between
those sounds which are concordant and harmonious, and those which are
discordant and grating to the ear.

In the doctrine of sounds (upon which all music depends) there is something
very mysterious and unaccountable. Sounds, at certain intervals or distances
from each other, mixing together, strike the ear with an agreeable sensation,
and are called concords; at certain other distances, they are harsh and grating
to the ear, and are called discords. Now why there should be such a coalescence
of sounds at just such distances, so as to make it grateful to the ear, and at
other intervals or distances either lesser or greater than the former, there
should be no such agreement, and the sounds when made, should be so jarring and
grating; is one of the secrets of nature not investigated by man. That it is
so, is fact: but why it is so, must be resolved into the will, power and
goodness of the great Creator, who doubtless designed the pleasing harmony and
melody of sounds, to sweeten and heighten the pleasures of human life, and to
alleviate and dispel its cares. Martin's Philosoph. Gram.
But this shows the necessity of certain Rules to find out the distances of
sounds, and adjust them in such a manner as to produce melody. Were all sounds,
at whatever distances from each other, equally concordant and harmonious; I see
not, that there would be any occasion for the intervention of any fixed rules:
But since it is not so, it is absolutely necessary that there should be rules
for the regulating our voices, distinguishing sounds, and measuring notes. Now,
is it possible for us to sing together harmoniously, unless we are regulated by
such rules? It is easy to see what disorder and confusion it would make for
every one, without regard to any rule, to sing loud or low, strong or weak,
quick or slow, just as he pleased. Singing in that manner, in an assembly,
would be rather like the yellings of Bedlam, than the worship of rational men.

God, is a God of order, and not of confusion: and He requires rule and order
among all his worshippers, and in every part of his worship. And as singing is
a part of his worship, it ought to be performed in an orderly ruleable manner,
so that different voices may go together, unite, and produce harmony; which
never can be in singing, if only the mere dictates of uncultivated nature be
followed. The rules of music, we must acquaint ourselves with, if we would
sing together, so as to make melody to the Lord, or please ourselves. We must
know the air of the tune -- the pitch of our voices, -- and the length of our
notes; or we cannot sing harmonious and concordant.

The Rules of music, are not mere arbitrary things, depending only upon the
will of him that invents them; but are founded in reason, nature, and the order
of things; insomuch that they cannot be otherwise than they are, and produce
such an agreement in sounds, as to be melodious. And therefore that singing
which is most by rule, is most agreeable and fit, in the nature of things, to
be offered to God, and for that reason, most acceptable unto him.

It is easy to infer from hence that any custom or manner of singing, practiced
in the Churches, that is contrary to the rules of music, such practice (unless
some greater advantages accrue some other way by it) must be disagreeable to
the mind and will of God. If God is a God of order, and a lover of harmony --
and if singing by rule is the most regular and harmonious singing -- then it is
the most fit and proper, that such singing should be offered to him; and we
cannot suppose but that He would be best pleased with it. And no custom of
singing that infringes upon the rules, or embarrasses the song, ought to be
tolerated in the Church, unless some greater advantages arise by such a custom
some other way, than would do, by attending closely to the rules of music.

The custom of reading the Psalm, line by line, as it is sung, is objected
against, by the greatest masters of song, as a violation of the rules of
singing. But so great are the advantages that are supposed to accrue by that
practice another way, that many are loath to give it up: and this in many places
causes great heat and contention. I shall not think it amiss at this time,
briefly to consider this matter, and shall endeavor to give the arguments on
both sides, their due weight, that we may better come to the knowledge of our
own duty in this affair.

As to matters of God's worship, we have nothing to direct us therein but his
Word, -- or the practice of the primitive Churches, -- or the expediency and
fitness of things. -- The Word of God is the only rule of conscience; and no
man can say that he cannot in conscience, comply with any proposed practice,
unless he can see something in the scriptures that forbids it: He may plead
that his humor forbids it, but he cannot plead conscience, unless he finds
something in the Bible, that directs him in the case. Now the Bible no where
tells us, that the psalm shall be read, line by line when we sing; nor is any
thing there said, that implies any such thing. It is well known to all that
have looked into antiquity, and what was the custom of the Jewish Church, that
they never practiced reading with singing: Indeed their tunes were so
contrived, that they would not admit of such a practice: They were something
like our Anthems, See Dr. WATTS'S larger Pref. to his Verse. of the Psalms, P.
17.
musical notes were set over the words in their psalm-books, which directed
their voices as they pronounced the words in singing. Christ and his Apostles
were trained up in this manner of singing, and were able to sing together, as
we find they did, at the institution of the Lord's Supper. They did not form a
new scale of music, but kept to that which was practiced upon in the Jewish
Church.

As to the primitive christians, we find not the least tittle to incline us to
think that reading with singing, was ever practiced in a single instance by
them; nor the least mention of any such officer as a Reader of the psalm for
the congregation, when singing: and certainly it belonged not to the Deacon's
office, any more than to the office of any one else, -- and yet some of the
writers of those times, professedly give an account of the customs and
practices of christians in their public worship; so that, if it had been the
custom to read with singing, it is very unaccountable that they should say
nothing at all about it. And I believe I may safely challenge any man to
produce a single instance, of thus reading with singing for about fifteen
hundred years after Christ. -- I confess I am unable to give a particular
account how the practice first came to take place in the christian churches:
But the most probable conjecture is this. -- When a reformation from popery
took place, the psalmody in the church of Rome was so corrupted with popish
doctrines and superstitions, that when the Reformers broke off from her
communion, they left their psalm-books behind them: and whenever a version was
published according to the Protestant scheme, special care was taken by the
Pope, to suppress all such translations: and in those countries where his
influence most extended, very few such psalm-books could be procured: And as
ignorance with them was the mother of devotion, very few were taught to read,
and so unable to make use of psalm-books if they had them. So that the churches
were obliged either to alter the manner of their singing, or many of them lose
the matter of the song: For which reason it is probable they first allowed of
reading with singing. But it appears that this practice never took place in
most of the reformed Churches.

The pious Dr. WATTS, who for his many sweet and heavenly songs, and superior
skill in singing, may fitly be called the British David; in his larger preface
to his version of the Psalms, speaking of other versions of the Psalms not
being adapted to the state of the christian Church, says thus upon it, Page 6.
that it renders the performance of psalmody -- extremely troublesome in those
assemblies where the Psalm is sung without reading line by line, which yet is
beyond all exception the truest and best method. And in another place Page 27.
he says, -- It were to be wished that all Congregations and private Families
would sing as they do, in foreign protestant countries, without reading line by
line -- many inconveniences will always attend this unhappy manner of singing.
Thus he.

Thus those who are in favor of singing without reading plead -- that they have
the example of God's ancient Church -- the practice of Christ and his Apostles,
and of the christian Church for fifteen hundred years together -- that reading,
is a violation of the rules of singing -- interrupts the long -- hurts the
melody and disappoints them of the pleasure of the music -- that in a country
where psalm-books, may be had at so cheap and easy a rate, as among us, it is
entirely needless to have it so -- and if people would provide themselves with
books (as they ought to do) they would better take the sense, and see the
connection of one line and verse, with another, than they possibly can do by
hearing it read line by line -- all might better understand the matter of the
song, and no interruption given to the manner of it.

But on the other side it is plead -- That many people are poor, and unable to
purchase psalm-books -- that others are old, and unable to see to read if they
had them -- that there are many young people and others, that cannot so well
read, and they would take the sense much better to have it read line by line:
They plead also -- that it has always been the practice of our Forefathers in
this Land -- and that this singing without reading, is a newfound invention of
Man -- that it disturbs the peace of Churches and Societies, -- and (those that
know no better, will say that it) is a leading step to Popery; and that if they
once begin to let in new things they know not where they shall stop, -- and
that since they have reason to believe that God has heard the prayers, and
accepted the praises of his people in this land, when they have worshipped Him
in the manner they now do, -- and since also, they cannot see that reading does
give such an interruption to regular singing as is pretended; -- they cannot see
their way clear to encourage the practice of singing without it: -- It is what
they never heard of till of late, and they don't love to be given to change. --
These are their main objections. -- Let us consider them, and see what can be
said in answer to them.

As to peoples being poor, and unable to purchase psalm-books; there are enough
that will engage to give to such as are not able to buy for themselves: So that
this objection, is quickly answered.

As for those that cannot see to read, or cannot read if they could see;
doubtless reading line by line may be some advantage to them: but I presume the
number of such is very small, -- and there may be others that are deaf, and
cannot hear, if it is read; and yet because it is not customary to carry
psalm-books to public worship, they neglect it, for fear of being looked upon
as singular, and making their infirmity to be taken notice of by the assembly:
Whereas if it had been customary to carry books, (as it would have been, if
there had been no reading) they would have done it, and so would always have
been able to have taken the sense of the psalm as it was sung. But further --
considering the disadvantages that attend singing with reading, it may justly
be questioned, whether for the sake of a very few old people and persons that
cannot read, congregations are in duty bound to tolerate that practice: We know
of no such provision that was made for their infirmities, either in God's
ancient Church, or by Christ and his Apostles, or by any of the primitive
Churches: And if they did it not, it will be hard to prove that we are in duty
bound to do it. I would condescend as far for the sake of such, as is any way
reasonable or convenient, but to do it at the expense of the regular
performance of that part of worship, and to the disadvantage of so many others,
is what I cannot see sufficient reason for. Besides, when once those persons
become better acquainted with the method, they will by the help of hearing the
Psalm once read over by the minister, and attending to the singers as it is
sung, (if they speak the words as distinctly and plainly as they can, which
they should be careful to do) I say such persons, and indeed all the
congregation may understand the most that is sung. So that reading with singing
will be but of very little, if any advantage upon this account.

As to the plea that it has been the universal practice of our Forefathers in
this land, and that to sing without reading, is a newfound invention of men;
this is wholly a mistake. -- Mr. MATHER, in his Ratio Discipline, a book
published above fifty years ago, tells us "that some congregations where they
had psalm-books, sung without reading:" and it is well known by those that have
made due enquiry, that it was never practiced in some of the oldest Churches in
this land; and and it is so far from being a new invention, that it is as old
as Christianity itself, and was the method practiced by our Savior and his
Apostles: So that when we plead for it, we ask for no more, than what was the
good old way -- and it is to be hoped that all that are lovers of that way,
will readily join with us.

As for its making disturbances in the Church -- It is generally observed that
those that are most disturbed, are commonly such as know the least of the
matter. There is no reformation that is ever set on foot, even though it be from
such gross corruptions as Idolatry itself, but what will cause disturbances,
and breed contention. The ignorance of some, the prejudice of others, and the
wilfulness of more, will always raise opposition: And what! because of this
shall we never attempt to reform? we were unworthy the name of Christians if we
did not. Indeed in matters of little or no consequence, it is not worth while
to disturb the peace of societies about them: And whether the thing now pleaded
for, is worth contending about, I will not determine. -- I hope none are for
driving matters to extremity, or making such a point of it, as to disturb the
peace of the society: -- But then, one way, or the other may be most agreeable
to the body of the people, and most acceptable to God; and it cannot be amiss
to consider what may be said on both sides of the question: And I hope that
every one will judge for himself, and act upon that side where he sees the
greatest light.

As to its being a leading step to popery, and an inlet to innovations; there
is not the least foundation, for such an assertion: This is only the "Bugbear
of folly," and an outcry to disturb the minds of others. For what sort of
connection can any one see, between singing without reading, and popery? They
may as well say that the practice of primitive christianity led to popery. And
if it is really a reformation in our worship, to sing without reading, and a
coming nearer to the practice of primitive christians, we ought to rejoice in
it, and be glad of such innovations every day.

Doubtless God has heard the prayers, and accepted the praises of his people in
this land, though they have not sung in the manner that is now pleaded for. It is
not every irregular practice in his worship that will cause Him who is so
infinite in mercy, and ready to pardon to reject the prayers and praises of his
worshippers. But although He has accepted the praises of his people when
performed in a less suitable manner, it will not from thence follow, that they
would not have been more acceptable, if they had been performed in a different
manner: And therefore it can be no plea for continuing that practice. Though the
prayers and praises of a person not perfectly sanctified, may be acceptable to
God; yet it would be very wicked for the person to say -- that therefore, he
will not press forward toward greater perfection: for certainly the nearer he
gets to perfection, the better he performs his duty, and the more acceptably to
God.

These are the main pleas that are made in favor of the present customary way
of singing -- you yourselves, are to judge of the force of them, and of the
answers given to them.

Whether reading is actually an interruption in singing -- every one that has
any tolerable acquaintance with the rules of singing, cannot but see that it
is. The like practice in any other part of divine worship, would be judged, I
believe, as a great interruption. Should a line of Prayer be read, and then
prayed over, and so on -- no one, I presume would deny but that reading in that
manner, was an interruption to praying: and I see not, but it is as much so in
singing -- in both cases the song and the prayer, are equally interrupted by
the reading

But some may say that they should not so strongly object against the practice
of singing without reading, if it was not for the continuing the Bass and
Treble between the Lines, but this is so much of sound without substance, and
sounds so odly and uncouthly to them, that they cannot away with it: -- But
such should know and consider that this continuing has its advantages; it keeps
the music alive, steadies the tune, and helps the better to strike into the
same pitch again -- and therefore ought not to be found fault with.

After all; whatever the advantages are that accrue by the practice of reading
the Psalm, line by line as it is sung; yet the disadvantages of it another way
not yet mentioned, I think, are more than a counter-balance: This practice
prevents many people from getting Psalm-books, which otherwise they would do:
And for want of books in our Families, neither the Heads of families nor
children can acquaint themselves sufficiently with our Psalmody, nor have the
benefit of it in their private devotions; and this, among christians, is a
criminal omission; Our Psalm-books are as necessary in their place, as our
Bibles; and it is what is enjoined upon christians by an inspired Apostle Col.
iii. 16.
to teach and admonish one another, in Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs. If
any are desirous of knowing the difference between Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual
Songs; I shall give it them, as I find them distinguished in LEIGH'S Sacra
Critica. Psalms, contain exhortation to manners, or holy life. Hymns, contain
praises to God, in the commemoration of his Benefits. Spiritual Songs, contain
Doctrine of the Chief Good or Man's eternal Felicity. A Psalm is a Ditty to be
played upon an Instrument; an Hymn is a song to be uttered with the voice only;
an Ode or Song, is a Ditty fitted for either way. See Leigh in Vocibus.
Now how we can comply with this duty, and never have psalms nor hymns in our
houses, is hard to conceive. Besides, children and young People, at their
leisure hours would take delight in reading and committing many of them to
memory, which would be of great service to them in future life: But for the
want of them in our houses, they are deprived of this privilege. Now so far as
the present practice, is an inducement to People to neglect providing
themselves with books; so far it is hurtful to Religion -- and their not having
books, instead of being urged as an argument for continuing the practice of
reading; it is (with me) one of the greatest arguments against it, as thereby
many are induced to neglect their duty in this affair. -- But with regard to
the manner of singing.

I shall only add,

3. That we should carefully attend to the matter, as well as the manner of the
song. The apostolic direction is to sing with grace in your hearts to the
Lord: And how skilfully soever we may tune our voices, and how melodious soever
our singing may be in the ears of others; yet if the matter that we sing is
neglected, and there is no suitable affection working in our hearts toward God
-- we are but as "sounding brass, and a tinkling cymbal;" and we are so far
from making melody in his ear, that our song is grating, discordant and
unharmonious; because, though with our voices we praise Him, yet our hearts are
not right with Him. This is a capital point, and ought to be well considered;
for it is the very Thing that renders our praises acceptable unto Him: And in
vain is our singing if it be not acceptable. -- But I must hasten to a word of
address. -- First, To the singers in this congregation in particular; and then,
to the assembly in general -- and so conclude.

First, -- To the Singers. -- We rejoice to see that under the good
Instructions which you have lately had, in so short a time, you have made so
great proficiency -- the assiduity and diligence with which you have applied
yourselves to this laudable and useful study, is much to your honor. We flatter
ourselves, that what we now see of your talents and accomplishments for church
music, is but a faint specimen of what your further improvements will be able
to produce -- you will not rest at those measures of knowledge to which you
have already attained, but press forward toward greater perfection; you would
do well to keep up your meetings for this purpose -- but be careful, at the
same time that you do not let one duty infringe upon another; nor pursue
singing so as to neglect prayer, or the duties of your particular callings; --
remember, you are in a world of trouble and temptation, in a state of trial and
probation, where something else is to be done, as well as singing; it is only
in Heaven that this is to be our main employment -- Observe such a decorum in
these things, as that your good may not be evil spoken of. -- It is by you,
that the most sublime part of public worship is to be performed -- God is
honoring you, by calling of you to discharge this duty: In a sense He is making
of you, his spiritual priests, to offer up, in his Church the spiritual
Sacrifices of praise unto Him! see then, that your behavior at all times,
corresponds with so high and honorable a character. -- Beware of every sinful
thing -- avoid that which is evil, and pursue that which is good; defile not
yourselves with any sinful impurities, lest, God have no respect unto your
offerings: God requires spiritual sacrifices; and that those who worship Him,
do it in spirit and in truth. -- Don't let it be altogether your concern to
have your voices rightly tuned, but look at your hearts and see that they are
tuned for God's worship; see that you make melody there unto Him. If you do not
take care to have your Hearts right with Him, all is but a hypocritical
oblation, which is an abomination unto Him. -- Consider, how dreadful your case
will be in the other world, if after you have sung God's praises, in such
melodious strains with your voices here, you should be forever rejected of Him,
and sent to howl the doleful notes of the damned in hell. The more you relish
the charms of music, the more tormenting will it be to you, to be forever
deprived of them -- to be banished that company, who shall be forever praising
God in the most rapturous strains of melody. -- See that you live in peace with
each other -- you are lovers of concord and harmony; and it is no less
delightful in a moral, than it is in a musical sense. -- If you meet with no
discouragements from the Society, (as I pray God you may not) if that part of
divine worship is not well performed; the blame will lie at your door. Be very
careful to give your attendance upon the public worship -- remember, you have
a part of it to carry on yourselves and there -- "Rehearse his Praise with Awe
profound,
"Let Knowledge lead the Song;
"Nor mock him with a solemn sound
"Upon a thoughtless Tongue."
The Lord be with you, and bless you.

Secondly -- To the Assembly in general. -- I hope there is none of us, but
what wish well to God's praises, and rejoice to see the improvements that are
made in our Church music -- and though there are some of us, that have not a
talent that way, yet I hope all our hearts are in it: If so, it may be said of
us, as of the "morning stars," they sang together. If God has given to any of
us a capacity and talent for singing his praises, together with others, and yet
we do not improve it, but let it rest and lie by neglected; we are undoubtedly
much to be blamed. It concerns us all to examine our talents this way, and to
improve them, as we find God has given us ability. We are not to imagine that
singing regularly is a useless and unnecessary accomplishment; God has given to
men voices, and a capacity for it, and requires us to worship him, by joining
in concert, and singing harmoniously. But if we cannot sing ourselves, be-sure
we must not discourage this work; such as do it, whatever they think of it now,
will at last be found fighting against God, and opposers of his worship: May we
all be directed to act in this, and in all other affairs to his Glory.

To conclude. If a few feeble voices very imperfectly tuned, singing in concert
here below, are so melodious -- then what will Heaven be? when all the saints
on earth, and "the Spirits of the Just made perfect," shall join with the
morning stars, singing and shouting forth everlasting praises to God and the
Lamb, -- Cherubims and Seraphims, Men and Women, shall all sing together in one
grand Assembly, and with voices perfectly tuned, shall carry the respective
parts assigned them, -- O! how sweet their song! and how charmed must our souls
be, when all at once they strike their harmonious notes, and raise their voices
in lofty strains of melody! -- How sublime and solemn the music, as it
resounds from the concave of the third Heavens, and echoes from Pole to Pole.
-- May we all be bro't, not only to imagine, but taste the pleasure; and with
the morning stars sing together -- through Jesus Christ our Lord.

AMEN.

