Mr. DIMAN'S SERMON ON The Day of the EXECUTION OF Bryan Sheehen.

A SERMON, Preached at SALEM, January 16, 1772. Being the Day on which BRYAN
SHEEHEN was EXECUTED, FOR COMMITTING A RAPE, On the BODY of ABIAL HOLLOWELL,
THE Wife of Benjamin Hollowell, Of MARBLEHEAD.

By JAMES DIMAN, A. M. PASTOR of the Second CHURCH in SALEM.

DEUTERONOMY. xxii.25. If a man find a betrothed damsel in the field, -- and force
her, and lie with her, -- he shall die.

LEV. xx.10. The man that commits Adultery with another man's wife -- the
Adulterer and the Adulteress shall surely be put to death.

-- ADULTERY, Though so unaccountably spared by the laws of many Christian
countries, the Heathens themselves have condemned, is a capital crime. Dr.
DODDRIDGE. SALEM: Printed by SAMUEL and EBENEZER HALL, near the Exchange.
MDCCLXXII.

A SERMON, ON THE Execution of Bryan Sheehen.
ROMANS vi.23. FOR the Wages of Sin is Death: but the Gift of God is eternal
Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.


THE Apostle having, in this chapter, represented the obligations Christians
are under to avoid sin and lead a virtuous life; he, in the close of it,
declares the different ends of the righteous and wicked: how happy one will be,
and how miserable the other. See the two verses immediately preceding our
text, What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? for
the end of those things is death. But now being made free from sin, and become
servants to God, ye have your fruits unto holiness, and the end everlasting
life. And here our text follows -- For the wages of sin is death; but the gift
of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

It is observable here, that the punishment of the wicked is called wages, to
show that it is the just demerit of their crimes; and that the reward of the
righteous, is called the gift of God through Jesus Christ, to show that it is
not merited by their good works, but is a free gift procured for them by Jesus
Christ, the great Mediator between God and man. -- It is observable also, that
the punishment of the wicked is called Death, and the reward of the righteous
Life, to show the greatness both of the one and of the other: It being usual in
scripture to express the greatest happiness by life, and the greatest misery by
death; life being the greatest of blessings, as it is the foundation of all
others, and death the greatest of evils to those who have their portion in this
world, not only as it is painful and terrible in itself, but also as it
deprives them of all their enjoyments, and fixes them in a state of misery,
which is the natural consequence as well as punishment of their sins.

Our text, as it stands connected with the preceding context, will lead to the
consideration of the following things.

That the end of a wicked life, will be everlasting misery. And

That this is the due wages, or just demerit of the sinners crimes.

That the end of a religious life, will be eternal happiness. And

That this is, in no measure, merited by the good works of the righteous, but
is the free gift of God. And

That this unspeakable gift, is procured for them* by Jesus Christ our Lord.

The first thing to be considered is,

That the end of a wicked life will be everlasting misery; that is, to those
who continue in their wickedness, and die without repentance. Some repent, and
apply to Christ, and through him, obtain forgiveness. Yea God is some times
pleased, to give repentance to those, who have lived in a long course of sin;
and have been guilty of very heinous transgressions; even such as the wisdom of
human governments, has thought fit to punish with death. I say God is sometimes
pleased, in great mercy to such, to give them grace to repent and receive an
offered Savior, and then they are plucked as brands out of the burning, and
made happy forever. But when sinners refuse to be reclaimed, and continue in
their sins till they leave the world; there is then nothing for them but a
fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation to devour them. Heb.
x.27.
They then go away into everlasting punishment, Matt. xxv.46.
and suffer the vengeance of eternal fire. Jude 7.


By death, in our text, may be implied temporal as well as eternal death: For
that is also the wages of sin; as appears not only from that threatening of God
to Adam -- In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die, but also from
what is said in Romans v.12. As by one man sin entered into the world, and death
by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.

And an untimely, violent, and ignominious death is the wages of those
atrocious crimes, which render the committers of them dangerous to others, and
pests to society: Or when the public good requires their being made examples
of, for a terror to others. This is the punishment which they receive from men.
But this, how severe and terrible soever it may seem, is nothing to that, which
if they die impenitent, they will receive, more immediately from the hand of
God. For, what is mainly intended by death, in our text, is eternal misery; as
appears by its being put in opposition to eternal life: And from the same
opposition in Mat. xxv.46. where it is also expressly said to be everlasting,
these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into life
eternal. The same greek word is here used to express the duration both of the
happiness of the righteous and misery of the wicked.
And it is not only asserted here, but in many other places of scripture, where
it is called everlasting destruction 2 These. i.9.
-- eternal damnation Mark iii.29.
-- and everlasting shame and contempt. Dan. ^ii.2.
And sinners are said to be punished, in everlasting burnings Isai. xxxiii.14.
-- in fire that is never quenched Mark ix.43, 44* 45, 46, 48.
-- in blackness of darkness forever Jude 1^.
-- and the smoke of their torment is said to ascend forever and ever. Rev.
xiv.11.


It appears from these passages of scripture, that the punishment of the
wicked, in another world will not only be everlasting, but exceeding great in
degree: Since it is represented by that which is capable of putting us to the
greatest misery in this world; namely, burning in the hottest fire. And as
their torment will be exquisite, so it seems it will be without intermission or
mitigation: They will not be allowed so much as a drop of water to cool their
tongues. Luke xvi.23, 24, 25.
And into this dreadful state of exquisite and everlasting misery, sinners pass
as soon as they leave the world. They go, with Judas, to their own place Acts
i.25.
and in hell they lift up their eyes being in torment.

And notwithstanding this punishment is thus great and everlasting; yet

It is but the due wages and just demerit of the sinner's crimes. It is what
God has ordered, and therefore must be just and right: And what the sinner will
not have the least reason to complain of. -- Shall not the Judge of all the
earth do right? If any should enquire, how it can consist with the justice of
God, to punish temporary crimes with eternal misery let them consider,

That the dignity of the person against whom a crime is committed, greatly
inhances the crime. The same crime, as to the matter of it, is much greater
when committed against a king, than when committed against one of our fellow
subjects: And doubtless the same crime committed against God, rises in
proportion to his superiority and dignity above a temporal king: And in the
same proportion, the punishment of it may be justly increased. 1 Samuel ii.25. If
one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him; but if a man sin
against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? Again, let them consider,

That God sets before men, life and death, rewards and punishments, and deals
with them according to their own free choice: And that this is agreeable to
justice, cannot be denied. We have the offer of eternal happiness, for a short
life of obedience, as well as the threatening of eternal misery, for a short
life of sin: And it is not only left to us which we will choose, but various
powerful means are used with us to induce us to avoid death and misery, and to
choose life and happiness; and if after all we choose death, and wilfully expose
ourselves to the threatened punishment; is it not just in God to let us have
our choice, and leave us to suffer the sad effects of our folly? To use the
words of another -- Since the rewards and punishments are both eternal, the
terms on both sides are equal; and since it is in our power, by the help of
divine grace, to avoid the punishment, and to obtain the reward, the condition
is such, as any wise man would be thankful for; far from complaining, that the
terrors of punishment are joined to the encouragements of reward; that all
motives concur to make him happy; and that God, in his great mercy, has used
all means, both inward by his grace, and outward by his threats and promises,
to bring him to salvation. Once more, let them consider,

That it seems to have been necessary, that eternal punishment should be
threatened against the violaters of the divine laws, since a less punishment
would not have been sufficient to secure man's obedience to them. We see, now
eternal misery is threatened, it is not sufficient, with the greatest part of
mankind, to deter them from sin; and if a less punishment had been threatened,
it would have had a proportionably less influence. And God's end in threatening
is not that he may punish, but that he might prevent men's wickedness, which
has a necessary connection with misery; and to excite them to a religious
life, the end whereof is happiness. Since then God's goodness was the
foundation of his threatenings, it was certainly just for him to threaten as he
has done; and if it was just for him to threaten, then it is just for him to
execute his threatenings; and that he will execute them, appears from his truth
and veracity; Number. xxiii.19. God is not a man, that he should lie, nor the Son
of man, that he should repent; has he said, and shall he not do it? or has he
spoken, and shall he not make it good? Thus it appears that the wicked will be
punished, in the world to come, with everlasting misery; and that this is the
due wages, and just demerit, of their crimes. -- I now proceed to the next
thing proposed, which was to show,

That the end of a life of piety and virtue, in this world, will be eternal
happiness, in the world to come. This also, God, who is truth itself, has
declared and promised. See the verse immediately preceding our text, -- But
now being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your fruit
unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. And Mat. xxvth chap. and last
verse, These shall go away into everlasting punishment; but the righteous unto
life eternal. By life eternal, is not only intended, a state of eternal
existence, for so the wicked will live forever; but by it is intended, a state
of everlasting happiness. When the righteous leave this world, they leave all
sorrow and trouble with it, and enter into an unchangeable state of ease,
comfort and happiness. They go into God's presence, where there is fullness of
joy, and are placed at his right hand, where there are pleasures forever more.
Psalm. x^vi.11.
Their happiness is not only eternal, but complete and perfect. All their
desires are satisfied; yea, they have more than heart can wish. Eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, nor is the heart of man, (while in this world) capable of
conceiving the good things, which God has laid up for them that love him.

The next thing proposed was to show, that this glorious and eternal state of
happiness, is in no measure merited by the good works of the righteous, but is
the free gift of God. The Pharisees among the Jews, thought they could do God
much service, and merit a reward of him, by their good works. And the Papists
among Christians, hold the same doctrine now. But this is a vain notion, and
without the least foundation, either in reason or scripture; but what is
plainly condemned by both. Reason tells us, that as we are God's creatures, and
depend entirely on him for life, breath, and all things, all the service we can
possibly render him, is most justly due to him. And therefore that when we have
done our utmost, we cannot demand a reward of him, for what we have done, any
more, than we can demand a reward of our neighbor for paying him a debt, which
we justly owed him. The scriptures also plainly teach us the same; Luke xvii.7
-- 10. Which of you, having a servant plowing or feeding cattle, will say to
him by and by, when he comes from the field, go and sit down to meat? And will
not rather say unto him, make ready wherewith I may sup* and gird thyself and
serve me, 'till I have eaten and drank, and afterward thou shall eat and drink.
Does he thank that servant because he did the things that were commanded him? I
trow not. So likewise ye, when ye shall have done all these things that are
commanded you; say, we are unprofitable servants; we have done that which was
our duty to do. As we are God's servants, all our time, strength, and abilities
-- all we have and are, are his; and therefore we should be constantly employed
in his service. And when we are so, we do but our duty, and must say, we are
unprofitable servants. This we ought to say, if we did all that is commanded
us, which we know we never do; and therefore we are not only unprofitable, but
sinful, disobedient servants. There is none that does good, and sins not.
And therefore instead of meriting any thing at God's hands, we stand in
continual need of his pardoning mercy.

All the good things therefore which we receive at God's hands (or in other
words, all we enjoy, for we receive all from him) are the effects of his free
grace and bounty. Not unto us therefore, not unto us -- but to his name the
praise is due.

The last thing proposed, was to show,

That this unspeakable gift of eternal life, was procured for us by Jesus
Christ our Lord. We are all sinners; and sin is the transgression of the law;
the penalty whereof is death. The soul that sins shall die; that is, be
miserable forever.

By Sin we had ruined and destroyed ourselves, but in God and Christ was our
help found. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. John
iii.16.
Christ, the blessed Son of God, came into the world, and suffered and died, to
make reconciliation for iniquity, Dan. ix.24.
and bring in everlasting righteousness. He suffered -- the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God. 1 Pet. iii.18.
Christ is the way, the truth and the life, John xiv.6.
and there is no other name under heaven, whereby we can be saved. Acts iv.12.
God has given us the promise of eternal life 1 John, ii.15.
but this life is in the Son. He that has the Son, has life; but he that has
not the Son of God, has not life; 1 John v.12.
but the wrath of God abides on him.

Let us now make some improvement of what has been thus briefly said on this
subject, And

1. Will the end of a sinful life, be eternal death and misery? How exceeding
foolish then are they who lead such a life! And alas! how many such are there!
What multitudes live, as without God in the world, and as if they were made to
serve diverse lusts and pleasures? -- are under no restraint* but commit all
manner of sin with greediness How strange is it that rational creatures, should
act so mad and foolish a part! Sinners may flatter themselves, that they shall
have peace though they walk in the imaginations of their hearts, adding
drunkenness to thirst; and to that innumerable other abominations; but as sure
as God is just, and his word true, they shall not, unless they repent, and
secure an interest in Christ, escape the damnation of hell. Oh consider where
the way you are in will lead you; even down to the regions of eternal woe and
misery! the lake which burns with fire and brimstone; into which you must soon
inevitably fall, unless you alter your course. And oh! be persuaded immediately
to break off from your sins by repentance, and from your iniquities, by turning
unto God. Turn ye -- turn ye, for why will ye die and be miserable forever.

2. Is eternal misery the due wages, and just demerit of sin? This shows the
evil nature and great malignity of it. For how vile a thing must that be, which
deserves so great a punishment? God who knows the true nature of things, is
represented in scripture as having the greatest hatred to sin: It is styled the
abominable thing which his soul hates. Shall not we then detest and abhor it,
and use our utmost endeavors to avoid it? When we are tempted to sin, let us
tremble at the thought; and say, with Joseph, how shall we do this great
wickedness, and sin against God!

3. Is this punishment but the due wages, and just desert of sin? We hence see,
who the wretched Inhabitants of hell must blame, that they are thus miserable.
They will be without excuse: Their own consciences will condemn them; and they
will have none to blame but themselves, that this awful punishment is inflicted
on them. They will see that their condemnation is perfectly just; and that it
is entirely their own fault that they perish. And Oh! What an aggravation will
it be of their misery, to act on their folly and madness, in thus ruining and
destroying themselves.

4. Is eternal life the gift of God, how great then is his goodness? And what
gratitude, thanksgiving and praise are due to him, from all who have the offer
of it? We have forfeited all favor at God's hands; and deserve nothing but
misery and destruction: And yet he offers us unspeakable and everlasting
happiness, on the easy terms of the gospel. What obligations are we then under
to him! Shall we not love him with all our heart, and soul, and mind, and
strength? Shall we not praise him, while we live, and give thanks unto him, as
long as we have a being?

5. Is eternal life the gift of God, through Jesus Christ? Let us then seek for
it as such. Let us look upon it as what Christ has procured for us, by what,
in his great condescension and goodness, he has done and suffered for us. And
let us apply to the Father, in his name, for it. Let us not think to merit it,
by any thing we can do. For alas! What can we do? Our very best performances
are attended with sin. -- And if they were not, they are but our duty; and we
are still unprofitable servants. But as they are atattended with sin; the wages
of that sin, is death and misery; we are by that sin, transgressors of the law;
and by the law we cannot be justified, for it condemns us: It curses every one
that continues not in all things that are written therein to do them. Gal.
iii.10.
We all lie at mercy. If ever we are saved, it must be by grace, through Christ.
By grace, says the apostle, are ye saved, through faith, and that not of
yourselves, it is the gift of God. Ephesians. ii.8.
We should look upon ourselves as lost, and undone by sin; and as destitute of
all help, and hope, but in the mercy of God, and the merits of Jesus Christ.
And we should give up all self-dependence, and rely entirely on God's mercy, in
the Redeemer, for pardon, grace and glory. And Oh! How earnest should we be in
our supplications to the throne of grace; that God would be pleased, to behold
us in his Son, and extend his mercy to us, through him, without which, me must
perish everlastingly? Those lines of Mr. Sternhold (however inconsiderable his
skill in poetry was) have been admired, by some celebrated masters of that art,
as being most expressive of the absolute need, poor guilty sinners, as we all
are, stand in of the divine mercy; and of the fervency and earnestness, with
which we should pray for it.

Mercy, good Lord! Mercy I crave:
This is the total sum.
For mercy Lord, is all my suit:
Lord, let thy mercy come.
May we all entertain these sentiments, and adopt this language; or language
equivalent. May we imitate the humble Publican; who, not presuming to lift up
his face before God, bowed his guilty head, and smote on his breast, saying,
God be merciful to me a sinner. In this way, we may hope to be heard, and
justified, as he was.

And in this way, Bryan Sheehen, you must look for salvation, if you expect to
obtain it. You acknowledge you are a great sinner; and the wages of sin, you
see, is death; that is, exquisite and everlasting misery. And this punishment,
though inexpressibly great and awful, is but the due wages, and just demerit of
a sinner's crimes. It is what he really deserves. Since God has threatened it,
and has expressly declared he will inflict it; we may depend upon it, it is just
and right. Now to this awful punishment you are exposed; and this you must
suffer; yea and in a few hours enter into, unless God delivers you from it. --
And what reason have you to expect this great deliverance? God has expressly
told us, that unless a sinner repents, he shall perish. But have you repented?
I wish -- heartily wish, I could tell you, I really thought you was a true
penitent; but I am constrained to say, thus much at least, that I stand in
great doubt of you. I think you have not, as yet, discovered sufficient marks
of real repentance. You have not appeared to have that lively sense of your sin
and danger, and of the great things of religion, and another world, which might
reasonably be expected, from one in your circumstances. And what is most
discouraging of all is, your denying the main fact, for which you are
condemned; He owned he was guilty of Adultery, but not of a Ra^^
though it was proved to the full satisfaction both of the Judges and Jury, and
almost all who heard your trial.

And if you have not repented, but still lie under the guilt of all your sins
-- how sad is your case! -- How awful your condition! -- Within a few hours of
death and the eternal world; and in a temper of mind, fit only for the company
of devils and damned spirits in hell. I don't say this, Bryan, to reproach you
-- far be it from me. I do it, that I may, if possible, now at length, rouse
and awaken you to a proper sense of your condition; and excite you to use your
utmost endeavors, to prepare for that great and awful change, which is so very
near you, and which will determine your state forever. I pity you from my
heart, and almost tremble to consider your danger. -- There is, I believe,
hardly a person, in this great assembly, but pities you: And every christian, I
trust, prays for you. And while others are thus concerned for you; is it
possible that you should not be greatly concerned for yourself -- for your own
immortal soul, now on the borders of the eternal world; and, it is to be
feared, on the brink of hell! -- That lake which burns with fire and brimstone
forever. One would think, that the thoughts of your danger would make you
shudder; and cause every joint in you, to tremble. -- For, if the king of
Babylon trembled, when he saw the handwriting on the wall, though he knew not
what it was, but only imagined, from a consciousness of his guilt, that it was
a threatening against himself, or a sign of his approaching ruin; I say, if
this great king's countenance was then changed, and his thoughts so troubled
him, that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smite out against
another; Dan. v.6.
what reason have you to tremble, when you know your days are now numbered and
finished, and that death, a change awful and important beyond all conception,
is so near you? If Felix trembled, when Paul reasoned of judgment to come; Acts
xxiv.25.
what reason have you to tremble, now you are just going to appear before your
Judge; and to receive a sentence, perhaps, to a state of woe and misery,
unutterable and everlasting? Oh! Sheehen, be persuaded, by these terrors of the
Lord, to exert yourself to the utmost, in preparing for death, judgment, and
eternity. Improve the short space, God is yet giving you, with the greatest
diligence. Your case, it is true, is exceeding hazardous and difficult; and if
you are saved, it will be out of God's usual way. But we have reason to
believe, he is sometimes pleased to show mercy to sinners, even at the last
hour. So it is supposed the thief on the cross was saved. It is to be feared
that this instance of success in the thief on the cross, has been abused by
many to their eternal ruin. To prevent this in others, let them consider, that
some suppose he might repent some time before, while he was in goal, though it
was not publicly known till he hung on the cross. But if his repentance did not
commence, 'till he was on the cross, and so just going out of the world: Though
it may give some grounds of hope to sinners, when brought to this last
extremity; especially if they have been under disadvantages in their education
and way of life, and sinned in a great measure through ignorance; yet it gives
no manner of encouragement to any, purposely to continue in their sins, and put
off their repentance to the last, with a dependence on God's mercy to save
them, when they can indulge their lusts no longer. This is such a vile abuse of
God's goodness, and so heinously wicked, that it may provoke him to cut them
off suddenly in their sins, or to deprive them of their reason when first
seized with their last sickness, or before they apprehend their danger: or to
refuse to hear them when they cry to him, in their distress and anguish;
agreeable to that righteous* but awful threatening of his, which I earnestly
entreat all sinners seriously to consider, and lay to heart: Prove. xxiv.20.
"Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no
man regarded; but ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my
reproof: I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes;
when your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a
whirlwind; when distress and anguish comes upon you. Then shall they call upon
me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find
me."
Don't despair then, and give yourself up as lost. While there is life, there
is some reason to hope. God's mercy is great; and Christ's blood is sufficient
to cleanse from all sin. Though your time is short, God can enable you to do
much in this short time. In an affair of such infinite importance, a bare
possibility of success, should be a sufficient motive to the most vigorous
exertions. And the greater the difficulty and danger are, the more earnest
should men be in their endeavors. Oh then! strive with your might -- be
fervent in spirit, in this most momentous affair. Look back upon your past
life, and call to mind as many of your sins as you can; and confess and lament
them before God, and strive to be humble and penitent. -- And let me once more
remind you, that you cannot be a true penitent, unless you undo what you have
done amiss, as far as it is in your power. And therefore if what you have
hitherto said of the woman, who accused you, be false; if you do not unsay it,
but persist in it to the last, there is no hope for you; but you must be
miserable forever: For all liars, shall have their part, in the lake that burns
with fire and brimstone forever. Rev. xxi.8.
Oh then! if you love your own soul, don't go out of the world, under the guilt
of falsehood; nor of any other sin; for the least sin, unrepented of, will be
sufficient to shut you out of heaven, and plunge you into hell. Confess and
lament, all your sins before God: Not only those that have been more
immediately against him; but those, whereby you have injured your neighbor,
and yourself. They are all transgressions of God's law, and must be heartily
repented of. And pray earnestly for forgiveness through Christ, and for the
renewing and sanctifying influences of the divine spirit -- pray without
ceasing* and call upon others to pray for you. But here, let me give you a
caution. -- Though you must do these things; yet you must not trust in them as
meritorious; that is, as what you can earn, or purchase pardon and happiness
by. Whatever you have been taught, in your younger years; He was educated a
Papist.
you may depend upon it, there is no proper merit in any thing you, or I, or
any person on earth can do. Eternal life is the gift of God, through Jesus
Christ. Seek for it then as such: As what you are utterly unworthy of; and what
you depend entirely on God, and Christ for. God has given his Son, and his Son
has suffered and died, to make way for the bestowment of it, on those, who
apply for it, with a humble, penitent, prayerful dependence on Christ. God
pardons sin, and receives sinners to favor and happiness, not for any
worthiness in them, but on the account of what Christ has done and suffered.
Christ is the way, the truth and the life; none can come to the Father but by
him. Apply then in Christ's name, and make mention of his righteousness only.
Bow your soul before God, and acknowledge you have forfeited all favor at his
hands, and deserve nothing but destruction; but beg of him to spare you for
Christ's sake, who is worthy though you are unworthy. Consider yourself, as
lost, and undone by sin; and as destitute of all help, but from God, through
Christ. And cast yourself on the mercy of God in Jesus Christ. Look to him,
whom God has set forth to be the propitiation for our sins, to Jesus Christ,
that lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world. There is salvation in
no other; neither is there any name given among men, whereby we can be saved,
but Christ's. Look to him then, by faith; trust in his merits; and commit your
soul into his hands, to be saved by him, in his own appointed way. This, says
Dr. Doddridge, is the great act of saving faith. See his Book entitled* The
rise and progress of religion in the soul, page 69, a book which I heartily
wish was in every family in the province, and throughout the land.
And the Lord have mercy on you, and work in you true repentance, and a proper
trust in, and dependence upon the merits at Christ; and for his sake pardon
you, and receive you into favor; and renew and sanctify you, and give you an
heavenly frame and temper of mind; that so, though your body must die, your
soul may live, and be happy forever.

I would now call upon all sinners, here present, to take warning, by the
unhappy prisoner before them. You see what sin has brought him to; and what it
may bring you to, if you persist in it.

It is by degrees that sinners are brought to commit great and heinous sins.
When the Prophet told Hazael, what he would do to the Israelites -- that he
would rip up their women with child, and dash their little ones against the
stones: He cried out, What! is thy servant a dog, that he should do these
things? ^
Yet, by indulging himself in sin, he by degrees, grew bold and hardy enough,
to do that, which he before seemed to abhor, and think it impossible he should
ever be guilty of. Oh then, take care, that you do not get a habit of sinning?
Don't venture to proceed any further in your evil ways; since you know not what
monsters sin may soon make of you, if you should.

Let those who have been preserved from great and heinous transgressions, be
thankful for God's restraining grace. Let young persons take care to preserve
their innocence; and use their utmost endeavors to suppress the first motions
to sin. Let those who have entered upon a course of sin, come to an immediate
stand: and tremble at the thought, of proceeding any further! And may all
sinners be enabled to see the infinite evil and danger of sin, and be excited
immediately to break off from their sins by repentance, and from their
iniquities, by turning unto God. And let all be careful to shun and guard
against all temptations to, and occasions of sin, particularly those, which
have proved so fatal to the poor criminal here before us. -- Such as bad
company, especially that of lewd women. Bad company in general is exceeding
ensnaring and dangerous; and has been the ruin of multitudes: And as to a
whorish woman -- her house is the way to hell; going down to the chambers of
death. Avoid intemperate drinking of spirituous liquors. This counteracts the
great design of the divine law; which is to restrain men's lusts and passions,
and make them act as becomes rational creatures. I say, intemperate drinking,
in direct opposition to this, clouds and weakens reason, and inflames men's
lusts and passions, and makes them fit instruments of the devil, to accomplish
his hellish designs. This ruins both the souls and bodies of thousands and ten
thousands; and, I believe, I may add millions! How lamentable is it then, that
it is become so common among us? Abstain from the horrible sin of profane
cursing and swearing. A sin which is highly provoking to Almighty God; and what
greatly exposes persons to his awful judgments.

Neglect not the assembling of yourselves together, on the Lord's day, as the
manner of too many among us is. This unhappy man owns, that for near twenty
years past, he has seldom or never attended any public worship, till now since
his condemnation. If he had steadily attended the public worship, in all
probability, such religious impressions would have been made on his mind, as
would have prevented his perpetrating the heinous crime, for which he must now
die. But the time will not permit me to enlarge.

To conclude,

Let all cease to do evil, and learn to do well. And let them do it
immediately, since their time is short and uncertain. You pity the criminal,
because he has but a short time -- but a few hours to live. But consider --
your time perhaps, may be as short, nay shorter than his! Instead of hours, you
may have but a few minutes to live. So it has been with others, who have
thought themselves as safe, as you think yourselves now; and of several, not
far from us, since this man was condemned. They have been seized suddenly, when
about their business, or perhaps at their diversions, and hurried, in a few
moments, out of time, into eternity. Oh! consider your awful danger and provide
against it, by repenting immediately, and securing an interest in Jesus Christ,
and thereby a title to life and happiness. And the Lord make us all wise for
our souls, and for eternity; and grant that whenever death comes, though it be
never so soon or suddenly, we may be ready; and may die in peace, and sleep in
Jesus; and in the morning of the resurrection, when Christ, who is our life,
shall appear, we also may appear with him in glory, and so be forever with the
Lord.

THE unhappy man, previous to whose execution the preceding discourse was
delivered, was born in Ireland* and educated in the principles of the Church of
Rome. In his 20th year he came over to America, lived about a year at Boston,
and then went to Casco-Bay, where he married, and had a number of children. His
wife and all his children, except one, died some time before his tragical end.
In the time of the last war, he was six years and an half in the army, and was
finally at the taking of the Havannah. His business before and after this was
that of a mariner. He was employed sometimes in the fishery, sometimes in the
coasting business, and sometimes in foreign voyages. Though he appeared to be
tolerably well acquainted with reading and writing, yet he was very ignorant in
things of Religion, having almost entirely neglected the means of religious
knowledge. For a number of years, he attended no public worship, seldom looked
into the bible, or any other book on religious subjects. And when he did read,
he confined his reading, as he told me, to history and books of diversion. In
consequence of this, he was a most abandoned sinner; living as without God in
the world, and as if he had been made to serve diverse lusts and pleasures. He
was horribly profane; was addicted to intemperate drinking, whoring, lying,
fighting and quarrelling, and almost all manner of wickedness; and finally was
charged with, and convicted of the heinous crime which brought him to the
gallows.

It appeared on his trial that he went up, in the middle of the night, to the
room where Mrs. Hollowell lay, found her asleep, awaken her, and swore, if she
made the least noise, he would kill her; and then stopping her mouth,
perpetrated the atrocious crime. After which (to prevent, it seems, a
pregnancy) he abused her with his hand, in an unheard of, cruel and shocking
manner: Insomuch that her life was for some time almost despaired of; and she
was not able for ten days after to get off her bed without help. It was
observed by the honorable court, that they never had a cause of this kind
before them, wherein the evidence against the criminal was more full and clear.
Yet he denied both the Rape and the abuse after it; and insisted that his
living with her, which he owned, was by mutual agreement. This be persisted in
during the whole time of his confinement in goal, and even to the last; though
he was often urged to confess the truth, and put in mind of the dreadful
consequence of going out of the world with a lie in his mouth. This has induced
many to entertain hard thoughts of the woman, and to think more favorably of
him: And many have said he ought not to have been hanged.

I think justice to the woman's character requires that this matter be set in
its true light. He did not blame the Judges nor Jury; but said the evidence was
so full against him, that he knew he should lose his life, long before his
trial was over. He blamed only the woman, and the other witnesses.
Let it then be considered; that though it be shocking to think of* yet there
is no doubt but there have been instances of persons going out of the world
denying the truth, and it is to be feared many. Some no doubt endeavor to
conceal their guilt, hoping thereby to obtain a reprieve, and entertaining this
hope to the last, and fearing to confess their guilt, least they should prevent
it, they die with a lie in their mouths.
One such instance I suppose it is generally thought there was, not many years
since, at Cambridge. -- And considering Sheehen's general character before his
death, and especially what I have heard of him since, I should as readily
believe it of him, as of any man I ever knew.

Some suppose he was drunk and did not know, and therefore could not remember
what he did. But it is difficult to conceive how he should be drunk, as not to
know what he did, and yet be capable of committing so (...) a crime. I am
therefore more inclined to believe he was one of those hardened* daring
wretches (as the man, who was hanged at Cambridge, was supposed to be) who
venture to go out of the world denying the truth. Some put an end to their own
lives, and so venture to go out of the world under the awful guilt of
Self-murder: And this, it is said, he himself sometimes talked of doing.


Again, let it be considered, that notwithstanding he pretended to have
renounced the errors of the church of Rome, yet he died a Papist. This appears
from the testimony of an intimate friend of his, of the same religion; who was
with him in goal, and attended him at the gallows. Now we know one tenet of the
church of Rome is, that they are not obliged, in some cases, to perform their
most solemn vows to Heretics* and he might possibly think that if he might
swear falsely, he might doubtless speak falsely to Heretics, as they call all
whose religious principles differ from theirs.

Again, let it be considered that it appears evidently from scripture, that God
is sometimes provoked to give heinous sinners up to blindness of mind and
hardness of heart -- to leave them to the power of their lusts and of the
devil. When they commence devils -- contract the temper of the infernal spirits
before they leave the world, and go to that place of punishment which is
prepared for the devil and his angels. And when men are thus blinded and
hardened, the motives and arguments of religion, have little or no influence on
them. And that Sheehen was such an one, there is great reason to believe, not
only from his general character, and behavior in goal, but also from what I am
now going to relate.

Two credible persons have, since his execution, informed me, that there was a
young woman, daughter of one Williams, of Gouldsborough, in the Eastern part of
this province, abused in the same manner Mrs. Hollowell was. That she was
way-layed in the evening, between her father's house and a neighbor's; was
seized, forced, and wounded to such a degree, that her friends were obliged to
carry her home, she being unable to walk, and that the next morning early she
died. That the villain, who perpetrated this crime, returned after he had done
it, to his companions, who, it seem, were before, or then, made acquainted with
his enterprise; for such wretches declare their sin as Sodom: And that one of
them told him he would probably have a child to maintain: He answered no, that
he had taken care to prevent that, and that she would never have a child by
him, nor by any other man. That he was taken up, and confined in a private
house, they having no goal, and that after two or three days, he made his
escape. My informers were, at that time, both of them, at a place very near to
Gouldsborough, heard the talk about the affair, and the man's name, and are
pretty confident it was Bryan Sheehen. And they say, he was said to be an
Irishman, and a married man, and that his wife was at Casco-Bay. He mentioned
to me his going a coasting from Casco to the Eastward, in a little boat owned
by him and another man.
Soon after this Sheehen left Casco-Bay (fearing, I imagine, he should be
pursued and taken there) came to Marblehead, changed his name, and went a
fishing from thence. While he was in goal, there was a man in town from
Gouldsborough, or some place adjacent, who was asked if he knew the man that
abused Williams's daughter, in that cruel, fatal manner. He said he knew him
well, that he had often seen him, and then described him: And the description
answered pretty exactly to Sheehen. He was told there was a man in goal, who
some thought might be the same man. He went to the goal, saw him, and when he
returned, declared he was the same. Now if he was the man, and I think there is
the highest probability that he was; there can be no doubt of his guilt with
respect to Mrs. Hollowell. I was present when Mrs. Hollowell visited him in
goal after his condemnation, and observed critically, not only what they said,
but also their behavior, and was of opinion that she talked and behaved much
more like an innocent person than he did.
And as I would hope there are not many such monsters upon earth, so I think it
a favor that the earth is rid of him.

Let all hear, and fear and do no such wickedness. Oh consider the evil nature
and dreadful consequences of sin! Dreadful in this world, and infinitely more
so in the world to come. Exhort one another daily, lest any be hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin. -- hardened past remedy -- hardened to their ruin
here, and eternal misery hereafter.

Let women consider their danger from whoremongers and adulterers: And let them
be so far from trusting themselves in their power, as to shun and avoid them,
as they would bears and tigers.

Let parents be careful to bring up their children in the fear of God. Let them
consider of what vast importance this is. That if they are neglected in
childhood and youth, they may contract such habits of sinning, as it will be as
hard for them to break off, as it is for the Ethiopian to change his skin or
the leopard his spots; whereas if they are trained up in the way of religion,
they will be likely never to depart from it.

Whatever turn you give the infant mind,
That way 'twill ever after be inclined.

