Col. BENJAMIN.CHURCH.


THE ENTERTAINING HISTORY OF King Philip's WAR, Which began in the Month of
June, 1675.

AS ALSO OF EXPEDITIONS MORE LATELY MADE Against the Common Enemy, and Indian
Rebels, in the Eastern Parts of New England: With some ACCOUNT of the Divine
Providence toward Col.Benjamin Church:

By THOMAS CHURCH. Esquire. HIS SON.

THE SECOND EDITION.

BOSTON: Printed, 1716.

NEWPORT, Rhode Island: Reprinted and Sold by SOLOMON SOUTHWICK, in
Queen Street, 1772.

TO THE READER.
THE subject of this following narrative, offering itself to your friendly
perusal, relates to the former and later wars of New England, which I myself
was not a little concerned in: For in the year 1675, that unhappy and bloody
Indian war broke out in Plymouth colony, where I was then building, and
beginning a plantation at a place called by the Indians Sogkonate, and since by
the English Little-Compton. I was the first Englishman that built upon that
neck, which was full of Indians. My head and hands were full about settling a
new plantation where nothing was brought to; no preparation of dwelling house,
or outhouses, or fencing made. Horses and cattle were to be provided, ground
to be cleared and broken up; and the utmost caution to be used, to keep myself
free from offending my Indian neighbors all round about me. While I was thus
busily employed, and all my time and strength laid out in this laborious
undertaking, I received a commission from the government to engage in their
defense: And with my commission I received another heart, inclining me to put
forth my strength in military service: And through the grace of GOD I was
spirited for that work, and direction in it was renewed to me day by day. And
although many of the actions that I was concerned in were very difficult and
dangerous, yet myself, and these who went with me voluntarily in the service,
had our lives, for the most part, wonderfully preserved, by the overruling hand
of the Almighty, from first to last; which does aloud bespeak our praises: And
to declare his wonderful works is our indispensable duty. I was ever very
sensible of my own littleness, and unfitness to be employed in such great
services; but calling to mind that GOD is STRONG, I endeavored to put all my
confidence in him, and by his almighty power was carried through every
difficult action: And my desire is that his name may have the praise.

It was ever my intent, having laid myself under a solemn promise, that the
many and repeated favors of GOD to myself, and those with me in the service,
might be published for generations to come. And now my great age requiring my
dismission from service in the militia, and to put off my armor, I am willing
that the great and glorious works of Almighty GOD, to us children of men,
should appear to the world; and having my minutes by me, my son has taken the
care and pains to collect from them the ensuing narrative of many passages
relating to the former and latter wars; which I have had the perusal of, and
find nothing amiss as to the truth of it; and with as little reflection upon
any particular person as might be, either alive or dead.

And seeing every particle of historical truth is precious; I hope the reader
will pass a favorable censure upon an old soldier, telling of the many
rencounters he has bad, and yet is come off alive. It is a pleasure to remember
what a great number of families, in this and the neighboring provinces in
New England, did, during the war, enjoy a great measure of liberty and peace by
the hazardous stations and marches of those engaged in military exercises, who
were a wall unto them on this side and on that side.

I desire prayers, that I may be enabled well to accomplish my spiritual
warfare, and that I may be more than conqueror through JESUS CHRIST loving of
me.

Benjamin Church

The entertaining HISTORY of Philip's WAR, Which began in the Year 1675. With
the Proceedings of Benjamin Church, Esquire
IN the Year 1674 Mr. Benjamin Church, of Duxbury, being providentially at
Plymouth, in the time of the court, fell into acquaintance with Capt. John
Almy, of Rhode Island. Capt. Almy, with great importunity, invited him to ride
with him, and view that part of Plymouth Colony that lay next to Rhode Island,
known then by their Indian names of Pocasset and Sogkonate. Among other
arguments to persuade him, he told him the foil was very rich, and the
situation pleasant: Persuades him by all means to purchase of the company some
of the court grant rights. He accepted his invitation, views the country, and
was pleased with it; makes a purchase, settled a farm, found the gentlemen of
the Island very civil and obliging. And being himself a person of uncommon
activity and industry, he soon erected two buildings upon his farm, and gained
a good acquaintance with the natives; got much into their favor, and was in a
little time in great esteem among them.

The next spring advancing, while Mr. Church was diligently settling his new
farm, stocking, leasing and disposing of his affairs, and had a fine prospect
of doing no small things; and hoping that his good success would be inviting
unto other good men to become his neighbors: Behold! the rumor of a war
between the English and the natives gave check to his projects. People began to
be very jealous of the Indians, and indeed they had no small reason to suspect
that they had formed a design of war upon the English. Mr. Church had it daily
suggested to him that the Indians were plotting a bloody design. That Philip,
the great Mount-Hope Sachem, was leader therein; and so it proved, he was
sending his messengers to all the neighboring Sachems, to engage them into a
confederacy with him in the war.

Among the rest he sent six men to Awashonks, SquawSachem of the Sogkonate
Indians, to engage her in his interest: Awashonks so far listened unto them, as
to call her subjects together, to make a great dance, which is the custom of
that nation when they advise about momentous affairs. But what does Awashonks
do, but sends away two of her men that well understood the English language, (
Sassamon and George by name) to invite Mr. Church to the dance. Mr. Church upon
the invitation, immediately takes with him Charles Hazelton, his tenant's son,
who well understood the Indian language, and rid down to the place appointed;
where they found hundreds of Indians gathered together from all parts of her
dominion. Awashonks herself, in a foaming sweat, was leading the dance; but she
was no sooner sensible of Mr. Church's arrival, but she broke off, sat down,
calls her nobles round her, orders Mr. Church to be invited into her presence;
compliments being past, and each one taking seats, she told him, King Philip
had sent six men of his, with two of her people, that had been over at
Mount-Hope, Or Mont-haup, a mountain in Bristol.
to draw her into a confederacy with him, in a war with the English, desiring
him to give her his advice in the case, and to tell her the truth, whether the
Umpame men (as Philip had told her) were gathering a great army to invade
Philip's country? He assured her he would tell her the truth, and give her his
best advice; then he told her it was but a few days since he came from
Plymouth, and the English were then making no preparations for war; that he was
in company with the principal Gentlemen of the government, who had no discourse
at all about war; and he believed no thoughts about it. He asked her, whether
she thought he would have brought up his goods to settle in that place, if he
apprehended an entering into war with so near a neighbor? She seemed to be
somewhat convinced by his talk, and said she believed he spoke the truth.

Then she called for the Mount-Hope men, who made a formidable appearance, with
their faces painted, and their hair trimmed up in comb-fashion, with their
powderhorns and shot-bags at their backs; which among that nation is the
posture and figure of preparedness for war. She told Mr. Church these were the
persons that had brought her the report of the English preparations for war,
and then told them what Mr. Church had said in answer to it.

Upon this began a warm talk among the Indians, but it was soon quashed, and
Awashonks proceeded to tell Mr. Church, that Philip's message to her was, that
unless she would forthwith enter into a confederacy with him, in a war against
the English, he would send his men over privately, to kill the English cattle,
and burn their houses on that side the river, which would provoke the English
to fall upon her, whom they would without doubt suppose the author of the
mischief. Mr. Church told her he was sorry to see so threatening an aspect of
affairs; and stepping to the Mount-Hopes, he felt of their bags, and finding
them filled with bullets, asked them what those bullets were for? They
scossingly replied, to shoot Pigeons with.

Then Mr. Church turned to Awashonks, and told her if Philip was resolved to
make war, her best way would be to knock those six Mount-Hopes on the head, and
shelter herself under the protection of the English: Upon which the Mount-Hopes
were for the present dumb. But those two of Awashonk's men, who had been at
Mount-Hope, expressed themselves in a furious manner against his advice. And
Little-Eyes, one of the Queen's council, joined with them, and urged Mr. Church
to go aside with him among the bushes, that he might have some private
discourse with him, which other Indians immediately forbid, being sensible of
his ill design: But the Indians began to side and grow very warm. Mr. Church,
with undaunted courage, told the Mount-Hopes they were bloody wretches, and
thirsted after the blood of their English neighbors, who had never injured
them, but had always abounded in their kindness to them. That, for his own
part, though he desired nothing more than peace, yet, if nothing but war would
satisfy them, he believed he should prove a sharp thorn in their sides: Bid the
company observe those men that were of such bloody dispositions, whether
providence would suffer them to live to see the event of the war, which others,
more peaceably disposed, might do.

Then he told Awashonks he thought it might be most advisable for her to send
to the Governor of Plymouth, and shelter herself and people under his
protection. She liked his advice, and desired him to go on her behalf to the
Plymouth government, which he consented to: And at parting advised her,
whatever she did, not to desert the English interest, to join with her
neighbors in a rebellion which would certainly prove fatal to her. [He moved
none of his goods from his house, that there might not be the least umbrage
from such an action.] She thanked him for his advice, and sent two of her men
to guard him to his house; which when they came there, urged him to take care
to secure his goods, which he refused for the reasons beforementioned: But
desired the Indians, that if what they feared should happen, they would take
care of what he left, and directed them to a place in the woods where they
should dispose of them; which they faithfully observed.

He took his leave of his guard and bid them tell their mistress, if she
continued steady in her dependence on the English, and kept within her own
limits of Sogkonate, he would see her again quickly; and then hastened away to
Pocasset, Tiverton shore over against the north end of Rhode Island.
where he met with Peter Nunnuit, the husband of the Queen of Pocasset, who was
just then come over in a canoe from Mount-Hope. Peter told him that there would
certainly be war; for Philip had held a dance of several weeks continuance, and
had entertained the young men from all parts of the country: And added, that
Philip expected to be sent for to Plymouth, to be examined about Sassamon's
death, who was murdered at Assawomset-Ponds; Middleborough.
knowing himself guilty of contriving that murder. The same Peter told him that
he saw Mr. James Brown, of Swanzey, and Mr. Samuel Gorton, who was an
interpreter, and two other men, who brought a letter from the Governor of
Plymouth to Philip. He observed to him further, that the young men were very
eager to begin the war, and would fain have killed Mr. Brown, but Philip
prevented it; telling them that his father had charged him to show kindness to
Mr. Brown. In short, Philip was forced to promise them that, on the next
Lord's Day, when the English were gone to meeting, they should rifle their
houses, and from that time forward kill their cattle.

Peter desired Mr. Church to go and see his wife, who was but up the hill; he
went and found but few of her people with her. She said they were all gone,
against her will, to the dances; and she much feared there would be a war. Mr.
Church advised her to go to the Island and secure herself, and those that were
with her; and send to the Governor of Plymouth, who she knew was her friend;
and so left her, resolving to hasten to Plymouth, and wait on the Governor: And
he was so expeditious that he was with the Governor early next morning, though
he waited on some of the magistrates by the way, who were of the council of
war, and also met him at the Governor's. He gave them an account of his
observations and discoveries, which confirmed their former intelligences, and
hastened their preparation for defense.

Philip, according to his promise to his people, permitted them to march out of
the neck on the next Lord's Day, when they plundered the nearest houses that
the inhabitants had deserted: But as yet offered no violence to the people, at
least none were killed. However the alarm was given by their numbers and
hostile equipage, and by the prey they made of what they could find in the
forsaken houses.

An express came the same day to the Governor, who immediately gave orders to
the Captains of the towns to march the greatest part of their companies, and to
rendezvous at Taunton, on Monday night, where Major Bradford was to receive
them, and dispose them under Capt. (now made Major) Cutworth, of Situate. The
Governor desired Mr. Church to give them his company, and to use his interest,
in their behalf, with the gentlemen of Rhode Island. He complied with it, and
they marched the next day. -- Major Bradford desired Mr. Church, with a
commanded party, consisting of English and some friend Indians, to march in the
front, at some distance from the main body. Their orders were to keep so far
before as not to be in sight of the army. And so they did, for by the way they
killed a deer, fleed, roasted, and eat the most of him, before the army came up
with them; but the Plymouth forces soon arrived at Swanzey, and were chiefly
posted at Major Brown's and Mr. Mile's garrisons; and were there soon joined
with those that came from Massachusetts, who had entered into a confederacy
with their Plymouth brethren, against the perfidious heathens.

The enemy, who began their hostilities with plundering, and destroying cattle,
did not long content themselves with that game; they thirsted for English
blood, and they soon broached it; killing two men in the way not far from Mr.
Mile's garrison; and soon after, eight more at Mattapoiset: In Swanzey.
Upon whose bodies they exercised more than brutish barbarities; beheading,
dismembring and mangling them, and exposing them in the most inhuman manner;
which gashed and ghostly objects struck a damp on all beholders.

The enemy, flushed with these exploits, grew yet bolder, and skulking every
where in the bushes, shot at all passengers, and killed many that ventured
abroad. They came so near as to shoot down two sentinels at Mr. Mile's
garrison, under the very noses of most of our forces. These provocations drew
out the resentment of some of Captain Prentices troops, who desired they might
have liberty to go out and seek the enemy in their own quarters. Quarter
Masters Gill and Belcher commanded the parties drawn out, who earnestly desired
Mr. Church's company: They provided him a horse and furniture (his own being
out of the way;) he readily complied with their desires, and was soon mounted.

This party was no sooner over Mile's bridge, but were fired upon by an
ambuscare of about a dozen Indians, as they were afterward discovered to be.
When they drew off, the pilot was mortally wounded, Mr. Belcher received a shot
in his knee, and his horse was killed under him, Mr. Gill was struck with a
musket-ball on the side of his belly; but being clad with a buff coat, and some
thickness of paper under it, it never broke his skin. The troopers were
surprised to see both their commanders wounded, and wheeled off; but Mr. Church
persuaded, at length stormed and stamped, and told them it was a shame to run,
and leave a wounded man there to become a prey to the barbarous enemy: For the
pilot yet sat on his horse, though so mazed with the shot, as not to have sense
to guide him; Mr. Gill seconded him, and offered, though much disabled, to
assist in bringing him off. Mr. Church asked a stranger, who gave him his
company in that action, if he would go with him and fetch off the wounded man:
He readily consented, and they, with Mr. Gill, went, but the wounded man
fainted and fell off his horse before they came to him; but Mr. Church and the
stranger dismounted, took up the man dead, and laid him before Mr. Gill on his
horse. Mr. Church told the other two, if they would take care of the dead man,
he would go and fetch his horse back, which was going off the causey toward the
enemy; but before he got over the causey he saw the enemy run to the right into
the neck. He brought back the horse, and called earnestly and repeatedly to the
army to come over and fight the enemy; and while he stood calling and
persuading, the skulking enemy returned to their old stand, and all discharged
their guns at him at one clap, though every shot missed him; yet one of the
army, on the other side of the river, received one of the balls in his foot.
Mr. Church now began (no succor coming to him) to think in time to retreat:
Saying, The Lord have mercy on us, if such a handful of Indians shall thus dare
such an army!

Upon this it was immediately resolved, and orders were given to march down
into the neck, and having passed the bridge and causey, the direction was to
extend both wings, which being not well heeded, by those that remained in the
center, some of them mistook their friends for their enemies, and made a fire
upon them in the right wing, and wounded that noble heroic youth, Ensign
Savage, in the thigh, but it happily proved but a flesh wound. They marched
until they came to the narrow of the neck, at a place called Keekamuit, Upper
part of Bristol.
where they took down the heads of eight English men that were killed at the
head of Mattapoiset-neck, and set upon poles, after the barbarous manner of
those savages. There Philip had staved all his drums, and conveyed all his
canoes to the East Side of Mattapoiset-river; hence it was concluded, by those
that were acquainted with the motions of those people, that they had quitted
the neck. Mr. Church told them that Philip was doubtless gone over to Pocasset
side, to engage those Indians in rebellion with him; which they soon found to
be true. The enemy were not really beaten out of Mount-Hope neck, though it was
true they fled from thence; yet it was before any pursued them. It was but to
strengthen themselves, and to gain a more advantageous post. However, some, and
not a few, pleased themselves with the fancy of a mighty conquest.

A grand council was held, and a resolve past, to build a fort there, to
maintain the first ground they had gained, by the Indians leaving it to them;
and to speak the truth, it must be said, that as they gained not that field by
their sword, nor their bow; so it was rather their fear than their courage,
that obliged them to set up the marks of their conquest. Mr. Church looked upon
it, and talked of it with contempt, and urged hard the pursuing the enemy on
Pocasset side, and with the greater earnestness, because of his promise made to
Awashonks, before mentioned. The council adjourned themselves from Mount-Hope
to Rohoboth, where Mr. Treasurer Southworth, being weary of his charge of
Commissary General, (provision being scarce and difficult to be obtained, for
the army, that now lay still to cover the people from no body, while they were
building a fort for nothing) retired, and the power and trouble of that post
was left with Mr. Church, who still urged the commanding officers to move over
to Pocasset side, Upper part of Bristol.
to pursue the enemy, and kill Philip, which would, in his opinion, be more
probable to keep possession of the neck, than to tarry to build a fort. He was
still restless on that side of the river, and the rather because of his promise
to the Squaw Sachem of Sogkonate, and Captain Fuller also urged the same, until
at length there came further orders concerning the fort; and withal an order
for Captain Fuller with six files to cross the river to the side so much
insisted on, and to try if he could get speech with any of the Pocasset or
Sogkonate Indians, and that Mr. Church should go his second. Upon the Captian's
receiving his orders, he asked Mr. Church whether he was willing to engage in
this enterprise: To whom it was indeed too agreeable to be declined; though he
thought the enterprise was hazardous enough for them to have more men assigned
them. Captain Fuller told him, that for his own part, he was grown ancient and
heavy, he feared the travel and fatigue would be too much for him; but Mr.
Church urged him, and told him, he would cheerfully excuse him his hardship and
travel, and take that part to himself, if he might but go; for he had rather do
any thing in the world than stay there to build the fort.

Then they drew out the number assigned them and marched the same night to the
ferry, and were transported to Rhode Island, from whence, the next night, they
got passage over to Pocasset side, in Rhode Island boats, and concluded there
to dispose themselves in two ambuscadoes before day, hoping to surprise some of
the enemy by their falling into one or other of their ambushments. But Capt.
Fuller's party, being troubled with the epidemical plague of just after
tobacco, must needs strike fire to smoke it; and thereby discovered themselves
to a party of the enemy coming up to them, who immediately fled with great
precipitation.

This ambuscade drew off about break of day, perceiving they were discovered,
the other continued in their post until the time assigned them, and the light
and heat of the sun rendered their station both insignificant and troublesome,
and then returned unto the place of rendezvous, where they were acquainted with
the other party's disappointment, and the occasion of it. Mr. Church calls for
the breakfast he had ordered to be brought over in the boat; but the man that
had the charge of it confected that he was asleep when the boats-men called
him, and in haste came away, and never thought of it. It happened that Mr.
Church had a few cakes of rusk in his pocket, that Madam Cronston (the Governor
of Rhode-Island's Lady) gave him when he came off the island, which he divided
among the company, which was all the provisions they had.

Mr. Church, after their slender breakfast, proposed to Capt. Fuller, that he
would march in quest of the enemy, with such of the company as would be willing
to march with him, which he complied with, though with a great deal of scruple,
because of his small number, and the extreme hazard he foresaw must attend them.

But some of the company reflected upon Mr. Church, that notwithstanding his
talk on the other side of the river, he had not shown them any Indians since
they came over. Which now moved him to tell them, that if it was their desire
to see Indians, he believed he should now soon show them what they should say
was enough.

The number allowed him soon drew off to him, which could not be many, because
their whole company consisted of no more than thirty-six. They moved toward
Sogkonate, until they came to the brook that runs into Nunnaquohqu^ neck, where
they discovered a fresh and plain track, which they concluded to be from the
great pine swamp, about a mile from the road that leads to Sogkonate. Now, says
Mr. Church, to his men, if we follow this track, no doubt but we shall soon see
Indians enough; they expressed their willingness to follow the track, and moved
in it, but had not gone far before one of them narrowly escaped being bit with
a rattle-snake: And the woods that the track led them through was haunted much
with those snakes, which the little company seemed more to be afraid of than
the black serpents they were in quest of, and therefore bent their course
another way, to a place where they thought it probable to find some of the
enemy. Had they kept the track to the pine swamp, they had been certain of
meeting Indians enough; but not so certain that any of them should have
returned to give account how many.

Now they passed down into Punkatees neck; and in their march discovered a
large wigwam full of Indian truck, which the soldiers were for loading
themselves with, until Mr. Church forbid it, telling them they might expect
soon to have their hands full, and business without caring for plunder. Then
crossing the head of the creek into the neck, they again discovered fresh
Indian tracks very lately passed before them into the neck. They then got
privately and undiscovered unto the fence of Capt. Almy's pease-field, and
divided into two parties, Mr. Church keeping the one party with himself, sent
the other with Lake, who was acquainted with the ground, on the other side. Two
Indians were soon discovered coming out of the pease-field toward them; when
Mr. Church, and those that were with him, concealed themselves from them, by
falling flat on the ground; but the other division, not using the same caution,
were seen by the enemy, which occasioned them to run; which when Mr. Church
perceived, he showed himself to them, and called, telling them he desired but
to speak with them, and would not hurt them: But they ran, and Church pursued.
The Indians climbed over a fence, and one of them facing about discharged his
piece, but without effect, on the English: One of the English soldiers ran up
to the fence and fired upon him that had discharged his piece; and they
concluded, by the yelling they heard, that the Indian was wounded; but the
Indians soon got into the thickets, whence they saw them no more for the
present.

Mr. Church then marching over a plain piece of ground, where the woods were
very thick on one side; ordered his little company to march at a double
distance, to make as big a show (if they should be discovered) as might be; but
before they saw any body, they were saluted with a volley of fifty or sixty
guns; some bullets came very surprisingly near Mr. Church, who starting, looked
behind him, to see what was become of his men, expecting to have seen half of
them dead, but seeing them all upon their legs, and briskly firing at the
smokes of the enemies guns (for that was all that was then to be seen) He
blessed God, and called to his men not to discharge all their guns at once,
left the enemy should take the advantage of such an opportunity to run upon
them with their hatchets.

Their next motion was immediately into the Peasefield. Tivorton shore, about
half a mile above Fogland ferry.
When they came to the fence, Mr. Church bid as many as had not discharged
their guns, to clap under the fence, and lie close, while the other, at some
distance in the field, stood to charge; hoping that if the enemy should creep
to the fence, to gain a shot at those that were charging their guns, they might
be surprised by those that lay under the fence; but casting his eyes to the
side of the hill above them, the hill seemed to move, being covered over with
Indians, with their bright guns glittering in the sun, and running in a
circumference with a design to surround them.

Seeing such multitudes surrounding him and his little company, it put him upon
thinking what was become of the boats that were ordered to attend him; and
looking up he spied them ashore at Sandy-point, on the island side of the
river, with a number of horse and foot by them, and wondered what should be the
occasion, until he was afterward informed, that the boats had been over that
morning from the island, and had landed a party of men at Fogland, that were
designed in Punkatees neck, to fetch off some cattle and horses, but were
ambuscaded, and many of them wounded by the enemy.

Now our gentleman's courage and conduct were both put to the test, he
encourages his men, and orders some to run and take a wall for shelter before
the enemy gained it. It was time for them now to think of escaping if they knew
which way. Mr. Church orders his men to strip to their white shirts, that the
islanders might discover them to be Englishmen; and then orders three guns to
be fired distinct, hoping it might be observed by their friends on the opposite
shore. The men that were ordered to take the wall being very hungry, stopped a
while among the pease to gather a few, being about four rod from the wall; the
enemy from behind hailed them with a shower of bullets; but soon all but one
came tumbling over an old hedge down the bank, where Mr. Church and the rest
were, and told him that his brother B. Southworth, who was the man that was
missing, was killed, that they saw him fall; and so they did indeed see him
fall, but it was without a shot, and lay no longer than till he had an
opportunity to clap a bullet into one of the enemy's forehead, and then came
running to his company. The meaness of the English powder was now their
greatest misfortune; when they were immediately upon this beset with multitudes
of Indians, who possessed themselves of every rock, stump, tree or fence that
was in sight, firing upon them without ceasing; while they had no other shelter
but a small bank and bit of a water fence. And yet to add to the disadvantage
of this little handful of distressed men, the Indians also possessed themselves
of the ruins of a stone house that over looked them; so that now they had no
way to prevent lying quite open to some, or other of the enemy, but to heap up
stones before them, as they did, and still bravely and wonderfully defended
themselves against all the numbers of the enemy. At length came over one of the
boats from the island shore, but the enemy plied their shot so warmly to her as
made her keep at some distance; Mr. Church desired them to send their canoe
ashore to fetch them on board; but no persuasions nor arguments could prevail
with them a bring their canoe to shore; which some of Mr. Church's men
perceiving, began to cry out, For God's sake to take them off, for their
ammunition was spent, etc. Mr. Church being sensible of the danger of the
enemy's hearing their complaints, and being made acquainted with the weakness
and scantiness of their ammunition, fiercely called to the boat's master, and
bid him either send his canoe ashore, or else be gone presently, or he would
fire upon him.

Away goes the boat, and leaves them still to shift for themselves; but then
another difficulty arose, the enemy seeing the boat leave them, were
re-animated, and fired thicker and faster than ever; upon which some of the men
that were lightest of foot, began to talk of attempting an escape by slight,
until Mr. Church solidly convinced them of the impracticableness of it; and
encouraged them yet, told them, That he had observed so much of the remarkable
and wonderful providence of God hitherto preserving them, that it encouraged
him to believe, with much confidence, that God would yet preserve them; that
not a hair of their head should fall to the ground; bid them be patient,
courageous and prudently sparing of their ammunition, and he made no doubt but
they should come well off yet, etc. until his little army again resolved, one
and all, to stay with, and stick by him. One of them, by Mr. Church's order,
was pitching a slat stone up an end before him in the sand, when a bullet from
the enemy, with a full force, struck the stone, while he was pitching it an
end; which put the poor fellow to a miserable start, till Mr. Church called
upon him to observe, how God directed the bullets, that the enemy could not bit
him when in the same place, yet could hit the stone as it was erected.

While they were thus making the best defense they could against their numerous
enemies, that made the woods ring with their constant yelling and shouting: And
night coming on, somebody told Mr. Church, they spied a sloop up the river as
far as Gold-Island, that seemed to be coming down toward them: He looked up
and told them, succor was now coming, for be believed it was Captain Golding,
whom be knew to be a man for business, and would certainly fetch them off, if
he came. The wind being fair, the vessel was soon with them; and Captain
Golding it was, Mr. Church (as soon as they came to speak with one another)
desired him to come to anchor at such a distance from the shore that he might
veer ^ut his cable and ride afloat, and let slip his canoe, that it might drive
ashore; which direction Captain Golding observed; but the enemy gave him such a
warm salute, that his sails, color, and stern, were full of bullet holes.

The canoe came ashore, but was so small that she would not bear above two men
at a time; and when two were got aboard, they turned her loose to drive ashore
for two more, and the sloop's company kept the Indians in play the while; but
when at last it came to Mr. Church's turn to go aboard, he had left his hat and
cutlass at the well where he went to drink, when he first came down; he told
his company, he would never go off and leave his bat and cutlass for the
Indians; they should never have that to reflect upon him: Though he was much
disuaded from it, yet he would go and fetch them. He put all the powder he had
lest into his gun (and a poor charge it was) and went presenting his gun at the
enemy, until he took up what he went for; at his return he discharged his gun
at the enemy, to bid them farewell for that time; but had not powder enough to
carry the bullet half way to them.

Two bullets from the enemy struck the canoe as he went on board, one grazed
the hair of his head a little before; another stuck in a small stake that stood
right against the middle of his breast.

Now this Gentleman with his army, making in all 20 men, himself and his pilot
being numbered with them, got all safe on board after six hours engagement with
300 Indians; whose number we were told afterward by some of themselves. A
deliverance which that good Gentleman often mentions to the Glory of God, and
his protecting providence. The next day meeting with the rest of his little
company, whom he had left at Pocasset (that had also a small skirmish with the
Indians, and had two men wounded) they returned to the Mount-Hope garrison;
which Mr. Church used to call the loosing fort. Mr. Church then returning to
the island, to seek provision for the army, meets with Alderman, a noted
Indian, that was just come over from the Squaw Sachem's cape of Pocasset,
having deserted from her, and brought over his family; who gave him an account
of the state of the Indians, and where each of the Sagamore's head quarters
were. Mr. Church then discoursed with some who knew the spot well where the
Indians said Weetamore's Squaw Sachem of Pocasset.
head quarters were, and offered their service to pilot him. With this news he
hastened to the Mount-Hope garrison. The army expressed their readiness to
embrace such an opportunity.

All the ablest soldiers were now immediately drawn off, equipped and
despatched upon this design, under the command of a certain officer; and having
marched about two miles, viz. until they came to the cove that lies south west
from the Mount, where orders were given for an halt: The commander in chief
told them he thought it proper to take advice before he went any further;
called Mr. Church and the pilot, and asked them, how they knew that Philip and
all his men were not by that time got to Weetamore's camp; or that all her own
men were not by that time returned to her again? With many more frightful
questions. Mr. Church told him, they had acquainted him with as much as they
knew, and that for his part he could discover nothing that need to discourage
them from proceeding; that he thought it so practicable, that he, with the
pilot, would willingly lead the way to the spot, and hazard the brunt. But the
chief commander insisted on this, That the enemies number were so great, and he
did not know what numbers more might be added unto them by that time: And his
company so small, that he could not think it practicable to attack them: Added
moreover, That if he was sure of killing all the enemy, and knew that he must
lose the life of one of his men in the action, he would not attempt it. Pray
Sir, then (replied Mr. Church) Please to lead your company to yonder windmill,
on Rhode Island, and there they will be cut of danger of being killed by the
enemy, and we shall have less trouble to supply them with provisions. But
return he would, and did, unto the garrison, until more strength came to them,
and a sloop to transport them to the Fall river, South part of Freetown.
in order to visit Weetamore's camp. Mr. Church, one Baxter, and Captain Hunter
an Indian, proffered to go out on the discovery on the left wing, which was
accepted; they had not marched above a quarter of a mile before they started
three of the enemy. Captain Hunter wounded one of them in his knee, whom, when
he came up, he discovered to be his near kinsman; the captive desired favor
for his squaw, if she should fall into their hands, but asked none for himself,
excepting the liberty of taking a whiff of tobacco, and while he was taking his
whiff, his kinsman with one blow of his hatchet despatched him. Proceeding to
Weetamore's camp, they were discovered by one of the enemy, who ran in and gave
information, upon which a lusty young fellow left his meat upon his spit,
Probably a wooden spit.
running hastily our, told his companions, he would kill an Englishman before
he cat his dinner; but failed of his design, being no sooner out but shot down.
The enemies fires, and what shelter they had was by the edge of a thick cedar
swamp, into which, on this alarm, they betook themselves, and the English as
nimbly pursued; but were soon commanded back by their chieftan, after they were
come within hearing of the cries of their women and children, and so ended that
exploit; but returning to their sloop the enemy pursued them, and wounded two
of their men. The next day they returned to the Mount-Hope garrison.

Soon after this, was Philip's head quarters visited by some other English
forces; but Philip and his gang had the very fortune to escape that Weetamore
and here is (but now mentioned) had; they took into a swamp, and their pursuers
were commanded back. After this Dartmouth's distresses required succor, great
part of the town being laid desolate, and many of the inhabitants killed; the
most of Plymouth forces were ordered thither; and coming to Russell's garrison
at Ponaganset, In Dartmouth.
they met with a number of the enemy that had surrendered themselves prisoners
on terms promised by Capt. Eels of the garrison, and Ralph Earl, who persuaded
them (by a friend Indian he had employed) to come in. And had their promises to
the Indians been kept, and the Indians fairly treated, it is probable that most
if not all the Indians in those parts had soon followed the example of those
who had now surrendered themselves; which would have been a good step toward
finishing the war. But in spite of all that Capt. Eels, Church or Earl could
say, argue, plead, or beg, some body else that had more power in their hands
improved it; and without any regard to the promises made them on their
surrendering themselves, they were carried away to Plymouth, there sold, and
transported out of the country, being about eight-score persons. An action so
hateful to Mr. Church, that he opposed it to the loss of the good will and
respects of some that before were his good friends. But while these things were
acting at Dartmouth, Philip made his escape, leaving his country, fled over
Taunton river, and Rehoboth plain, and Petuxet river, where Capt. Edmunds, of
Providence, made some spoil upon him, and had probably done more, but was
prevented by the coming of a superior officer, that put him by. And now another
fort was built at Pocasset, that proved as troublesome and chargeable as that
at Mount-Hope; and the remainder of the summer was improved in providing for
the forts and forces there maintained, while our enemies were fled some hundred
of miles into the country, near as far as Albany. And now strong suspicions
began to arise of the Narraganset Indians, that they were ill affected, and
designed mischief; and so the event soon discovered. The next winter they began
their hostilities upon the English. The united colonies then agreed to send an
army to suppress them: Governor Winslow to command the army. He undertaking the
expedition, invited Mr. Church to command a company in the expedition, which he
declined, craving excuse from taking commission, he promised to wait upon him
as a Reformado through the expedition. Having rid with the General to Boston,
and from thence to Rehoboth; upon the General's request he went thence the
nearest way over the ferries, with Major Smith to his garrison in the
Narraganset country, to prepare and to provide for the coming of General
Winslow; who marched round through the country with his army, proposing by
night to surprise Pumham Sachem of Shawomet, or Warwick.
(a certain Narraganset Sachem) and his town; but being aware of the approach
of our army, made their escape into the deserts; but Mr. Church meeting with
fair winds arrived safe at the Major's garrison in the evening, and soon began
to inquire after the enemies resorts, wigwams, or sleeping places, and having
gained some intelligence, he proposed to the Eldriges, and some other brisk
hands that he met with, to attempt the surprising of some of the enemy, to make
a present of to the General, when he should arrive, which might advantage his
design: Being brisk blades, they readily complied with the motion, and were
soon upon their march. The night was very cold, but blessed with the moon;
before the day broke they effected their exploit, and by the rising of the sun
arrived at the Major's garrison, where they met the General, and presented him
with eighteen of the enemy they had captived. The General, pleased with the
exploit, gave them thanks, particularly to Mr. Church, the mover and chief
actor of the business; and sending two of them (likely boys) a present to
Boston; smiling on Mr. Church, told him, That he made no doubt but his faculty
would supply them with Indian boys enough before the war was ended.

Their next move was to a swamp, which the Indians had fortified with a fort.
Mr. Church rid in the General's guard when the bloody engagement began; but
being impatient of being out of the heat of the action, importunately begged
leave of the General that he might run down to the assistance of his friends;
the General yielded to his request, provided he could rally some hands to go
with him. Thirty men immediately drew out and followed him: They entered the
swamp, and passed over the log, that was the passage into the fort, where they
saw many men and several valiant Captains lie slain: Mr. Church spying Captain
Gardner of Salem, amidst the wigwams in the east end of the fort, made toward
him, but on a sudden, while they were looking each other in the face, Captain
Gardner settled down, Mr. Church stepped to him, and seeing the blood run down
his cheek, lifted up his cap, and calling him by his name; he looked up in his
face, but spoke not a word, being mortally shot through the head; and observing
his wound, Mr. Church found the ball entered his head on the side that was next
the upland, where the English entered the swamp, upon which, having ordered
some care to be taken of the Captain, he despatched information to the General
that the best and forwardest of his army, that hazarded their lives to enter
the fort, upon the muzzle of the enemies guns, were shot in their backs, and
killed by them that lay behind. Mr. Church with his small company hastened out
of the fort that the English were now possessed of) to get a shot at the
Indians that were in the swamp, and kept firing upon them. He soon met with a
broad and bloody track, where the enemy had fled with their wounded men;
following hard in the tract, he soon spied one of the enemy, who clapped his
gun across his breast, made toward Mr. Church, and beckoned to him with his
hand; Mr. Church immediately commanded no man to hurt him, hoping by him to
have gained some intelligence of the enemy, that might be of advantage; but it
unhappily fell out that a fellow that had lagged behind coming up, shot down
the Indian, to Mr. Church's great grief and disappointment; but immediately
they heard a great shout of the enemy, which seemed to be behind them, or
between them and the fort; and discovered them running from tree to tree to
gain advantages of firing upon the English that were in the fort. Mr. Church's
great difficulty now was how to discover himself to his friends in the fort,
using several inventions, till at length he gained an opportunity to call to,
and informed a Sergeant in the fort, that he was there, and might be exposed to
their shots, unless they observed it. By this time he discovered a number of
the enemy almost within shot of him, making toward the fort. Mr. Church and
his company were favored by a heap of brush that was between them and the
enemy, and prevented their being discovered to them. Mr. Church had given his
men their particular orders for firing upon the enemy, and as they were rising
up to make their shot; the aforementioned Sergeant in the fort called out to
them, for God's sake not to fire, for he believed they were some of their
friend Indians; they clapped down again, but were soon sensible of the
Serjeant's mistake. The enemy got to the top of the tree, the body whereof the
Sergeant stood upon, and there clapped down out of sight or the fort, but all
this while never discovered Mr. Church, who observed them to keep gathering
unto that place, until there seemed to be a formidable black heap of them. Now
brave boys (said Mr. Church to his men) if we mind our hits, we may have a
brave shot, and let our sign for firing on them, be their rising to fire into
the fort. It was not long before the Indians rising up as one body, designing
to pour a volley into the fort; when our Church nimbly started up and gave them
such a round volley, and unexpected clap on their backs, that they, who escaped
with their lives, were so surprised, that they scampered, they knew not whither
themselves, about a dozen of them ran right over the log into the fort, and
took into a fort of hovel that was built with poles, after the manner of a corn
crib. Mr. Church's men having their cartridges fixed, were soon ready to obey
his order, which was immediately to charge, and run on upon the hovel, and
overset it, calling, as he ran on, to some that were in the fort, to assist him
in oversetting it; they no sooner came to face the enemies shelter, but Mr.
Church discovered that one of them had found a hole to point his gun through,
right at him; but however encouraged his company, and ran right on, till he was
struck with three bullets, one in his thigh, which was near half cut off as it
glanced on the joint of his hip-bone; another through the gatherings of his
breeches and drawers, with a small flesh wound; a third pierced his pocket, and
wounded a pair of mittens, that he had borrowed of Captain Prentice; being
wrapped up together had the misfortune of having many holes cut through them
with one bullet; but however, he made shift to keep on his legs, and nimbly
discharged his gun at them that had wounded him; being disabled now to go a
step, his men would have carried him off, but he forbid their touching of him,
until they had perfected their project of oversetting the enemies shelter; bid
them run, for now the Indians had no guns charged. While he was urging them to
run on, the Indians began to shoot arrows, and with one pierced through the arm
of an Englishman that had hold of Mr. Church's arm to support him. The English,
in short, were discouraged, and drew back; and by this time the English people
in the fort had began to set fire to the wigwams and houses in the fort, which
Mr. Church labored hard to prevent; they told him, They had orders from the
General to burn them; he begged them to forbear until he had discoursed the
General; and hastening to him, he begged to spare the wigwams, etc. in the fort
from fire, told him, the wigwams were musket-proof, being all lined with
baskets and tubs of grain, and other provisions, sufficient to supply the whole
army, until the spring of the year; and every wounded man might have a good
warm house to lodge in, who otherways would necessarily perish with the storms
and cold: And moreover, that the army had no other provision to trust unto, or
depend upon; that he knew that the Plymouth forces had not so much as one
bishake left, for he had seen their last dealt out, etc. The General advising a
few words with the Gentlemen that were about him, moved toward the fort,
designing to ride in himself, and bring in the whole army; but just as he was
entering the swamp, one of his Captains met him, and asked him, whither he was
going? He told him into the fort; the Captain laid hold of his horse, and told
him, his life was worth an hundred of theirs, and he should not expose himself.
The General told him, that he supposed the brunt was over, and that Mr. Church
had informed him that the fort was taken, etc. and as the case was
circumstanced he was of the mind, that it was most practicable for him, and his
army to shelter themselves in the fort. The Captain in a great heat replied,
that Church lied; and told the General, That if he moved another step toward
the fort be would shoot his horse under him. Then brus^ed up another Gentleman,
a certain Doctor, and opposed Mr. Church's advice, and said, If it were
complied with, it would kill more men than the enemy had killed; for (said he)
by tomorrow the wounded men will be so stiff that there will be no moving of
them: And looking upon Mr. Church, and seeing the blood slow a-pace from his
wounds, told him, That if he gave such advice as that was, he should bleed to
death like a dog before they would endeavor to stench his blood; though after
they had prevailed against his advice, they were sufficiently kind to him. And
burning up all the houses and provisions in the fort; the army returned the
same night in the storm and cold: And I suppose that every one who is
acquainted with that night's march, deeply laments the miseries that attended
them, especially the wounded and dying men. But it mercifully came to pass that
Captain Andrew Betcher arrived at Mr. Smith's that very night from Boston, with
a vessel laden with provisions for the army, who must otherwise have perished
for want. Some of the enemy that were then in the fort have since informed us,
that near a third of the Indians belonging to all the Narraganset country were
killed by the English and by the cold of that night, that they fled out of
their fort so hastily that they carried nothing with them: That if the English
had kept in the fort, the Indians would certainly have been necessitated,
either to surrender themselves to them, or to have perished by hunger, and the
severity of the Season. The swamp fight happened on December 29, 1675, in which
about 50 English were killed in the action, and died of their wounds; and about
300 or 350 Indians, men women and children, were killed, and as many more
captivated. It is said 500 wigwams were burnt with the fort; and 200 more in
other parts of Narraganset. The place of the fort was an elevated Ground or
piece of upland, of perhaps 3 or 4 acres, in the middle of a hedious swamp;
about seven miles nearly due west from Narraganset south ferry.
Some time after this fort-fight a certain Sogkonate Indian hearing Mr. Church
relate the manner of his being wounded, told him, That he did not know but he
himself was the Indian that wounded him, for that he was one of that company of
Indians that Mr. Church made a shot upon, when they were rising to make a shot
into the fort. They were in number about 60 or 70, that just then came down
from Pumham's Town, and never before then fired a gun against the English; that
when Mr. Church fired upon them he killed fourteen dead upon the spot, and
wounded a greater number than he killed, many of which died afterward of their
wounds, in the cold and storm the following night.

Mr. Church was moved, with other wounded men, over to Rhode Island, where, in
about three months time, he was in some good measure recovered of his wounds,
and the fever that attended them: And then went over to the General to take his
leave of him, with a design to return home.

But the General's great importunity again persuaded him to accompany him in a
long march into the Nipmuck Country about Worcester, Oxford, Grafton, Dudley,
etc.
country, though he had then tents in his wounds, and so lame as not able to
mount his horse without two men's assistance.

In this march, the first thing remarkable was, they came to an Indian town,
where there were many wigwams in sight, but an icy swamp, lying between them
and the wigwams, prevented their running at once upon it as they intended:
There was much firing upon each side before they passed the swamp. But at
length the enemy all fled, and a certain Mohegan, that was a friend Indian,
pursued and seized one of the enemy that had a small wound in his leg, and
brought him before the General, where he was examined. Some were for torturing
him to bring him to a more ample confession of what he knew concerning his
countrymen. Mr. Church, verily believing he had been ingenuous in his
confession, interceded and prevailed for his escaping torture. But the army
being bound forward in their march, and the Indian's would somewhat disenabling
him for traveling, it was concluded he should be knocked on the head:
Accordingly he was brought before a great fire, and the Mohegan that took him
was allowed, as he desired, to be his executioner. Mr. Church taking no delight
in the sport, framed an errand at some distance among the baggage-horses, and
when he had got ten rods, or thereabouts, from the fire, the executioner
fetching a blow with a hatchet at the head of the prisoner, he being aware of
the blow, dodged his head aside, and the executioner missing his stroke, the
hatchet flew out of his hand, and had like to have done execution where it was
not designed. The prisoner, upon his narrow escape, broke from them that held
him, and, notwithstanding his wound, made use or his legs, and happened to run
right upon Mr. Church, who laid hold on him, and a close skuffle they had, but
the Indian having no cloths on slipped from him, and ran again, and Mr. Church
pursued the Indian, although being lame, there was no great odds in the race,
until the Indian stumbled and fell, and they closed again, skuffled and fought
pretty smartly, until the Indian, by the advantage of his nakedness, slipped
from his hold again, and set out on his third race, with Mr. Church close at
his heels, endeavoring to lay hold on the hair of his head, which was all the
hold could be taken of him; and running through a swamp that was covered with
hollow ice, it made so loud a noise that Mr. Church expected (but in vain) that
some of his English friends would follow the noise, and come to his assistance.
But the Indian happened to run athwart a large tree, that lay fallen near breast
high, where he stopped, and cried out aloud for help; but Mr. Church being soon
upon him again, the Indian seized him fast by the hair of his head, and
endeavoring by twisting to break his neck, but though Mr. Church's wounds had
somewhat weakened him, and the Indian a stout fellow, yet he held him in play,
and twisted the Indian's neck as well, and took the advantage of many
opportunities, while they hung by each other's hair, gave him notorious bunts
in the face with his head. But in the heat of this skuffle they heard the ice
break with somebody's coming apace to them, which when they heard, Church
concluded there was help for one or other of them, but was doubtful which of
them must now receive the fatal stroke; anon some body comes up to them, who
proved to be the Indian that had first taken the Prisoner. Without speaking a
word, he felt them out, (for it was so dark he could not distinguish them by
sight) the one being clothed, and the other naked, he felt where Mr. Church's
hands were fast'ned in the Netop's hair, and with one blow settled his hatchet
in between them, and ended the strife. He then spoke to Mr. Church, and hugged
him in his arms, and thanked him abundantly for catching his prisoner; and cut
off the head of his victim, and carried it to the camp; and giving an account
to the rest of the friend Indians in the camp, how Mr. Church had seized his
prisoner, etc. they all joined a mighty shout.

Proceeding in this march, they had the success of killing many of the enemy;
until at length their provisions failing, they returned home.

King Philip (as was before hinted) was fled to a place called Scattacook,
between York and Albany, where the Moobags Mohawks.
made a descent upon him and killed many of his men, which moved him from
thence.

His next kennelling place was at the falls of Connecticut river, Above
Deerfield.
where, sometime after, Capt. Turner found him, came upon him by night, killed
him a great many men, and frightened many more into the river, that were hurled
down the falls and drowned.

Philip got over the river, and on the back side of Wetuset hills meets with
all the remnants of the Narraganset and Nipmuck About Rutland.
Indians, that were there gathered together, and became very numerous, and made
their descent on Sudbury, and the adjacent parts of the country, where they met
with and swallowed up valiant Capt. Wadsworth (...) his company, and many other
doleful desolations in tho^^ parts. The news whereof coming to Plymouth, and
they expecting probably the enemy would soon return again into their colony;
the council of war were called together, and Mr. Church was sent for to them,
being observed by the whole colony to be a person extraordinarily qualified
for, and adapted to, the affairs of war. It was proposed in council, that left
the enemy, in their return, should fall on Rehoboth, or some other of their
out-towns, a company, consisting of 60 or 70 men, should be sent into those
parts; and Mr. Church invited to take the command of them. He told them, That
if the enemy returned into that colony again, they might reasonably expect that
they would come very numerous, and if he should take the command of men, he
should not lie in any town or garrison with them, but would lie in the woods as
the enemy did: And that to send out such small companies against such
multitudes of the enemy that were now mustered together, would be but to
deliver so many men into their hands, to be destroyed, as the worthy Captain
Wadsworth and his company were. His advice upon the whole was, that if they
sent out any forces, to send no less than 300 soldiers; and that the other
colonies should be asked to send out their quotas also; adding, That if they
intended to make an end of the war, by subduing the enemy, they must make a
business of the war, as the enemy did; and that for his own part, he had wholly
laid aside all his own private business and concerns, ever since the war broke
out. He told them, That if they would send forth such forces as he should
direct to, he would go with them for six weeks march, which was long enough for
men to be kept in the woods at once; and if they might be sure of liberty to
return in such a space, men would go out cheerfully; and be would engage 150 of
the best soldiers should immediately list voluntarily to go with him, if they
would please to add, 50 more; and 100 of the friend Indians; and with such an
army, be made (...) doubt, but he might do good service; but on other terms
(...) did not incline to be concerned.

Their ^^^y was, that they were already in debt, and so big an ^^my would bring
such charge upon them, that they should never be able to pay; and as for
sending out Indians, they thought it no ways advisable, and in short none of
his advice practicable.

Now Mr. Church's confort, and his then only son were till this time remaining
at Duxbury, and his fearing their safety there (unless the war were more
vigorously engaged in) resolved to move to Rhode Island, though it was much
opposed both by government and relations; but at length, the governor
considering that he might be no less serviceable by being on that side of the
colony, gave his permit, and wished he had twenty more as good men to send with
him.

Then preparing for his removal, he went with his small family to Plymouth, to
take leave of their friends, where they met with his wife's parents, who much
persuaded that she might be left at Mr. Clark's garrison, (which they supposed
to be a mighty safe place) or at least that she might be there until her soon
expected lying-in was over, (being near her time.) Mr. Church no ways inclining
to venture her any longer in those parts, and no arguments prevailing with him,
he resolutely set out for Taunton, and many of their friends accompanied them.
There they found Captain Pierce with a commanded party, who offered Mr. Church
to send a relation of his with some others to guard him to Rhode Island; but
Mr. Church thanked him for his respectful offer, but for some good reasons
refused to accept it. In short, they got safe to Captain John Almy's house upon
Rhode Island, where they met with friends and good entertainment. But, by the
way, let me not forget this remarkable Providence, viz. That within twenty-four
hours, or thereabouts, after their arrival at Rhode Island, Mr. Clark's
garrison that Mr. Church was so much importuned to lea^^^^is wife and children
at, was destroyed by the enemy.

Mr. Church being at present disenabled from any particular service in the war,
began to think of ^^me other employ; but he no sooner took a tool to out a
small stick, but he cut off the top of his fore-singer, and the next to it half
off; upon which he smilingly said, that he thought he was out of his way, to
leave the war, and resolved he would to war again. Accordingly his second son
being born on the 12th of May, and his wife and son like to do well, Mr. Church
embraces the opportunity of a passage in a sloop bound to Barnstable; who
landed him at Sogkonesset, from whence he rid to Plymouth; and arrived there on
the first Tuesday in June: The General Court then sitting welcomed him, and
told him they were glad to see him alive. He replied, he was as glad to see
them alive, for he had seen so many fires and smoakes toward their side of the
country, since he left them, that he could scarce eat or sleep with any
comfort, for fear they had all been destroyed. For all traveling was stopped,
and no news had passed for a long time together. He gave them an account, that
the Indians had made horrid desolations at Providence, Warwick, Pawtuxet, and
all over the Narraganset country, and that they prevailed daily against the
English on that side of the country: Told them, he longed to hear what methods
they designed in the war. They told him, they were particularly glad that
Providence had brought him there at that juncture; for they had concluded the
very next day to send out an army of 200 men, two thirds English, and one third
Indians, in some measure agreeable to his former proposal; expecting Boston and
Connecticut to join with their quotas: In short, it was so concluded, and that
Mr. Church should return to the island, and see what he could muster there, of
those who had moved from Swanzey, Dartmouth, etc. So returning the same way he
came; when he came to Sogkonesset, he had a sham put upon him about a boat he
had bought to go home in, and was forced to hire two of the friend Indians to
paddle him in a canoe from Elisabeth's to Rhode Island.

It fell out, that as they were in their voyage passing by Sogkonate-point,
some of the enemy were upon the rocks a fishing; he bid the Indians that
managed the canoe to paddle so near the rocks as that he might call to those
Indians; told them, that he had a great mind ever since the war broke out to
speak with some of the Sogkonate Indians, and that they were their relations,
and therefore they need not fear their hurting of them. And he added, That he
had a mighty conceit, that if he could get a fair opportunity to discourse
them, that he could draw them off from Philip, for he knew they never heartily
loved him. The enemy hallooed and made signs for the canoe to come to them; but
when they approached them they skulked and hid in the clifts of the rocks; then
Mr. Church ordered the canoe to be paddled off again, left if he came too near
they should fire upon him. Then the Indians appearing again, beck'ned and
called in the Indian language, and bid them come ashore, for they wanted to
speak with him. The Indians in the canoe answered them again; but they on the
rocks told them, that the surf made such a noise against the rocks, they could
not hear any thing they said. Then Mr. Church, by signs with his hands, gave to
understand, that he would have two of them go down upon the point of the beach
(a place where a man might see who was near him) accordingly two of them ran
along the beach, and met him there without their arms, excepting that one of
them had a lance in his hand; they urged Mr. Church to come ashore, for they
had a great desire to have some discourse with him. He told them, if he that
had his weapon in his hand would carry it up some distance upon the beach, and
leave it, he would come ashore and discourse them. He did so, and Mr. Church
went ashore, haled up his canoe, ordered one of his Indians to stay by it, and
the other to walk above on the beach, as a sentinel, to see that the coasts
were clear; and when Mr. Church came up to the Indians, one of them happened to
be honest George, one of the two that Awashonks formerly sent to call him to
her dance, and was so careful to guard him back to his house again, the last
Sogkonate Indian he spoke with before the war broke out; he spoke English very
well. Mr. Church asked him where Awashonks was? He told him in a swamp about
three miles off. Mr. Church asked him, what it was he wanted that he hallooed
and called him ashore? He answered, that he took him for Church as soon as he
heard his voice in the canoe, and that he was very glad to see him alive, and
he believed his mistress would be as glad to see him, and speak with him; he
told him further, that he believed she was not fond of maintaining a war with
the English, and that she had left Philip, and did not intend to return to him
any more; he was mighty earnest with Mr. Church to tarry there while he would
run and call her; but he told him no, for he did not know but the Indians would
come down and kill him before he could get back again; he said, if Mount-Hope,
or Pocasset Indians could catch him, he believed they would knock him on the
head, but all Sogkonate Indians knew him very well, and he believed none of
them would hurt him. In short, Mr. Church refused then to tarry, but promised
that he would come over again, and speak with Awashonks, and some other Indians
that he had a mind to talk with.

Accordingly he appointed him to notify Awashonks, her son Peter, their chief
Captain, and one Nompash (an Indian that Mr. Church had formerly a particular
respect for) to meet him two days after, at a rock at the lower end of Captain
Richmond's farm, which was a very noted place; and if that day should prove
stormy, or windy, they were to expect him the next moderate day, Mr. Church
telling George that he would have him come with the persons mentioned, and no
more. They giving each other their hand upon it parted, and Mr. Church went
home, and the next morning to Newport, and informed the government of what had
passed between him and the Sogkonate Indians, and desired their permit for him
and Daniel Wilcox (a man that well understood the Indian language) to go over
to them. They told him, that they thought he was mad, after such service as he
had done, and such dangers that he escaped, now to throw away his life, for the
rogues would as certainly kill him, as ever he went over; and utterly refused
to grant his permit, or to be willing that he should run the risque.

Mr. Church told them, That it ever had been in his thoughts since the war
broke out, that if he could discourse the Sogkonate Indians, he could draw them
off from Philip, and employ them against him; but could not, till now, never
have an opportunity to speak with any of them, and was very loath to loose it,
etc. At length they told him, if he would go, it should be only with the two
Indians that came with him; but they would give him no permit under their
hands. He took his leave of them, resolving to prosecute his design; they told
him they were sorry to see him so resolute, nor if he went did they ever expect
to see his face again.

He bought a bottle of rum, and a small roll of tobacco, to carry with him, and
returned to his family. The next day, being the day appointed for the meeting,
he prepared two light canoes for the design, and his own man, with the two
Indians for his company. He used such arguments with his tender, and now almost
broken hearted wife, from the experience of former preservations, and the
prospect of the great service he might do, might it please God to succeed his
design, etc. that he obtained her consent to his attempt; and committing her,
the babes and himself to Heaven's protection, he set out. They had from the
shore about a league to paddle; drawing near the place, they saw the Indians
setting on the bank, waiting for their coming. Mr. Church sent one of his
Indians ashore in one of the canoes, to see whether they were the same Indians
whom he had appointed to meet him, and no more; and if so to stay ashore and
send George to fetch him; accordingly George came and fetched Mr. Church
ashore, while the other canoe played off to see the event, and to carry tidings
if the Indians should prove false.

Mr. Church asked George whether Awashonks and the other Indians he appointed
to meet him were there? He answered they were; he then asked him if there were
no more than they whom he appointed to be there? To which he would give him no
direct answer. However, he went ashore, where he was no sooner landed, but
Awashonks and the rest that he had appointed to meet them there, rose up and
came down to meet him; and each of them successively gave him their hands, and
expressed themselves glad to see him, and gave him thanks for exposing himself
to visit them. They walked together about a gunshot from the water, to a
convenient place to sit down. Where at once rose up a great body of Indians,
who had lain hid in the grass, (that was high as a man's waist) and gathered
round them, till they had closed them in; being all armed with guns, spears,
hatchets, and c. with their hair trimmed and faces painted, in their warlike
appearance. It was doubtless somewhat surprising to our Gentleman at first, but
without any visible discovery of it, after a small silent pause on each side,
he spoke to Awashonks, and told her, That George had informed him that she had
a desire to see him, and discourse about making peace with the English. She
answered yes; then said Mr. Church, it is customary when people meet to treat
of peace, to lay aside their arms, and not to appear in such hostile form as
your people do; desired of her, that if they might talk about peace, which he
desired they might, her men might lay aside their arms, and appear more
treatable. Upon which there began a considerable noise and murmur among them in
their own language, till Awashonks asked him, what arms they should lay down,
and where? He (perceiving the Indians looked very surly, and much displeased)
replied, only their guns (...) some small distance, for formality's sake; upon
which, with one consent, they laid aside their guns, and came and sat down.

Mr. Church pulled out his calabash and asked Awashonks, whether she had lived
so long at Wetuset, as to forget to drink Occapeches; and drinking to her, he
perceived that she watched him very diligently, to see (as he though it) whether he
swallowed any of the rum; he offered her the shell, but she desired him to
drink again first, he then told her, there was no poison in it, and pouring
some into the palm of his hand, sipped it up, and took the shell and drank to
her again, and drank a good swig, which indeed was no more than he needed. Then
they all standing up, he said to Awashonks, you will not drink for fear there
should be poison in it; and then handed it to a little ill-looking fellow, who
catched it readily enough, and as greedily would have swallowed the liquor when
he had it at his mouth; but Mr. Church catched him by the throat and took it
from him, asking him, whether he intended to swallow shell and all? And then
handed it to Awashonks, she ventured to take a good hearty dram, and passed it
among her attendants.

The shell being emptied, he pulled out his tobacco, and having distributed it,
they began to talk.

Awashonks demanded of him the reason why he had not (agreeable to his promise
when she saw him last) been down at Sogkonate before now, saying, that probably
if he had come then, according to his promise, they had never joined with
Philip against the English.

He told her he was prevented by the war's breaking out so suddenly, and yet he
was afterward coming down, and came as far as Punkateese, where a great many
Indians set upon him, and fought him a whole afternoon, though he did not come
prepared to fight, had but nineteen men with him, whose chief design was to
gain an opportunity to discourse some Sogkonate Indians. Upon this there at
once arose a mighty murmur, confused noise, and talk among the fierce looking
creatures, and all rising up in a hubbub; and a great surly looking fellow took
up his Tomhog, or wooden cutlash, to kill Mr. Church, but some others prevented
him.

The interpreter asked Mr. Church, if he understood what it was that the great
fellow (they had hold of) said? He answered him, no. Why, said the interpreter,
he says, you killed his brother at Punkateese, and therefore he thirsts for
your blood. Mr. Church bid the interpreter tell him that his brother began
first; that if he had kept at Sogkonate, according to his desire and order, he
should not have hurt him.

Then the chief Captain commanded silence, and told them, that they should talk
no more about old things, etc. and quelled the tumult, so that they sat down
again, and began upon a discourse of making peace with the English. Mr. Church
asked them, what proposals they would make, and on what terms they would break
their league with Philip? Desiring them to make some proposals that he might
carry to his masters, telling them that it was not in his power to conclude a
peace with them, but that he knew that if their proposals were reasonable, the
government would not be unreasonable; and that he would use his interest with
the government for them; and to encourage them to proceed, put them in mind
that the Pequots once made war with the English, and that after they subjected
themselves to the English, the English became their protectors, and defended
them against other nations that would otherwise have destroyed them, etc. After
some further discourse and debate, he brought them at length to consent, that
if the Government of Plymouth would firmly engage to them, that they, and all
of them, and their wives and children, should have their lives spared, and none
of them transported out of the country, they would subject themselves to them,
and serve them in what they were able.

Then Mr. Church told them, That he was well satisfied the Government of
Plymouth would readily concur with what they proposed, and would sign their
articles: And complimenting them upon it, how pleased he was with the thoughts
of their return, and of the former friendship that had been between them, etc.

The chief Captain rose up, and expressed the great value and respect he had
for Mr. Church; and bowing to him said, Sir, If you will please to accept of me
and my men, and will head us, we'll fight for you, and will help you to
Philip's head before the Indian corn be ripe; and when he had ended, they all
expressed their consent to what he said, and told Mr. Church they loved him,
and were willing to go with him and fight for him, as long as the English had
one enemy left in the country.

Mr. Church assured them, that if they proved as good as their word, they
should find him their's and their children's fast friend. And (by the way) the
friendship is maintained between them to this day.

Then he proposed unto them, that they should choose five men to go straight
with him to Plymouth: They told him no; they would not choose, but he should
take which five he pleased; some compliments passed about it, at length it was
agreed, they should choose three, and he two. Then he agreed, that he would go
back to the island that night, and would come to them the next morning, and go
through the woods to Plymouth; but they afterward objected, that his
traveling through the woods would not be safe for him; the enemy might meet
with them, and kill him, and then they should loose their friend, and the whole
design ruined beside. And therefore proposed, that he should come in an English
vessel, and they would meet him, and come on board at Sogkonate-point, and fail
from thence to Sandwich, which, in fine, was concluded upon.

So Mr. Church promising to come as soon as he could possibly obtain a vessel,
and then they parted. He returned to the island, and was at great pains and
charge to get a vessel, but with unaccountable disappointments, sometimes by
the falseness, and sometimes by the faintheartedness of men that he bargained
with, and something by wind and weather, etc. until at length Mr. Anthony Low
put into the harbor with a laden vessel bound to the westward, and being made
acquainted with Mr. Church's case, told him, That he had so much kindness for
him, and was so pleased with the business he was engaged in, that he would run
the venture of his vessel and cargo, to wait upon him. Accordingly, next
morning they set fail with a wind that soon brought them to Sogkonate point;
but coming there they met with a contrary wind, and a great swelling sea.

The Indians were there waiting upon the rocks, but had nothing but a miserable
broken canoe to get aboard in; yet Peter Awashonks ventured off in it, and with
a great deal of difficulty and danger got aboard: And by this time it began to
rain and blow exceedingly, and forced them up the Sound; and then went away
through Bristol ferry, round the island to Newport, carrying Peter with them.

Then Mr. Church dismissed Mr. Low, and told him, That inasmuch as Providence
opposed his going by water, and he expected that the army would be up in a few
days, and probably if he should be gone at that juncture, it might ruin the
whole design; would therefore yield his voyage.

Then he writ the account of his transactions with the Indians, and drew up the
proposals, and articles of peace, and despatched Peter with them to Plymouth,
that his Honor the Governor, if he saw cause, might sign them.

Peter was sent over to Sogkonate on the Lord's Day morning, with orders to
take those men that were chosen to go down, or some of them at least with him.
The time being expired that was appointed for the English army to come, there
was great looking for them. Mr. Church on the Monday morning (partly to divert
himself after his fatigue, and partly to listen for the army) rid out with his
wife, and some of his friends to Portsmouth, under a pretense of cherrying; but
came home without any news from the army: But by midnight, or sooner, he was
roused with an express from Major Bradford, who was arrived with the army at
Pocasset; to whom he forthwith repaired, and informed him of the whole of his
proceedings with the Sogkonate Indians. With the Major's consent and advice, he
returned again next morning to the island, in order to go over that way to
Awashonks, to inform her that the army was arrived, etc. Accordingly from
Sachueeset-Neck The south-east corner of Rhode Island.
he went in a canoe to Sogkonate; told her that Major Bradford was arrived at
Pocasset, with a great army, whom he had informed of all his proceedings with
her; that if she would be advised and observe order she nor her people need not
to fear being hurt by them; told her, she should call all her people down into
the neck, left if they should be found straggling about, mischief might light
on them; that on the morrow they would come down and receive her, and give her
further orders. She promised to get as many of her people together as possibly
she could: Desiring Mr. Church to consider that it would be difficult for to
get them together at such short warning. Mr. Church returned to the island and
to the army the same night. The next morning the whole army marched toward
Sogkonate, as far as Punkateese; and Mr. Church with a few men went down to
Sogkonate to call Awashonks, and her people to come up to the English camp; as
he was going down, they met with a Pocasset Indian; who had killed a cow and
got a quarter of her on his back, and her tongue in his pocket; who gave them
an account, that he came from Pocasset two days since in company with his
mother, and several other Indians, now hid in the swamp above Nomquid; In
Tiverton.
disarming of him, he sent him by two men to Major Bradford, and proceeded to
Sogkonate. They saw several Indians by the way skulking about, but let them
pass; arriving at Awashonks camp, told her, He was come to invite her and her
people up to Punkateese, Adjoining Fogland-Ferry.
where Major Bradford now was with the Plymouth army, expecting her and her
subjects to receive orders, until further order could be had from the
Government. She complied, and soon sent out orders for such of her subjects as
were not with her, immediately to come in; and by twelve of clock of the next
day, she with most of her number appeared before the English camp at
Punkateese. Mr. Church tendered the Major to serve under his commission,
provided the Indians might be accepted with him, to fight the enemy. The Major
told him, his orders were to improve him, if he pleased, but as for the Indians
he would not be concerned with them. And presently gave forth orders for
Awashonks, and all her subjects, both men, women and children, to repair to
Sandwich, and to be there upon peril, in six days. Awashonks and her chiefs
gathered round Mr. Church, (where he was walked off from the rest) expressed
themselves concerned that they could not be consided in, nor improved. He told
them, it was best to obey orders, and that if he could not accompany them to
Sandwich, it should not be above a week before he would meet them there; that
he was confident the Governor would commission him to improve them. The Major
hastened to sent them away with Jack Havens, (an Indian who had never been in
the wars) in the front with a flag of truce in his hand. They being gone, Mr.
Church, by the help of his man Toby (the Indian whom he had taken prisoner as
he was going down to Sogkonate) took said Toby's mother, and those that were
with her, prisoners. Next morning the whole army moved back to Pocasset. This
Toby informed them that there were a great many Indians gone down to Wepoiset
to eat clams, other provisions being very scarce with them) that Philip himself
was expected within 3 or 4 days at the same place; being asked what Indians
they were? He answered some Weetemores Indians, some Mount-Hope Indians, some
Narraganset Indians, and some other Upland Indians, in all about 300.

The Rhode Island boats, by the Major's order, meeting them at Pocusset, they
were soon embarked, it being just in the dusk of the evening, they could
plainly discover the enemies fires at the place the Indian directed to; and the
army concluded no other but they were bound directly thither, until they came
to the north end of the island, and heard the word of command for the boats to
bare away. Mr. Church was very fond of having this probable opportunity of
surprising that whole company of Indians embraced; but orders, it was said,
must be obeyed, which was to go to Mount-Hope, and there to fight Philip. This
with some other good opportunities of doing spoil upon the enemy, being
unhappily missed, Mr. Church obtained the Major's consent to meet the Sogkonate
Indians, according to his promise. He was offered a guard to Plymouth, but
chose to go with one man only, who was a good pilot. About sunset he, with
Sabin his pilot, mounted their horses at Rehoboth, where the army now was, and
by two hours by sun next morning arrived safe at Plymouth; and by that time
they had refreshed themselves, the Governor and Treasurer came to town. Mr.
Church giving them a short account of the affairs of the army, etc. His Honor
was pleased to give him thanks for the good and great service he had done at
Sogkonate, told him, He had confirmed all that he had promised Awashonks, and
had sent the Indian back again that brought his letter. He asked his Honor
Whether he had any thing later from Awashonks? He told him he had not.
Whereupon he gave his Honor an account of the Major's orders relating to her
and hers, and what discourse had passed pro and con, about them; and that he
had promised to meet them, and that he had encouraged them, that he thought he
might obtain of his Honor a commission to lead them forth to fight Philip. His
Honor smilingly told him, That he should not want commission if he would
accept it, nor yet good English men enough to make up a good army. But in
short, he told his Honor the time was expired that he had appointed to meet
the Sogkonates at Sandwich. The Governor asked him, when he would go? He told
him that afternoon, by his Honor's leave. The Governor asked him how many men
he would have with him? He answered not above half a dozen, with an order to
take more at Sandwich, if he saw cause, and horses provided. He no sooner moved
it, but had his number of men tendering to go with him, among which was Mr.
Jabez Howland, and Nathaniel Southworth; they went to Sandwich that night,
where Mr. Church (with need enough) took a nap of sleep. The next morning, with
about 16 or 18 men, he proceeded as far as Agawom, where they had great
expectation of meeting the Indians, but met them not; his men being discouraged
about half of them returned; only half a dozen stuck by him, and promised so to
do until they should meet with the Indians. When they came to Sippican River,
Rochester.
Mr. Howland began to tire, upon which Mr. Church left him, and two more, for a
reserve at the river, that if he should meet with enemies and be forced back,
they might be ready to assist them in getting over the river. Proceeding in
their march, they crossed another river, and opened a great bay, where they
might see many miles along shore, where were sands and flats; and hearing a
great noise below them toward the sea, they dismounted their horses, left them
and creep'd among the bushes, until they came near the bank, and saw a vast
company of Indians of all ages and sexes, some on horseback running races,
some at football, some catching eels and flat-fish in the water, some
clamming, etc. but which way with safety to find out what Indians they were,
they were at a loss. But at length, retiring into a thicket, Mr. Church
hallooed to them; they soon answered him, and a couple of smart young fellows,
well mounted, came upon a full career to see who it might be that called, and
came just upon Mr. Church before they discovered him; but when they perceived
themselves so near Englishmen, and armed, were much surprised, and tacked short
about to run as fast back as they came forward, until one of the men in the
bushes called to them, and told them his name was Church, and need not fear his
hurting of them. Upon which, after a small pause, they turned about their
horses, and came up to him; one of them that could speak English Mr. Church
took aside and examined, who informed him, that the Indians below were
Awashonks and her company, and that Jack Havens was among them; whom Mr. Church
immediately sent for to come to him, and ordered the messenger to inform
Awashonks that he was come to meet her; Jack Havens soon came, and by that time
Mr. Church had asked him a few questions, and had been satisfied by him, that
it was Awashonks and her company that were below, and that Jack had been kindly
treated by them, a company of Indians all mounted on horseback, and well armed,
came riding up to Mr. Church, but treated him with all due respects. He then
ordered Jack to go tell Awashonks, that he designed to sup with her in the
evening, and to lodge in her camp that night. Then taking some of the Indians
with him, he went back to the river to take care of Mr. Howland. Mr. Church
having a mind to try what metal he was made of, imparted his notion to the
Indians that were with him, and gave them directions how to act their parts;
when he came pretty near the place, he and his Englishmen pretendedly fled,
firing on their retreat toward the Indians that pursued them, and they firing
as fast after them. Mr. Howland being upon his guard, hearing the guns, and by
and by seeing the motion both of the English and Indians, concluded his friends
were distressed, was soon on the full career on horseback to meet them, until
he perceiving their laughing, mistrusted the truth. As soon as Mr. Church had
given him the news, they hastened away to Awashonks. Upon their arrival, they
were immediately conducted to a shelter, open on one side, whither Awashonks
and her chiefs soon came and paid their respects; and the multitudes gave
shouts as made the heavens to ring.

It being now about sunsetting, or near the dusk of the evening, the Netops
came running from all quarters laden with the tops of dry pines, and the like
combustible matter, making a huge pile thereof, near Mr. Church's shelter, on
the open side thereof; but by this time supper was brought in, in three dishes,
viz. a curious young bass in one dish, eels and flat fish in a second, and
shellfish in a third, but neither bread nor salt to be seen at table; but by
that time supper was over, the mighty pile of pine knots and tops, etc. was
fired, and all the Indians, great and small gathered in a ring round it.
Awashonks with the oldest of her people, men and women mixed, kneeling down
made the first ring next the fire, and all the lusty stout men standing up made
the next, and then all the rabble in a confused crew surrounded on the
outside. Then the chief Captain stepped in between the rings and the fire,
with a spear in one hand, and a hatchet in the other, danced round the fire,
and began to fight with it, making mention of all the several nations and
companies of Indians in the country that were enemies to the English; and at
naming of every particular tribe of Indians, he would draw out and fight a new
firebrand, and at finishing his fight with each particular firebrand, would
bow to him and thank him; and when he had named all the several nations and
tribes, and fought them all, he stuck down his spear and hatchet, and came out;
and another stepped in and acted over the same dance, with more fury, if
possible, than the first; and when about half a dozen of their chiefs had thus
acted their parts, the Captain of the guard stepped up to Mr. Church and told
him, They were making soldiers for him, and what they had been doing was all
one swearing of them, and having in that manner engaged all the stout lusty
men; Awashonks and her chiefs came to Mr. Church, and told him, That now they
were all engaged to fight for the English, and he might call forth all, or any
of them at any time as he saw occasion to fight the enemy; and presented him
with a very fine firelock. Mr. Church accepts their offer, drew out a number of
them, and set out next morning before day for Plymouth, where they arrived the
same day.

The Governor being informed of it, came early to town next morning, and by
that time he had Englishmen enough to make up a good company, when joined with
Mr. Church's Indians, that offered their voluntary service, to go under his
command in quest of the enemy. The Governor then gave him a commission, which
is as follows: CAPTAIN BENJAMIN CHURCH, you are hereby nominated, ordered,
commissioned, and empowered to raise a company of volunteers of about 200 men,
English and Indians; the English not exceeding the number of 60, of which
company, or so many of them as you can obtain, or shall see cause at present to
improve, you are to take the command and conduct, and to lead them forth now
and hereafter, at such time, and unto such places within this colony, or
elsewhere, within the confederate colonies, as you shall think fit; to
discover, pursue, fight, surprise, destroy, or subdue our Indian enemies, or
any part or parties of them that by the providence of God you may meet with; or
them, or any of them, by treaty and composition to receive to mercy, if you see
reason (provided they be not murderous rogues, or such as have been principal
actors in those villainies:) And forasmuch as your company may be uncertain, and
the persons often changed, you are also hereby empowered, with the advice of
your company, to choose and commissionate a Lieutenant, and to establish
Sergeants, and Corporals as you see cause: And you herein improving your best
judgment and discretion and utmost ability, faithfully to serve the interest of
God, his Majesty's interest, and the interest of the colony; and carefully
governing your said company at home and abroad. These shall be unto you full
and ample commission, warrant and discharge. Given under the public seal, this
24th day of July, 1676.

Per JOS. WINSLOW, GOVERNOR.



Receiving commission, he marched the same night into the woods, got to
Middleborough before day, and as soon as the light appeared, took into the
woods and swampy thickets, toward a place where they had some reason to expect
to meet with a parcel of Narraganset Indians, with some others that belonged to
Mount-Hope. Coming near to where they expected them, Captain Church's Indian
scout discovered the enemy, and well observing their fires, and postures,
returned with the intelligence to their Captain, who gave such directions for
the surrounding of them, as had the desired effect; surprising them from every
side so unexpectedly, that they were all taken, not so much as one escaped. And
upon a strict examination, they gave intelligence of another parcel of the
enemy, at a place called Munponset-Pond. Captain Church hastening with his
prisoners through the woods of Plymouth, disposed of them all, excepting only
one Jeffery, who proving very ingenuous and faithful to him, in informing where
other parcels of Indians harbored; Captain Church promised him, that if he
continued to be faithful to him, he should not be sold out of the country, but
should be his waiting man, to take care of his horse, etc. and accordingly he
served him faithfully as long as he lived.

But Captain Church was forthwith sent out again, and the terms for his
encouragement being concluded on, viz. That the country should find them
ammunition and provision and have half the prisoners and arms they took: The
Captain and his English soldiers to have the other half of the prisoners and
arms, and the Indian soldiers the loose plunder. Poor encouragement! But after
some time it was mended.

They soon captivated the Munponsets, and brought them in, not one escaping.
This stroke he held several weeks, never returning empty handed. When he wanted
intelligence of their kennelling places, he would march to some place likely to
meet with some travelers or ramblers, and scattering his company, would lie
close; and seldom lay above a day, or two, at the most, before some of them
would fall into their hands, whom he would compel to inform where their company
was; and so by his method of secret and sudden surprises took great numbers of
them prisoners.

The government observing his extraordinary courage and conduct, and the
success from Heaven added to it, saw cause to enlarge his commission; gave him
power to raise and dismiss his forces, as he should see occasion; to
commissionate officers under him, and to march as far as he should see cause,
within the limits of the three united colonies: To receive to mercy, give
quarter, or not; excepting some particular and noted murderers: viz. Philip and
all that were at the destroying of Mr. Clark's garrison, and some few others.

Major Bradford being now at Taunton with his army, and wanting provisions,
some carts were ordered from Plymouth for their supply, and Captain Church to
guard them; but he obtaining other guards for the carts, as far as
Middleborough, ran before with a small company, hoping to meet with some of the
enemy, appointing the carts and their guards to meet with them at Nemascut,
Near Raynham.
about an hour after sun's rising next morning; he arrived there about the
breaking of the daylight, discovered a company of the enemy; but his time was
too short to wait for gaining advantage, and therefore ran right in upon them,
surprised and captivated about 16 of them, who, upon examination, informed,
that Tispaquin, a very famous Captain among the enemy was at Assawompset, In
Middleborough.
with a numerous company.

But the carts must now be guarded, and the opportunity of visiting Tispaquin
must now be laid aside: The carts are to be faithfully guarded, left Tispaquin
should attack them.

Coming toward Taunton, Capt. Church taking two men with him, made all speed
to the town; and coming to the river side, he halloo'd, and inquiring of them
that came to the river, for Major Bradford, or his Captains; he was informed
they were in the town, at the tavern. -- He told them of the carts that were
coming, that he had the cumber of guarding them, which had already prevented
his improving opportunities of doing service. -- Prayed therefore that a guard
might be sent over to receive the carts, that he might be at liberty; refusing
all invitations and persuasions to go over to the tavern to visit the Major: He
at length obtained a guard to receive the carts; by whom also he sent his
prisoners, to be conveyed with the carts, to Plymouth, directing them not to
return by the way they came, but by Bridgwater.

Hastening back, he proposed to camp that night at Assawomset neck. But as soon
as they came to the river that runs into the great pond through the thick
swamp, at the entering of the neck, the enemy fired upon them, but hurt not a
man. Capt. Church's Indians ran right into the swamp, and fired upon them, but
it being in the dusk of the evening, the enemy made their escape in the
thickets: The Capt. then moving about a mile into the neck, took the advantage
of a small valley to feed his horses; some held the horses by the bridles, the
rest on the guard looked sharp out for the enemy, within hearing on a very
side, and some very near; but in the dead of the night, the enemy being out of
hearing, or still, Capt. Church moved out of the neck, (not the same way he
came in, left he should be ambuscado'd) toward Cushnes, In Dartmouth.
where all the houses were burnt; and crossing Cushnet river, being extremely
fatigued with two nights and one day's ramble without rest or sleep; and
observing good forage for their horses, the Captain concluded upon baiting, and
taking a nap: Setting six men to watch the passage of the river, two to watch
at a time, while the others slept, and so to take their turns, while the rest
of the company went into a thicket, to sleep under the guard of two sentinels
more. But the whole company being very drowsy, soon forgot their danger, and
were fast asleep, sentinels and all. The Captain first awakes, looks up, and
judges he had slept four hours, which being longer than he designed,
immediately rouses his company, and sends away a file to see what was become of
the watch at the passage of the river, but they no sooner opened the river in
sight, but they discovered a company of the enemy viewing of their tracks,
where they came into the neck; Capt. Church, and those with him, soon dispersed
into the brush on each side of the way, while the file sent got undiscovered to
the passage of the river, and found their watch all fast asleep: But these
tidings thoroughly awakened the whole company. But the enemy giving them no
present disturbance, they examined their snapsacks, and taking a little
refreshment, the Captain orders one party to guard the horses, and the other to
scout, who soon met with a track, and following of it, they were brought to a
small company of Indians, who proved to be Little Eyes, and family, and near
relations, who were of Sogkonate, but had forsaken their countrymen, upon their
making peace with the English. Some of Capt. Church's Indians asked him, If he
did not know this fellow? Told him, This is the rogue that would have killed
you at Awashonk's dance; and signified to him that now he had an opportunity to
be revenged on him. But the Captain told them, It was not Englishmen's fashion
to seek revenge; and that he should have the same quarter the rest bad. Moving
to the river side, they found an old canoe, with which the Captain ordered
Little Eyes and his company to be carried over to an island; telling him, He
would leave him on that island until he returned; and left the English should
light on them, and kill them, he would leave his cousin Light-foot (whom the
English knew to be their friend) to be his guard. Little Eyes expressed himself
very thankful to the Captain. He leaving his orders with Light-foot, returns to
the river side, toward Poneganset, to Russell's orchard; coming near the
orchard, they clapped into a thicket, and there lodged the rest of the night
without any fire; and upon the morning light appearing, moves toward the
orchard, discovers some of the enemy, who had been these the day before, and
had beat down all the apples, and carried them away; discovered also where they
had lodged that night, and saw the ground where they set their baskets bloody,
being, as they supposed, and as it was afterward discovered to be, with the
flesh of swine, etc. which they had killed that day: They had lain under the
senses without any fires, and seemed, by the marks they left behing them, to be
very numerous; perceived also, by the dew on the grass, that they had not been
long gone; and therefore moved apace in pursuit of them. Traveling three
miles, or more, they came into the country road, where the track parted, one
parcel steered toward the west end of the great cedar swamp, and the other to
the east end. The Captain halted, and told his Indian soldiers, That they had
heard, as well as he, what some men had said at Plymouth, about them, and c.
That now was a good opportunity for each party to prove themselves: The track
being divided, they should follow one, and the English the other, being equal
in number. The Indians declined the motion, and were not willing to move any
where without him; said, they should not think themselves safe without him. But
the Captain insisting upon it, they submitted; he gave the Indians their choice
to follow which track they pleased; they replied, They were light, and able to
travel, therefore, if he pleased, they would take the west track. And
appointing the ruins of John Cook's house at Cushnet, for the place to meet at,
each company set out briskly to try their fortunes. Captain Church, with his
English soldiers, followed their track until they came near entering a miery
swamp, when the Captain heard a whistle in the rear, (which was a note for a
halt) looking behind him, he saw William Fobes start out of the company and
made toward him, who hast'ned to meet him as fast as he could; Fobes told him
they had discovered abundance of Indians, and if he pleased to go a few steps
back he might see them himself: He did so, and saw them across the swamp,
observing them, he perceived they were gathering whortle-berries, and that they
had no apprehensions of their being so near them: The Captain supposed them to
be chiefly women, and therefore calling one Mr. Dillano, who was acquainted
with the ground, and the Indian language, and another named Mr. Barns; with
these two men he takes right through the swamp as fast as he could, and orders
the rest to hasten after them. Capt. Church, with Dillano and Barns, having
good horses, spurred on, and were soon amongst the thickest of the Indians, and
out of sight of their own men: Among the enemy was an Indian woman, who with
her husband had been drove off from Rhode Island, notwithstanding they had an
house upon Mr. Sanford's land, and had planted an orchard before the war; yet
the inhabitants would not be satisfied till they were sent off; and Capt.
Church, with his family, living then at the said Sanford's, came acquainted
with them, who thought it very hard to turn off such old quiet people: But in
the end it proved a providence and an advantage to him and his family, as you
may see afterward. This Indian woman knew Captain Church, and as soon as she
knew him, held up both her hands, and came running toward him, crying aloud,
Church, Church, Church. Capt. Church bid her stop the rest of the Indians, and
tell them, The way to save their lives was not to run, but yield themselves
prisoners, and he would not kill them; so with her help and Dillano's, who
could call to them in their own language, many of them stopped and surrendered
themselves, others scampering and casting away their baskets, and c. betook
themselves to the thickets, but Captain Church being on horseback soon came up
with them, and laid hold of a gun that was in the hand of one of the foremost
of the company, pulled it from him, and told him he must go back. And when he
had turned them, he began to look about him to see where he was, and what was
become of his company, hoping they might be all as well employed as himself,
but could find none but Dillano, who was very busy gathering up prisoners. The
Captain drove his that he had stopped to the rest, inquiring of Dillano for
their company, but could have no news of them; but moving back picked up now
and then a skulking prisoner by the way. When they came near the place where
they first started the Indians, they discovered their company standing in a
body together, and had taken some few prisoners; when they saw their Captain
they hastened to meet him: They told him they found it difficult getting
through the swamp, and neither seeing nor hearing any thing of him, they
concluded the enemy had killed him, and were at a great loss what to do.

Having brought their prisoners together they found they had taken and killed
66 of the enemy. Captain Church then asked the old squaw, What company they
belonged unto? She said, they belonged part to Philip, and part to Qunnappin
and the Narraganset Sachem, discovered also, upon her declaration, that both
Philip and Qunappin were about two miles off, in the great cedar swamp; he
inquired of her, What company they had with them? She answered, Abundance of
Indians. The swamp, she said, was full of Indians from one end unto the other,
that were settled there, that there were near an hundred men came from the
swamp with them, and left them upon that plain to gather whortle-berries, and
promised to call them as they came back out of Sconticut-Neck; whither they
went to kill cattle and horses for provisions for the company. She perceiving
Captain Church move toward the neck, told him, If they went that way they
would all be killed. He asked her, Where-about they crossed the river? She
pointed to the upper passing place. Upon which Captain Church passed over so
low down as he thought it not probable they should meet with his track in their
return; and hastened toward the island; where he left Little Eyes with
Lightfoot. Finding a convenient place by the river side for securing his
prisoners, Captain Church, and Mr. Diliano went down to see what was become of
Captain Lightfoot, and the prisoners left in his charge. Lightfoot seeing and
knowing them, soon came over with his broken canoe, and informed them, That he
had seen that day about 100 men of the enemy go down into Sconticut Neck, and
that they were now returning again: Upon which they three ran down immediately
to a meadow where Lightfoot said the Indians had passed, where they not only
saw their tracks, but also them: Whereupon they lay close until the enemy came
into the said meadow, and the foremost set down his load and halted, until all
the company came up, and then took up their loads and marched again the same
way that they came down into the neck, which was the nearest way unto their
camp; had they gone the other way along the river, they could not have missed
Captain Church's track, which would doubtless have exposed them to the loss of
their prisoners, if not of their lives. But as soon as the coast was clear of
them, the Captain sends his Lightfoot to fetch his prisoners from the island,
while he and Mr. Dillano returns to the company, sent part of them to conduct
Lightfoot and his company to the aforesaid meadow, where Captain Church and his
company met them. Crossing the enemies track they made all haste until they got
over Mattapoiset-river, In Rochester.
near about four miles beyond the ruins of Cook's house, where he appointed to
meet his Indian company, whither he sent Dillano with two more to meet them;
ordering them, that if the Indians were not arrived to wait for them.
Accordingly, finding no Indians there, they waited until late in the night,
when they arrived with their booty. They despatched a post to their Captain, to
give him an account of their success; but the day broke before they came to
him; and when they had compared successes, they very remarkably found that the
number that each company had taken and slain, was equal. The Indians had killed
three of the enemy, and taken 63 prisoners, as the English had done before
them. Both English and Indians were surprised at this remarkable providence,
and were both parties rejoicing at it; being both before afraid of what might
have been the unequal success of the parties; but the Indians had the fortune
to take more arms than the English. They told the Captain, That they had missed
a brave opportunity by parting; they came upon a great town of the enemy, viz.
Captain Tyasks company, (Tyasks was the next man to Philip:) They fired upon
the enemy before they were discovered, and ran upon them with a shout; the men
ran and left their wives and children, and many of them their guns. They took
Tyasks wife and son, and thought that if their Captain and the English company
had been with them they might have taken some hundreds of them; and now they
determined not to part any more.

That Night Philip sent (as afterward they found out) a great army to waylay
Captain Church at the entering on of Assawompset neck, expecting he would have
returned the same way he went in; but that was never his method to return the
same way that he came; and at this time going another way, he escaped falling
into the hands of his enemies. The next day they went home by Scipican, and got
well with their prisoners to Plymouth.

He soon went out again, and this stroke he drove many weeks; and when he took
any number of prisoners, he would pick out some that he took a fancy to, and
would tell them, He took a particular fancy to them, and had chose them for
himself to make soldiers of; and if any would behave themselves well, he would
do well by them, and they should be his men, and not sold out of the country.
If he perceived they looked surly, and his Indian soldiers called them
treacherous dogs, as some of them would sometimes do, all the notice he would
take of it, would only be to clap them on the back, and tell them, Come, come,
you look wild and surly, and mutter, but that signifies nothing, these my best
soldiers were a little while ago as wild and surly as you are now; by that time
you have been but one day along with me, you will love me too, and be as brisk as
any of them. And it proved so; for there was none of them but (after they had
been a little while with him, and seen his behavior, and how cheerful and
successful his men were) would be as ready to pilot him to any place where the
Indians dwelt, or haunted (though their own fathers or nearest relations should
be among them) or to fight for him, as any of his own men.

Captain Church was in two particulars much advantaged by the great English
army that was now abroad. One was, that they drove the enemy down to that part
of the country, viz. to the eastward of Taunton river, by which his business
was nearer home. The other was, that when he fell on with a push upon any body
of the enemy (were they never so many) they fled, expecting the great army. And
his manner of marching through the woods was such, as if he were discovered,
they appeared to be more than they were; for he always marched at a wide
distance one from another, partly for their safety: And this was an Indian
custom to march thin and scattered. Captain Church inquired of some of the
Indians that were become his soldiers, How they got such advantage often of the
English in their marches through the woods? They told him, that the Indians
gained great advantage of the English by two things; the Indians always took
care in their marches and fights, not to come too thick together; but the
English always kept in a heap together, that it was as easy to hit them as to
hit an house. The other was, that if at any time they discovered a company of
English soldiers in the woods, they knew that there was all, for the English
never scattered; but the Indians always divided and scattered.

Captain Church now at Plymouth, something or other happened that kept him at
home a few days, until a post came to Marshfield on the Lord's day morning,
informing the Governor that a great army of Indians were discovered, who it was
supposed were designing to get over the river toward Taunton or Bridgwater, to
attack those towns that lay on that side the river. The Governor hastened to
Plymouth, raised what men he could by the way, came to Plymouth in the
beginning of the forenoon exercise; sent for Captain Church out of the
meetinghouse, gave him the news, and desired him immediately to rally what of
his company he could; and what men he had raised should join them. The Captain
bestirs himself, but found no bread in the storehouse, and so was forced to
run from house to house to get household bread for their march; but this nor
any thing else prevented his marching by the beginning of the afternoon
exercise: Marching with what men were ready, he took with him the post that
came from Bridgwater to pilot him to the place, where he thought he might meet
with the enemy.

In the evening they heard a smart firing at a distance from them; but it being
near night, and the firing but of short continuance, they missed the place, and
went into Bridgwater town. It seems the occasion of the firing was, that Philip
finding that Captain Church made that side of the country too hot for him,
designed to return to the other side of the country that he came last from. And
coming to Taunton river with his company, they felled a great tree across the
river, for a bridge to pass over on; and just as Philip's old uncle Akkompoin,
and some other of his chiefs were passing over the tree, some brisk Bridgwater
lads had ambushed them, fired upon them, and killed the old man, and several
others, which put a stop to their coming over the river that night.

Next morning Capt. Church moved very early with his company, which was
increased by many of Bridgwater, that inlisted under him for that expedition,
and, by their piloting, soon came very still to the top of the great tree which
the enemy had fallen across the river; and the Captain spied an Indian sitting
on the stump of it on the other side of the river, and he clapped his gun up,
and had doubtless despatched him, but that one of his own Indians called
hastily to him, not to fire, for he believed it was one of their own men; upon
whith the Indian upon the stump looked about, and Capt. Church's Indian seeing
his face perceived his miskake, for he knew him to be Philip, clapped up his
gun and fired, but it was too late, for Philip immediately threw himself off
the stump, leaped down a bank on the side of the river, and made his escape. --
Capt. Church, as soon as possible, got over the river, and scattered in quest
of Philip and his company; but the enemy scattered and fled every way; but he
picked up a considerable many of their women and children, among which was
Philip's wife, and son of about nine years old. Discovering a considerable new
track along the river, and examining the prisoners, found it was Qunnappin and
the Narragansets, that were drawing off from those parts toward the
Narraganset country; he inquired of the prisoners, Whether Philip was gone in
the same track? They told him, They did not know, for he fled in a great fright
when the first English gun was fired, and they had none of them seen or beard
any thing of him since. Capt. Church left part of his company there to secure
the prisoners they got, and to pick up what more they could find; and with the
rest of his company hastened in the track of the enemy, to overtake them, if it
might be, before they got over the river, and ran some miles along the river,
until he came to a place where the Indians had waded over; and he with his
company waded over after them up to the armpits; being almost as wet before
with sweat as the river could make them: Following about a mile further, and
not overtaking them, and the Captain being under necessity to return that night
to the army, came to an halt, told his company, he must return to his other
men. His Indian soldiers moved for leave to pursue the enemy (though he
returned;) said, The Narragansets were great rogues, and they wanted to be
revenged on them for killing some of their relations; named Tockamona,
(Awashonk's brother) and some others. Capt. Church bad them go and prosper, and
made Lightfoot their chief, and gave him the title of Captain: Bid them go and
quit themsolves like men. And away they scampered like so many horses. Next
morning early they returned to their Captain, and informed him, That they had
come up with the enemy, and killed several of them, and brought him thirteen of
them prisoners; were mighty proud of their exploit, and rejoiced much at the
opportunity of avenging themselves. Capt. Church sent the prisoners to
Bridgwater, and sent out his scouts to see what enemies or tracks they could,
discovering some small tracks, he follows them, found where the enemy had
kindled some fires, and roasted some flesh, etc. but had put out their fires
and were gone. The Captain followed them by the track, putting his Indians in
the front; some of which were such as he had newly taken from the enemy, and
added to his company. Gave them orders to march softly, and upon hearing a
whistle in the rear, to sit down, till further order: or, upon discovery of any
of the enemy, to stop, for his design was, if he could discover where the enemy
were, not to fall upon them (unless necessitated to it) until next morning. The
Indians in the front came up with many women and children, and others that were
faint and tired, and so not able to keep up with the company; these gave them
an account that Philip, with a great number of the enemy, were a little before.
-- Capt. Church's Indians told the others, They were their prisoners, but if
they would submit to order, and be still, no one should burt them: They being
their old acquaintance, were easily persuaded to conform. A little before
sunset there was a halt in the front, until the Captain came up, they told him,
They discovered the enemy. He ordered them to dog them, and watch their motion
till it was dark. But Philip soon came to a stop, and fell to breaking and
chopping wood, to make fires; and a great noise they made. Captain Church draws
his company up in a ring, and sat down in the swamp without any noise or fire.
The Indian prisoners were much surprised to see the English soldiers; but the
Captain told them, If they would be quiet and not make any disturbance or
noise, they should meet with civil treatment; but if they made any disturbance,
or offered to run, or make their escape, he would immediately kill them all; so
they were very submissive and obsequious. When the day broke, Captain Church
told his prisoners, That his expedition was such at this time that he could not
afford them any guard: Told them, They would find it to be their interest to
attend the orders he was now about to give them; which was, that when the fight
was over, which they now expected, or as soon as the firing ceased, they must
follow the track of his company, and come to them. (An Indian is next to a
blood-hound to follow a track.) He said to them, It would be in vain for them
to think of disobedience, or to gain any thing by it, for he had taken and
killed a great many of the Indian rebels, and should in a little time kill and
take all the rest, etc. By this time it began to be so light, as the time that
he usually chose to make his onset. He moved, sending two soldiers before, to
try if they could privately discover the enemies postures. But very unhappily
it fell out, that the very same time Philip had sent two of his as a scout upon
his own track, to see it none dogged them; who spied the two Indian men, and
turned short about, and fled with all speed to their camp, and Captain Church
pursued as fast as he could. The two Indians set a yelling and howling, and
made the most hideous noise they could invent, soon gave the alarm to Philip
and his camp; who all fled at the first tidings, left their kettles boiling,
and meat roasting upon their wooden spits, and ran into a swamp with no other
breakfast than what Capt. Church afterward treated them with. Captain Church
pursuing, sent Mr. Isaac Howland with a party on one side of the swamp, while
himself with the rest ran on the other side, agreeing to run on each side,
until they met on the further end, placing some men in secure stands at that
end of the swamp where Philip entered, concluding that if they headed him and
beat him back, that he would take back in his own track. Captain Church and Mr.
Howland soon met at the further end of the swamp (it not being a great one)
where they met with a great number of the enemy, well armed, coming out of the
swamp; but, on sight of the English, they seemed very much surprised and tacked
short. Captain Church called hastily to them, and said, If they fired one gun
they were all dead men; for he would have them to know that he had them hemmed
in, with a force sufficient to command them; but if they peaceably surrendered
they should have good quarter, etc. They seeing both Indians and English come
so thick upon them, were so surprised that many of them stood still and let the
English come and take the guns out of their hands, when they were both charged
and cocked.

Many, both men, women and children of the enemy, were imprisoned at this time,
while Philip, Tispaquin, Totoson, etc. concluded that the English would pursue
them upon their tracks, so were waylaying their tracks at the first end of the
swamp, hoping thereby to gain a shot upon Captain Church, who was now better
employed in taking prisoners, and running them into a valley, in form something
shaped like a punch-bowl, and appointing a guard of two files, treble armed
with guns taken from the enemy. But Philip having waited all this while in
vain, now moves on after the rest of his company, to see what was become of
them. And by this time Capt. Church was got into the swamp ready to meet him;
and as it happened made the first discovery, clapped behind a tree until
Philip's company came pretty near, and then fired upon them, killed many of
them, and a close skirmish followed. Upon this Philip having grounds sufficient
to suspect the event of his company that went before them, fled back upon his
own track; and coming to the place where the ambush lay, they fired on each
other, and one Lucus, of Plymouth, not being so careful as he might have been
about his stand, was killed by the Indians. In this swamp-skirmish Captain
Church with his two men, who always run by his side as his guard, met with
three of the enemy, two of which surrendered themselves, and the Captain's
guard seized them; but the other, being a great, stout, surly fellow, with his
two locks tied up with red, and a great rattle-snake skin hanging to the back
part of his head, (whom Captain Church concluded to be Totoson) ran from them
into the swamp; Captain Church, in person, pursued him close, till coming
pretty near up with him, presented his gun between his shoulders, but it
missing fire, the Indian perceiving it, turned and presented at Captain Church,
and missing fire also (their guns taking wet with the fog and dew of the
morning;) but the Indian turning short for another run, his foot tripped in a
small grape-vine, and he fell flat on his face; Captain Church was by this time
up with him, and struck the muzzle of his gun an inch and an half into the back
part of his head, which despatched him without another blow. But Captain Church
looking behind him saw Totoson, the Indian, whom he thought he had killed, come
flying at him like a dragon; but this happened to be fair in sight of the guard
that were set to keep the prisoners, who, spying Totoson and others that were
following him, in the very seasonable juncture made a shot upon them, and
rescued their Captain; though he was in no small danger from his friends bullets,
for some of them came so near him that he thought he felt the wind of them. The
skirmish being over, they gathered their prisoners together, and found the
number that they had killed and taken was 173, (the prisoners which they took
over night included) who after the skirmish came to them, as they were ordered.

Now having no provisions but what they took from the enemy, they hastened to
Bridgwater, sending an express before to provide for them, their company being
now very numerous. The Gentlemen of Bridgwater met Capt. Church with great
expressions of honor and thanks, and received him and his army with all due
respect and kind treatment.

Capt. Church drove his prisoners that night into Bridgwater pound, and set his
Indian soldiers to guard them. They being well treated with victuals and drink,
they had a merry night; and the prisoners laughed as loud as the soldiers, not
being so treated a long time before.

Some of the Indians now said to Captain Church, Sir, you have now made Philip
ready to die, for you have made him as poor and miserable as he used to make
the English; for you have now killed or taken all his relations. That they
believed he would now soon have his head, and that this bout had almost broke
his heart.

The next day Captain Church moved and arrived with all his prisoners safe at
Plymouth. The great English army was now at Taunton, and Major Talcot, with the
Connecticut forces, being in these parts of the country, did considerable spoil
upon the enemy.

Now Captain Church being arrived at Plymouth, received thanks from the
government for his good service, and c. many of his soldiers were disbanded;
and he though it to rest himself a while, being much fatigued, and his health
impaired, by excessive heats and colds, and wading through rivers, and c. But it
was not long before he was called upon to rally, upon advice that some of the
enemy were discovered in Dartmouth woods. He took his Indians, and as many
English volunteers as presented, to go with him; and scattering into small
parcels, Mr. Jabez Howland (who was now, and often, his Lieutenant, and a
worthy good soldier) had the fortune to discover and imprison a parcel of the
enemy. In the evening they met together at an appointed place, and by examining
the prisoners, they gained intelligence of Totoson's haunt; and being brisk in
the morning, they soon gained an advantage of Totoson's company, though he
himself with his son of about eight years old made their escape, and one old
squaw with them, to Agawom, his own country; but Sam Barrow, as noted a rogue
as any among the enemy, fell into the hands of the English at this time. Capt.
Church told him, That because of his inhuman murders and barbarities, the Court
had allowed him no quarter, but was to be forthwith put to death, and therefore
he was to prepare for it. Barrow replied, That the sentence of death against
him was just, and that indeed he was ashamed to live any longer, and desired no
more favor than to smoke a whiff of tobacco before his execution. When he had
taken a few whiffs, he said, He was ready; upon which one of Capt. Church's
Indians sunk his hatchet into his brains. The famous Totoson arriving at
Agawom, Several places were called Agawom; as at Ipswich, and Springfield: This
Agawom lies in Wareham.
his son, which was the last that was left of the family, (Captain Church
having destroyed all the rest) fell sick: The wretch reflecting upon the
miserable condition he had brought himself into, his heart became a stone
within him, and died. The old squaw flung a few leaves and brush over him, and
came into Sandwich, and gave this account of his death, and offered to show
them where she left his body; but never had the opportunity, for she
immediately fell sick and died also.

Captain Church being now at Plymouth again, weary and worn, would have gone
home to his wife and family, but the Government being solicitous to engage him
in the service until Philip was slain, and promising him satisfaction and
redress for some mistreatment that he had met with; he fixes for another
expedition: He had soon volunteers enough to make up the company he desired,
and marched through the woods, until he came to Pocasset; and not seeing or
hearing of any of the enemy, they went over the ferry to Rhode Island, to
refresh themselves. The Capt. with about half a dozen in his company, took
horse and rid about eight miles down the island, to Mr. Sandford's, where he
had left his wife; who no sooner saw him but fainted with surprise; and by that
time she was a little revived, they spied two horsemen coming a great pace.
Captain Church told his company that those men (by their riding) came with
tidings. When they came up they proved to be Major Sandford, and Captain
Golding; who immediately asked Captain Church, what he would give to hear some
news of Philip? He replied, That was what he wanted. They told him, They had
rid hard with some hopes of overtaking him, and were now come on purpose to
inform him, that there was just now tidings from Mount-Hope; an Indian came
down from thence ( where Philip's camp now was) on to Sand-point, over against
Trip's, and balloo'd, and made signs to be fetched over; and being fetched
over, be reported, That he was fled from Philip, who (said he) has killed my
brother just before I came away, for giving some advice that displeased him.
And said, he was fled for fear of meeting with the same his brother had met
with: Told them also, That Philip was now in Mount-Hope neck. Captain Church
thanked them for their good news, and said, he hoped by tomorrow morning to
have the rogue's head. The horses that he and his company came on standing at
the door, (for they had not been unsaddled) his wife must content herself with
a short visit, when such game was ahead; they immediately mounted, set spurs to
their horses, and away.

The two Gentlemen that brought him the tidings, told him, They would gladly
wait upon him to see the event of the expedition; he thanked them, and told
them, he should be as fond of their company as any men's; and (in short) they
went with him. And they were soon at Trip's ferry (with Capt. Church's company)
where the deserter was; who was a fellow of good sense, and told his story
handsomely. He offered Captain Church to pilot him to Philip, and to help to
kill him, that he might revenge his brother's death. Told him, that Philip was
now upon a little spot of upland, that was in the south end of the miry swamp,
just at the foot of the Mount, which was a spot of ground that Captain Church
was well acquainted with. By that time they were got over the ferry, and came
near the ground half the night was spent. The Captain commands a halt, and
bringing the company together, he asked Major Sandford's and Captain Golding's
advice, what method was best to take in making the onset, but they declined
giving him any advice, telling him, That his great experience and success
forbid their taking upon them to give advice. Then Captain Church offered
Captain Golding that he should have the honor (if he would please to accept of
it) to beat up Philip's head quarters. He accepted the offer, and had his
allotted number drawn out to him, and the pilot. Captain Church's instructions
to him were to be very careful in his approach to the enemy, and be sure not to
show himself until by day light they might see and discern their own men from
the enemy; told him also, that his custom in the like cases was, to creep with
his company, on their bellies, until they came as near as they could; and that
as soon as the enemy discovered them they would cry out; and that was the word
for his men to fire and fall on. Directed him when the enemy should start, and
take into the swamp, they should pursue with speed, every man shouting and
making what noise they could; for he would give orders to his ambuscade to fire
on any that should come silently.

Captain Church knowing that it was Philip's custom to be foremost in the
flight, went down to the swamp, and gave Capt. William's of Situate the
command of the right wing of the ambush, and placed an Englishman and an Indian
together behind such shelters of trees, and c. that he could find, and took
care to place them at such distance that none might pass undiscovered between
them, charged them to be careful of themselves, and of hurting their friends,
and to fire at any that should come silently through the swamp; but being
somewhat further through the swamp than he was aware of, he wanted men to make up
his ambuscade. Having placed what men he had, he took Major Sandford by the
hand, said, Sir, I have so placed them that it is scarce possible Philip should
escape them. The same moment a shot whistled over their heads, and then the
noise of a gun toward Philip's camp. Captain Church at first thought it might
be some gun fired by accident; but before he could speak, a whole volley
followed, which was earlier than he expected. one of Philip's gang going forth
to case himself, when he had done, looked round him, and Captain Golding though it
the Indian looked right at him, (though probably it was but his conceit) so
fired at him, and upon his firing, the whole company that were with him fired
upon the enemies shelter, before the Indians had time to rise from their sleep,
and so overshot them. But their shelter was open on that side next the swamp,
built so on purpose for the convenience of flight on occasion. They were soon
in the swamp, and Philip the foremost, who starting at the first gun, threw his
petunk and powder-horn over his head, caught up his gun, and ran as fast as he
could scamper, without any more clothes than his small breeches and stockings,
and ran directly on two of Capt. Church's ambush; they let him come fair within
shot, and the Englishman's gun missing fire, he bid the Indian fire away, and
he did so to purpose, sent one musket bullet through his heart, and another not
above two inches from it; he fell upon his face in the mud and water, with his
gun under him. By this time the enemy perceived they were waylaid on the east
side of the swamp, tacked short about. one of the enemy, who seemed to be a
great surly old fellow, halloo'd with a loud voice, and often called out,
Iootash, Iootash, Capt. Church called to his Indian Peter, and asked him, Who
that was that called so? He answered, It was old Annawon, Philip's great
Captain, calling on his soldiers to stand to it, and fight stoutly. Now the
enemy finding that place of the swamp which was not ambush'd, many of them made
their escape in the English tracks. The man that had shot down Philip, ran with
all speed to Capt. Church, and informed him of his exploit, who commanded him
to be silent about it, and let no man more know it, until they had drove the
swamp clean; but when they had drove the swamp through, and found the enemy had
escaped, or at least the most of them, and the sun now up, and so the dew gone,
that they could not easily track them, the whole company met together at the
place where the enemies night shelter was; and then Captain Church gave them
the news of Philip's death; upon which the whole army gave three loud huzzas.
Captain Church ordered his body to be pulled out of the mire on to the upland,
so some of Captain Church's Indians took hold of him by his stockings, and some
by his small breeches, (being otherwise naked) and drew him through the mud to
the upland, and a doleful, great, naked, dirty beast he looked like. Captain
Church then said, That forasmuch as he had caused many an Englishman's body to
be unburied, and to rot above ground, that not one of his bones should be
buried. And calling his old Indian executioner, bid him behead and quarter him;
accordingly he came with his hatchet and stood over him, but before he struck
he made a shall speech, directing it to Philip, and said, He had been every
great man, and had made many a man afraid of him, but so big as he was he would
now chop his arse for him; and so he went to work, and did as he was ordered.
Philip having one very remarkable hand, being much scarred, occasioned by the
splitting of a pistol in it formerly; Captain Church gave the head and that
hand to Alderman, the Indian who shot him, to show to such Gentlemen as would
bestow gratuities upon him; and accordingly he got many a penny by it.

This being on the last day of the week, the Capt. with his company returned to
the island, tarried there until Tuesday; and then went off and ranged through all
the woods to Plymouth, and received their Premium, which was Thirty Shillings
per head, for the enemies which they had killed or taken, instead of all wages;
and Philip's head went at the same price. Methinks it is scanty reward and poor
encouragement; though it was better than what had been some time before. For this
march they received Four Shillings and Six Pence a man, which was all the
reward they had, except the honor of killing Philip. This was in the latter end
of August, 1676.

Captain Church had been but a little while at Plymouth, before a post from
Rehoboth came to inform the government, that old Annawon, Philip's chief
Captain was with his company ranging about their woods, and was very offensive
and pernicious to Rehoboth and Swansey. Capt. Church was immediately sent for
again, and treated with to engage in one expedition more; he told them, Their
encouragement was so poor he feared his soldiers would be dull about going
again; but being a hearty friend to the cause, he rallies again, goes to Mr.
Jabez Howland, his old Lieutenant, and some of his soldiers that used to go out
with him; told them how the case was circumstanced, and that he had
intelligence of old Annawon's walk and haunt, and wanted hands to hunt him;
they did not want much entreating, but told him, They would go with him, as
long as there was an Indian left in the woods. He moved and ranged through the
woods to Pocasset.

It being the latter end of the week, he proposed to go on to Rhode Island, and
rest until Monday; but on the Lord's day morning, there came a post to inform
the Captain, that early the same morning a canoe with several Indians in it
passed from Prudence-Island to Poppasquash neck. on the west side of Bristoe.
Captain Church thought if he could possibly surprise them, he might probably
gain some intelligence of more game; therefore he made all possible speed after
them. The ferry-boat being out of the way, he made use of canoes; but by that
time they had made two freights, and had got over the Captain, and about 15 or
16 of his Indians, the wind sprung up with such violence that canoes could no
more pass. The Captain seeing it was impossible for any more of his soldiers to
come to him, he told his Indians, If they were willing to go with him, he would
go to Poppasquash, and see if they could catch some of the enemy Indians. They
were willing to go, but were sorry they had no English soldiers; so they
marched through the thickets that they might not be discovered, until they came
unto the salt meadow, to the northward of Bristoe town, that now is. Then they
heard a gun, the Captain looked about, not knowing but it might be some of his
own company in the read; so halting till they all came up, he found it was none
of his own company that fired. Now though he had but a few men, was minded to
send some of them out on a scout. He moved it to Captain Lightfoot to go with
three more on a scout; he said he was willing, provided the Captain's man
Natbaniel (which was an Indian they had lately taken) might be one of them,
because he was well acquainted with the neck, and coming lately from among
them, knew how to call them. The Captain bid him choose his three companions,
and go; and if they came across any of the enemy, not to kill them if they
could possibly take them alive; that they might gain intelligence concerning
Annawon. The Capt. with the rest of his company moved but a little way further
toward Poppasquash, before they heard another gun, which seemed to be the same
way with the other, but further off; but they made no halt until they came unto
the narrow of Poppasquash neck; where Capt. Church left three men more, to
watch if any should come out of the neck, and to inform the scout when they
returned which way he was gone.

He parted the remainder of his company, half on one side of the neck, and the
other with himself went on the other side of the neck, until they met; and
meeting neither with Indians nor canoes, returned big with expectations of
tidings by their scout; but when they came back to the three men at the narrow
of the neck, they told their Captain the scout was not returned, had heard nor
seen any thing of them: This filled them with thoughts of what should become of
them; by that time they had sat and waited an hour longer, it was very dark,
and they despaired of their returning to them. Some of the Indians told their
Captain, They feared his new man Nathaniel had met with his old Mount-Hope
friends, and was turned rogue. They concluded to make no fires that night, (and
indeed they had no great need of any) for they had no victuals to cook, had not
so much as a morsel of bread with them.

They took up their lodging scattering, that if possibly their scout should
come in the night, and whistle (which was their sign) some or other of them
might hear them. They had a very solitary, hungry night; and as soon as the day
broke they drew off through the brush to a hill without the neck, and looking
about them they espied one Indian man come running somewhat toward them; the
Captain ordered one man to step out and show himself. Upon this the Indian ran
right to him, and who should it be but Capt. Lightfoot, to their great joy.
Capt. Church asked him, What news? He answered, Good news, they were all well,
and had catched ten Indians, and that they guarded them all night in one of the
flankers of the old English garrison; that their prisoners were part of
Annawon's company, and that they had left their families in a swamp above
Mattapoiset Neck. In Swanzey. There is another Mattapoiset in Rochester.
And as they were marching toward the old garrison, Lightfoot gave Capt.
Church a particular account of their exploit, viz. That presently after they
left him, they heard another gun, which seemed toward the Indian burying
place, and moving that way, they discovered two of the enemy fleeing of an
horse. The scout clapping into the brush, Nathaniel bid them fit down, and he
would presently call all the Indians thereabout unto him. They hid, and he went
a little distance back from them, and set up his note, and howled like a wolf.
One of the two immediately left his horse and came running to see who was
there; but Nathaniel howling lower and lower drew him in between those that lay
in wait for him, who seized him; Nathaniel continuing the same note, the other
left the horse also, following his mate, and met with the same. When they ought
there two they examined them apart, and found them to agree in their story,
that there were eight more of them come down into the neck to get provisions,
and had agreed to meet at the burying place that evening. These two being some
of Nathaniel's old acquaintance, he had great influence upon them, and with his
entiring story, (telling what a brave Captain he had, how bravely he lived
since he had been with him, and how much they might better their condition by
turning to him, etc.) persuaded and engaged them to be on his side which indeed
now began to be the better side of the hedge. They waited out a little while
before they espied the rest of theirs coming up to the burying place, and
Nathaniel soon howled them in as he had done their mates before.

When Capt. Church came to the garrison, he met his Lieutenant and the rest of
his company; and then making up good fires they fell to roasting their
horse-beef, enough to last them the whole day, but had not a morsel of bread;
though salt they had, which they always carried in their pockets, which, at this
time was very acceptable to them. Their next motion was toward the place where
the prisoners told them they had left their women and children, and surprised
them all, and some others that were newly come to them. And upon examination
they held to one story, that it was hard to tell where to find Annawon, for he
never roosted twice in a place. Now a certain Indian soldier that Captain
Church had gained over to be on his side, prayed that he might have liberty to
go and fetch in his father, who, he said, was about four miles from that place,
in a swamp, with no other than a young squaw. Capt. Church inclined to go with
him, thinking it might be in his way to gain some intelligence of Annawon; and
so taking one Englishman and a few Indians with him, leaving the rest there, he
went with his new soldier to look his father. When he came to the swamp he bid
the Indian go to see if he could find his father; he was no sooner gone but
Captain Church discovered a track coming down out of the woods, upon which he
and his little company lay close, some on one side of the track, and some on
the other. They heard the Indian soldier make a howling for his father; and at
length some body answered him, but while they were listening, they thought they
heard somebody coming toward them, presently saw an old man coming up with a
gun on his shoulder, and a young woman following, in the track which they lay
by: They let them come up between them, and then started up and laid hold of
them both. Captain Church immediately examined them apart, telling them, What
they must trust too if they told false stories: He asked the young woman, What
company they came from last? She said, From Capt. Annawon's. He asked her, How
many were in company with him when she left him? She said 50 or 60. He asked
her, How many miles it was to the place where she left him? She said, She did
not understand miles, but he was up in Squannaconk Swamp. Southeasterly part of
Rehoboth.
The old man who had been one of Philip's council, upon examination, gave
exactly the same account. Captain Church asked him, If they could get there
that night? He said, If they went presently, and traveled stoutly, they might
get there by sunset. He asked, Whither he was going? He answered, That Annawon
had sent him down to look for some Indians, that were gone down into Mount-Hope
neck to kill provisions. Capt. Church let him know that those Indians were all
his prisoners. By this time came the Indian soldier and brought his father and
one Indian more. The Capt. was now in great straight of mind what to do next,
he had a mind to give Annawon a visit, now he knew where to find him; but his
company was very small, but half a dozen men beside himself, and was under a
necessity to send somebody back to acquaint his Lieutenant and company with his
proceedings. However, he asked his small company that were with him, Whether
they would willingly go with him, and give Annawon a visit? They told him, They
were always ready to obey his commands, etc. but withal told him, That they
knew this Capt. Annawon was a great soldier; that he had been a valiant Captain
under Asuhmequin, Philip's father, and that he had been Philip's chieftan all
this war; a very subtle man, and of great resolution, and had often said, that
he would never be taken alive by the English; and moreover they knew that the
men that were with him were resolute fellows, some of Philip's chief soldiers;
and therefore feared whether it was practicable to make an attempt upon him
with so small a handful of assistants as were now with him: Told him further,
That it would be a pity that after all the great things he had done, he should
throw away his life at last. Upon which he replied, That he doubted not Annawon
was a subtle and valiant man: That he had a long time but in vain sought for
him, and never till now could find his quarters; and he was very loath to miss
of the opportunity; and doubted not but that if they would cheerfully go with
him, the same Almightly Providence that had hitherto protected and befriended
them would do so still, and c. Upon this with one consent they said, They would
go. Captain Church then turned to one Cook of Plymouth, (the only Englishman
then with him) and asked him, What he thought of it? Who replied, Sir, I am
never afraid of going any where when you are with me: Then Capt. Church asked
the old Indian, if he could carry his horse with him? (For he conveyed a horse
thus far with him:) He replied, that it was impossible for an horse to pass the
swamps: Therefore he sent away his new Indian soldier with his father and the
Captain's horse to his Lieutenant, and orders for him to move to Taunton with
the prisoners, to secure them there, and to come out in the morning in the
Rehoboth road, in which he might expect to meet him, if he were alive and had
success.

The Captain then asked the old fellow, if he would pilot him unto Annawon? He
answered, that he having given him his life, he was obliged to serve him. He
bid him move on then, and they followed. The old man would out-travel them so
far sometimes that they were almost out of light; looking over his shoulder,
and seeing them behind, he would halt. Just as the sun was setting, the old man
made a full stop and sat down, the company coming up also sat down, being all
weary. Capt. Church asked, What news? He answered, that about that time in the
evening Capt. Annawon sent out his scouts to see if the coast was clear, and as
soon as it began to grow dark the scouts returned. And then (said he) we may
move again securely. When it began to grow dark the old man stood up again,
Capt. Church asked him, if he would take a gun and fight for him? He bowed very
low and prayed him not to impose such a thing upon him, as to fight against
Capt. Annawon his old friend. But says he, I will go along with you, and be
helpful to you, and will lay hands on any man that shall offer to hurt you. It
being now pretty dark they moved close together; anon they heard a noise; the
Captain stayed the old man with his hand, and asked his own men what noise they
thought it might be? They concluded it to be the pounding of a mortar. The old
man had given Captain Church a description of the place where Annawon now lay,
and of the difficulty of getting at him. Being sensible that they were pretty
near them, with two of his Indians he creeps to the edge of the rocks, from
whence he could see their camps: He saw three companies of Indians at a little
distance from each other, being easy to be discovered by the light of their
fires. He saw also the great Annawon and his company, who had formed his camp
or kennelling-place, by falling a tree under the side of the great clefts of
rocks, and setting a row of birch bushes up against it, where he himself, his
son, and some of his chiefs had taken up their lodging, and made great fires
without them, and had their pots and kettles boiling, and spits roasting; their
arms also he discovered, all set together in a place fitted for the purpose,
standing up an end against a stick lodged in two crotches, and a mat placed
over them, to keep them from the wet or dew. The old Annawon's feet and his
son's head were so near the arms as almost to touch them; but the rocks were so
steep that it was impossible to get down, but as they lowered themselves by the
bows, and the bushes that grew in the cracks of the rocks. Capt. Church
creeping back again to the old man, asked him, if there was no possibility of
getting at them some other way? He answered, no: That he and all that belonged
to Annawon were ordered to come that way, and none could come any other way
without difficulty or danger of being shot.

Capt. Church then ordered the old man and his daughter to go down foremost,
with their baskets at their backs, that when Annawon saw them with their
baskets he should not mistrust the intrigue. Capt. Church and his harmful of
soldiers crept down also under the shadow of these two and their baskets, and
the Capt. himself crept close behind the old man, with his hatchet in his hand,
and stepped over the young man's head to the arms; the young Annawon discovering
of him, whipped his blanket over his head and shrunk up in a heap: The old Capt.
Annawon started up on his breech, and cried out Howoh, and despairing of
escape, threw himself back again, and lay silent until Capt. Church had secured
all the arms, and c. And having secured that company, he sent his Indian
soldiers to the other fires and companies, giving them instructions, what to do
and say. Accordingly, they went into the midst of them: When they discovered
themselves who they were, told them that their Captain Annawon was taken, and
it would be best for them quietly and peaceably to surrender themselves, which
would procure good quarter for them: otherwise, if they should pretend to
resist or make their escape, it would be in vain, and they could expect no
other but that Capt. Church with his great army, who had now entrap'd them,
would cut them to pieces; told them also if they would submit themselves, and
deliver up all their arms unto them, and keep every man his place until it was
day; they would assure them that their Captain Church, who had been so kind to
themselves when they surrendered to him, should be as kind unto them. Now they
being old acquaintance, and many of them relations did much the readier give
heed to what they said, complied and surrendered up their arms unto them, both
their guns and hatchets, and c. and were forth with carried to Captain Church.

Things being so far settied, Capt. Church asked Annawon, What he had for
supper? For (said he) I am come to sup with you. Taubut (said Annawon) with a
big voice; and looking about upon his women, bid them hasten and get Captain
Church and his company some supper; then turned to Captain Church and asked
him, Whether he would eat cow-beef or horse-beef; the Capt. told him cow-beef
would be most acceptable. It was soon got ready, and pulling his little bag of
falt out of his pocket, which was all the provision he bro't with him; this
seasoned his cow-beef so that with it and the dried green corn, which the old
squaw was pounding in the mortar, while they were sliding down the rocks, he
made a very hearty lupper. And this pounding in the mortar proved lucky for
Capt. Church's getting down the rocks; for when the old squaw pounded, they
moved, and when she ceased, to turn the corn, they ceased creeping, the noise
of the mortar prevented the enemies hearing their creeping, and the corn being
now dressed supplied the want of bread, and gave a fine relish with the
cow-beef. Supper being over, Captain Church sent two of his men to inform the
other companies, that he had killed Philip, and had taken their friends in
Mount-Hope neck, but had spared their lives, and that he had subdued now all
the enemy (he supposed) excepting this company of Annawon's, and now if they
would be orderly and keep their places until morning, they should have good
quarter, and that he would carry them to Taunton, where they might see their
friends again, and c.

The messengers returned, that the Indians yielded to his proposals. Captain
Church though it it was now time for him to take a nap, having had no sleep in two
days and one night before; told his men that if they would let him sleep two
hours, they should sleep all the rest of the night. He laid himself down and
endeavored to sleep, but all disposition to sleep departed from him. After he
had lain a little while he looked up to see how his watch managed, but found
them all fast asleep. Now Captain Church had told Capt. Annawon's company, as
he had ordered his Indians to tell the others, that their lives should all be
spared, excepting Capt. Annawon's, and it was not in his power to promise him
his life, but he must carry him to his masters at Plymouth, and he would
entreat them for his life. Now when Capt. Church found not only his own men,
but all the Indians fast asleep, Annawon only excepted, whom he perceived was
as broad awake as himself; and so they lay looking one upon the other perhaps
an hour. Captain Church said nothing to him, for he could not speak Indian, and
though it Annawon could not speak English; at length Annawon raised himself up,
cast off his blanket, and with no more clothes than his small breeches, walked
a little way back from the company; Captain Church though it no other but that he
had occasion to case himself, and so walked to some distance rather than offend
him with the stink: But by and by he was gone out of sight and hearing, and
then Captain Church began to suspect some ill design in him, and got all the
guns close to him, and crowded himself close under young Annawon, that if he
should any where get a gun he should not make a shot at him without endangering
his son; lying very ^^ill a while, waiting for the event; at length, he heard
some body coming the same way that Annawon went. The moon now shining bright,
he saw him at a distance coming with something in his hands, and coming up to
Captain Church, he fell upon his knees before him, and offered him what he had
brought, and speaking in plain English, said, Great Captain, you have killed
Philip, and conquered his country; for I believe that I and my company are the
last that war against the English, so suppose the war is ended by your means;
and therefore these things belong unto you. Then opening his pack, he pulled
out Philip's belt curiously wrought with wompom, being nine inches broad,
wrought with black and white wompom, in various figures and flowers, and
pictures of many birds and beasts. This, when hung upon Capt. Church's
shoulders, reached his ancles; and another belt of wompom he presented him
with, wrought after the former manner, which Philip was wont to put upon his
head; it had two flags on the back part, which hung down on his back, and
another small belt with a star upon the end of it, which he used to hang on his
breast; and they were all edged with red hair, which Annawon said they got in
the Mohog's country. Then he pulled out two horns of glazed powder, and a red
cloth blanket. He told Captain Church these were Philip's royalties, which he
was wont to adorn himself with when he fat in state. That he though it himself
happy that he had an opportunity to present them to Capt. Church, who had won
them, and c. spent the remainder of the night in discourse; and gave an account
of what mightly success he had formerly in wars against many nations of
Indians, when he served Asuhmequin, Philip's father, and c. In the morning, as
soon as it was light, the Captain marched with his prisoners out of that swampy
country toward Taunton, met his Lieutenant and company about four miles out of
town, who expressed a great deal of joy to see him again, and said, it was more
than ever he expected. They went into Taunton, were civilly and kindly treated
by the inhabitants, refreshed and rested themselves that night. Early next
morning, the Captain took old Ann^^won and half a dozen of his Indian soldiers,
and his own man, and went to Rhode Island, sending the rest of his company and
his prisoners by his Lieutenant to Plymouth, Tarrying two or three days upon
the island, he then went to Plymouth, and carried his wife and his two children
with him.

Capt. Church had been but a little while at Plymouth, when he was informed of
a parcel of Indians who had haunted the woods between Plymouth and Sippican,
that did great damage to the English, in killing, their cattle horses, and
swine; the Capt. was soon in pursuit of them: Went out from Plymouth the next
Monday in the afternoon; next morning early they discovered a track; the Capt.
sent two Indians on the track to see what they could discover, whilst he and
his company followed gently after, but the two Indians soon returned with
tidings that they discovered the enemy sitting round their fires, in a thick
place of brush. When they came pretty near the place, the Captain ordered every
man to creep as he did; and surround them by creeping as near as they could,
till they should be discovered, and them to run on upon them and take them
alive, if possible, (for their prisoners were their pay:) They did so, took
every one that was at the fires, not one escaping. Upon examination they agreed
in their story, that they belonged to Tispaquin, who was gone with Johu Bump,
and one more, to Agawom Wareham.
and Sippican, Rochester.
to kill horses, and were not expected back in two or three days.

This same Tispaquin had been a great Captain, and the Indians reported that he
was such a great Pauwau, that no bullet could enter him, etc. Capt. Church
said, He would not have him killed, for there was a war broke out in the
eastern part of the country, and he would have him saved to go with him to
fight the eastern Indians. Agreeably he left two old squaws, of the prisoners,
and bid them tarry there until their Capt. Tispaquin returned, and to tell him,
that Church had been there, and had taken his wife and children, and company,
and carried them down to Plymouth; and would spare all their lives, and his
too, if he would come down to them, and bring the other two that were with him,
and they should be his soldiers, etc. Capt. Church then returned to Plymouth,
leaving the old Squaws well provided for, and busket for Tispaquin when he
returned: Telling his soldiers that he doubted not but he had laid a trap that
would take him. Capt. Church, two days after, went to Boston, (the
Commissioners then fitting) and waited upon the honorable Governor Leverett,
who then lay sick; who requested Capt. Church to give him some account of the
war; who readily obliged his honor therein, to his great satisfaction, as he
was pleased so express himself; taking him by the hand, and telling him, if it
pleased God he lived, he would make it a brace of a hundred pounds advantage to
him out of the Massachusetts colony, and would endeavor that the rest of the
colonies should do proportionably; but he died within a fortnight after, and so
nothing was done of that nature. -- The same day Tispaquin came in, and those
that were with him; but when Capt. Church returned from Boston, he found, to
his grief, the heads of Annawon, Tispaquin, etc. cut off, which were the last
of Philip's friends. The General Court of Plymouth, then sitting, sent for
Captain Church, who waited upon them accordingly, and received their thanks for
his good service, which they unanimously voted, which was all that Capt. Church
had for his aforesaid service.

Afterward, in the year 1676, in the month of January, Capt. Church received a
commission from Governor Winslow, to scour the woods of some of the lurking
enemy which they were well informed were there. Which Commission is as follows:
BEING well informed that there are certain parties of our Indian enemies
(remains of the people or allies of Philip, late Sachem of Mount-Hope, our
mortal enemy) that are still lurking in the woods, near some of our
Plantations, that go on to disturb the peace of his Majesty's subjects in this
and the neighboring colonies, by their frequent robberies, and other
insolences: Captain Benjamin Church is therefore hereby nominated, ordered,
commissioned, and empowered to raise a company of volunteers, consisting of
English and Indians, so many as he shall judge necessary to improve in the
present expedition, and can obtain: And of them to take the command and
conduct, and to lead them forth unto such place or places, within this or the
neighboring colonies, as he shall think fit, and as the providence of God, and
his intelligence, may lead him; to discover, pursue, fight, surprise, destroy,
and subdue our said Indian enemy, or any party or parties of them, that, by the
providence of God, they may meet with: Or them, or any of them, to receive to
mercy, if he see causel (provided they be not murderous rogues, or such as have
been principal actors in those villainies.) And, for the prosecution of this
design, liberty is hereby granted to the said Capt. Church, and others, to arm
and set out such of our friendly Indians as he is willing to entertain. -- And
forasmuch as all these our enemies that have been taken, or at any time may be
taken by our forces, have, by our courts and councils, been rendered lawful
captives of war, and condemned to perpetual servitude; this council do also
determine, and hereby declare, That all such prisoners as, by the blessing of
God, the said Captain and company, or any of them, shall take, together with
their arms and other plunder, shall he their own, and to be distributed amongst
themselves, according to such agreement as they may be at one with another: And
it shall be lawful, and is hereby warrantable, for him and them to make sale of
such prisoners as their perpetual slaves; or otherwise to retain and keep them
as they think meet, (they being such as the law allows to be kept.) Finally,
the said Capt. Church herein improving his best judgment and discretion, and
utmost ability, faithfully to serve the interest of God, his Majesty's
interest, and the interest of the colony; and carefully governing his said
company at home and abroad: These shall be unto him full and ample commission,
warrant and Discharge. Given under the Public Seal, January 15th, 1676.

Per JOSIAH WINSLOW, Gov.



Accordingly Capt. Church, accompanied with several gentlemen and others, went
out, and took diverse parties of Indians; and in one of which parties there was
a certain old man whom Capt. Church seemed to take particular notice of, and
asking him where he belonged, he told him to Swanzey; the Captain asked his
name, who replied, his name was Conscience; Conscience, said the Capt. smiling,
then the war is over, for that was what they were searching for it being much
wanted, and then returned the said Conscience to his post again at Swanzey, to
a certain person the said Indian desired to be sold to, and so returned home.

PHILIP. KING of Mount Hope.



A further account of the actions in the more late wars against the common
enemy and Indian rebels, in the eastern parts, under the command of the
aforesaid Captain BENJAMIN CHURCH.
IN the time of Sir Edmund Andross's government began that bloody war in the
eastern parts of New England; so that, immediately Sir Edmund sent an express
for Capt. Church; who, then being at LittleCompton, received it on a Lord's
Day, in the afternoon meeting; going home after meeting, took his horse and set
out for Boston, as ordered; and by sunrise next morning got to Braintree, where
he met with Col. Page on horseback, going to Weymouth and Hingham to raise
forces to go East; who said he was glad to see him, and that his Excellency
would be as glad to see him in Boston so early: So parting he soon got to
Boston, and waited upon his Excellency; who informed him of an unhappy war
broke out in the eastern parts; and said, he was going himself in person, and
that he wanted his company with him: But Captain Church not finding himself in
the same spirit he used to have, said, he hoped his Excellency would give him
time to consider of it. He told him he might; and also said that he must come
and dine with him. Captain Church having many acquaintance in Boston, who made
it their business some to encourage, and others to discourage him from going
with his Excellency: So after dinner his Excellency took him into his room and
discoursed freely; saying, that he having knowledge of his former actions and
successes; and that he must go with him, and be his second, with other
encouragements. But in short, the said Captain Church did not accept, so was
dismissed and went home.

Soon after this was the revolution, and the other government reassumed; and
then Governor Bradstreet sent for Captain Church to come to Boston as soon as
his business would permit; whereupon he went to Boston, and waited upon his
Honor; who told him he was requested by the Council to send for him, to see if
he could be prevailed with to raise volunteers, both English and Indians, to go
East; for the eastward Indians had done great spoil upon the English in those
parts; giving him an account of the miseries and sufferings of the people
there. Capt. Church's spirits being affected, said, if he could do any service
for his Honor, the country, and their relief, he was ready and willing. He was
asked how he would act? He said, He would take with him as many of his old
soldiers as he could get, both English and Indians, etc. The Gentlemen of
Boston requested him to go to Rhode Island government to ask their assistance:
So giving him their letter, and about forty shillings in money, he took leave,
and went home to Bristol on a Saturday, and the next Monday morning he went
over to Rhode Island, and waited upon their Governor, delivering the letter as
ordered; prayed his Honor for a speedy answer: Who said, they could not give an
answer presently; so he waited on them till he had their answer; and when he
had obtained it, he carried it to the Boston Gentlemen; who desired him to
raise what volunteers he could in Plymouth colony, and Rhode Island government,
and what was wanting they would make up out of their's that was already out in
the eastern parts. The summer being far spent, Capt. Church made what despatch
he could, and raised about 250 men volunteers, and received his commission from
Governor Hinkley, which is as follows, viz. The Council of war of their
Majesty's colony of New-Plymouth, in New England: To Major Benjamin Church,
Commander in Chief.
WHEREAS the Kennebeck and eastern Indians with their confederates, have openly
made war upon their Majesty's subjects of the provinces of Maine,
New Hampshire, and of the Massachusetts colony, having committed many barbarous
murders, spoils and rapines upon their persons and estates: And whereas there
are some forces of soldiers, English and Indians, now raised and detached out
of the several regiments and places within this colony of New-Plymouth, to go
forth to the assistance of our neighbors and friends, of the aforesaid
provinces and colony of the Massachusetts, subjects of one and the same crown;
and to join with their forces for the repelling and destruction of the common
enemy: And whereas you, Benjamin Church, are appointed to be Major and
Commander in Chief of all the forces, English and Indians, detached within this
colony, for the service of their Majesty's aforesaid: THESE are in their
Majesty's name to authorize and require you to take into your care and conduct
all the said forces, English and Indians, and diligently to attend that
service, by leading and exercising of your inferior Officers and soldiers,
commanding them to obey you as their chief commander; and to pursue, fight,
take, kill, or destroy the said enemies, their aiders and abettors, by all the
ways and means you can, as you shall have opportunity. And you are to observe
and obey all such orders and instructions as from time to time you shall
receive from the Commissioners of the colonies, the Council of war of this
colony, or the Governor and Council of the Massachusett's colony. In testimony
whereof the public seal of the said colony of New-Plymouth is hereunto affixed.

Dated in Plymouth, the sixth day of September, Anno Dom. 1689. Annoque regni
Regis et Regina Willielmi et Mariae Angliae etc. Primo. THOMAS HINKLEY,
President.




And now marching them all down to Boston, then received his further orders and
instructions, which are as follows: Boston, September 16th, 1689. To all
Sheriffs, Marshals, Constables, and other Officers military and civil, in their
Majesty's province of Maine.
WHEREAS, pursuant to an agreement of the Commissioners of the United Colonies,
Major Benjamin Church is commissionated Commander in Chief over that part of
their Majesty's forces (levied for the present expedition against the common
enemy) whose headquarters are appointed to be at Falmouth, in Casco-Bay: In
their Majesty's names, you, and every of you are required to be aiding and
assisting to the said Major Church in his pursuit of the enemy, as any
emergency shall require; and so impress boats, or other vessels, carts,
carriages, horses, oxen, provision and ammunition, and men for guides, and c.
as you shall receive warrants from the said chief commander, or his Lieutenant
so to do: You may not fail to do the same speedily and effectually, as you will
answer your neglect and contempt of their Majesty's authority and service at
your uttermost peril. Given under my hand and seal the day and year above
written. Annoque Regni Regis et Regina Willielmi and Mariae Primo.

By Thomas Danforth, President of the province of Maine.


By the Governor and Council of the Massachusetts Colony: To Major Benjamin
Church.
WHEREAS you are appointed and commissioned by the Council of War, of the
colony of NewPlymouth, Commander in Chief of the forces raised within the said
colony, against the common Indian enemy, now ordered into the eastern parts, to
join with some of the forces of this colony; for the prosecution, repelling and
subduing of the said enemy: It is therefore ordered that Captain Simon Willard,
and Captain Nathaniel Hall, with the two companies of soldiers under their
several command, belonging to this colony, now in or about Casco-Bay, be, and
are hereby put under you, as their Commander in Chief for this present
expetition. And in pursuance of the commissions severally given to either of
them, they are ordered to observe and obey your orders and directions as their
Commander in Chief until further order from the Governor and Council, or the
Commissioners of the colonies. Dated in Boston the 17th day of September, Anno
Dom. 1689. Annoque Regni Regis et Reginae Guilielmi et Mariae, Anglia, etc.
Primo.

S. BRADSTREET, Gov. Past in Council, Attest. Isaac Addington, Secr.


By the Commissioners of the colonies of the Massachusetts, Plymouth and
Connecticut, for managing the present war against the common enemy.
INSTRUCTIONS for Major Benjamin Church, Commander in Chief of the Plymouth
forces, with others of the Massachusetts, put under his command.
IN pursuance of the commission given you, for their Majesty's service in the
present expedition against the common Indian enemy, their aiders and abettors;
reposing confidence in your wisdom, prudence and fidelity in the trust
committed to you, for the honor of God, good of his people, and the security of
the interest of Christ in his churches, expecting and praying that in your
dependence upon him, you may be helped and assisted with all that grace and
wisdom which is requisite for carrying you on with success in this difficult
service; and though much is and must be left to your discretion, as Providence
and opportunity may present from time to time in places of attendance: Yet the
following instructions are commended unto your observation, and to be attended
to so far as the state of matters with you in such a transaction will admit.
You are with all possible speed to take care that the Plymouth forces, both
English and Indians, under your command, be fixed and ready, and the first
opportunity of wind and weather, to go on board such vessels as are provided to
transport you and them to Casco, where, if it shall please God you arrive, you
are to take under your care and command the companies of Captain Nathaniel
Hall, and Capt. Simon Willard, who are ordered to attend your command, whom,
together with the Plymouth forces, and such as from time to time may be added
unto you, you are to improve in such way as you shall see meet, for the
discovering, pursuing, subduing and destroying the said common enemy, by all
opportunities you are capable of; always intending the preserving of any of the
near towns from incursions, and destruction of the enemy, yet chiefly improving
your men for the finding and following the laid enemy abroad, and if possible
to find out and attack their head quarters and principal rendezvous, if you
find you are in a rational capacity of so doing. The better to enable you
thereto, we have ordered two men of war sloops, and other small vessels for
transportation to attend you, for some considerable time. You are to see that
your soldiers arms be always fixed, and that they be furnished with ammunition,
provisions and other necessaries, that so they may be in a readiness to repel
and attack the enemy. In your pursuit you are to take special care to avoid
danger by ambushments, or being drawn under any disadvantage by the enemy in
your marches, keeping out scouts and a forlorn hope before your main body, and
by all possible means endeavoring to surprise some of the enemy, that so you
may gain intelligence. You are to suppress all mutinies and disorders among
your soldiers, as much as in you lies, and to punish such as disobey your
officers, according to the rules of war herewith given you.

You are, according to your opportunity, or any occasion more than ordinary
occurring, to hold correspondence with Major Swain, and to yield mutual
assistance when and as you are capable of it, and you may have reason to judge
it will be of most public service; and it will be meet you and he should agree
of some signal whereby your Indians may be known from the enemy. You are to
encourage your soldiers to be industrious, vigorous, and venturous in their
service, to search out and destroy the enemy, acquainting them, it is agreed by
the several colonies, that they shall have the benefit of the captives, and all
lawful plunder, and the reward of Eight Pounds per head, for every fighting
Indian man flain by them, over and above their stated wages; the same being
made appear to the Commander in Chief, or such as shall be appointed to take
care therein. If your Commission officers, or any of them should be flain, or
otherwise incapable of service, and for such reason dismissed, you are to
appoint others in their room, who shall have the like wages, and a commission
sent upon notice given, you to give them commissions in the mean time. You are
to take effectual care that the worship of God be kept up in the army, morning
and evening prayer attended as far as may be, and as the emergencies of your
affairs will admit, to see that the holy sabbath be duly fanctisied. You are to
take care as much as may be, to prevent or punish drunkenness, swearing,
cursing, or such other sins, as do provoke the anger of God. You are to advise
with your chief officers in any matters of moment, as you shall have
opportunity. You are from time to time to give intelligence and advice to the
Governor and Council of the Massachusetts, or Commissioners of the colonies, of
your proceedings and occurrences that may happen, and how it shall please the
Lord to deal with you in this present expedition.

If you find the vessels are not likely to be serviceable to you, dismiss them
as soon as you may.

Captain Silvanus Davis is a prudent man, and well acquainted with the affairs
of those parts, and is writ unto to advise and inform you all he can.

Such further instructions as we shall see reason to send unto you, you are
carefully to attend and observe, and in the absence of the Commissioners, you
shall observe the orders and instructions directed unto you from the Governor
and Council of the Massachusetts.

Given under our hands in Boston, Sept. 18, 1689. Tho. Hinky, Thomas Danforth,
President, John Walley, Elisha Cook, Samuel Mason, William Pitkin.




The First EXPEDITION East.
BEING ready, Major Church embarked with his forces on board the vessels
provided to transport them for Casco, having a brave gale at S. W. and on
Friday about 3 o'clock, they got in fight of Casco harbor; and discovering two
or three small ships there, not knowing whether they were friends or enemies;
whereupon the said Commander, Major Church, gave orders that every man that was
able should make ready, and all lie close, giving orders how they should act in
case they were enemies. He going in the Mary sloop, together with the
Resolution, went in first, being both well fitted with guns and men; coming to
the first hailed them, who said they were friends, presently manned their boat,
brought to, and so came along the side of them; who gave the said Church an
account, that yesterday there was a very great army of Indians and French with
them upon the island, at the going out of the harbor, and that they were come
on purpose to take Casco fort and town; likewise informed him that they had got
a captive woman aboard (Major Walden's daughter of Piscataqua) that could give
him a full account of their number and intentions: He bid them give his service
to their Captain, and tell him, he would wait upon him after he had been on
shore and given some orders and directions. Being come pretty near he ordered
all the men still to keep close, giving an account of the news he had received,
and then went ashore, where were several of the chief men of the town who met
him, being glad that he came so happily to their relief; told him the news Mrs.
Lee had given them, being the woman aforesaid. He going to Captain Davis's to
get some refreshment, having not eat a morsel since he came by Boston castle;
and now having inquired into the state of the town, found them in a poor
condition to defend themselves against such a number of enemies: He gave them
an account of his orders and instructions, and told them what forces he had
brought, and that when it was dark they should all land, and not before, left
the enemy should discover them. And then he went on board the privateer, who
were Dutchmen; but as he went called aboard every vessel, and ordered the
Officers to take care that their men might be all fitted and provided to fight,
for the people of the town expected the enemy to fall upon them every minute,
but withal charging them to keep undiscovered; and coming on board said
privateer was kindly treated, discoursed Mrs. Lee, who informed him that the
company she came with had fourscore canoes, and that there were more of them
whom she had not seen, which came from other places, and that they told her
when they came all together, should make up 700 men. He asked her whether
Casteen was with them? She answered, that there were several French men with
them, but did not know whether Casteen was there or not. He then having got
what intelligence she could give him, went ashore and viewed the fort and town,
discoursing with the Gentlemen there according to his instructions; and when it
began to grow dark, he ordered the vessels to come as near the fort as might
be, and land the soldiers with as little noise as possible; ordering them as
they landed to go into the fort and houses that stood near, that so they might
be ready upon occasion; having ordered provisions for them, went to every
company and ordering them to get every thing ready; they that had no
powderhorns or shot-bags, should immediately make them; ordering the officers
to take special care that they were ready to march into the woods an hour
before day: And also directing the watch to call him two hours before day; so
he hastened to bed to get some rest.

At the time prefixed he was called, and presently ordering the companies to
make ready, and about half an hour before day they moved. Several of the town
people went with them into a thick place of brush, about half a mile from the
town; now ordering them to sent out their scouts, as they used to do, and
seeing them all settled at their work, he went into town by sunrise again, and
desired the inhabitants to take care of themselves, till his men had fitted
themselves with some necessaries: For his Indians most of them wanted both bags
and horns; so he ordered them to make bags like wallets, to put powder in one
end, and shot in the other. So most of them were ready for action, (viz:) the
Seconet Indians, but the Cape Indians were very bare, lying so long at Boston
before they embarked, that they had sold every thing they could make a penny
of; some tying shot and powder in the corners of their blankets. He being in
town, just going to breakfast, there was an alarm, so he ordered all the
soldiers in town to move away as fast as they could, where the firing was; and
he, with what men more were with with him of his soldiers, moved immediately,
and meeting with Captain Bracket's sons, who told him their father was taken,
and that they saw a great army of Indians in their father's orchard, and c. By
this time our Indians that wanted bags and horns were fitted, but wanted more
ammunition. Presently came a messenger to him from the town and informed him,
that they had knocked out the heads of several casks of bullets, and they were
all too big, being musket bullets, and would not fit their guns, and that if he
did not go back himself a great part of the army would be kept back from
service for want of suitable bullets.

He run back and ordered every vessel to send ashore all their casks of
bullets; being brought knocked out their heads, and turned them all out upon
the green by the fort, and set all the people in the town, that were able, to
make flugs; being most of them too large for their use, which had like to have
been the overthrow of their whole army: He finding some small bullets, and what
slugs were made, and three snapsacks of powder, went immediately to the army,
who were very hotly engaged; but coming to the river the tide was up; he called
to his men that were engaged, encouraging them, and told them he had brought
more ammunition for them. An Indian called Captain Lightfoot, laid down his
gun, and came over the river, taking the powder upon his head, and a kettle of
bullets in each hand, and got safe to his fellow soldiers. He perceiving great
firing upon that side he was of, went to see who they were, and found them to
be two of Major Church's companies, one of English and the other of Indians,
being in all about fourscore men, that had not got over the river, but lay
firing over our men's heads at the enemy; he presently ordered them to rally,
and come all together; and gave the word for a Casco man: So one Swarton, a
Jersey man, appearing, who he could hardly understand; he asked him how far it
was to the head of the river, or whether there was any place to get over? He
said there was a bridge about three quarters of a mile up, where they might get
over: So he calling to his soldiers engaged on the other side, that he would
soon be with them over the bridge, and come upon the backs of the enemy; which
put new courage into them; so they immediately moved up toward the bridge,
marching very thin, being willing to make what show they could, shouting as
they marched: They saw the enemy running from the riverside, where they had
made stands with wood to prevent any body from coming over the river; and
coming to the bridge, they saw on the other side that the enemy had laid logs
and stuck birch brush along to hide themselves from our view.

He ordered the company to come altogether, bidding them all to run after him,
who would go first, and that as soon as they got over the bridge to scatter,
that so they might not be all shot down together, expecting the enemy to be at
their stands; so running up to the stands, found none there, but were just
gone, the ground being much tumbled with them behind the said stands. He
ordered the Captain with his company of English to march down to our men
engaged, and that they should keep along upon the edge of the marsh, and
himself with his Indian soldiers would march down through the brush: And coming
to a parcel of low ground, which had been formerly burnt, the old brush being
fallen down lay very thick, and the young brush being grown up made it bad
traveling; but coming near the back of the enemy, one of his men called unto
him, their commander, and said, that the enemy run westward to get between us
and the bridge, and he looking that way saw men running, and making a small
stop, heard no firing, but a great choping with hatchets; so concluding the
fight was over, made the best of their way to the bridge again, left the enemy
should get over the bridge into the town. The men being most of them out (our
ammunition lay exposed) coming to the bridge where he left six Indians for an
ambuscade on the other side of the river, that if any enemy offered to come
over, they should fire at them, which would give him notice, so would come to
their assistance; (but in the way having heard no firing nor shouting,
concluded the enemy were drawn off) he asked the ambuscade, whether they saw
any Indians? They said yes, abundance. He asked them where? They answered, that
they ran over the head of the river by the cedar swamp, and were running into
the neck toward the town.

There being but one Englishman with him, he bid his Indian soldiers scatter,
run very thin to preserve themselves, and be the better able to make a
discovery of the enemy; and soon coming to Lieutenant Clark's field, on the
south side of the neck, and seeing the cattle feeding quietly, and perceiving
no track, concluded the ambuscade had told them a falsehood; they hastily
returned back to the said bridge, perceiving there was no noise of the enemy.
He hearing several great guns fire at the town, concluded that they were either
assaulted, or that they had discovered the enemy: He having ordered that in
case such should be, that they should fire some of their great guns to give him
notice; he being a stranger to the country, concluded the enemy had by some
other way got to the town; whereupon he sent his men to the town, and himself
going to the river, near where the fight had been, asked them how they did, and
what was become of the enemy? Who informed him that the enemy drew off in less
than an hour after he left them, and had not fired a gun at them since. He told
them he had been within little more than a gun shot of the back of the enemy,
and had been upon them had it not been for thick brushy ground, and c. Now some
of his men returning from the town gave him the account, that they went while
they saw the colors standing and men walking about as not molested. He
presently ordered that all his army should pursue the enemy; but they told him
that most of them had spent their ammunition, and that if the enemy had engaged
them a little longer they might have come and knocked them on the head; and
that some of their Bullets were so unsizable that some of them were forced to
make slugs while they were engaged. He then ordered them to get over all the
wounded and dead men, and to leave none behind; which was done by some canoes
they had got. Captain Hall and his men being first engaged did great service,
and suffered the greatest loss in his men; but Captain Southworth with his
company, and Capt. Numposh with the Seconet Indians, and the most of the men
belonging to the town all coming suddenly to his relief, prevented him and his
whole company from being cut off, and c.

By this time the day was far spent, and marching into town about sunset,
carrying in all their wounded and dead men, being all sensible of God's
goodness to them, in giving them the victory, and causing the enemy to fly with
shame, who never gave one shout at their drawing off. The poor inhabitants
wonderfully rejoiced that the Almighty had favored them so much; saying, That
if Maj. Church, with his forces, had not come at that juncture, they had been
all cut off; and said further, That it was the first time that ever the
eastward Indians had been put to flight, and the said Church with his
volunteers were wonderfully preserved, having never a man killed outright, and
but one Indian mortally wounded, who died, several more being badly wounded,
but recovered.

After this engagement Maj. Church, with his forces, ranging all the country
thereabout, in pursuit of the enemy; and visiting all the garrisons at
Black-Point, Spurwink, and Blue-Point, and went up Kennebeck river, but to
little effect. And now winter drawing near, he received orders from the
government of the Massachusetts Bay, to settle all the garrisons, and put in
suitable officers according to his best discretion, and to send home all his
soldiers, volunteers and transports; which orders he presently obeyed. Being
obliged to buy him a horse to go home by land, that so he might the better
comply with his orders. The poor people, the inhabitants of Casco, and places
adjacent, when they saw he was going away from them, lamented sadly, and begged
earnestly that he would suffer them to come away in the transports; saying,
that if he left them there, that in the spring of the year the enemy would come
and destroy them and their families, etc. So by their earnest request the said
Maj. Church promised them, that if the governments that had now sent him, would
send him the next spring, he would certainly come with his volunteers and
Indians to their relief: And that as soon as he had been at home, and taken a
little care of his own business, he would certainly wait upon the gentlemen of
Boston, and inform them of the promise he had made to them; and if they did not
see cause to send them relief, to entreat their honors seasonably to draw them
off, that they might not be a prey to the barbarous enemy.

Taking his leave of those poor inhabitants, some of the chief men there waited
upon him to Black-Point, to Capt. Scottaway's garrison; coming there, they
prevailed with the said Capt. Scottaway to go with him to Boston, which he
readily complied with, provided the said Church would put another in to command
the garrison; which being done, and taking their leave one of another, they set
out and traveled through all the country, home to Boston; (having employed
himself to the utmost to fulfill his instructions last received from Boston
gentlemen, which cost him about a month's service over and above what he had
pay for from the Plymouth gentlemen:) And in his travel homeward several
gentlemen waited upon the said Major Church, who was obliged to bear their
expenses. When he came to Boston gentlemen, he informed them of the miseries
those poor people were in by having their provisions taken from them by order
of the President, etc. Then went home; staid not long there before he returned
to Boston, where Capt. Scottaway waited for his coming, that he might have the
determination of the government of Boston to carry home with him; and it being
the time of the Smallpox there, (and Maj. Church not having had it) taking up
his lodging near the Courthouse, took the first opportunity to inform those
gentlemen of the Court his business; who said they were very busy in sending
home Sir Edmund, the ship being ready to fail. The said Major Church still
waiting upon them, and at every opportunity entreating those gentlemen in
behalf of the poor people of Casco, informing the necessity of taking care of
them, either by sending them relief early in the spring, or suffer them to draw
off, otherwise they would certainly be destroyed, etc. Their answer was, They
could do nothing till Sir Edmund was gone. Waiting there three weeks upon great
expenses, he concluded to draw up some of the circumstances of Casco, and
places adjacent, and to leave it upon the Council Board, before the Governor
and Council; having got it done, obtained liberty to go up where the Governor
and Council were sitting, he informed their honors, that he had waited till his
patience was wore out, so had drawn up the matter to leave upon the Board
before them: Which is as follows: To the honored Governor and Council of the
Massachusetts.
Gentlemen,
WHEREAS by virtue of yours, with Plymouth's desires and commands, I went
eastward in the last expedition against the common Indian enemy, where
Providence so ordered that we attacked their greatest body of forces, coming
then for the destruction of Falmouth, which we know marched off repulsed with
considerable damage, leaving the ground, and never since seen there, or in any
place adjacent: The time of the year being then too late to prosecute any
further design, and other accidents falling contrary to my expectation,
impeding the desired success. Upon my then removal from the province of Maine,
the inhabitants were very solicitous that this enemy might be further
prosecuted, willing to venture their lives and fortunes in the said enterprise,
wherein they might serve God, their King and country, and enjoy quiet and
peaceable habitations; upon which I promised to signify the same to yourselves,
and willing to venture that little which Providence has betrusted me with, on
the said account. The season of the year being such if some speedy action be
not performed in attacking them, they will certainly be upon us in our out
towns (God knows where) and the inhabitants there not being able to defend
themselves, without doubt many souls may be out off, as our last year's
experience woefully has declared: The inhabitants there trust to your
protection, having undertaken government and your propriety; if nothing be
performed on the said account, the best way (under correction) is to demolish
the garrison, and draw off the inhabitants, that they may not be left to a
merciless enemy; and that the arms and ammunition may not be there for the
strengthening of the enemy; who without doubt have need enough, having
exhausted their greatest store in this winter season. I have periormed my
promise to them, and acquitted myself in specifying the same to yourselves: Not
that I desire to be in any action (although willing to serve my King and
country) and may pass under the censure of scandalous tongues in the last
expedition, which I hope they will amend on the first opportunity of service. I
leave to mature consideration, the loss of trade and fishery; the war brought
to the doors; what a triumph it will be to the enemy, derision to our
neighbors, besides dishonor to God and our nation, and grounds of frowns from
our Prince, the frustration of those whose eyes are upon you for help, who
might have otherwise applied themselves to their King. Gentlemen, this I
thought humbly to propose unto you, that I might discharge myself in my trust
from yourselves, and Promise to the inhabitants of the province, but especially
my duty to God, her Majesty, and my nation, praying for your Honors prosperity,
subscribe,

Your servant, Benj. Church.
A true copy given in at Boston, this 6th of February, 1689, at the Council
Board.

Attest. T. S.






Major Church said moreover that in thus doing he had complied with his promise
to those poor people of Casco, and should be quit from the guilt of their
blood. The Governor was pleased to thank him for his care and pains taken; then
taking his leave of them went home, and left Captain Scottaway in a very
sorrowful condition, who returned home some time after with only a copy of what
was left on the board by the said Church. Maj. Church nothearing any thing till
May-following, and then was informed, that those poor people of Casco were cut
off by the barbarous enemy: And that although they made their terms with Monsieur
Casteen, who was commander of tose enemies, yet he suffered those merciless
savages to massacre and destroy the most of them. To conclude this first
expedition East; I shall just give you a hint how Major Church was treated
(although he was Commander in Chif of all the forces out of Plymouth and Boston
government) after he came home, for Plymouth Gentlemen paid him but Forty-two
pounds; telling him, he must go to Boston Gentlemen for the rest, who were his
employers as well as they. Of whom he never had one penny for all travel and
expenses in raising volunteers, and services done; except Forty shillings or
thereabout, for going from Boston to Rhode Island on their business, and back
to Boston again: Also for sending a man to Providence for Captain Edmunds (who
raised a company in those parts) and went East with them.

The 2d EXPEDITION East.
IN the year 1690 was the expedition to Canada, and Major Walley often
requested Major Church that if he would not go himself in that expedition, that
he would not hinder others: He answered the said Walley, That he should hinder
none but his old soldiers, that used to go along with him, and c. And the said
Church going down to Charlestown, to take his leave of some or his relations,
and friends, who were going into that expedition, promised his wife and family
not to go into Boston, the smallpox being very rife there. Coming to
Charl^^^^on, several of his friends in Boston came over to see him; and the
next day after the said Church came there, Major Walley came to him, and
informed him, that the Governor and Council wanted to speak with him: He
answered him, That he had promised his wife and family not to go into Boston;
saying, if they had any business, they could write to him, and that he would
send them his answer. Soon after came over two other Gentlemen with a message,
that the Governor and Council wanted to have some discourse with him: The
answer returned was, that he intended to lodg^ that night at the Gray-bound, in
Roxbury, and that in the morning would come to Pollard's at the south end of
Boston; which accordingly he did: Soon after he came thither received a letter
from the honorable Captain Sewall, to request him to come to the Council; the
answer he returned by the bearer was, That he thought there was no need of his
hazarding himself so much as to come and speak with them; not that he was
afraid of his life, but because he had no mind to be concerned, and further by
reason they would not hearken to him about the poor people of Casco. But
immediately came Mr. Maxfield to him, saying, That the Council bid him tell the
said Church, That if he would take his horse and ride along the middle of the
street, there might be no danger, they were then sitting in Council: He bid
them go and tell his masters, not to trouble themselves, whether he came upon
his head of feet, he was coming: However, thinking the return was something
rude, called him back to drink a glass of wine, and then he would go with him.
So coming to the Council, they were very thankful to him for his coming; and
told him that the occasion of their sending for him was, That there was a
captive come in who gave them an account, that the Indians were come down, and
had taken possession of the stone fort at Pejepscot, so that they wanted his
advice and thoughts about the matter; whether they would tarry and keep in the
fort or not? And whether it was not expedient to send some forces to do some
spoil upon them; and further to know whether he could not be prevailed with to
raise some volunteers and go, to do some spoil upon them? He answered them, he
was unwilling to be concerned any more; it being very difficult and chargeable
to raise volunteers, as he found by experience in the last expedition. But they
using many arguments prevailed so far with him, that if the Government of
Plymouth saw cause to send him (he would go) thinking the expedition would be
short; took his leave of them and went home. And in a short time after there
came an express from Governor Hinkley, to request Major Church to come to
Barnstable to him: He having received a letter from the government of Boston to
raise some forces to go East: whereupon the said Major Church went the next day
to Barnstable, as ordered; finding the Governor and some of the Council of War
there, discoursed him, concluding that he should take his Indian soldiers, and
two English Captains, with what volunteers could be raised; and that one
Captain should go out of Plymouth and Barnstable county, and the other out of
Bristol county, with what forces he could raise, concluding to have but few
officers, to save charge. The said Church was at great charge and expense in
raising of forces. Governor Hinkley promised that he would take care to provide
vessels to transport the said army with ammunition and provisions, by the time
prefixed by himself, for the government of Boston had obliged themselves by
their letter, to provide any thing that was wanting; so at the time prefixed
Major Church merched down all his soldiers out of Bristol county to Plymouth,
as ordered; and being come, found it not us he expected, for there were neither
provisions, ammunition nor transports; so he immediately sent an express to the
Governor who was at Barnstable, to give him an account that he with the men
were come to Plymouth, and found nothing ready; in his return to the said
Church, gave him an account of his disappointments; and sent John Lathrop of
Barnstable in a vessel with some ammunition and provision on board, to him at
Plymouth; also sent him word that there was more on board of Samuel Alling of
Barnstable, who was to go for a transport, and that he himself would be at
Plymouth next day; but Alling never came near him, but went to Billings-gate,
at Cape-cod, as he was informed. The Governor being come, said to Major Church
that he must take some of the open sloops, and make spar decks to them, and lay
platforms for the soldiers to lie upon; which delays were very expensive to the
said Church; his soldiers being all volunteers, daily expected to be treated by
him, and the Indians always begging for money to get drink; but he using his
utmost diligence, made what despatch he could to be gone, being ready to
embark, received his commission and instructions from Governor Hinkley, which
are as follows, viz. The Council of War of their Majesty's colony of
New-Plymouth, in New England:
To Major Benjamin Church, Commander in Chief, etc.
WHEREAS the Kenebeck and Eastward Indians, with the French their confederates,
have openly made war upon their Majesty's subjects of the provinces of Maine,
New Hampshire, and of the Massachusetts colony having committed many barbarous
murders, spoils and rapines upon their persons and estates And whereas there
are some forces of soldiers, English and Indians, now raised and detached out
of the several regiments and places within this colony of NewPlymouth, to go
forth to the assistance of our neighbors and friends of the aforesaid
provinces and colony of the Massachusetts, subjects of one and the same crown.
And whereas you, Benjamin Church, are appointed to be Major and Commander in
Chief of all the forces, English and Indians, detached within this colony,
together with such other of their Majesty's subjects as elsewhere shall list
themselves, or shall be orderly put under your command for the service of their
Majesty's, as aforesaid. These are in their Majesty's name to authorize and
require you to take into your care and conduct all the said forces, English and
Indians, and diligently to intend that service, by leading and exercising your
inferior officers and soldiers, commanding them to obey you as their chief
Commander. And to pursue, fight, take, kill or destroy the said enemies, their
aiders and abettors by all the ways and means you can, as you shall have
opportunity, and to accept to mercy, or grant quarter and favor to such, or so
many of said enemies as you shall find needful for promoting the design
aforesaid. And you are to observe and they all such orders and instructions, as
from time to time you shall receive from the Commissioners of the colonies, or
the Council of War of the said colony of New-Plymouth, or from the Governor and
Council of the Massachusetts. In testimony whereof is affixed the public seal
of this colony. Dated in Plymouth the second day of September, Anno Dom. 1690.
Annoque regni Regis et Reginae Willielmi et Mariae and c. Secundo.

THO. HINKLEY, President.


INSTRUCTIONS for Major Benjamin Church, Commander in Chief of the Plymouth
forces, with other of the Massachusetts put under his command.
IN pursuance of the commission given you for their Majesty's service, in the
present expedition against the common enemy, Indian and French, their aiders
and abettors, on the request of our brethren and friends of the Massachusetts
colony, subjects of one and the same crown of England; for our assistance of
them therein: Reposing confidence in your wisdom, prudence, pro^ess and
faithfulness in the trust under God committed to you for the honor of his name,
the interest of Christ in these churches, and the good of the whole people;
praying and expecting that in your dependence on him, you may be helped and
assisted with all that grace, wisdom and courage necessary for the carrying of
you on with success in this difficult service; and though much is and must be
left to your discretion, with your Council of Officers, as Providence and
opportunity may present from time to time in places of action: Yet the
following instructions are commended to you to be observed and attended to by
you, so far as the state and circumstances of that affair will admit.

You are with all possible speed to take care that the Plymouth forces, both
English and Indians, under your command, be fixed and ready on the first
opportunity of wind and weather, to go on board such vessels, as are provided
to transport you to Piscataqua; and there to take under your care and command
such companies of the Massachusetts colony, as shall by them be ordered and
added to you there, or elsewhere from time to time; all which you are to
improve in such way, and from place to place, as with the advice of your
Council, consisting of the Commission Officers of the Massachusetts colony, and
Plymouth, under your conduct, shall seem meet, for the finding out, pursuing,
taking or destroying of said common enemy, on all opportunities, according to
commission, and such further orders and instructions as you have or may receive
from the Governor and Council of the Massachusetts, the Commissioners for the
united colonies, or the Governor and Council of Plymouth; so far as you may be
capable, intending what you can the preserving of the near towns from the
incursions and destructions of the enemy; but chiefly to intend the finding
out, pursuing, taking and destroying the enemy abroad, and if possible to
attack them in their head quarters and principal rendezvous, if you are in a
rational capacity of so doing; and for the better enabling you thereunto, we
have appointed the vessels that transport you, and the provisions, and c. to
attend your motion and order, until you shall see cause to dismiss them, or any
one of them, which is desired to be done the first opportunity that the service
will admit. You are to see that your soldiers arms be always fixed, and they
provided with ammunition, and other necessaries, that they may be always ready
to repel and attack the enemy. You are to take special care to avoid danger in
the pursuit of the enemy by keeping out scouts, and a forlorn, to prevent the
ambushments of the enemy on your main body in their marches. And by all
possible means to surprise some of the enemy, that so you may gain better
intelligence.

You are to take effectual care that the worship of God be kept up in the army,
that morning and evening prayer be attended, and the holy sabbath duly
sanctified, as the emergency of your affairs will admit.

You are to take strict care to prevent or punish drunkenness, cursing,
swearing, and all other vices, left the anger of God be thereby provoked to
fight against you. You are, from time to time, to give intelligence and advice
to the Governor of the Massachusetts, and to us, of your proceedings and
occurrences that may attend you. And in case of a failure of any commission
officers, you are to appoint others in their stead. -- And when, with the
advice of your Council aforesaid, you shall, after some trial, see your service
not like to be advantageous to the accomplishment of the public end aforesaid;
that then you return home with the forces; especially if you shall receive any
orders or directions so to do from the Massachusetts, or from us. Given under
my hand, at Plymouth, the second day of September, Anno Dom. 1690.

THO. HINKLEY, Gov. and President.




Now having a fair wind Maj. Church soon got to Piscat^qua, who was to apply
himself to Maj. Pike, a worthy gentleman, who said, He had advice of his coming
from Boston gentlemen; also he had received directions that what men the said
Church should want must be raised out of Hampshire, out of the several towns
and garrisons; Maj. Pike asked him, How many men he should want? He said enough
to make up his forces that he brought with him, 300 at least, and not more than
350. And so in about nine days time he was supplied with two companies of
soldiers. He having been at about twenty shillings a day charge in expenses
while there. Now he received Maj. Pike's instructions: Which are as follows:
Portsmouth, in New Hampshire, Sept. 9, 1690. To Major Benjamin Church,
Commander in Chief of their Majesty's forces now designed upon the present
expedition eastward, and now resident at Portsmouth.
THE Governor and Council of the Massachusetts Colony reposing great trust and
confidence in your loyalty and valor, from experience of your former actions,
and of God's presence with you in the same: In pursuance of an order, received
from them, commanding it: These are in their Majesty's names to empower and
require you, as Commander in Chief, to take into your care and conduct these
forces now here present at their rendezvous at Portsmouth; and they are alike
required to obey you: And with them to sail eastward by the first opportunity
to Casco, or places adjacent, that may be most commodious for landing with
safety and secrecy; and to visit the French and Indians at their headquarters
at Ameras-cogen, Pejepscot, or any other place, according as you may have hope
or intelligence of the residence of the enemy; using always your utmost
endeavor for the preservations of your own men, and the killing, destroying,
and utterly rooting out of the enemy, wheresoever they may be found; and also
as much as may possibly be done for the redeeming or recovering of our captives
in any places.

You being there arrived, and understanding your way, to take your journey back
again either by land or water, as you shall judge most convenient for the
accomplishing of the end intended; and to give intelligence always of your
motions whenever you can with safety and convenience.

Lastly, In all to consult your council, the commanders or commission officers
of your several companies, when it may be obtained, the greater part of whom to
determine: And so the Lord of Hosts, the God of armies, go along with you, and
be your conduct. Given under my hand the day and year abovesaid.

Per ROBERT PIKE.




Being ready, they took the first opportunity, and made the best of their way
to Pejepscot fort, where they found nothing. From thence they marched to
Ameras-cogen, and when they came near the fort, Maj. Church made a halt,
ordering the Captains to draw out of their several companies 60 of their
meanest men, to be a guard to the Doctor and snapsacks, being not a mile from
said fort; and then moving toward the fort, they saw young Doney and his wife,
with two English captives: The said Doney made his escape to the fort, his wife
was shot down, and so the two poor captives were released out of their bondage.
-- The said Maj. Church and Capt. Walton made no stop, making the best of their
way to the fort, with some of the army, in hopes of getting to the fort before
young Doney; but the river, through which they must pass, being as deep as
their armpits; however Maj. Church, as soon as he was got over, stripped to his
shirt and jacket, leaving his breeches behind, ran directly to the fort, having
an eye to see if young Doney, who ran on the other side of the river, should
get there before him: The wind now blowing very hard in their faces, as they
ran, was some help to them; for several of our men fired guns, which they in
the fort did not hear, so that we had taken all in the fort, had it not been
for young Doney, who got to the fort just before we did, who ran into the south
gate, and out at the north, all the men following him, except one, who all ran
directly down to the great river and falls. The said Church, and his forces,
being come pretty near, he ordered the said Walton to run directly, with some
forces, into the fort, and himself, with the rest, ran down to the river after
the enemy, who ran some of them into the river, and the rest under the great
falls; those who ran into the river were killed, for he saw but one man get
over, and he only crept up the bank, and there lay in open sight; and those
that run under the falls they made no discovery of, notwithstanding several of
his men went in under the said falls, and were gone some considerable time,
could not find them; so leaving a watch there, returned up to the fort, where
he found but one man taken, and several women and children, amongst whom was
Capt. Hakins's wife and Worumbos's wife, the Sachem of that fort, with their
children; the said Hakins was Sachem of Pennacook, who destroyed Maj. Walden
and his family, some time before, etc. The said two women, viz. Hakins's and
Worumbos's wives, requested the said Church that he would spare them and their
children's lives, promising, upon that condition, he should have all the
captives that were taken, and in the Indians hands: He asked them, how many?
They said, about fourscore: So, upon that condition, he promised them their
lives, etc. And in the said for there were several English captives, who were
in a miserable condition; amongst them was Capt. Huckings's wife, of
Oyster-river. Maj. Church proceeded to examine the man taken, who gave him an
account that most or the fighting men were gone to Winterharbour, to provide
provisions for the Bay of Fundy Indians, who were to come and join with them to
fight the English. The soldiers being very rude, would hardly spare the
Indian's life, while in examination, intending when he had done that he should
be executed: But Capt. Huckings's wife, and another women, down on their knees
and begged for him, saying, He had been a means to save their lives, and a great
many more; and had helped several to opportunities to run away and make their
escape; and that never, since he came amongst them, had fought against the
English, but being related to Hakins's wife, kept at the fort with them, he
having been there two years; but his living was to the westward of Boston. So,
upon their request, his life was spared, etc. Next day the said Church ordered
that all their corn should be destroyed, being a great quantity, saving a
little for the two old Squaws which he designed to leave at the fort, to give
an account who he was, and from whence he came; the rest being knocked on the
head, except the aforementioned, for an example, ordering them all to be
buried. Having inquired where all their best beaver was? They said, it was
carried away to make a present to the Bay of Fundy Indians, who were coming to
their assistance.

Now being ready to draw off from thence, he called the two old squaws to him,
and gave each of them a kettle and some biscuit, bidding them to tell the
Indians when they came home, that he was known by the name of Capt. Church, and
lived in the westerly part of Plymouth government; and that those Indians that
came with him were formerly King Philip's men, and that he had met with them in
Philip's war, and drew them off from him, to fight for the English, against the
said Philip and his associates, who then promised him to fight for the English
as long as they had one enemy left; and said, that they did not question but
before Indian corn was ripe to have Philip's head, notwithstanding he had twice
as many men as were in their country; and that they had killed and taken one
thousand three hundred and odd of Philip's men, women and children, and Philip
himself, with several other Sachems, etc. and that they should tell Hakins and
Worumbos, That if they had a mind to see their wives and children they should
come to Wells garrison, and that there they might hear of them, etc. Major
Church having done, moved with all his forces down to Mequait, where the
transports were (but in the way some of his soldiers threatened the Indian man
prisoner very much, so that in a thick swamp he gave them the slip and got
away) and when they all got on board the transport; the wind being fair, made
the best of their way for Winter Harbor, and the next morning before day, and
as soon as the day appeared, they discovered some smokes rising toward
Skaman's garrison: He immediately sent away a scout of 60 men, and followed
presently with the whole body; the scout coming near a river discovered the
enemy to be on the other side of the river: But three of the enemy were come
over the river, to the same side of the river which the scout was of; ran
hastily down to their canoe, one of which lay at each end of the canoe, and the
third stood up to paddle over: The scout fired at them, and he that paddled
fell down upon the canoe, and broke it to pieces, so that all three perished.
The firing put the enemy to the run, who left their canoes and provisions to
ours; and old Doney, and one Thomas Baker, an Englishman, who was a prisoner
amongst them, were up at the Falls, and heard the guns fire, expected the other
Indians were come to their assistance, so came down the river in a canoe; but
when they perceived that there were English as well as Indians, old Doney ran
the canoe ashore, and ran over Baker's head, and followed the rest, and then
Baker came to ours; and gave an account of the beaver hid at Pejepscot plain,
and coming to the place where the plunder was, the Major sent a scout to
Pejepscot fort, to see if they could make any discovery of the enemies tracks,
or could discover any coming up the river; who returned and said they saw
nothing but our old tracks at the said fort, and c.

Now having got some plunder, one of the Captains said it was time to go home,
and several others were of the same mind; and the Major being much disturbed at
the motion of theirs, expecting the enemy would come in a very short time,
where they might have a great advantage of them, and c. Notwithstanding all he
could say or do, he was obliged to call a council, according to his
instructions, wherein he was out-voted. The said Commander seeing he was put by
of his intentions, proffered if sixty men would stay with him, he would not
embark as yet; but all he could say or do could not prevail; then they moved to
the vessels and embarked, and as they were going in the vessels, on the back
side of Mayr-point, they discovered eight or nine canoes, who turned short
about, and went up the river; being the same Indians that the Major expected,
and would have waited for; and the aforesaid Captain being much disturbed at
what the Major had said to him, drew off from the fleet, and in the night ran
aground, in the morning Anthony Bracket, having been advised and directed by
the Indian that had made his escape from our forces, came down near where the
aforesaid vessel lay aground, and got aboard, who has proved a good pilot and
Capt. for his country. The next day being very calm and misry, so that they
were all day getting down from Maquail to Perpodack; and the masters of the
vessels thinking it not safe putting out in the night, so late in the year,
anchored there at Perpodack; the vessels being much crowded, the Major ordered
that three companies should go on shore, and no more, himself with Capt.
Converse went with them to order their lodging, and finding just houses
convenient for them, viz. two barns and one house; so seeing them all settled
and their watches out, the Major and Capt. Converse returned to go on board,
and coming near where the boat was, it was pretty dark, they discovered some
men, but did not know what or who they were; the Major ordered those that were
with him all to clap down and cock their guns, and he called out and asked them
who they were? And they said, Indians: He asked them whose men they were? They
said, Captain Southworth's: He asked them where they intended to ledge? They
said, In those little huts that the enemy had made when they took that
garrison. The Major told them they must not make any fires, for if they did,
the enemy would be upon them before day. They laughed, and said, Our Major is
afraid. Having given them their directions, he, with Capt. Converse, went on
board the Mary floop; designing to write home, and send away in the morning the
two floops which had the smallpox on board, etc. -- But before day our Indians
began to make fires, and to sing and dance; so the Major called to Capt.
Southworth to go ashore and look after his men, for the enemy would be upon
them by and by. He ordered the boat to be haled up to carry him ashore, and
called Capt. Converse to go with him, and just as the day began to appear, as
the Major was getting into the boat to go ashore, the enemy fired upon our men,
the Indians, notwithstanding that one Philip, an Indian of ours, who was out
upon the watch, heard a man cough, and the sticks crack; who gave the rest an
account, that he saw Indians; which they would not believe; but said to him,
You are afraid: His answer was, that they might see them come creeping: They
leugh'd, and said, They were hogs: Ay, said he, and they will bite you by and
by. So presently they did fire upon our men; but the morning being misty their
guns did not go off quick, so that our men had all time to fall down before
their guns went off, and saved themselves from that volley, except one man, who
was killed.

This sudden firing upon our Indian soldiers surprised them that they left
their arms, but soon recovered them again, and got down the bank, which was but
low. The Major, with all the forces on board, landed as fast as they could, the
enemy firing smartly at them; however all got safe ashore. The enemy had a
great advantage of our forces, who were between the furnising and the enemy, so
that if a man put up his head or hand they could see it, and would fire at it:
However some, with the Major, got up the bank behind stumps and rocks, to have
the advantage of firing at the enemy; but when the sun was risen the Major
slipped down the bank again, where all the forces were ordered to observe his
motion, viz. That he would give three shouts, and then all of them should run
with him up the bank: So, when he had given the third shout, ran up the bank,
and Capt. Converse with him, but when the said Converse perceived that the
forces did not follow as commanded, called to the Major and told him the forces
did not follow; who, notwithstanding the enemy fired smartly at him, got safe
down the bank again, and rallying the forces up the bank, soon put the enemy to
flight; and following them so close, that they took 13 canoes, and one lusty
man, who had Joseph Ramsdel's scalp by his side, who was taken by two of our
Indians, and having his deserts was himself scalped. This being a short and
smart fight, some of our men were killed and several wounded. Some time after
an Englishman, who was prisoner amongst them, gave an account that our forces
had killed and wounded several of the enemy, for they killed several prisoners
according to custom, etc.

After this action was over our forces embarked for Piscataqua, and the Major
went to Wells, and removed the Captain there, and put in Captain Andros, who
had been with him and knew the discourse left with the two old squaws at
Ameras-cogen, for Hakins and Worumbos to come there in 14 days, if they had a
mind to hear of their wives and children: Who did then or soon after come with
a flag of truce to said Wells garrison, and had leave to come in, and more
appearing came in, to the number of eight, (without any terms) being all Chief
Sachems; and were very glad to hear of the women and children, viz. Hakins and
Worumbos's wives and children; who all said three several times that they would
never fight against the English any more, for the French made fools of them,
and c. They saying as they did, the said Andros let them go. Major Church being
come to Piscataqua, and two of his transports having the small pox on board,
and several of his men having got great colds by their hard service, pretended
they were going to have the smallpox, thinking by that means to be sent home
speedily; the Major being willing to try them, went to the Gentlemen there, and
desired them to provide an house, for some of his men expected they should have
the smallpox; who readily did, and told him, That the people belonging to it
were just recovered of the smallpox, and had been all at meeting, etc. The
Major returning to his Officers ordered them to draw out all their men that
were going to have the smallpox, for he had provided an hospital for them: So
they drew out 17 men, that had, as they said, all the symptoms of the
smallpox; he ordered them all to follow him, and coming to the house, he asked
them how they liked it? They said very well. Then he told them that the people
in the said house had all had the smallpox, and were recovered; and that if
they went in they must not come out till they all had it: Whereupon they all
presently began to grow better, and to make excuses, except one man who desired
to stay out till night before he went in, etc. The Major going to the
Gentlemen, told them, That one thing more would work a perfect cure upon his
men, which was to let them go home: Which did work a cure upon all, except one,
and he had not the smallpox. So he ordered the plunder should be divided
forthwith, and sent away all the Plymouth forces. But the Gentlemen there
desired him to stay, and they would be assisting to him in raising new forces,
to the number of what was sent away; and that they would send to Boston for
provisions; which they did, and sent Captain Plaisted to the Governor and
Council at Boston, etc. And in the mean time the Major with those Gentlemen
went into all those parts and raised a sufficient number of men, both Officers
and soldiers; who all met at the bank on the same day that Captain Plaisted
returned from Boston; whose return from the Boston Gentlemen was, That the
Canada expedition had drained them so that they could do no more: So that Major
Church, notwithstanding he had been at considerable expenses in raising said
forces to serve his King and country, was obliged to give them a treat and
dismiss them: Taking his leave of them came home to Boston, in the Mary Sloop,
Mr. Alden Master, and Captain Converse with him, on a Saturday; and waiting
upon the Governor, and some of the Gentlemen in Boston, they looked very
strange upon them, which not only troubled them, but put them in some
consternation what the matter should be, that after so much toil and hard
service could not have so much as one pleasant word, nor any money in their
pockets; for Major Church had but eight pence left, and Captain Converse none,
as he said afterward. Major Church seeing two Gentlemen which he knew had
money, asked them to lend him forty shillings, telling them his necessity: Yet
they refused. So being bare of money was obliged to lodge at Mr. Alden's three
nights; and the next Tuesday morning Captain Converse came to him (not knowing
each others circumstances as yet) and said he would walk with him out of town;
so coming near Pollard's at the south end, they had some discourse; that it was
very hard that they should part with dry lips: Major Church told Capt. Converse
that he had but eight pence left, and could not borrow any money to carry him
home. And the said Converse said, that he had not a penny left, so they were
obliged to part without going to Pollard's, etc. The said Captain Converse
returned back into town, and the said Church went over to Roxbury; and at the
tavern he met with Stephen Braton, of Rhode Island, a drover; who was glad to
see him, the said Church, and he as glad to see his neighbor: Whereupon Major
Church called for an eight-penny tankard of drink, and let the said Braton know
his circumstances, asked him whether he would lend him forty shillings? He
answered, yes: Forty Pounds, if he wanted it. So he thanked him, and said, he
would have but forty shillings; which he freely lent him: And presently after
Mr. Church was told that his brother Caleb Church, of Watertown, was coming
with a spare horse for him, having heard the night before that his brother was
come in; by which means the said Major Church got home. And for all his travel
and expenses in raising soldiers, and service done, never had but L. 14 of
Plymouth Gentlemen, and not a penny of Boston, notwithstanding he had wore out
all his clothes, and run himself in debt, so that he was obliged to sell half a
share of land in Tiverton, for about L60, which is now worth L 300 more and
above what he had.

Having not been at home long before he found out the reason why Boston
Gentlemen looked so disaffected on him; as you may see by the sequel of two
letters Major Church sent to the Gentlemen in the eastward parts: Which are as
follows. Bristol, November 27, 1690. Worthy Gentlemen,
ACCORDING to my promise when with you last, I waited upon the Governor at
Boston, upon the Saturday, Capt. Converse being with me. The Governor informed
us that the Council was to meet on the Monday following in the afternoon, at
which time we both there waited upon them, and gave them an account of the
state of your country, and great necessities. They informed us, that their
General Court was to convene the Wednesday following, at which time they would
debate and consider of the matter; myself being bound home, Captain Converse
was ordered to wait upon them, and bring you their resolves. I then took notice
of the Council that they looked upon me with an ill aspect, not judging me
worthy to receive thanks for the service I had done in your parts; nor as much
as asked me whether I wanted money to bear my expenses, or a horse to carry me
home. But I was forced, for want of money (being far from friends) to go to
Roxbury on foot; but meeting there with a Rhode Island Gentleman, acquainted
him of my wants, who tendered me Ten Pounds, whereby I was accommodated for my
journey home: And being come home, I went to the minister of our town, and gave
him an account of the transactions of the great affairs I had been employed in,
and of the great favor God was pleased to show me, and my company, and the
benefit I hoped would accrue to yourselves; and desired him to return public
thanks; but at the same interim of time a paper was presented unto him from a
Court of Plymouth, which was holden before I came home, to command a day of
humiliation through the whole government, because of the frown of God upon those
forces sent under my command, and the ill success we had, for want of good
conduct. All which was caused by those false reports which were posted home by
those ill affected Officers that were under my conduct; especially one which
yourselves very well know, who had the advantage of being at home a week before
me, being sick of action, and wanting the advantage to be at the bank, which he
every day was mindful of more than fighting the enemy in their own country.

After I came home, being informed of a General Court at Plymouth, and not
forgetting my faithful promise to you, and the duty I lay under, I went
thither, where, waiting upon them, I gave them an account of my eastward
transactions, and made them sensible of the falseness of those reports that
were posted to them by ill hands, and found some small favorable acceptance
with them, so far that I was credited. I presented your thanks to them for
their seasonably sending those forces to relieve you, with that expense and
charge they had been at; which thanks they gratefully received; and said a few
lines from yourselves would have been well accepted. I then gave them an
account of your great necessities, by being imprisoned in your garrisons, and
the great mischief that would attend the public concerns of this country by the
loss of their Majesty's interest, and so much good estate of yours and your
neighbors, as doubtless would be on the deserting of your town. I then moved
for a free contribution for your relief, which they with great forwardness
promoted; and then ordered a day of thanksgiving through the government upon the
26th day of this instant. Upon which day a collection was ordered for your
relief (and the places near adjacent) in every respective town in this
government; and for the good management of it that it might be safely conveyed
unto your hands, they appointed a man in each county for the receipt and
conveyance thereof. The persons nominated and accepted thereof, are: For the
county of Plymouth, Captain Nathaniel Thomas of Marshfield: For the county of
Barnstable, Captain Joseph Lathrop of Barnstable: And for the county of
Bristol, myself. Which, when gathered you will have a particular account from
each person, with orders of advice how it may be disposed of for your best
advantage, with a copy of the Court's order. The Gentlemen the effects are to
be sent to are yourselves that I now write to, viz. John Wheelwright, Esquire Capt.
John Littlefield, and Lieutenant Joseph Story. I deferred writing, expecting
every day to hear from you concerning the Indians, coming to treat about their
prisoners that we had taken. The discourse I made with them at Ameras-cogen, I
knew would have that effect as to bring them to a treaty, which I would have
thought myself happy to have been improved in, knowing that it would have made
much for your good. But no intelligence coming to me from any Gentlemen in your
parts, and hearing nothing but by accident, and that in the latter end of the
week by some of ours coming from Boston, informed me that the Indians were come
into your town to seek for peace; and that there was to be a treaty speedily;
but the time they knew not. I took my horse, and upon the Monday set out for
Boston, expecting the treaty had been at your town, as rationally it should;
but on Tuesday night coming to Boston, there met with Captain Elisha Andros,
who informed me that the place of treaty was Sacaty-hock, and that Captain
Alden was gone from Boston four days before I came there, and had carried all
the Indian prisoners with him, and that all the forces were drawn away out of
your parts, except 12 men in your town, and 12 in Piscataqua, which news did so
amuse me, to see that wisdom was taken from the wise, and such imprudence in
their actions, as to be deluded by Indians; and to have a treaty so far from
any English town, and to draw off the forces upon what pretense soever, to me
looks very ill. My fear is that they will deliver those we have taken, which,
if kept, would have been greatly for your security, in keeping them in awe, and
preventing them from doing any hostile action or mischief, I knowing that the
English being abroad are very earnest to go home, and the Indians are very
tedious in their discourses, and by that means will have an advantage to have
their captives at very low rates, to your great damage. Gentlemen, as to Rhode
Island, I have not concerned myself as to any relief for you, having nothing in
writing to show to them, yet upon discourse with some Gentlemen there, they
have signified a great forwardness to promote such a thing. I lying under great
reflections from some of yours in the eastward parts, that I was a very
covetuous person, and came there to enrich myself, and that I killed their
cattle and barreled them up, and sent them to Boston, and sold them for
plunder, and made money to put into my own pocket; and the owners of them being
poor people begged for the hides and tallow, with tears in their eyes; and that
I was so cruel as to deny them; which makes me judge myself incapable to serve
you in that matter: Yet I do assure you that the people are very charitable at
the island, and forward in such good actions, and therefore advise you to
desire some good substantial person to take the management of it, and write to
the government there, which I know will not be labor lost. As nor what I am
accused of, you all can witness to the contrary, and I should take it very
kindly from you to do me that just right, as to vindicate my reputation; for
the wise man says, A good name is as precious ointment. When I hear of the
effects of the treaty, and have an account of this contribution, I intend again
to write to you, being very desirous, and should think myself very happy; to be
favored with a few lines from yourselves, or any Gentleman in the eastward
parts. Thus leaving you to the protection and guidance or the Great God of
Heaven and Earth, who is able to protect and supply you in your great
difficulties, and to give you deliverance in his own due time;

I remain, Gentlemen,

Your most assured friend to serve you to my utmost power, Benjamin Church.
Postscript. Esquire Wheelwright, Sir, I entreat you, after your perusal of
these lines, to communicate the same to Captain John Littlefield, Lieutenant
Joseph Story; and to any other Gentlemen, as in your judgment you see fit: With
the tenders of my respects to you, and c. and to Major Vaughan, and his good
Lady and family. To Captain Friar and good Mrs. Friar, with hearty thanks for
their kindness whilst in those parts, and good entertainment from them. My kind
respects to Maj. Frost, Capt. Walton, Lieut. Honeywel, and my very good friend
little Lieut. Plaisted: With due respects to all Gentlemen my friends in the
eastward parts, as if particularly named.

Farewell. B. C.




To Major Pike. Honored Sir, Bristol, Nov. 27, 1690.
THESE come to wait upon you, to bring the tenders of my hearty service to
yourself and lady, with due acknowledgment of thankfulness for all the kindness
and favor I received from you in the eastward parts, when with you. Since I
came from those parts, I am informed, by Capt. Andros, that yourself and most
all the forces, are drawn off from the eastward parts; I admire at it,
considering that they had so low esteem of what was done, that they can
apprehend the eastward parts so safe before the enemy were brought into better
subjection. I was in hopes, when I came from thence, that those who were so
desirous to have my room, would have been very brisk in my absence, to have got
themselves some honor, which they very much gaped after, or else they would not
have spread so many false reports to defame me: Which had I known, before I
left the bank, I would have had satisfaction of them. Your honor was pleased to
give me some small account, before I left the bank, of some things that were
ill represented to you, concerning the eastward expedition, which being rolled
home like a snow-ball through both colonies was got to such a bigness that it
overshadowed me from the influence of all comfort, or good acceptance amongst
my friends in my journey homeward. But through God's goodness am come home,
finding all well, and myself in good health, hoping that those reports will do
me the favor, to quit me from all other public actions; that so I may the more
peaceably and quietly wait upon God, and be a comfort to my own family, in this
dark time of trouble; being as one hid, till his indignation is overpast. I
shall take it as a great favor to hear of your welfare: Subscribing myself, as
I am, Sir,

Your most assured friend and servant, Benjamin Church.




Major Church did receive, after this, answers to his letters, but has lost
them, except it be a letter from several of the gentlemen in those parts, in
June following; which is as follows: Portsmouth, June 29, 1691. Major Benj.
Church, SIR,
YOUR former readiness to expose yourself in the service of the country,
against the common enemy; and particularly the late obligations, you have laid
upon us, in these eastern parts, leaves us under a deep and grateful sense of
your favor therein: And forasmuch as you was pleased, when last here, to
signify your ready inclination to further service of this kind, it occasion
should call for it: We therefore presume confidently to promise ourselves
compliance accordingly; and have sent this messenger on purpose to you, to let
you know, that notwithstanding the late overture of peace, the enemy have
approved themselves as perfidious as ever, and are almost daily killing and
destroying upon all our frontiers: The Governor and Council of the
Massachusetts have been pleased to order the raising of 150 men, to be
forthwith despatched into those parts; and, as we understand have writ to your
Governor and Council of Plymouth for further assistance, which we pray you to
promote, hoping if you can obtain about 200 men, English and Indians, to visit
them at some of their head quarters, up Kennebeck river, or elsewhere, which
(for want of necessaries) was omitted last year, it may be of great advantage
to us. We offer nothing of advice as to what methods are most proper to be
taken in this affair, your acquaintance with our circumstances as well as the
enemies, will direct you therein: We leave the conduct thereof to your own
discretion; but that the want of provision, etc. may be no remora to your
motion, you may please to know Mr. Geafford, one of our principal inhabitants,
now residing in Boston, has promised to take care to supply to the value of
two or three hundred pounds, if occasion require: We pray a few lines by the
bearer to give us a prospect of what we may expect for our further
encouragement, and remain,

Sir, Your obliged friends and servants, Will. Vaughan, Richard Martyn,
Nathaniel Friar, William Fernald, Francis Hook, Charles Frost, John Wincol,
Robert Elliott.




A true copy of the original letter; which letter was presented to me by
Captain Hatch, who came express.

Major Church sent them his answer: The contents whereof was, That he had gone
often enough for nothing; and especially to be ill treated with scandals and
false reports, when last out, which he could not forget. And signified to them.
That doubless some amongst them thought they could do without him, and c. And
to make short of it, did go out, and meeting with the enemy at Maquait, were
most shamefully beaten, as I have been informed.

The Third EXPEDITION East.
THIS was in the year 1692. In the time of Sir William Phips's government:
Major Walley being at Boston, was requested by his Excellency to treat with
Major Church about going East with him. Major Walley coming home, did as
desired; and to encourage the said Major Church, told him, That now was the
time to have recompense for his former great expenses; saying also, That the
country could not give him less than two or three hundred pounds. So upon his
Excellency's request Maj. Church went down to Boston, and waited upon him; who
said he was glad to see him, and c. And after some discourse told the said
Church, That he was going East himself, and that he should be his second, and
in his absence command all the forces: And being requested by his Excellency to
raise what volunteers he could of his old soldiers in the county of Bristol,
both English and Indians, received his commission: Which is as follows. Sir
WILLIAM PHIPS, Knight, Captain General and Governor in Chief, in and over his
Majesty's province of the Massachusett's-Bay, in New England:
To BENJAMIN CHURCH, Gent. Greeting.
REPOSING special trust and confidence in your loyalty, courage and good
conduct: I do by these presents constitute and appoint you to be Major of the
several companies of militia, detached for their Majesty's service against
their French and Indian enemies. You are therefore authorized and required in
their Majesty's names, to discharge the duty of a Major, by leading, ordering
and exercising the said several companies in arms, both inferior Officers and
soldiers, keeping them in good order and discipline, commanding them to obey
you as their Major: And diligently to intend the said service, for the
prosecuting, pursuing, killing and destroying of the said common enemy. And
yourself to observe and follow such orders and directions as you shall from
time to time receive from myself, according to the rules and discipline of war,
pursuant to the trust reposed in you for their Majesty's service. Given under
my hand and seal at Boston, the twenty-fifth day of July 1692. In the fourth
year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord and Lady William and Mary, by the grace
of GOD, King and Queen of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, defender of
the faith, and c.

WILLIAM PHIPS.
By his Excellency's command, Isaac Addington, Secr.



Returning home to the county aforesaid, he soon raised a sufficient number of
volunteers, both English and Indians, and Officers suitable to command them,
marched them down to Boston. But there was one thing I would just mention;
which was, That Major Church, being short of money, was forced to borrow six
pounds in money of Lieutenant Woodman, in Little-Compton, to distribute by a
shilling, and a bit at a time to the Indian soldiers; who, without such
allurements, would not have marched to Boston. This Money Major Church put into
the hands of Mr. William Fobes, who was going out their commissary in that
service, who was ordered to keep a just account of what each Indian had, so
that it might be deducted out of their wages at their return home. Coming to
Boston, his Excellency having got things in a readiness, they embarked on board
their transports, his Excellency going in person with them, being bound to
Pemequid; but in their way stopped at Casco, and buried the bones of the dead
people there, and took off the great guns that were there; then went to
Pemequid: Coming there his Excellency asked Major Church to go ashore and give
his judgment about erecting a fort there? He answered, That his genius did not
incline that way, for he never had any value for them, being only nests for
destructions: His Excellency said, He had a special order from their Majesty's
King William and Queen Mary, to erect a fort there, and c. Then they went
ashore and spent some time in the projection thereof. Then his Excellency told
Major Church that he might take all the forces with him, except one company to
stay with him, and work about the fort; the Major answered, that if his
Excellency pleased he might keep two companies with him, and he would go with
the rest to Penobscot, and places adjacent. Which his Excellency did, and gave
Major Church his orders, which are as follows. By his Excellency Sir WILLIAM
PHIPS, Knight, Captain General and Governor in Chief, in and over their
Majesty's province of the Massachusett's-Bay, in New England, and c.
INSTRUCTIONS for Major Benjamin Church.
WHEREAS you are Major, and so chief Officer, of a body of men detached out of
the militia appointed for an expedition against the French and Indian enemy;
you are duly to observe the following instructions:

Imprimis, You are to take care that the worship of God be duly and constantly
maintained and kept up amongst you; and to suffer no swearing, cursing, or
other profanation of the holy name of God; and, as much as in you lies, to
deter and hinder all other vices amongst your soldiers.

2dly, You are to proceed, with the soldiers under your command, to Penobscot,
and, with what privacy and undiscoverable methods you can, there to land your
men, and take the best measures to surprise the enemy.

3dly, You are, by killing, destroying, and all other means possible, to
endeavor the destruction of the enemy, in pursuance whereof, being satisfied
of your courage and conduct, I leave the same to your discretion.

4thly, You are to endeavor the taking what captives you can, either men,
women or children, and the same safely to keep and convey them unto me.

5thly, Since it is not possible to judge how affairs may be circumstanced with
you there, I shall therefore not limit your return, but leave it to your
prudence, only that you make no longer stay than you can improve for advantage
against the enemy, or may reasonably hope for the same.

6thly, You are also to take care and be very industrious by all possible means
to find out and destroy all the enemies corn, and other provisions in all
places where you can come at the same.

7thly, You are to return from Penobscot and those eastern parts, to make all
despatch hence for Kennebeck river, and the places adjacent, and there
prosecute all advantages against the enemy as aforesaid.

8thly, If any soldier, Officer, or other shall be disobedient to you as their
Commander in Chief, or other their superior Officer, or make, or cause any
mutiny, commit other offense or disorders, you shall call a council of war
amongst your Officers, and having tried him or them so offending, inflict such
punishment as the merit of the offense requires, death only excepted, which, if
any shall deserve, you are to secure the person, and signify the crime unto me
by the first opportunity.

Given under my hand this 11th day of August, 1692. WILLIAM PHIPS.




Then the Major and his forces embarked, and made the best of their way to
Penobscot; and coming to an island in those parts in the evening, landed his
forces at one end of the said island: Then the Major took part of his forces,
and moved toward day to the other end of the said island, where they found two
Frenchmen, and their families in their houses; and that one or both of them had
Indian women to their wives, and had children by them. The Major presently
examining the Frenchmen, where the Indians were? They told him, that there was
a great company of them upon an island just by; and showing him the island,
presently discovered several of them. Major Church and his forces still keeping
undiscovered to them, asked the Frenchmen where their passing place was? Which
they readily showed them; so presently they placed an ambuscade to take any
that should come over. Then sent orders for all the rest of the forces to come;
sending them an account of what he had seen and met withal; strictly charging
them to keep themselves undiscovered by the enemy. The ambuscade did not lie
long before an Indian man and woman came over in a canoe, to the place for
landing, where the ambuscade was laid, who haled up their canoe, and came right
into the hands of our ambuscade, who so suddenly surprised them that they could
not give any notice to the others from whence they came; the Major ordering
that none of his should offer to meddle with the canoe, lest they should be
discovered, hoping to take the most of them if his forces came as ordered, he
expecting them to come as directed; but the first news he had of them was, That
they were all coming, though not privately, as ordered; but the vessels fair in
fight of the enemy, which soon put them all to flight; and our forces not
having boats suitable to pursue them, they got all away in their canoes, etc.
(which caused Major Church to say, he would never go out again without
sufficient number of whale-boats) which for want of was the ruin of that
action. Then Major Church, according to his instructions, ranged all those
parts, to find all their corn, and carried aboard their vessels what he thought
convenient, and destroyed the rest. Also finding considerable quantities of
plunder, viz. beaver, moose-skins, and c. Having done what service they could
in those parts, he returned back to his Excellency at Pemequid; where being
come, staid not long, they being short of bread, his Excellency intended home
for Boston, for more provisions; but before, going with Major Church and his
forces to Kennebeck river, and coming there, gave him further orders, which are
as follows: By his Excellency the Governor.
To Major BENJAMIN CHURCH.
YOU having already received former instructions, are now further to proceed
with the soldiers under your command for Kennebeck river, and the places
adjacent, and use your utmost endeavors to kill, destroy and take captive the
French and Indian enemy wheresoever you shall find any of them; and at your
return to Pemequid (which you are to do as soon as you can conveniently; after
your best endeavor done against the enemy, and having destroyed their corn and
other provisions) you are to stay with all your soldiers and Officers, and set
them to work on the fort, and make what despatch you can in that business,
staying there until my further order.

WILLIAM PHIPS.




Then his Excellency taking leave went for Boston, and soon after Major Church
and his forces had a smart fight with the enemy in Kennebeck river, pursued
them so hard that they left their canoes, and ran up into the woods, still
pursued them up to their fort at Taconock, which the enemy perceiving set fire
to their houses in the fort, and ran away by the light of them, and when Major
Church came to the said fort found about half their houses standing and the
rest burnt; also found great quantities of corn, put up into Indian cribs,
which he and his forces destroyed, as ordered.

Having done what service he could in those parts, returned to Pemequid, and
coming there employed his forces according to his instructions. Being out of
bread, his Excellency not coming, Major Church was obliged to borrow bread of
the Captain of the man of war that was then there, for all the forces under his
command, his Excellency not coming as expected; but at length his Excellency
came and brought very little bread more than would pay what was borrowed of the
man of war: So that in a short time after Major Church, with his forces,
returned home to Boston, and had their wages for their good service done. Only
one thing by the way I will just mention, that is, about the Six Pounds Major
Church borrowed as aforementioned, and put into the hands of Mr. Fobes, who
distributed the said money, all but thirty shillings, to the Indian soldiers,
as directed, which was deducted out of their wages, and the country had credit
for the same; and the said Fobes kept the 30S. to himself, which was deducted
out of his Wages. Whereupon Maj. Walley and said Fobes had some words. In
short, Maj. Church was obliged to expend about six pounds of his own money in
marching down the forces both English and Indians, to Boston, having no drink
allowed them upon the road, etc. So that instead of Major Church's having the
allowances aforementioned by Major Walley, he was out of pocket about twelve
pounds over and above what he had; all which had not been had not his
Excellency been gone out of the country.

The 4th EXPEDITION East.
IN 1696 Major Church being at Boston, and belonging to the House of
Representatives, several Gentlemen requesting him to go East again, and the
General Court having made acts of encouragement, and c. He told them, if they
would provide whale-boats, and other necessaries convenient, he would: Being
also requested by the said General Court, he proceeded to raise volunteers, and
made it his whole business, riding both east and west in our province and
Connecticut, at great charge and expenses; and in about a month's time raised a
sufficient number out of those parts, and marched them down to Boston; where he
had the promise that every thing should be ready in three weeks or a month's
time, but was obliged to stay considerably longer. Being now at Boston, he
received his commission and instructions; which are as follows. WILLIAM
STOUGHTON, Esquire, Lieutenant Governor, and Commander in Chief, in and over
his Majesty's province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England:
To Major BENJAMIN CHURCH, Greeting.
WHEREAS there are several companies raised, consisting of Englishmen and
Indians, for his Majesty's service, to go forth upon the encouragement given by
the Great and General Court, or Assembly of this his Majesty's province,
convented at Boston, the 27th day of May, 1696, to prosecute the French and
Indian enemy, etc. And you having offered yourself to take the command and
conduct of the said several companies: By virtue therefore of the power and
authority in and by his Majesty's royal commission to me granted, reposing
special trust and confidence in your loyalty, prudence, courage and good
conduct: I do by these presents constitute and appoint you to be Major of the
said several companies, both Englishmen and Indians, raised for his Majesty's
service upon the encouragement aforesaid. You are therefore carefully and
diligently to perform the duty of your place, by leading, ordering, and
exercising the said several companies in arms, both inferior Officers and
soldiers, keeping them in good order and discipline, commanding them to obey
you as their Major. And yourself diligently to intend his Majesty's service for
the prosecuting, pursuing, taking, killing or destroying the said enemy by sea
or land; and to observe all such orders and instructions as you shall from time
to time receive from myself, or Commander in Chief for the time being,
according to the rules and discipline of war, pursuant to the trust reposed in
you. Given under my hand and seal at arms, at Boston, the third day of August,
1696, in the eighth year of the reign of our sovereign Lord William the Third,
by the grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender
of the Faith, etc.

WILLIAM STOUGHTON.
By command of the Lieut. Gov. etc. Isaac Addington, Secr.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay. By the Right Honorable the Lieutenant
Governor and Commander in Chief.
INSTRUCTIONS for Major Benjamin Church, Commander of the forces raised for his
Majesty's service, against the French and Indian enemy and rebels.
PURSUANT to the commission given you, you are to embark the forces now
furnished and equipped for his Majesty's service on the present expedition, to
the eastern parts of this province, and with them, and such others as shall
offer themselves to go forth on the said service, to sail unto Piscataqua, to
join those lately despatched thither for the same expedition, to await your
coming: And with all care and diligence to improve the vessels, boats and men
under your command, in search for, prosecution and pursuit of the said enemy,
at such places where you may be informed of their abode or resort, or where you
may probably expect to find, or meet with them, and take all advantages against
them which Providence shall favor you with.

You are not to list or accept any soldiers that are already in his Majesty's
pay, and posted at any town or garrison within this province, without special
order from myself.

You are to require and give strict orders that the duties of religion be
attended on board the several vessels, and in the several companies under your
command, by daily prayers unto God, and reading his holy word, and observance
of the Lord's Day, to the utmost you can.

You are to see that your soldiers have their due allowance of provisions and
other necessaries, and that the sick or wounded be accommodated in the best
manner your circumstances will admit. And that good order and command may be
kept up and maintained in the several companies, and all disorders,
drunkenness, profane cursing, swearing, disobedience to Officers, mutinies,
omissions or neglect of duty, be duly punished according to the laws martial.
And you are to require the Captain or chief Officer of each company, with the
clerk of the same, to keep an exact journal of all their proceedings from time
to time.

In case any of the Indian enemy and rebels offer to submit themselves, you are
to receive them only at discretion; but if you think fit to improve any of
them, or any others which you may happen to take prisoners, you may encourage
them to be faithful by the promise of their lives, which shall be granted upon
approbation of their fidelity.

You are carefully to look after the Indians which you have out of the prison,
so that they may not have opportunity to escape, but otherwise improve them to
what advantage you can, and return them back again to this place.

You are to advise, as you can have occasion, with Captain John Gorham, who
accompanies you in this expedition, and is to take your command in case of your
death. A copy of these instructions you are to leave with him, and to give me
an account from time to time of your proceedings.

WILLIAM STOUGHTON.
Boston, August 12th, 1696.



In the time Major Church lay at Boston, the news came of Pemequid fort being
taken; it came by a shallop that brought some prisoners to Boston, who gave an
account also that there was a French ship at Mount-Desart, who had taken a ship
of ours; so the discourse was that they would send the man of war, with other
forces to take the would send the man of war, with other forces to take the ^
French ship, and retake ours. But in the mean time Major Church and his forces
being ready, embarked, and on the 15th day of August set sail for Piscataqua,
where more men were to join them, (but before they left Boston, Major Church
discoursed with the Captain of the man of war, who promised him, if he went to
Mount-Desart, in pursuit of the French ship, that he would call for him and his
forces at Piscataqua, expecting that the French and Indians might not be far
from the said French ship, so that he might have an opportunity to fight them
while he was engaged with the French ship:) Soon after the forces arrived at
Piscataqua, the Major sent his Indian soldiers to Colonel Gidney, at York, to
be assisting for the defense of those places; who gave them a good commend for
their ready and willing services done, in scouting, and the like. Lying at
Piscataqua with the rest of our forces near a week, waiting for more forces who
were to join them, to make up their complement; in all which time heard never a
word of the man of war. On the 22d of August they all embarked for Piscataqua,
and when they came against York, the Major went ashore, sending Capt. Gorham
with some forces, in two brigantines and a sloop, to Winter-Harbour, ordering
him to send out scouts, to see if they could make any discovery of the enemy,
and to wait there till he came to them. Major Church coming to York, Col.
Gidney told him his opinion was, That the enemy was drawn off from those parts,
for that the scouts could not discover any of them, nor their tracks. So having
done his business there, went, with what forces he had there, to
Winter-Harbour, where he had the same account from Captain Gorham, That they
had not discovered any of the enemy, nor any new tracks: So, concluding they
were gone from those parts toward Penobscot, the Major ordered all the vessels
to come to sail and make the best of their way to Monbegin, which being not far
from Penobscot, where the main body of our enemies living was; being in great
hopes to come up with the army of French and Indians, before they had scattered
and were gone past Penobscot, or Mount-Desart, which is the chief place of
their departure from each other after such actions; and having a fair wind made
the best of their way, and early next morning they got into Monbegin, and there
lay all day sitting their boats, and other necessaries to embark in the night
at Mussel-neck with their boats; lying there all day to keep undiscovered from
the enemy; at night the Major ordered the vessels all to come to sail, and
carry the forces over the bay, near Penobscot; but having little wind, he
ordered all the soldiers to embark on board the boats with eight day's
provision, and sent the vessels back to Monbegin, that they might not be
discovered by the enemy; giving them orders when and where they should come to
him. The forces being all ready in their boats, rowing very hard, got ashore at
a point near Penobscot, just as the day broke, and hid their boats, and keeping
a good look-out by sea, and sent scouts out by land; but could not discover
either canoes or Indians; what tracks and fire-places they saw were judged to
be seven or eight days before they came: As soon as night came, that they might
go undiscovered, got into their boats, and went by Mussel-neck, and so amongst
Penobscot Islands, looking very sharp as they went for fires on the shore, and
for canoes, but found neither; getting up to Mathebestucks hills, day coming
on, landed, and hid their boats; looking out for the enemy, as the day before,
but to little purpose. Night coming on, to their oars again, working very hard,
turned the night into day; made several of their new soldiers grumble: But
telling them they hoped to come up quickly with the enemy, put new life into
them; and by daylight they got into the mouth of the river, where landing,
found many rendezvous and fire places where the Indians had been; but at the
same space of time, as beforementioned. And no canoes passed up the river that
day. Their pilot, Joseph York, informed the Major that 50 or 60 miles up that
river, at the great falls, the enemy had a great rendezvous, and planted a
great quantity of corn, when he was a prisoner with them, four years ago, and
that he was very well acquainted there; this gave great encouragement to have
had some considerable advantage of the enemy at that place; so using their
utmost endeavors to get up there undiscovered, and coming there found no
enemy, nor corn planted, they having deserted the place. And ranging about the
falls on both sides of the river, leaving men on the east side of the said
river, and the boats just below the falls, with a good guard to secure them,
and to take the enemy if they came down the river in their canoes. The west
side being the place where the enemy lived and best to travel on, they resolved
to range as privately as they could, a mile or two above the falls discovered a
birch canoe coming down with two Indians in it, the Major sent word immediately
back to those at the falls, to lie very close, and let them pass down the
falls, and to take them alive, that he might have intelligence where the enemy
was (which would have been a great advantage to them;) but a foolish soldier
seeing them passing by him, shot at them, contrary to orders given, which
prevented them going into the ambuscade that was laid for them; whereupon
several more ofour men being near, shot at them; so that one of them could not
stand when he got ashore, but crept away into the brush, the other stepped out
of the canoe with his paddle in his hand, and ran about a rod, and then threw
down his paddle, and turned back and took up his gun, and so escaped. One of
our Indians swam over the river, and fetched the canoe, wherein was a
considerable quantity of blood on the feats, that the Indians fat on; the canoe
having several holes shot in her: They stopped the holes, and then Capt. Bracket,
with an Indian soldier, went over the river, who track'd them by the blood
about half a mile, found his gun, took it up, and seeing the blood no further,
concluded that he stopped his blood, and so got away. In the mean time another
canoe with three men were coming down the river, were fired at by some of our
forces, ran ashore, and left two of their guns in the canoe, which were taken,
and also a letter from a Priest to Casteen, that gave him an account of the
French and Indians returning over the lake to Mount-Royal, and of their little
service done upon the Maquas Indians westward, only demolishing one fort, and
cutting down some corn, etc. He desiring to hear of the proceedings of
Deborabuel, and the French man of war; and informed him that there were several
canoes coming with workmen from Quebec, to St. John's, where since we
concluded it was to build a fort at the river's mouth, where the great guns
were taken, etc. It being just night, the Officers were called together to
advise, and their pilot York informed them of a fort up that river, and that it
was built on a little island in that river; and that there was no getting to it
but in canoes, or on the ice in the winter time: This, with the certain
knowledge that we were discovered by the enemy that escaped out of the upper
canoe, concluded it not proper, at that time, to proceed any further up, and
that there was no getting any further with our boats; and the enemy being
alarmed would certainly fly from them (and do as they did four years ago at
their fort at Taconock; having fought them in Kennebeck river, and pursued them
about thirty miles to Taconock; for they then set their fort on fire, and run
away by the light of it, ours not being able to come up with them at that
place.) Major Church then encouraging his soldiers, told them, he hoped they
should meet with part of the enemy, in Penobscot-Bay, or at Mount-Desart, where
the French ships were. So notwithstanding they had been rowing several nights
before, with much toil, besides were short of provisions, they cheerfully
embarked on board their boats, and went down the river, both with and against
the tide: And next morning came to their vessels, where the Major had ordered
them to meet him, who could give him no intelligence of any enemy. Where being
come they refreshed themselves; meeting then with another disappointment, for
their pilot York not being acquainted any further, they began to lament the
loss of one Robert Cawley, who they chiefly depended on for all the service to
be done now eastward: He having been taken away from them the night before they
set fail from Boston (and was on board Mr. Thorp's sloop) and put on board the
man of war, unknown to Major Church; notwithstanding he had been at the charge
and trouble of procuring him. Then the Major was obliged to one Board, procured
by Mr. William Alden, who being acquainted in those parts, to leave his vessel,
and go with him in the boats, which he readily complied with, and so went to
Nasket-point; where being informed was a likely place to meet with the enemy;
coming there found several houses and small fields of corn, the fires having
been out several days, and no new tracks. But upon Penobscot island they found
several Indian houses, corn and turnips, though the enemy still being all gone,
as beforementioned. Then they divided and sent their boats some one way, and
some another, thinking that if any straggling Indians, or Casteen himself,
should be thereabout, they might find them, but it proved all in vain. Himself
and several boats went to Mount-Desart, to see if the French ships were gone,
and whether any of the enemy might be there, but to no purpose: The ships being
gone, and the enemy also. They being now got several leagues to the westward of
their vessels; and seeing that the way was clear for their vessels to pass: And
all their extreme rowing, and traveling by land and water, night and day, to
be all in vain. The enemy having left those parts, as they judged, about eight
or ten days before. And then returning to their vessels, the Commander calling
all his Officers together, to consult and resolve what to do, concluding that
the enemy, by some means or other, had received some intelligence of their
being come out against them; and that they were in no necessity to come down to
the sea side as yet, moose and beaver now being fat. They then agreed to go so
far East, and employ themselves, that the enemy, belonging to those parts,
might think they were gone home. Having some discourse about going over to St.
John's; but the masters of the vessels said, he had as good carry them to Old
France, etc. which put off that design, they concluding that the French ships
were there. Then the Major moved for going over the bay, toward Lahane, and
toward the gut of Cancer, where was another considerable fort of Indians, who
often came to the assistance of our enemy, the barbarous Indians; saying, that
by the time they should return again, the enemy belonging to those parts would
come down again, expecting that we are gone home. But in short, could not
prevail with the masters of the open sloops to venture across the bay; who said
it was very dangerous so late in the year, and as much as their lives were
worth, etc. Then they concluded and resolved to go to Senactaca, wherein there
was a ready compliance (but the want of their pilot, Robert Cawley, was a great
damage to them, who knew all those parts:) However, Mr. John Alden, master of
the brigantine Endeavor, piloted them up the bay to Senactaca; and coming to
Grinstone-point, being not far from Senactaca; then came to with all the
vessels, and early next morning came to fail, and about sunrise got into town;
but it being so late before we landed, that the enemy, most of them, made their
escape, and as it happened landed where the French and Indians had some time
before killed Lieutenant John Pain, and several of Captain Smithson's men,
that were with said Pain.) They seeing our forces coming took the opportunity,
fired several guns, and so ran all into the woods, carried all or most part of
their goods with them. One Jarman Bridgway came running toward our forces,
with a gun in one hand, and his cartridge-box in the other, calling to our
forces to stop, that he might speak with them; but Major Church thinking it was
that they might have some advantage, ordered them to run on; when the said
Bridgway saw they would not stop, turned and ran, but the Major called unto
him, and bid him stop, or he should be shot down; some of our forces being near
to the said Bridgway, said it was the General that called to him: He hearing
that, stopped and turned about, laying down his gun, stood, till the Major came
up to him; his desire was that the Commander would make haste with him to his
house, left the savages should kill his father and mother, who were upward of
fourscore years of age, and could not go. The Major asked the said Bridgway
whether there were any Indians amongst them, and where they lived? He shaked
his head, and said, he durst not tell, for if he did they would take an
opportunity and kill him and his. So all that could be got out of him was, that
they were run into the woods with the rest. Then orders were given to pursue
the enemy, and to kill what Indians they could find, and take the French alive,
and give them quarter if they asked it. Our forces soon took three Frenchmen,
who, upon examination, said, That the Indians were all run into the woods. The
French firing several guns at our forces, and ours at them; but they being
better acquainted with the woods than ours, got away. The Major took the
abovesaid Jarman Bridgway for a pilot, and with some of his forces went over a
river, to several of their houses, but the people were gone and carried their
goods with them: In ranging the woods found several Indian houses, their fires
being just out, but no Indians. Spending that day in ranging to and for, found
considerable of their goods, and but few people; at night the Major writ a
letter, and sent out two French prisoners, wherein was signified, That if they
would come in, they should have good quarters. The next day several came in,
which did belong to that part of the town where our forces first landed, who
had encouragements given them by our Commander, That if they would assist him
in taking those Indians which belonged to those parts, they should have their
goods returned to them again, and their estates should not be damnified; which
they refused. Then the Major and his forces pursued their design, and went
further ranging their country, found several more houses, but the people fled,
and carried what they had away; but in a creek found a prize bark, that was
brought in there by a French privateer. In ranging the woods took some
prisoners, who upon examination gave our Commander an account, that there were
some Indians upon a neck of land, toward Menes; so a party of men was sent
into those woods, and in their ranging about the said neck found some plunder,
and a considerable quantity of whortleberries, both green and dry, which were
gathered by the Indians, and had like to have taken two Indians, who, by the
help of a birch canoe, got over the river, and made their escape. Also they
found two barrels of powder, and near half a bushel of bullets; the French
denying it to be theirs, said they were the savages, but sure it might be a
supply for our enemies: Also they took from Jarman Bridway several barrels of
powder, with bullets, shot, spears and knives, and other supplies to relieve
our enemies; he owning that he had been a trading with those Indians along
Gape-Sable shore, with Peter Assnow, etc. in a sloop our forces took from him;
and that there he met with the French ships, and went along with them to St.
John's, and helped them to unload the said ships, and carried up the river
provisions, ammunition, and other goods to Vilboon's fort.

The Major having ranged all places that were thought proper, returned back to
the place where they first landed, and finding several prisoners come in, who
were troubled to see their cattle, sheep, hogs and dogs lying dead about their
houses, chopp'd and hacked with hatchets; (which was done without order from
the Major) however he told them, it was nothing to what our poor English, in
our frontier towns, were forced to look upon; for men, women and children were
chopp'd and hacked so, and left half dead, with all their scalps taken off, and
that they, and their Indians, served ours so; and our savages would be glad to
serve them so too, if he would permit them; which caused them to be mighty
submissive, and begged the Major that he would not let the savages serve them
so. Our Indians being somewhat sensible of the discourse, desired to have some
of them to roast, and so make a dance; and dancing in a hideous manner, to
terrify them; said, That they could eat any sort of flesh, and that some of
theirs would make their hearts strong: Stepping up to some of the prisoners,
said, They must have their scalps, which much terrified the poor prisoners, who
begged for their lives. The Major told them he did not design the savages
should hurt them; but it was to let them see a little what the poor English
felt, saying, It was not their scalps he wanted, but the savages, for he should
get nothing by them; and told them, That their fathers, the Friars and
Governors, encouraged their savages, and gave them money to scalp our English,
notwithstanding they were with them; which several of our English, there
present, did testify to their faces, that their fathers and mothers were served
so in their sight. But the Major bid them tell their fathers the Friars, and
the Governors, That if they still persisted, and let their wretched savages
kill and destroy the poor English at that rate, he would come with some
hundreds of savages, and let them loose amongst them, who would kill, scalp,
and carry away every French person in all those parts, for they were the root
from whence all the branches came that hurt us; for the Indians could not do us
any harm, if they did not relieve and supply them. The French being sensible of
the Major's kindness to them, kissed his hand, and were very thankful to him
for his favor to them in saving their lives; owned that their Priests were at
the taking of Pemequid fort, and were now gone to Layhone, with some of the
Indians, to meet the French ships, but for what they would not tell. The
Commander, with his forces, having done all they could in those parts,
concluded to go to St. John's river, to do further service for their King and
country, embarked all on board their transports; and having a fair wind, soon
got to Monogenest, which lies a little distance from the mouth of St. John's
river. Next morning early the Major, with his forces, landed to see what
discovery they could make, traveled across the woods to the old fort or falls
at the mouth of St. John's river, keeping themselves undiscovered from the
enemy; finding that there were several men at work, and having informed
themselves as much as they could (the enemy being on the other side of the
river, could not come at them) returned back, but night coming on, and dark wet
weather, with bad traveling, was obliged to stop in the woods till toward day
next morning, and then went on board; soon after the Major ordered all the
vessels to come to fail, and go into the mouth of the river; being done, it was
not long before the Major and his forces landed on the east side of the river,
the French firing briskly at them, but did them no harm; and running fiercely
upon the enemy, they soon fled into the woods. The Major ordered a brisk party
to run across a neck to cut them off from their canoes, which the day before
they had made a discovery of; so the Commander, with the rest, ran directly
toward the new fort they were building, not knowing but they had some ordnance
mounted. The enemy running directly to their canoes, were met by our forces,
who fired at them, and killed one, and wounded Corporal Canton, who was taken,
the rest threw down what they had and ran into the woods; the said prisoner
Canton being brought to the Major, told him, if he would let his Surgeon dress
his wound and cure him, he would be serviceable to him as long as he lived: So,
being dressed, he was examined: Who gave the Major an account of the twelve
great guns which were hid in the beach, below high water mark; (the carriages,
shot and wheelbarrows, some flour and pork, all hid in the woods:) And the next
morning the officers being all ordered to meet together to consult about going
to Vilboon's fort, and none amongst them being acquainted but the Aldens, who
said the water in the river was very low, so that they could not yet up to the
fort, and the prisoner Canton told the Commander, That what the Aldens said was
true. So not being willing to make a Canada expedition, concluded it was not
practicable to proceed. Then ordered some of the forces to get the great guns
on board the open sloops, and the rest to range the woods for the enemy, who
took one prisoner, and brought in: who in their ranging found there a shallop
haled in a creek, and a day or two after there came in a young soldier to our
forces, who upon examination gave an account of two more which he left in the
woods at some distance; so immediately the Major with some of his forces went
in pursuit of them, taking the said prisoner with them, who conveyed them to
the place where he left them, but they were gone. Then asked the prisoner,
whether there were any Indians in those parts? Said No, it was as hard for
Vilboon, their Governor, to get an Indian down to the water side, as it was for
him to carry one of those great guns upon his back to his fort: For they having
had intelligence by a prisoner out of Boston gaol, that gave them an account of
Major Church and his forces coming out against them. Now having with a great
deal of pains and trouble got all the guns, shot, and other stores aboard,
intended on our design which we came out first for, but the wind not serving,
the Commander sent out his scouts into the woods, to seek for the enemy, and
four of our Indians came upon three Frenchmen undiscovered, who concluded that
if the French should discover them, would fire at them, and might kill one or
more of them, which to prevent fired at the French, killed one, and took the
other two prisoners; and it happened that he who was killed was Shanelere, the
chief man there, etc. The same day they mended their whale-boats, and the
shallop which they took, fitting her to row with eight oars, that she might be
helpful to their prosecuting their intended design against the enemy, in their
returning homeward. Then the Commander ordering all the Officers to come
together, informed them of his intentions, and ordered that no vessels should
depart from the fleet, but to attend the motions of their Commodore, as
formerly, except they were parted by storms, or thick fogs, and if so it should
happen that any did part, when they come to Passamequady, should stop there a
while, for there they intended to stop, and do business with the help of their
boats against the enemy, and if they missed that, to stop at Machias; which was
the next place he intended to stop at, having an account by the prisoners
taken, That Mr. Lateril was there a trading with the Indians in that river.
Encouraging them, said, He did not doubt but to have a good booty there; and if
they should pass those two places, be sure not to go past Naskege-point, but to
stop there till he came, and not to depart thence in a fortnight without his
orders, having great service to do in and about Penobscot, etc. Then the Major
discoursed with Captain Brackit, Captain Hunewell, and Captain Larking, (with
their Lieutenants) Commanders of the forces belonging to the eastward parts,
who were to discourse their soldiers about their proceeding, when they came to
Penobscot; and the Major himself was to discourse his Indian soldiers, and
their Captains; who with all the rest readily complied. The projection being
such, That when they came to Penobscot, the Commander designed to take what
provisions could be spared out of all the sloops, and put on board the two
brigantines, and to send all the sloops home with some of the Officers and men
that wanted to be at home: And then with those forces aforementioned (to wit)
the eastward men, and all the Indians; and to take what provisions and
ammunition was needful, and to march with himself up into the Penobscot
country, in search for the enemy, and if possible to take that fort in
Penobscot river. Captain Brackit informing the Major, that when the water was
low they could wade over, which was (at that time) the lowest that had been
known in a long time: And being there, to range through that country down to
Pemequid; where he intended the two brigantines should meet them; and from
thence taking more provisions, (viz.) bread, falt and ammunition suitable (to
send those two vessels home also) to travel through the country to Nerigiwack,
and from thence to Ameras-cogen fort, and so down where the enemy used to
plant, not doubting but that in all this travel to meet with many of the enemy
before they should get to Piscataqua. All which intentions were very acceptable
to the forces that were to undertake it, who rejoicing, said, They had rather
go home by land than by water, provided their commander went with them; who, to
try their fidelity, said, He was grown ancient, and might fail them; they all
said, they would not leave him, and when he could not travel any further, they
would carry him. Having done what service they could at and about the mouth of
St. John's river, resolved on their intended design; and the next morning
having but little wind, came all to sail, the wind coming against them, they
put into MushquashCove, and the next day the wind still being against them, the
Major with part of his forces landed, and employed themselves in ranging the
country for the enemy, but to no purpose; and in the night the wind came pretty
fair, and at 12 o'clock they came to fail, and had not been out long before
they spied three fail of vessels; expecting them to be French, fitted to defend
themselves, so coming near, hailed them: Who found them to be a man of war, the
Province-Galley, and old Mr. Alden in a sloop, with more forces, Col. Hathorne
Commander. Major Church went aboard the Commodore, where Colonel Hathorne was,
who gave him an account of his commission and orders, and read them to him.
Then his Honor told Major Church, that there was a particular order on board
Captain Southack for him, which is as follows: Boston, September 9th, 1696.
SIR,
HIS Majesty's ship Orford having lately surprised a French shallop, with
twenty-three of the soldiers belonging to the fort upon John's-river, in
Nova Scotia, together with Villeau, their Captain, Providence seems to
encourage the forming of an expedition to attack that fort, and to disrest and
remove the enemy from that post, which is the chief source from whence the most
of our disasters do issue, and also to favor with an opportunity for gaining
out of their hands the ordnance, artillery, and other warlike stores, and
provisions, lately supplied to them from France, for erecting a new fort near
the river's mouth, whereby they will be greatly strengthened, and the reducing
of them rendered more difficult. I have therefore ordered a detachment of two
new companies, consisting of about an hundred men to join the forces now with
you for that expedition, and have commissionated Lieutenant Colonel John
Hathorne, one of the members of his Majesty's Council, who is acquainted with
that river, and in whose courage and conduct I repose special trust, to take
the chief command of the whole during that service, being well assured that
your good affections and zeal for his Majesty's service will induce your ready
compliance and assistance therein, which, I hope, will take up no long time,
and be of great benefit and advantage to these his Majesty's territories, if it
please God to succeed the same. Besides, it is very probable to be the fairest
opportunity, that can be offered unto yourself and men, of doing execution upon
the Indian enemy and rebels, who may reasonably be expected to be drawn to the
defense of that fort. I have also ordered his Majesty's ship Arundel, and the
Province-G^^ley to attend this service.

Colonel Hathorne will communicate unto you the contents of his commission and
instructions received from myself for this expedition, which I expect and order
that yourself, Officers and soldiers, now under you, yield obedience unto. He
is to advise with yourself and others in all weighty attempts. Praying for a
blessing from Heaven upon the said enterprise, and that all engaged in the same
may be under the special protection of the Almighty; I am your loving friend,

WILLIAM STOUGHTON.




The Major having read his last orders, and considering his commission, found
that he was obliged to attend All Orders, etc. was much concerned that he and
his were prevented in their intended projection, if carried back to St. John's.
Then discoursing with Colonel Hathorne, gave him an account of what they had
done at St. John's, viz. That as to the demolishing the new f^^^ they had done
it, and got all their great guns and stores aboard their vessels; and that if
it had not been that the waters were follow would have taken the fort up the
river also before he came away: Told him also that one of the prisoners which
he had taken at St. John's, upon examination, concerning the Indians in those
parts, told him, it was as hard for Vilboon, their Governor, to get one of
their Indians down to the waterside, as to carry one of those great guns upon
his back; and that they had an account of him and his forces coming to those
parts by a prisoners out of Boston gaol: Also told his honor, That if they
went back it would wholly disappoint them of their doing any further service,
which was that they came for to Penobscot, and places adjacent; but all was to
no purpose, his Honor telling the Major that he must attend his orders then
received. And to encourage the Officers and soldiers, told them, They should be
wholly at the Major's ordering and command in the whole action: And to be short
did go back; and the event may be seen in Colonel Hathorne's journal of the
said action. Only I must observe one thing by the way, which was, That when
they drew off to come down the river again, Colonel Hathorne came off and left
the Major behind to see that all the forces were drawn off; and coming down the
river, in or near the rear, in the night heard a person hallow, not knowing at
first but it might be a snare to draw them into; but upon consideration sent to
see who or what he was, found him to be as negro man belonging to Marblehead,
that had been taken, and kept a prisoner amongst them for some time. The Major
asked him, whether he could give any account of the Indians in those parts? He
said yes, they were or had been all drawn off from the sea coast, up into the
woods, near an hundred miles, having had an account by a prisoner out of Boston
gaol, that Major Church and his forces were coming out against them in four
brigantines, and four sloops, with pettiaugers, meaning whale-boats, which put
them into a fright, that notwithstanding they were so far up in the woods, were
afraid to make fires by day, left he and his forces should discover the smokes,
and in the night left they should see the light. One thing more I would just
give a hint of, that is, how the French in the eastward parts were much
surprised at the motion of the whale-boats; said, There was no abiding for them
in that country: And I have been informed since, that soon after this
expedition, they drew off from St. John's fort and river. But to return, Then
going all down the river, embarked and went homeward; only by the way, Candid
Reader, I would let you know of two things that proved very prejudicial to
Major Church and his forces: The first was, that the government should miss it
so much as to send any prisoner away from Boston before the expedition was
over. Secondly, That they should send Col. Hathorne to take them from the
service and business they went to do: Who, with submission, doubtless thought
they did for the best, though it proved to the contrary. So shall wind up with a
just hint of what happened at their coming home to Boston. After all their hard
service both night and day. the government took away all the great guns, and
warlike stores, and gave them not a penny for them, (except it was some powder,
and that they gave what they pleased for) and besides the assembly passed a
vote that they should have but half pay; but his Honor the Lieutenant Governor
being much disturbed at their so doing, went into the town house, where the
Representatives were sitting, and told them, except they did reassume that
vote, which was to cut Major Church and his forces off their half-pay, they
should sit there till the next spring. Whereupon it was reassumed: So that
they had just their bare wages. But as yet never had any allowance for the
great guns and stores; neither has Major Church had any allowance for all his
travel and great expenses in raising the said forces volunteers.

The 5th and last Expedition East.
IN the year 1703-4, Major Church had an account of the miserable devastations
made on Deerfield, a town in the westward parts of this province, and the
horrible barbarities and cruelties exercised on those poor innocent people, by
the French and Indians, especially of their cruelties toward that worthy
Gentlewoman Mrs. Williams, and several others, whom they marched in that
extreme season; forcing them to carry great loads, and when any of them by
their hard usage could not bare with it, were knocked on the head, and so
killed in cool blood. All which with some other horrible instances done by
those barbarous savages, which Major Church himself was an eyewitness to in
his former travel in the eastward parts, did much astonish him. To see a woman
that those barbarous savages had taken and killed, exposed in a most brutish
manner (as can be expressed) with a young child seized fast with strings to her
breast; which infant had no apparent wound, which doubtless was left alive to
suck its dead mother's breast, and so miserably to perish and die: Also to see
other poor children hanging upon fences dead, of either sex, in their own poor
rags, not worth their stripping them of, in scorn and derision: Another
instance was, of a straggling soldier, who was found at Casco, exposed in a
shameful and barbarous manner; his body being staked up, his head cut off, and
a hog's head set in the room, his body ripp'd up, and his heart and inwards
taken out, and private members cut off, and hung with bests of their own, the
inwards at one side of his body, and his privates at the other, in scorn and
derision of the English soldiers, and c. These and such like barbarities caused
Major Church to express himself to this purpose, That if he were Commander in
Chief of these provinces, he would soon put an end to those barbarities done by
the barbarous enemy, by making it his whole business to fight and destroy those
savages, as they did our poor neighbors; which doubtless might have been done
if rightly managed, and that in a short time, and c. So that these, with the
late inhumanities done upon the inhabitants of Deerfield, made such an
impression on his heart as can not well be expressed; so that his blood boiled
within him, making such impulses on his mind, that he forgot all former
treatments, which were enough to hinder any man, especially the said Major
Church, from doing any further service. Notwithstanding all which, having a
mind to take some satisfaction on the enemy, his heart being full: Took his
horse and went from his own habitation, near 70 miles, to wait upon his
Excellency, and offered his service to the Queen, his Excellency and the
country; which his Excellency readily accepted of, and desired Major Church to
draw a scheme for the ensuing action, or actions; so taking leave went home,
and drew it; which is as follows. Tiverton, February 5, 1703-4. May it please
your Excellency,
ACCORDING to your request, when I was last with yourself; and in obedience
thereunto, I present you with these following lines, that concern the
preparation for next spring's expedition, to attack the enemy. According to my
former direction, for it is good to have a full stroke at them first, before
they have opportunity to run for it; for the first of our action will be our
opportunity to destroy them, and to prevent their running away, in way-laying
every passage; and make them know we are in good earnest, and so we being in a
diligent use of means, we may hope for a blessing from the Almighty, and that
He will be pleased to put a dread in their hearts, that they may fall before us
and perish: For my advice is,

1st, That ten or twelve hundred good able soldiers, well equipped, be in a
readiness fit for action, by the first of April at farthest, for then will be
the time to be upon action.

2dly, That five and forty, or fifty good whale-boats be had ready, well
fitted, with five good oars, and twelve or fifteen good paddles to every boat:
And upon the wale of each boat five pieces of strong leather be fastened on
each side, to slip five small ash bars through, that so, whenever they land, the
men may step overboard, and slip in said bars across, and take up said boat,
that she may not be hurt against the rocks: And that two suitable brass kettles
be provided to belong to each boat, to dress the men's victuals in, to make
their lives comfortable.

3dly, That four or five hundred pair of good Indian shoes be made ready, fit
for the service, for the English and Indians, that must improve the
whale-boats, and birch canoes, for they will be very proper, and safe for that
service; and let there be a good store of cow-bides, well tanned, for a supply
of such shoes; and hemp to make thread, and wax, to mend and make more such
shoes when wanted, and a good store of awls.

4thly, That there be an hundred large hatchets, or light axes, made pretty
broad, and steeled with the best steel that can be got, and made by workmen,
that may cut very well, and bold, that the hemlock knots may not break or turn
them, to widen the landing place up the falls, for it may happen that we may
get up, with some of our whale-boats, to their falls or headquarters.

5thly, That there be a suitable quantity of small bags, or wallets provided,
that every man that wants may have one, to put up his bullets in, of such a
size as will fit his gun, (and not be served as at Casco.) That every man's bag
be so marked that he may not change it: For if so, it will make a great
confusion in action; that every man's store of ball be weighed to him, that so
he may be accountable, and may not squander it away, and also his store of
powder, that so he may try his powder and gun before action. And that every
particular company may have a barrel of powder to themselves, and so marked
that it may by no means be changed; that men may know beforehand, and may not
be cheated out of their lives, by having bad powder; or not knowing how to use
it: And this will prove a great advantage to the action.

6thly, That Col. John Gorham, if he may be prevailed with, may be concerned in
the management of the whale-boats, he having been formerly concerned in the
eastern parts, and experienced in that affair. And whale-men then will be very
serviceable in this expedition, which having a promise made to them, that they
shall be released in good season, to go home a whaling in the fall, your
Excellency will have men enough.

7thly, That there may be raised for this service three hundred Indians at
least, and more if they may be had; for I know certainly of my own knowledge,
that they exceed most of our English in hunting and skulking in the woods,
being always used to it; and it must be practiced if ever we intend to destroy
those Indian enemies.

8thly, That the soldiers already out eastward in the service, men of known
judgment, may take a survey of them and their arms; and see if their arms he
good, and that they know how to use them, in shooting right at a mark; and that
they be men of good reason and sense, to know how to manage themselves in so
difficult a piece of service, as this Indian hunting is; for bad men are but a
clogg and hindrance to an army, being a trouble and vexation to good
Commanders, and so many months to devour the country's provision, and a
hindrance to all good action.

9thly, That special care be had in taking up the whaleboats, that they be good
and fit for that service; so that the country be not cheated, as formerly, in
having rotten boats; and as much care that the owners may have good
satisfaction for them.

10thly, That the tenders or transports, vessels to be improved in this action,
be good decked vessels, not too big, because of going up several rivers; having
four or six small guns a piece for defense, and the fewer men will defend them:
And there are enough such vessels to be had.

11thly, To conclude all, If your Excellency will be pleased to make yourself
great, and us a happy people, as to the destroying of our enemies, and easing
of our taxes, etc. be pleased to draw forth all those forces now in pay in all
the eastward parts, both at Saco and Casco-Bay; for those two tradinghouses
never did any good, nor ever will, and are not worthy the name of Queen's
forts; and the first building of them had no other effect, but to lay us under
tribute to that wretched pagan ^^ew; and I hope will never be wanted, for that
they were first built for: But sure it is, they are very serviceable to them,
for they get many a good advantage of us to destroy our men, and laugh at us
for our folly, that we should be at so much cost and trouble to do a thing that
does us so much harm, and no manner of good: But to the contrary, when they see
all our forces drawn forth, and in the pursuit of them, they will think that we
begin to be rouzed up, and to be awake, and will not be satisfied with what
they have pleased to leave us, but are resolved to retake from them, that they
took formerly from us, and drive them out of their country also. The which
being done, then to build a fort at a suitable time, and in a convenient place;
and it will be very honorable to your Excellency, and of great service to her
Majesty, and to the enlargement of her Majesty's government: (The place meant
being at Port Royal.)

12thly, That the objection made against drawing off the forces in the eastward
parts will be no damage to the inhabitants; for former experience teaches us,
that so soon as drawn into their country, they will presently forsake ours to
take care of their own: And that there be no failure in making preparation of
these things aforementioned, for many times the want of small things prevents
the completing of great actions; and that every thing be in readiness before
the forces be raised, to prevent charges; and the enemy having intelligence:
And that the General Court be moved to make suitable acts, for the encouraging
both English and Indians; that so men of business may freely offer estates and
concerns to serve the public.

Thus hoping what I have taken the pains to write in the sincerity of my heart
and good affection, will be well accepted; I make hold to subscribe, as I am,
your Excellency's most devoted humble servant,

Benjamin Church.




Then returning to his Excellency presented the said scheme, which his
Excellency approved of; and returned it again to Maj. Church, and desired him
to see that every thing was provided, telling him that he should have an order
from the Commissary General to proceed. Then returned home and made it his
whole business to provide oars and paddles, and a vessel to carry them round;
and then returned again to his Excellency, who gave him a commission: Which is
as follows. JOSEPH DUDLEY, Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief in and
over Her Majesty's Provinces of the Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire, in
New England, in America, and Vice Admiral of the same.
To Benjamin Church, Esquire Greeting.
BY virtue of the power and authority, in and by her Majesty's Royal
commission, to me granted, I do by these presents, reposing special trust and
confidence in your loyalty, courage, and good conduct, constitute and appoint
you to be Colonel of all the forces raised, and to be raised for her Majesty's
service, against the French and Indian enemy and rebels, that shall be improved
in the service to the eastward of Casco-Bay; and to be Captain of the first
company of the said forces. You are therefore carefully and diligently to
perform the duty of a Colonel and Captain, by leading, ordering and exercising
the said regiment and company in arms, both inferior Officers and soldiers; and
to keep them in good order and discipline. Hereby commanding them to obey you
as their Colonel and Captain; and with them to do and execute all acts of
hostility against the said enemy and rebels. And you are to observe and follow
such orders and directions as you shall receive from myself, or other your
superior Officer, according to the rules and discipline of war, pursuant to the
trust reposed in you. Given under my hand and feal at arms, at Boston, the 18th
day of March, in the third year of her Majesty's reign. Anno Dom. 1703-4.

J. DUDLEY.
By his Excellency's command, Isaac Addington, Secr.



Colonel Church no sooner received his commission, but proceeded to the raising
of men volunteers, by going into every town within the three counties, which
were formerly Plymouth government; advising with the chief Officer of each
company, to call his company together, that so he might have the better
opportunity to discourse and encourage them to serve their Queen and country;
treating them with drink convenient; told them he did not doubt but with God's
blessing to bring them all home again: All which, with many other arguments,
animated their hearts to do service, so that Colonel Church enlisted out of
some companies near twenty men, and others fifteen. He having raised a
sufficient number of English soldiers, proceeded to the enlisting of Indians in
all those parts where they dwelt, which was a great fatigue and expense; being
a people that need much treating, especially with drink, etc. Having enlisted
the most of his soldiers in those parts, who daily lay upon him; was not less
than 5 l. per day expenses, some days, in victuals and drink; who doubtless
thought (especially the English) that the country would have reimbursed it
again, otherwise they would hardly accepted it of him. Col. Church's soldiers
both English and Indians in those parts being raised, marched them all down to
Nantasket, according to his Excellency's directions; where being come, the
following Gentlemen were commissionated to be Commanders of each particular
company, viz. Lieut. Col. Gorham, Captains John Brown, Constant Church, James
Cole, John Dyer, John Cook, Caleb Williamson and Edward Church, of the forces
raised by Col. Church, each company being filled up with English and Indians as
they agreed among themselves, and by the Colonel's directions; Captain Lamb,
and Captain Mirick's company, who were raised by his Excellency's direction,
were ordered to join those aforesaid, under the command of Col. Church. Matters
being brought thus far on, Colonel Church waited upon his Excellency at Boston
to know his pleasure, what further measures were to be taken; and did humbly
move that they might have liberty in then instructions to make an attack upon
Port Royal: Being very well satisfied in his opinion, that with the blessing of
God, with what forces they had or should have; and whale-boats so well fitted
with oars and paddles, as they had with them, might be sufficient to have taken
it. His Excellency (looking upon Colonel Church) replied, He could not admit of
that, by reason he had by the advice of her Majesty's Council, writ to her
Majesty about the taking of Port Royal fort, and how it should be disposed of
when taken, etc. However Colonel Church proceeding to get every thing ready for
the forces down at Nantasket, which was the place of parade: He happening one
day to be at Captain Belcher's, where his Excellency happened to come; who was
pleased to order Col. Church to put on his sword, and walk with him up the
common; which he readily complied with: Where being come he saw two mortar
pieces with shells, and an ingineer trying with them, to throw a shell from
them to any spot of ground where he said it should fall: Which, when Col.
Church had seen done, gave him great encouragement and hopes that it would
promote their going to Port Royal, which he had solicited for; and returning
from thence, after they had seen them tried, by the said engineer, and
performing what was proposed: Coming near to Capt. William Clark's house, over
against the horse-shoe, his Excellency was invited by Captain Clark to walk
over and take a glass of wine; which he was pleased to accept of, and took Col.
Church with him; and in the time they were taking a glass of wine, Col. Church
once more presumed to say to his Excellency; Sir, I hope that now we shall go
to Port Royal in order to take it; those mortars being very suitable for such
an enterprise. His Excellency was pleased to reply; Col. Church you must say no
more of that matter, for the letter I told you of I writ by the advice of her
Majesty's Council, now lies at home on the board before the Lords Commissioners
of her Majesty's foreign plantations, etc. After some days every thing being
ready to embark, Col. Church received his instructions: Which are as follows.
By his Excellency JOSEPH DUDLEY, Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief, in
and over her Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, etc. in New England,
and Vice Admiral of the same.
INSTRUCTIONS for Colonel BENJAMIN CHURCH, in the present Expedition.
IN pursuance of the Commission given you to take the chief command of the land
and sea forces by me raised, equipped and set forth on her Majesty's service,
against her open declared enemies the French and Indian rebels: You are to
observe the following instructions.

First, you are to take care, That the duties of religion be attended on board
the several vessels, and in the several companies under your command, by daily
prayers unto God, and reading his holy word: And that the Lord's Day be
observed and duly sanctified to the utmost of your power, as far as the
circumstances and necessity of the service can admit, that so you may have the
presence of God with, and obtain his blessing on, your undertaking.

You are to take care, That your soldiers have their due allowance of
provisions and other necessaries; that their arms be well fixed, and kept fit
for service, and that they be furnished with a suitable quantity of powder and
ball, and be always in readiness to pass upon duty.

That good order and discipline be maintained; and all disorders, drunkenness,
profane swearing, cursing, omission or neglect of duty, disobedience to
Officers, mutiny, desertion, and sedition be duly punished according to the
rules and articles of war; the which you are once a month, or oftener, to cause
to be published, and made known to your Officers and soldiers for their
observance and direction in their duty. Let notorious and capital offenders be
sent away to the next garrisons, there to be imprisoned until they can be
proceeded with.

Let the sick and wounded be carefully looked after, and accommodated after the
best manner your circumstances will admit of, and be sent either to Casco-Fort,
or to Mr. Peperel's at Kittery, which may be easiest, so soon as you can.

You are forthwith to send away the forces and stores by the transports, with
the whale-boats to Piscataqua, on Kittery side, there to attend your coming;
whither you are to follow them with all expedition.

You are to embark in the Province-Galley, Captain Southack Commander, and let
Lieutenant Colonel Gorham go on board Captain Gallop; who are both directed to
attend your motion on the French side, after which they are to return. Let the
Commanders of all the store sloops and transports know that they fail, anchor
and serve at your direction.

When you fail from Piscataqua, keep at such distance off the shore, that you
be not observed by the enemy to alarm them. Stop at Montinicus, and there
embark the forces in the whale boats for the main, to range-that part of the
country, in search of the enemy, to Mount Desert, sending the vessels to meet
you there; and after having refreshed and recruited your soldiers, proceed to
Machias, and from thence to Passamequado; and having effected what spoils you
possibly may upon the enemy in those parts, embark on your vessels for Menis
and Signecto; to Port Royal Gut; and use all possible methods for the burning
and destroying of the enemies houses, and breaking the dams of their co^n
grounds in the said several places, and make what other spoils you can upon
them, and bring away the prisoners. In your return call at Penobscot, and do
what you can there; and so proceed westward.

This will probably employ you a month, or six weeks; when you will draw
together again, and by the latter end of June consider whether you can march to
Norrigwack, or other parts of their planting, to destroy their corn and
settlements, and keep the expedition on foot until the middle of August next.

Notwithstanding the particularity of the aforegoing instruction, I lay you
under no restraint, because I am well assured of your courage, care, caution
and industry; but refer you to your own resolves, by the advice of your
Commission Officers, not under the degree of Captains, and the sea Commission
Captains (whom you will, as often as you can, advise with) according to the
intelligence you may receive, or as you may find needful upon the spot.

You are by every opportunity, and once a week certainly, by some means, either
by way of Casco, Piscataqua, or otherwise to acquaint me of your proceedings
and all occurrences, and what may be further necessary for the service: And to
observe such further and other instructions as you shall receive from myself.

As often as you may, advise with Captain Smith and Captain Rogers, Commanders
of her Majesty's ships.

Let your Minister, Commissary and Surgeons be treated with just respects. I
pray to God to preserve, prosper and succeed you.

Given under my hand at Boston, the fourth day of May, 1704. J. DUDLEY.




Pursuant to his instructions he sent away his transports and forces to
Piscataqua, but was obliged himself to wait upon his Excellency by land to
Piscataqua, in order to raise more forces in the way thither; and did raise a
company under the command of Captain Harridon; taking care also to provide a
pilot for them in the Bay of Fundy; Colonel Church being directed to one --
Fellows, whom he met with at Ipswich. And going from thence to Piscataqua with
his Excellency, was there met by that worthy Gentleman Major Winthrop Hilton,
who was very helpful to him in the whole expedition, whose name and memory
ought not to be forgot. Being ready to embark from Piscataqua, Colonel Church
requested the Commanders of her Majesty's ships, Captain Smith and Capt. Rogers
to tarry at Piscataqua a fortnight, that so they might not be discovered by the
enemy before he had done some spoil upon them. Then moving in their transports,
as directed, got safe into Montinicus, undiscovered by the enemy. Next morning
early fitted out two whale-boats with men, Captain John Cook in one, and
Captain Constant Church in the other; and sent them to Green-Island, upon a
discovery; and coming there they parted, one went to one part, and the other to
the other part, that so they might not miss of what could be discovered; where
they met with old Lasaure with his two sons Thomas and Timothy, and a Canada
Indian. The enemy seeing that they were discovered, threw down their ducks and
eggs, who had got a considerable quantity of each, and ran to their canoes,
getting into them, stood directly for the Main; looking behind them, perceived
the whale-boats to gain so fast upon them, clapped side by side, and all four got
into one canoe, which proved of little advantage to them, for the whale-boats
gained so much upon them, and got so near that Capt. Cook, firing at the
steer's man, which was the Indian, and happened to graze his skull, and quite
spoiled his paddling: Upon which old Lasaure and sons, seeing their companion's
condition, soon begged for quarter, and had it granted: The two Captains with
their success presently returned to their Commander, taking care that their
captives should not discourse together before they were examined; when bro't to
Colonel Church, he ordered them to be apart, and first proceeded to examine old
Lasaure, whom he found to be very surly and cross, so that he could gain no
manner of intelligence by him; upon which the Commander was resolved to put in
practice what he had formerly done at Senecto; ordering the Indians to make two
large heaps of dry wood, at some distance one from the other, and to set a
large stake in the ground, close to each heap; then ordered the two sons,
Thomas and Timothy, to be bro't, and to be bound to the stakes; also ordering
his Indians to paint themselves with colors, which they had bro't for that
use. Then the Colonel proceeded to examine first Timothy; and told him, He had
examined his father already; and that if he told him the truth he would save
his life, and take him into his service; and that he should have good pay and
live well. He answered, That he would tell him the truth; and gave him an
account of every thing he knew; which was all minuted down: He being asked
whether his brother Thomas did not know more than he? His answer was, Yes, for
his Brother Thomas had a commission sent him from the Governor of Canada, to
command a company of Indians, who were gathered together at a place where some
French Gentlemen lately arrived from Canada, who were Officers to command the
rest that were to go westward to fight the English, and that there was sent to
his father and brother Tom, a considerable quantity of flower, fruit,
ammunition and stores, for the supply of the said army. He being asked, Whether
he could pilot our forces to them? Said No: But his brother Tom could, for he
had hid it, and that he was not then with him. The Colonel asked him, What
Gentlemen those were that came from Canada? He answered Monsieur Gourdan, and
Mr. Sharkee. Being asked where they were? Answered at Passamequado; building a
fort there. Being also asked, What number of Indians and French there were at
Penobscot? He answered, There were several families, but they lived scattering.
Asked him further, If he would pilot our forces thither? Answered, He would if
the Commander would not let the savages roast him. Upon which the Colonel
ordered him to be loosed from the stake, and took him by the hand, told him, He
would be as kind to him as his own father; at which he seemed to be very
thankful. And then the Colonel proceeded to examine his brother Tom, and told
him that he had examined his father and brother and that his brother had told
him every title he knew, and that he knew more than his brother Timothy did;
and that if he would be ingenuous and confess all he knew, he should fare as
well as his brother; but if not, the savages should roast him. Whereupon he
solemnly promised that he would, and that he would pilot him to every thing he
knew, to the value of a knife and sheath (which without doubt he did.) Then the
Colonel immediately gave orders for the whale-boats to be ready, and went
directly over where the said goods and stores were, and found them as informed,
took them on board the boats, and returned to their transports; and ordering
provisions to be put into every man's snapsack for 6 or 8 days; so in the dusk
of the evening left their transports, with orders how they should act; and went
directly for the main land of Penobscot, and mouth of that river, with their
pilots Tom and Timothy, who carried them directly to every place and
habitation, both of French and Indians thereabouts, with the assistance of one
De Young, whom they carried out of Boston goal for the same purpose, who was
very serviceable to them. Being there we killed and took every one, both French
and Indians, not knowing that any one did escape in all Penobscot; among those
that were taken was St. Casteen's daughter, who said that her husband was gone
to France, to her father Monsieur Casteen. She having her children with her,
the Commander was very kind to her and them. All the prisoners that were then
taken, held to one story in general, which they had from Lafaure's sons; that
there were no more Indians thereabouts, but enough of them at Passamequado;
upon which they soon returned to their transports with their prisoners and
plunder. The Commander giving order immediately for the soldiers in the
whale-boats to have a recruit of provisions for a further pursuit of the enemy,
giving orders to the transports to stay a few days more there, and then go to
Mount-Desart (and there to stay for her Majesty's ships, who were directed to
come thither) and there to wait his further order. Then Col. Church with his
forces immediately embarked on board their whale-boats, and proceeded to scour
the coast, and to try if they could discover any of the enemy coming from
Passamequado; making their stops in the daytime at all the points and places
where they were certain the enemy would land, or come by with their canoes, and
at night to their paddles. Then coming near where the vessels were ordered to
come, having made no discovery of the enemy went directly to Mount-Desart,
where the transports were just come; and taking some provisions for his
soldiers, gave direction for the ships and transports in six days to come
directly to Passamequado, where they should find him and his forces. Then
immediately moved away in the whale-boats, and made diligent search along
shore, as formerly, inspecting all places where the enemy was likely to lurk:
Particularly at Machias; but found neither fires nor tracks. Coming afterward
to the west harbor at Passamequado, where they entered upon action; an account
whereof Colonel Church did communicate to his Excellency, being as follows:
May it please your Excellency,
I Received yours of this instant, October 9th, with the two enclosed
informations, that concern my actions at Passamequado; which I will give a just
and true account of as near as possibly I can, (viz.) on the 7th of June last,
1704. In the evening we entered in at the westward harbor at said
Passamequado; coming up said harbor to an island, where landing, we came to a
French house, and too a French woman and children, the woman upon her
examination said, her husband was abroad a fishing. I asked her, whether there
were any Indians thereabouts? She said, Yes: There were a great many, and
several on that island. I asked her, whether she could pilot me to them? Said,
No: They hid in the woods. I asked her, when she saw them? Answered, just now,
or a little while since. I asked her whether she knew where they had laid the
canoes? She answered, No: They carried their canoes into the woods with them.
We then hastened away along shore, seizing what prisoners we could, taking old
Lotriel and his family.

This intelligence caused me to leave Col. Gorham, and a considerable part of
my men, and boats, with him at that Island, partly to guard and secure those
prisoners, being sensible it would be a great trouble to have them to secure
and guard at our next landing, where I did really expect, and hoped to have an
opportunity, to fight our Indian enemies; for all our French prisoners that we
had taken at Penobscot, and along shore, had informed us, That when we came to
the place where these Canada gentlemen lived, we should certainly meet with the
Savages to fight us, those being the only men that set the Indians against us,
or upon us, and were newly come from Canada, to manage the war against us,
(pleading in this account and information their own innocence) and partly in
hopes that he, the said Col. Gorham, would have a good opportunity in the
morning to destroy some of those our enemies, (we were informed by the said
French woman as above) with the use of his boats, as I had given direction:
Ordering also Maj. Hilton to pass over to the next Island, that lay East of us,
with a small party of men and boats, to surprise and destroy any of the enemy
that in their canoes might go here and there, from any place, to make their
flight from us, and, as he had opportunity, to take any French prisoners. We
then immediately moved up the river, in the dark night, through great
difficulty, by reason of the eddies and whirlpools, made with the fierceness of
the current. And here it may be hinted, that we had information that Lotriel
had lost part of his family passing over to the next island, falling into one
of those eddies were drowned; which the two pilots told to discourage me: But I
said nothing of that nature shall do it; for I was resolved to venture up, and
therefore forthwith paddling our boats as privately as we could, and with as
much expedition as we could make with our paddles, and the help of a strong
tide, we came up to Monsieur Gourdan's a little before day; where taking notice
of the shore, and finding it somewhat open and clear, I ordered Capt. Mirick
and Capt. Cole, having English companies, to tarry with several of the boats to
be ready, that if any of the enemy should come down out of the brush into the
bay, (it being very broad in that place) with their canoes, they might take and
destroy them: Ordering the remainder of the army being landed, with myself and
the other officers, to march up into the woods, with a wide front, and to keep
at a considerable distance; for that if they should run in heaps the enemy
would have the greater advantage: And further directing them that, if possible,
they should destroy the enemy with their hatchets, and not fire a gun. This
order I always gave at landing, telling them the inconveniency of firing, in
that it might be, first, dangerous to themselves, they being many of them young
soldiers, (as I had some time observed, that one or two guns being fired, many
others would fire, at they knew not what; as happened presently after) and it
would alarm the enemy, and give them the opportunity to make their escape; and
it might alarm the whole country, and also prevent all further action from
taking effect. Orders being thus passed, we moved directly toward the woods,
Le Faver's son directing us to a little hut or wigwam, which we immediately
surrounded with a few men, the rest marching directly up into the woods, to see
what wigwams or huts they could discover; myself made a little stop, ordering
the pilot to tell them in the hut, that they were surrounded with an army, and
that if they would come forth, and surrender themselves, they should have good
quarter, but if not, they should all be knocked on the head and die: One of
them showed himself; I asked who he was? He said, Gourdan; and begged for
quarter: I told him, he should have good quarter; adding further, That if there
were any more in the house, they should come out: Then came out two men;
Gourdan said they were his sons, and asked quarter for them, which was also
granted -- Then came out a woman and a little boy; she fell upon her knees,
begged quarter for herself and children, and that I would not suffer the
Indians to kill them. I told them they should have good quarter, and not be
hurt. After which I ordered a small guard over them, and so moved presently up
with the rest of my company, after them that were gone before, but looking on
my right hand, over a little run, I saw something look black just by me,
stopped, and heard a talking, stepped over, and saw a little hut or wigwam,
with a crowd of people round about it, which was contrary to my former
directions: Asked them what they were doing? They replied, There were some of
the enemy in a house, and would not come out: I asked, what house? They said, A
bark house. I hastily bid them pull it down, and knock them on the head, never
asking whether they were French or Indians; they being all enemies alike to me.
And passing then to them, and seeing them in great disorder, so many of the
army in a crowd together, acting to contrary to my command and direction,
exposing themselves, and the whole army, to utter ruin, by their so disorderly
crowding thick together; had an enemy come upon them in that interim, and fired
a volley amongst them, they could not have missed a shot; and wholly neglecting
their duty, in not attending my orders, in searching diligently for our lurking
enemies in their wigwams, or by their fires, where I had great hopes, and real
expectations to meet with them.

I most certainly know that I was in an exceeding great passion, but not with
those poor miserable enemies; for I took no notice of half a dozen of the
enemy, when at the same time, I expected to be engaged with some hundreds of
them, of whom we had a continued account, who were expected from Port Royal
side, In this heat of action, every word that I then spoke, I cannot give an
account of, and I presume it is impossible. I stopped but little here, but went
directly up into the woods, hoping to be better employed, with the rest of the
army: I listened to hear, and looked earnestly to see what might be the next
action; but meeting with many of the soldiers, they told me they had discovered
nothing; we fetching a small compass round, came down again. It being pretty
dark, I took notice, I saw two men lay dead, as I thought, at the end of the
house, where the door was, and immediately the guns went off, and they fired
every man, as I thought, and most toward that place where I left the guard
with Monsieur Gourdan. I had much ado to stop their firing, and told them, I
thought they were mad, and I believed they had not killed and wounded less than
forty or fifty of our own men. And I asked them what they shot at? They
answered, At a Frenchman that ran away: But to admiration no man was killed,
but he, and one of our men wounded in the leg; and I turning about, a Frenchman
spoke to me, and I gave him quarter. Daylight coming on, and no discovery made
of the enemy, I went to the place where I had left Monsieur Gourdan, to examine
him, and his sons, who agreed in their examinations; told me two of their men
were abroad. It proved a damage; and further told me, That Monsieur Sharkee
lived several leagues up at the head of the river, at the falls, and all the
Indians were fishing, and tending their corn there; and that Monsieur Sharkee
had sent down to him, to come up to him, to advise about the Indian army, that
was to go westward; but he had returned him answer, his business was urgent,
and he could not come up: And that Sharkee, and the Indians would certainly be
down that day, or the next at the furthest, to come to conclude of that matter.
This was a short night's action, and all sensible men do well know, that
actions done in the dark (being in the night as aforesaid) under so many
difficulties, as we then labored under, as before related, was a very hard
task for one man, matters being circumstances as in this action; which would
not admit of calling a council, and at that time could not be confined
thereunto; at which time I was transported above fear, or any sort of dread;
yet being sensible of the danger in my armies crowding so thick together, and
of the great duty incumbent on me, to preserve them from all the danger I
possibly could, for further improvement, in the destruction of our implacable
enemies; am ready to conclude, that I was very quick and absolute in giving
such commands and orders, as I then apprehended most proper and advantageous.
And had it not been for the intelligence I had received from the French we took
at Penobscot, as before hinted, and the false report the French woman (first
took) gave me, I had not been in such haste. I question not but those Frenchmen
that were slain, had the same good quarter of other prisoners. Let I ever
looked on it a good providence of Almighty God, that some few of our cruel and
bloody enemies wre made sensible of their bloody cruelties, perpetrated on my
dear and loving friends and countrymen; and that the same measure (in part)
meeted to them, as they had been guilty of in a barbarous manner at Deerfield,
and I hope justly. I hope God Almighty will accept hereof, although it may not
be eligible to our French implacable enemies, and such others as are not our
friends. The foregoing journal, and this short annexment, I thought it my duty
to exhibit, for the satisfaction of my friends and countrymen, whom I very
faithfully and willingly served in the late expedition; and I hope will find
acceptance with your Excellency, the honorable Council and Representatives now
assembled, as being done from the zeal I had in the said service of her
Majesty, and her good subjects here.

I remain your most humble and obedient Servant, BENJAMIN CHURCH.




This night's service being over, immediately Colonel Church leaves a
sufficient guard with Gourdan, and the other prisoners, moved in some
whale-boats with the rest, and as they were going spied a small thing upon the
water, at a great distance, which proved to be a birch canoe, with two Indians
in her; the Colonel presently ordered the lightest boat he had to make the best
of her way, and cut them off from the shore; but the Indians perceiving their
design, run their canoe ashore and fled. Colonel Church fearing they would run
directly to Sharkee, made all the expedition imaginable; but it being ebb and
the water low, was obliged to land, and make the best of their way through the
woods, hoping to intercept the Indians, and get to Sharkee's house before them;
which was two miles from where our forces landed. The Colonel being ancient and
unwildy, desired Sergeant Edee to run with him, and coming to several trees
fallen, which he could not creep under, or readily get over, would lay his
breast against the tree, the said Edee turning him over, generally had
cat-luck, falling on his feet, by which means kept in the front; and coming
near to Sharkee's house, discovered some French and Indians making a wear in
the river, and presently discovered the two Indians aforementioned, who called
to them at work in the river; told them there was an army of English and
Indians just by; who immediately left their work and ran, endeavoring to get
to Sharkee's house; who, hearing the noise, took his Lady and child, and ran
into the woods. Our men running briskly fired and killed one of the Indians,
and took the rest prisoners. Then going to Sharkee's house found a woman and
child, to whom they gave good quarter: And finding that Madam Sharkee had left
her silk clothes and fine linen behind her, our forces were desirous to have
pursued and taken her; but Colonel Church forbad them, saying he would have her
run and suffer, that she might be made sensible, what hardships our poor people
had suffered by them, etc. Then proceeded to examine the prisoners newly taken,
who gave him the same account he had before, of the Indians being up at the
falls, etc. It being just night prevented our attacking of them that night. But
next morning early they moved up to the falls (which was about a mile higher:)
But doubtless the enemy had some intelligence by the two aforesaid Indians,
before our forces came, so that they all got on the other side of the river,
and left some of their goods by the waterside, to decoy our men, that so they
might fire upon them; which indeed they effected: But through the good
Providence of God never a man of ours was killed, and but one slightly wounded.
After a short dispute Colonel Church ordered that every man might take what
they pleased of the fish which lay bundled up, and to burn the rest, which was
a great quantity. The enemy seeing what our forces were about, and that their
stock of fish was destroyed, and the season being over for getting any more,
set up a hideous cry, and so ran all away into the woods; who being all on the
other side of the river, ours could not follow them. Having done, our forces
marched down to their boats at Sharkee's, and took their prisoners, beaver, and
other plunder which they had got, and put it into their boats, and went down to
Gourdan's house, where they had left Lieutenant Colonel Gorham, and Major
Hilton, with part of the forces to guard the Prisoners, (and kept a good
look-out for more of the enemy) who, upon the Colonel's return, gave him an
account that they had made no discovery of the enemy since he left them, and c.
Just then her Majesty's ships and transports arriving: The Commanders of her
Majesty's ships told Colonel Church that they had orders to go directly for
Port Royal Gut, and wait the coming of some store-ships, which were expected at
Port Royal from France; and Colonel Church advising with them, proposed that it
was very expedient and serviceable to the Crown, that Captain Southack in the
Province Galley should accompany them, which they did readily acquiesce with
him in. Upon which the Colonel immediately embarked his forces on board the
transports, and himself on board Captain Jarvis; ordering the Commissary of the
stores, the minister, surgeons and pilots all to embark on board the same
vessel with him; ordering all the whaleboats to be put on board the transports,
and then to come to fail. The ships standing away for Port Royal Gut, and
Colonel Church with the transports for Menis. In their way the Colonel inquired
of their pilot -- Fellows, what depth of water there was in the creek, near the
town of Menis? He answered him that there was water enough near the town to
float that vessel they were in allow water. So when coming near, Colonel Church
observed a woody island between them and the town, that they run up on the back
side of the said island, with all their transports undiscovered to the enemy,
and came to anchor. Then the Colonel and all his forces embarked in the
whale-boats, it being late in the day, moved directly for the town, and in the
way asked for the pilot, whom he expected was in one of the boats; but he had
given him the slip, and tarried behind. The Colonel not knowing the
difficulties that might attend their going up to the town; immediately sent
Lieutenant Giles, who could speak French, with a flag of truce up to the town,
with a summons, which was wrote before they landed, expecting their surrender:
Which is as follows: Aboard Her Majesty's Ship Adventure, near the Gut of
Menis, June 20, 1704.
An agreement made by the Field Officers commanding Her Majesty's forces for
the present expedition against the French enemies, and Indian rebel.
AGREED,

THAT a declaration or summons be sent on shore at Menis and Port Royal, under
a flag of truce.

Particularly,

We do declare to you, the many cruelties and barbarities that you and the
Indians have been guilty of toward us, in laying waste our country here in the
East, at Casco, and the places adjacent: Particularly, the horrid action at
Deerfield, this last winter, in killing, massacreing, murdering and scalping,
without giving any notice at all, or opportunity to ask quarter at your hands;
and, after all, carrying the remainder into captivity in the height of winter,
(of which they killed many in the journey) and exposed the rest to the
hardships of cold and famine, worse than death itself: Which cruelties we are
yet every day exposed unto, and exercised with.

We do also declare, That we have already made some beginnings of killing and
scalping some Canada men, (which we have not been wont to do or allow) and are
now come with a great number of English and Indians, all volunteers, with
resolutions to subdue you, and make you sensible of your cruelties to us, by
treating you after the same manner.

At this time we expect our men of war and transport ships to be at Port Royal.
(We having but lately parted with them.)

In the last place, We do declare to you, That inasmuch as some of you have
shown kindness to our captives, and expressed a love to, and desire of being
under the English government, We do therefore, notwithstanding all this, give
you timely notice, and do demand a surrender immediately, by the laying down
your arms, upon which we promise very good quarter; if not, you must expect the
utmost severity.

Benjamin Church, Col. John Gorham. Lt. Col. Winthrop Hilton, Maj.
To the Chief Commander of the town of Menis, and the inhabitants thereof, and
we expect your answer positively, within an hour.






Then moving to the creek, expecting to have had water enough for the boats, as
the pilot had informed them, but found not water enough for a canoe; so were
obliged to land, intending to have been up at the town before the hour was out,
that the summons expressed: (For their return was, That if our forces would not
hure their estates, then they would surrender, if otherwise intended, they
should fight for them, etc.) But meeting with several creeks near 20 or 30 feet
deep, which were very muddy and dirty, so that the army could not get over
them, was obliged to return to their boats again, and wait till within night
before the tide served them to go up to the town; and then intended to go up
pretty near the town, and not to fall to till morning, being in hopes that the
banks of the creeks would shelter them from the enemy; but the tides rising so
high exposed them all to the enemy, who had the trees and woods to befriend
them: -- And so came down in the night and fired smartly at our forces; but
Col. Church being in a Pinnace that had a small cannon placed in the head,
ordered it to be charged several times, with bullets in small bags, and fired
at the enemy which made such a rattling amongst the trees, that caused the
enemy to draw off; and by the great providence of Almighty God, not one of our
forces was hurt that night; (but, as I have been informed, they had one Indian
killed, and some others wounded, which was some discouragement to the enemy.)
Next morning, by break of day, Col. Church ordered all his forces (and placed
Maj. Hilton on the right wing) to run all up, driving the enemy before them,
who leaving their town to our forces, but had carried away the best of their
goods, which were soon found by our soldiers. The bulk of the enemy happening
to lie against our right wing, caused the hottest dispute there, who lay behind
logs and trees, till our forces, and Major Hilton, who led them, came on upon
them, and forced them to run; and notwithstanding the sharp firing of the enemy
at our forces, by the repeated providence of God, there was never a man of ours
killed or wounded.

Our soldiers not having been long in town before they found considerable
quantities of strong drink (both brandy and claret) and being very greedy after
it, especially the Indians, were very disorderly, firing at every pig, turkey
or fowl they law, of which were very plenty in the town, which endangered our
own men: Colonel Church perceiving the disorder, and firing of his own men, ran
to put a stop to it, had several shot come very near him; and finding what had
occasioned this disorder, commanded his Officers to knock out the heads of
every cask of strong liquor they could find in the town, to prevent any further
disturbance amongst his army; knowing it was impossible to have kept it from
them, especially the Indians, if it was saved, and c. Then some of the army,
who were desirous to pursue the enemy, having heard them driving away their
cattle, requested the Colonel to let them go; who did: And gave them their
orders. Captain Cook, and Captain Church to lead the two wings, and Lieutenant
Barker, who led the Colonel's company, in the center: And the said Captain
Cook, and Captain Church desired Lieutenant Barker not to move too fast; so
that lie might have the benefit of their assistance, if he had occasion; but
the said Lieutenant not being so careful as he should have been, or at least
was too eager, was shot down, and another man; which were all the men that were
killed in the whole expedition. Toward night Colonel Church ordered some of
his forces to pull down some of the houses, and others to get logs and make a
fortification for his whole army to lodge in that night, that so they might be
together: And just before night ordered some of his men to go see if there were
any men in any of the houses in the town; if not, to set them all on fire;
which was done, and the whole town seemed to be on fire all at once, etc. The
next morning the Colonel gave orders to his men to dig down the dams, and let
the tide in to destroy all their corn, and every thing that was good, according
to his instructions; and to burn the fortification which they had built the day
before: And when the tide served to put all their plunder which they had got
into the boats. Then ordering his soldiers to march at a good distance one from
another; which caused the enemy to think that there were no less than a
thousand men (as they said afterward) and that their burning of the
fortification, and doing as they did, caused the enemy to think that they were
gone clear off, and not to return again. But it proved to the contrary, for
Colonel Church and his forces only went aboard their transports, and there
staid till the tide served; in the night embarked on board their whale-boats,
landed some of his men, expecting they might meet with some of the enemy
mending their dams; which they did, and with their boats went up another branch
of the river, to another town or village; upon such a surprise took as many
prisoners as they could desire. And it happened that Colonel Church was at the
French Captain's house when two gentlemen came post from the Governor of
Port Royal to him, who was the chief Commander at Menis, with an express to
send away two companies of men to defend the King's fort there; and to give him
an account, That there were three English men of war come into Port Royal Gut
or harbor; and that the me^^^ent for must be posted away with all speed.
Colonel Church, as was said before, being there, treated the two gentlemen very
handsomely, and told them, He would send them back again post to their master
upon his business; and bid them give him his hearty thanks for sending him such
good news, that part of his fleet was in so good a harbor. Then reading the
summons to them that he had sent to Menis: Further added, That their Master the
Governor of PortRoyal must immediately send away a post to the Governor of
Canada, at Quebec, to prevent his further sending any of his cruel and bloody
French and savages, as he had done lately upon Deerfield, where they had
committed such horrible and bloody outrages upon those poor people, that never
did them any harm, as is intolerable to think of; and that for the future, if
any such hostilities were made upon our frontier towns, or any of them, He
would come out with a thousand savages, and whaleboats convenient, and turn his
back upon them, and let his savages scalp and roast the French; or at least
treat them as their savages had treated ours: Also gave them an account of part
of that action at Passamequado, and how that his soldiers had killed and
scalped some Canada men there, and would be glad to serve them so too, if he
would permit them, which terrified them very much, and c. The two French
Gentlemen that came post made solemn promises that they would punctually do the
Colonel's message to their Governor. So with the desire of the French people
there, that the Governor might have this intelligence, Colonel Church dismissed
them, and sent them away; telling the same story to several of the prisoners,
and what they must expect if some speedy course was not taken to prevent
further outrages upon the English. The number of prisoners then present (which
were considerable) did unanimously entreat of Colonel Church, that he would
take them under the protection of the crown of England; making great pr^^ises
of their fidelity to the same, begging with great agony of spirit to save their
lives, and to protect them from his savages, whom they extremely dreaded: As to
the matter of the savages, he told them, it would be just retaliation for him
to permit his savages to treat the French in the same manner, as the French
with their savages treated our friends in our frontier towns: But as to his
taking them under the protection of the crown of England, he utterly refused
it, urging to them their former persidiousness; they also urging to him, that
it would be impossible for any French to live any where in the Bay of Fundy, if
they were not taken under the English government; for with the benefit of the
whale-boats, (as the English called them) they could take and destroy all their
people in the town of Menis, in one night: But he replied to them, It should
never be; alleging to them that when they were so before, when PortRoyal was
taken last by the English, that it proved of very ill consequence to the crown
of England, and the subjects thereof in our frontiers; for that our English
traders supplying them, enabled them (which opportunity they improved) to
supply the Indians, our bloody enemies; and therefore he could make no other
terms of peace with them than that; If the French at Menis, Signecto and
Canada, would keep at home with their bloody savages, and not commit any
hostilities upon any of our frontiers, we would return home and leave them; for
that we lived at a great distance off, and had not come near them to hurt them
now, had not the blood of our poor friends and brethren in all the frontiers of
our province cried for vengeance; especially that late unheard of barbarity
committed upon the town of Deerfield; which wrought so generally on the hearts
of our people, that our forces came out with that unanimity of spirit, both
among the English and our savages, that we had not, nor needed a pressed man
among them. The Colonel also telling them, That if ever hereafter any of our
frontiers, East or West were molested by them, as formerly, that he would (if
God spared his life) and they might depend upon it, return upon them with a
thousand of his savages, if he wanted them, all volunteers, with our
whale-boats, and would pursue them to the last extremity. The Colonel's warm
discourse with them wrought such a consternation in them, which they discovered
by their panic fears and trembling, their hearts sensibly beating, and rising
up as it were ready to choke them; confessed they were all his prisoners, and
begged of him, for JESUS sake, to save their lives, and the lives of their poor
families; with such melting terms, as wrought relentings in the Colonel's
breast toward them; but however, he told them, That his intent was to carry as
many prisoners home as he could, but that he had taken so many, they were more
than he had occasion for, nor desired any more; and therefore he would leave
them. The Colonel resolving the next day to complete all his action at Menis,
and so draw off. Accordingly, sent his orders to Colonel Gorham, and Major
Hilton, with all the English companies both officers and soldiers, except some
few, which he thought he might have occasion for to go with the Indians in the
whaleboats up the eastward river, where a third part of the inhabitants lived;
that so he might prevent any reflection made on them, in leaving any part of
the service undone. And therefore in the evening ordered all the whale-boats to
be laid ready for the night's service; and accordingly when the tide served, he
went with his Indians up the river, where they did some spoil upon the enemy
going up. In the morning several of their transports came to meet them, to
their great rejoicing, whom they went on board, and soon came up with the whole
fleet, with whom they joined, bending their course directly toward Port Royal,
where they were ordered. Coming to PortRoyal Gut, where their ships were, and
calling a council according to his instructions, drew up their result: Which is
as follows. Present all the Field Officers and Captains of the land forces.
Aboard the Province Galley, 4 th July, 1704, in Port Royal harbor.
WE whose names are hereunto subscribed, having deliberately considered the
cause in hand, whether it be proper to land all our forces, to offend and
destroy as much as we can at Port Royal, all or any part of the inhabitants
thereof, and their estates, We are of opinion, that it is no for our interest
and honor, and the country's whom we serve, to land or expose ourselves; but
quit it wholly, and go on about our other business we have to do, for this
reason, That we judge ourselves inferior to the strength of the enemy; and
therefore the danger and risk we run, is greater than the advantage we can, or
are likely to obtain, seeing the enemy has such timely notice, and long
opportunity to provide themselves against us, by our ships lying here in the
road about twelve days, before we could join them from Menis, where we were
during that time, and being so very meanly provided with necessaries convenient
for such an undertaking with so small a number of men, not being above four
hundred capable and fit for service to land; and understanding by all the
intelligence we can get from both English and French prisoners, that the fort
is exceeding strong.

John Gorham, Lieut. Col. Jos. Brown, James Cole, John Cook, Isaac Myrick, John
IIarradon, Winthrop Hilton, Major. Constant Church, John Dyer, Joshua Lamb,
Caleb Williamson, Edward Church.
Having, pursuant to my instructions, taken the advice of the Gentlemen above
subscribed, and considering the weight of their reasons, I do concur therewith.

Benj. Church.




WHEREAS Colonel Church has desired our opinions, as to the landing the forces
at Port Royal, they being but 400 effective men to land, and by all the
information both of French and English prisoners, the enemy having a greater
number of men, and much better provided to recive, than they are to attack
them, We do believe it is for the service of the crown, and the preservation of
her Majesty's subjects to act as above mentioned. Thomas Smith, George Rogers,
Cyprian Southack.




After this, they concluded what should be next done; which was, that the ships
should stay some days longer at Port Royal Gut, and then go over to
Mount-Desart harbor, and there stay till Colonel Church with his transports
came to them. Being all ready, the Colonel with his transports and forces went
up the bay to Signecto, where they needed not a pilot, being several of them
well acquainted there; (and had not met with so many difficulties at Menis, had
it not been that their pilot deceived them; who knew nothing of the matter,
kept out of the way and landed not with them, and c. And coming to Signecto,
the enemy were all in arms ready to receive them. Col. Church landing his men,
the Commander of the enemy waving his sword over his head, bid a challenge to
them. The Colonel ordering his two wings to march up a pace, and come upon the
backs of the enemy, himself being in the center, and the enemy knowing him,
(having been there before) shot chiefly at him; but through God's goodness
received no harm, neither had he one man killed, nor but two slightly wounded,
and then all ran into the woods, and left their town with nothing in it; having
had timely notice of our forces, had carried all away out of the reach of our
army; for Colonel Church while there with part of his forces ranged the woods;
but to no purpose: Then returning to the town, did them what spoil he could,
according to his instructions, and so drew off, and made the best of their way
for Passamequado, and going in, in a great fog, one of their transports ran
upon a rock, but was soon got off again. Then Col. Church with some of his
forces embarked in their whaleboats, and went amongst the islands, with an
intent to go to Sharkee's, where they had destroyed the fish; but observing a
springy place in a cove, went on shore to get some water to drink; it being a
sandy beach, they espied tracks, the Colonel presently ordered his men to
scatter, and make search; soon found De Boisses Wife, who had formerly been
Colonel Church's prisoner, and carried to Boston; but returned, who seemed very
glad to see him: She had with her two sons that were near men grown: The
Colonel ordering them apart, examined the woman first, who gave him this
account following, That she had lived thereabouts ever since the fleet went by,
and that she had never seen but two Indians since, who came in a canoe from
Norrigwock; who asked her, what made her to be there alone? She told them, She
had not seen a Frenchman nor an Indian, except those two since the English
ships went by. Then the Indians told her there was not one Indian left except
those two, who belong to the Gut of Canso, on this side of Canada; for those
friars coming down with the Indians to M. Gordans, and finding the Frenchmen
slain, and their hair spoiled, being scalped, put them into a great
consternation; and the friars told them it was impossible for them to live
thereabouts, for the English with their whale-boats would serve them all so;
upon which they all went to Norrigiwock: Also told her that when the English
came along through Penobscot, they had swept it of the inhabitants, as if it
had been swept with a broom, neither French nor Indians escaping them: Further
told her, That when their fathers, the friars, and the Indians met together at
Norrigwock they called a council, and the friars told the Indians, That they
must look out for some other country, for that it was impossible for them to
live there; also told them there was a river called Mossippee, where they might
live quietly, and no English come near them: It being as far beyond Canada, as
it was to it, and c. and if they would go and live there, they would live and
die with them, but if not they would leave them, and never come near them
again. Whereupon they all agreed to go away; which they did, and left their
rough housholdstuff, and corn behind them, and went all, except those two for
Canada. Also her sons giving the same intelligence, so we had no reason to
think but that it was true.

Colonel Church having done what he could there, embarked on board the
transports, and went to Mount-Desart, found no ships there, but a rundlet rid
off by a line in the harbor, which he ordered to be taken up, and opening of
it found a letter, which gave him an account that the ships were gone home for
Boston. Then he proceeded and went to Penobscot; where being come, made
diligent search in those parts for the enemy, but could not find or make any
discovery of them, or that any had been there since he left those parts, which
caused him to believe what De Boisses wife had told him was true.

I will only by the way just give a hint of what we heard since of the effects
of this expedition, and then proceed: First, That the English forces that went
next to Norrigwock, found that the enemy was gone, and had left their rough
household stuff and corn behind them; also not long after this expedition, there
were several gentlemen sent down from Canada, to concert with our Governor
about the settling of a cartile for the exchange of prisoners; and that the
Governor of Canada has never since sent down an army upon our frontiers (that I
know of) except sometimes a scout of Indians to take some prisoners, that he
might be informed of our state, and what we were acting, and c. and always took
care that the prisoners so taken should be civilly treated, and safely
returned, as I have been informed; that some of the prisoners that were taken
gave an account; so that we have great cause to believe that the message
Colonel Church sent by the two French gentlemen from Menis, to the Governor of
Port Royal, took effect, and was a means to bring peace in our borders, and c.
Then Col. Church with his forces embarked on board the transports, and went to
Casco-Bay, where they met with Capt. Gallop, in a vessel from Boston, who had
brought Col. Church further orders; which was to send some of his forces up to
Norrigwock, in pursuit of the enemy; but he being sensible that the enemy were
gone from thence, and that his soldiers were much wore out, and fatigued in the
hard service they had already done, and wanted to get home, called a council,
and agreed all to go home, which accordingly they did.

To conclude this expedition, I will just give a hint of some treatment Colonel
Church had before and after he came home. For all his great expenses, fatigues
and hardships, in and about this expedition, ( viz.) He received of his
Excellency Fifteen Pounds, as an earnest penny toward raising volunteers; and
after he came to receive his debenture for his Colonel's pay, there was Two
Shillings and Four Pence due to him; and as for his Captain's pay, and man
Jack, he has never received any thing as yet. Also after he came home, some ill
minded persons did their endeavor to have taken away his life, for that there
were some of the French enemy killed this expedition; but his Excellency the
Governor, the honorable Council, and House of Representatives saw cause to
clear him, and gave him thanks for his good service done.

FINIS.
THE LIFE OF Colonel CHURCH.
COLONEL BENJAMIN CHURCH was born in 1639, at Duxbury, near Plymouth, of
reputable parents, who lived and died there. His father's name was JOSEPH, who,
with two of his brethren, came early into New England, as refugees from the
religious oppression of the parent state. Mr. Joseph Church, among other
children, had three sons, Joseph, Caleb, and Benjamin. Caleb settled at
Watertown; the other two at Seconet, or Little-Compton. Benjamin, the Hero of
this history, was of a good stature, his body well proportioned, and built for
hardiness and activity. Although he was very corpulent and heavy in the latter
part of his life; yet when he was a young man, he was not so, being then
active, sprightly and vigorous. He carried dignity in his countenance --
thought and acted with a rational and manly judgment -- which, joined with a
naturally generous, obliging and hospitable disposition, procured him both
authority and esteem. He married Mrs. Alice Southworth, by whom he had a
daughter, Mrs. Rothhotham, and five sons, viz.

Thomas Church, the author, or publisher of this history, and father of the
Honorable Thomas Church, Esquire now living in Little-Compton.

Constant Church, a Captain under his father in the eastern expedition, and in
the militia; and of a military and enterprizing spirit.

Benjamin Church, who died a bachelor.

Edward Church, whose only son, now living, is deacon Benjamin Church of
Boston, who furnishes these memoirs of the family.

Charks Church, who had a numerous issue.

Colonel Church was a man of integrity, justice, and uprightness, of piety and
serious religion: He was a member of the church of Bristol at its foundation,
in the Rev. Mr. Lee's day. He was constant and devout in family worship,
wherein he read and often expounded the scriptures to his household. He was
exemplary in observing the sabbath, and in attending the worship and ordinances
of God in the sanctuary. He lived regularly, and left an example worthy of the
imitation of his posterity. He was a friend to the civil and religious
liberties of his country, and greatly rejoiced in the revolution. He was
Colonel of the militia in the county of Bristol. The several offices of civil
and military trust, with which he was invested from time to time, through, a
long life, he discharged with fidelity and usefulness.

The war of 1675 was the most important Indian War that New England ever saw.
Philip or Metacomet (a son of good old MASSASOIT, and his 2d successor) had
wro't up the Indians of all the tribes through New England, into a dangerous
combination to extirpate the English. It was one of the last works of the
Commissioners of the United Colonies (a council which subsisted, the great
security of New England, from 1643 to 1678) to break up this confederacy. An
army of 1000 English was on foot at once, under the command of Governor
Winslow. Whoever desires further information concerning this war, may consult
Mr. Hubbard's history of it. The part Col. Church acted in it is exhibited in
this plain narrative, given by his son two years before his father's death.

Colonel Church perfectly understood the manner of the Indians in fighting, and
was thoroughly acquainted with their haunts, swamps, and places of refuge on
the territory between Narraganset and Cape-Cod: There he was particularly
successful: On that field he gathered his laurels. The surprisal and seizure of
ANNAWON was an act of true boldness and heroism. Had the eastern Indians been
surrounded with English settlements, there is reason to think that he would
have been more successful among them. But on a long etc extended frontier, open
to immense deserts, little more has ever been done by troops of undoubted
courage, than to arouse and drive off the Indians into a wide, howling
wilderness; where it was as much in vain to seek them, as for Casar to sock the
Gauls in the Hircinian forests.

The present edition of this history is given without any alterations in the
body of it; it being thought best that it should go down to posterlty, (like
the Periplus of Hanno) with its own internal marks of originality. However, in
the margin the editor has given the English names of the places described by
Indian names in the narrative; and also some few notes and illustrations.

After Philip's war Colonel Church settled and lived first at Bristol, then at
Fall-River, lastly at Seconet, -- in each of which places he acquired and left
a large estate. Having served his generation faithfully, by the will of God, he
fell asleep, and was gathered to his fathers. He died and was buried at
Little-Compton. The morning before his death he went about two miles on
horseback, to visit his only sister Mrs. Irish, to sympathize with her on the
death of her only child. After a friendly and pious visit, in a moving and
affecting manner he took his leave of her, and said, It was a last farewell;
telling her he was persuaded he should never see her more; but hoped to meet
her in heaven. Returning homeward, he had not rode above half a mile before his
horse stumbled, and threw him over his head: And the Colonel being exceeding
fat and heavy, fell with such force that a blood vessel was broken, and the
blood gushed out of his mouth like a torrent. His wife was soon brought to him;
he tried but was unable to speak to her, and died in about twelve hours. He was
carried to the grave with great funeral pomp, and was buried under arms, and
with military honors. On his tombstone is this inscription: Here lies
interred the Body BENJAMIN CHURCH, Esquire 17 th, 1717-18, In the 78 th Year of his
Age.

Newport, April 8, 1772.
Ode Heroica,
[a Nepote Herois composita]
Biographiae praecedenti affigenda sit.
NUNC permit Nepos Lector, magnalia Av^ ejus,
Et vitam ut breviter caneret, quoque pauca loquendo,
Traduce de veteri, celebrata et, versibus, ex quo
Magnanimusque Heroes frondebat: Deinde locoque:
Quo suit intrepidus Phoenix, memorandus et ortus!
Agricola ecce Pater manuum gaudebat in omni
Tumve labor ^uo, nutritus frugibus Arvi!
Matter pauperibus curas, casusque relaxans,
Omnibus afflictis passim matter suit alma!
Numinis arbitrioque bono, fine murmr mentis,
Acquievere, suis contenti fortibus ambo --
Cordibus elatis, gratique fuere Parents,
Filius ut talis mortalibus hisce daretur!
Qui patriaeque fuae perluxit gloria long,
Donec erat victus truculentae mortis ab ictu!
Duxburiae dictum est, Genioque fuisse beatum
Oppidum, et exultans, tanto quod munere Martis
Distinctum fuerat! Vicinis majus ab illo!
Historicus supra probiter canit arma virumque
Quique erat in pugna multis, magnisque periclis
Expositus! Natos nemoris fuscosve secutus
Armipotens; sylvas, Dumosque arbustaque densa
Pervolitans, nigros scloppo ejus perdidit Angues;
Monstraque quos natura parens crudelia dixit!
Victoriisque suis pacem stabilivit in Orbis
Terrarum occsu -- jam, jam sub vitibus omnis
Hie fedeat salvus -- terrore absente Mavortis!
Mortuus est Heroes! Nomen sed vivet in aevum --
Spiritus ascendit Coelos, Jesuq triumphans;
Dum latet in tumulo corpus cum pulvere mixtum!
Sic cecinit Nepos BENJ. CHURCH, Sen.

FINIS

