Englishman's Right; A DIALOGUE.

As Jurymen are liable to Doubts in the Discharge of their Duty, This Treatise
is earnestly Recommended, as giving them full Instruction in every Part of it.

THE Englishman's Right; A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A BARRISTER at LAW AND A JURYMAN;
Plainly setting forth, I. The ANTIQUITY, II. The Excellent Designed USE, III.
The OFFICE, and Just PRIVILEGES, of JURIES,


BY THE LAW OF ENGLAND.

By Sir JOHN HAWLES, Knight, SOLICITOR-GENERAL to the late King WILLIAM.

LONDON, Printed M,DCC,LXXI.

BOSTON, Reprinted by EDES and GILL, in Queen Street, M,DCC,LXXII.

PREFACE.
"AS the people of England cannot be bound by any law, without the consent of
their representatives first had in parliament; so neither can any Englishman
suffer in his person, or estate, for the breach of any laws, or for any real,
or pretended crime, without the consent of the people first had by a jury of
his peers, or equals:" therefore,

It can never be unseasonable to inform, or to remind. Jurors of their duty;
because they are the persons, on whom the property, the liberty, and the lives
of their fellow subjects depend. When questions, however, which relate to the
national liberty of the people, are agitated in the courts of justice; it
becomes of the utmost consequence, that those who serve upon Juries should be
acquainted with their duties. For, if Juries are destitute of the instructions
necessary upon these occasions, we must not expect that they will exert
themselves with spirit: while they remain ignorant of the nature of their
station, it is impossible that they should feel its importance.

Men of great eminence in the law have publicly declared, that encroachments
have lately been made upon the rights of Juries. To enquire into the truth of
this charge is of the utmost consequence, not only to Jurors, but to the whole
body of the people; as there is no man who may not, directly, or indirectly, be
affected by these invasions. Indeed, the good intentions and dispositions of
Jurymen will avail little to the security of the nation, if they are
fraudulently, or forcibly, prevented from discharging the duties of their
office.

A knowledge, therefore, of whatever relates to the office of Juries, seems at
this time essentially necessary; since from hence alone can arise the proper
execution of its duties, and the preservation of its rights. -- To promote
these purposes, the following little pamphlet is now republished. Its character
for perspicuity, and strength of reasoning, (...) so well established, that it
is unnecessary to enlarge upon it here. If it meets with the success which its
merit deserves, it will perhaps be a principal means of preserving the trial by
Jury, (...) its full force, to posterity.

ADVERTISEMENT to the READER.
THIS treatise has passed through many editions. It appeared first in the year
1680; it was reprinted in the year 1731, and again in 1763, 1764, 1770 and
1771; and is now presented to the public at least for the seventh time.

N. B. Many circumstances might lead the reader to suspect, that this Dialogue
has been altered in order to accommodate it to the present times. This edition,
however, has been carefully collated with the first, which was printed in
London for Richard Janeway, in Queen's Head Alley, Paternoster Row, in the
year 1680: and so scrupulously has the Original been adhered to, that not a
single word has been altered, except in the translation of the Latin sentences
in page 3, the latter of which was before unintelligible. Liberties, indeed,
have been taken with the orthography, and pointing; but these have not in the
least affected the sense.

THE ENGLISHMAN's RIGHT.
Barrister. MY old Client! a good morning to you: whither so fast? you seem
intent upon some important affair.


Jurym. Worthy Sir! I am glad to see you thus opportunely, there being scarce
any person that I could at this time rather have wished to meet with.


Bar. I shall esteem myself happy, if in any thing I can serve you. -- The
business, I pray?


Jurym. I am summoned to appear upon a Jury, and was just going to try if I
could get off. Now I doubt not but you can put me into the best way to obtain
that favor.


Bar. It is probable I could: but first let me know the reasons why you desire
to decline that service.


Jurym. You know, Sir, there is something of trouble and loss of time in it;
and men's lives, liberties, and estates (which depend upon a jury's Guilty, or
Not Guilty, for the plaintiff, or for the defendant) are weighty things. I
would not wrong my conscience for a world, nor be accessory to any man's ruin.
There are others better skilled in such matters. I have ever so loved peace,
that I have forborne going to law, (as you well know many times) though it has
been much to my loss.


Bar. I commend your tenderness and modesty; yet must tell you, these are but
general and weak excuses.

As for your time and trouble, it is not much; and however, can it be better
spent than in doing justice, and serving your country? to withdraw yourself in
such cases, i^ a kind of Sacrilege, a robbing of the public of those duties
which you justly owe it; the more peaceable man you have been, the more fit you
are. For the office of a Juryman is, conscientiously to judge his neighbor;
and needs no more law than is easily learnt to direct him therein. I look upon
you therefore as a man well qualified with estate, discretion, and integrity;
and if all such as you should use private means to avoid it, how would the king
and country be honestly served? At that rate we should have none but fools or
knaves entrusted in this grand concern, on which (as you well observe) the
lives, liberties, and estates of all England depend.

Your tenderness not to be accessory to any man's being wronged or ruined, is
(as I said) much to be commended. But may you not incur it unawares, by seeking
thus to avoid it? Pilate was not innocent because he washed his hands, and
said, He would have nothing to do with the blood of that just one. There are
faults of omission as well as commission. When you are legally called to try
such a cause, if you shall shuffle out yourself, and thereby persons perhaps
less conscientious happen to be made use of, and so a villain escapes justice,
or an innocent man is ruined, by a prepossessed or negligent verdict; can you
think yourself in such a case wholly blameless? Qui non prohibet cum potest,
jubet: That man abets an evil, who prevents it not, when it is in his power.
Nec caret scrupulo societatis occulta qui evidenter sacinori desinit obviare:
Nor can he escape the suspicion of being a secret accomplice, who evidently
declines the prevention of an atrocious crime.


Jurym. Truly, I think a man is bound to do all the good he can, especially
when he is lawfully called to it. But there sometimes happen nice cases,
wherein it may be difficult to discharge one's conscience without incurring the
displeasure of the court, and thence trouble and damage may arise.


Bar. That is but a vain and needless fear. For as the jurors privileges (and
every Englishman's in and by them) are very considerable; so the laws have no
less providently guarded them against invasion or usurpation. So that there
needs no more than, first, understanding to know your duty; and, in the next
place, courage and resolution to practice it with impartiality and integrity,
free from accursed bribery and malice, or (what is full as bad in the end) base
and servile fear.


Jurym. I am satisfied, that as it is for the advantage and honor of the
public, that men of understanding, substance and honesty, should be employed to
serve on juries, that justice and right may fairly be administered; so it is
their own interest, when called thereunto, readily to bestow their attendance
and service, to prevent ill precedents from men otherwise qualified; which may
by degrees fatally, though insensibly, undermine our just birthrights, and
perhaps fall heavy one day upon us, or our posterity. But, for my own part, I
am fearful lest I should suffer through my ignorance of the duty and office of
a juryman; and, therefore, on that account principally it is, that I desire to
be excused in my appearance; which if I understood but so well as I hope many
others do, I would with all my heart attend the service.


Bar. You speak honestly, and like an Englishman. But if that be all your
cause of scruple, it may soon be removed, if you will but give yourself a very
little trouble of enquiry into the necessary provisions of the law of England
relating to this matter.


Jurym. There is nothing (of a temporal concern) that I would more gladly be
informed in; because I am satisfied, it is very expedient to be generally
known. And first, I would learn how long trials by juries have been used in
this nation.


Bar. Even time out of mind; so long, that our best historians cannot date the
original of the institution, being indeed cotemporary with the nation itself,
or in use as soon as the people were reduced to any form of civil government,
and administration of justice. Nor have the several conquests or revolutions,
the mixtures of foreigners, or the mutual feuds of the natives, at any time,
been able to suppress or overthrow it. For,

1. That juries (the thing in effect and substance, though perhaps not just the
number of twelve men) were in use among the Britons, the first inhabitants of
this island, appears by the ancient monuments and writings of that nation,
attesting that their Freeholders had always a share in all trials and
determinations of differences.

2. Most certain it is, that they were practiced by the Saxons Lamb. p. 218.
Coke, 1 part, Institutes, fol. 155.
, and were then the only courts, or at least an essential, and the greater part
of all courts of judicature: for so (to omit a multitude of other iustances) we
find in king Ethelr^d's Laws, In singulis Centuriis, etc. In every Hundred let
there be a court, and let twelve ancient freemen, together with the Lord, or
rather, according to the Saxon, the Greve, i. e. the chief officer amongst
them, be sworn, That they will not condemn any person that is innocent, nor
acquit any one that is guilty.

3. When the Normans came in, William, though commonly called the Conqueror, was
so far from abrogating this privilege of Juries See Spelman's Gl^ssar. in the
Word Jurata.
, that in the fourth year of his reign, he confirmed all king Edward the
Confessor's laws, and the ancient customs of the kingdom, whereof this was an
essential and most material part. Nay, he made use of a Jury chosen in every
county, to report and certify on their oaths what those laws and customs were;
as appears in the p^oem of such his confirmation.

4. Afterward when the Great Charter, commonly called Magna Charta, (which is
nothing else than a recital, confirmation, and corroboration of our ancient
English liberties) was made and put under the great seal of England, in the
ninth year of king Henry the Third, (which was Anno Domini 1225.) then was this
privilege of trials by Juries in an especial manner confirmed and established;
as in the fourteenth chapter, That no amercements shall be assessed, but by the
oath of good and honest men of the vicinage. And more fully in that golden
nine-and-twentieth chapter -- No freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, nor be
disseised of his freehold or liberties, or free customs, or be out lawed, or
exiled, or any other way destroyed, nor shall we pass upon him, or condemn him,
but by the lawful judgment of his peers, etc Which Grand Charter having been
confirmed by above thirty acts of parliament, the said right of Juries thereby,
and by constant usage, and common custom of England, which is the common law,
is brought down to us as our undoubted birthright, and the best inheritance of
every Englishman. For as that famous lawyer, chief justice Coke (...) fol. ^6.
, in the words of Cicero, excellently avers, Major H^reditas venit unicuique
nostrum a jure and legibus quam a parentibus: It is a greater inheritance, and
more to be valued, which we derive from the fundamental constitution and laws
of our country, than that which comes to us from our respective parents. For
without the former, we have no claim to the latter.


Jurym. But has this method of trial never been attempted to be invaded or
justled out of practice?


Bar. It is but rarely that any have arrived to so great a confidence: For it
is a most dangerous thing to shake, or alter, any of the rules, or fundamental
points, of the common law, which in truth are the main pillars, and supporters
of the fabric of the commonwealth: these are judge Coke's words 2 Instit. p. 74.
. Yet sometimes it has been endeavored: but so sacred and valuable was the
institution in the eyes of our ancestors, and so tenacious were they of their
privileges, and zealous to maintain, and preserve such a vital part of their
birth right and freedom; that no such attempts could ever prove effectual, but
always ended with the shame and severe punishment of the rash undertakers. For
example.

1. Andrew Horn, an eminent lawyer, in his book, entitled, the Mirror of
Justices, (written in the reign of king Edward I. now near 400 years ago) in
the fifth chapter, and first section, records, That the renowned Saxon king
Alfred caused four-and forty justices to be hanged in one year, as murderers
for their false judgments. And there recites their particular crimes, most of
them being in one kind or other infringements, violations, and encroachments of
and upon the rights and privileges of Juries. Amongst the rest, that worthy
author tells us, he hanged one justice Cadwine, because he judged one Hackwy to
death without the consent of all the Jurors; for whereas he stood upon his Jury
of twelve men, because three of them would have saved him, this Cadwine removed
those three, and put others in their room on the Jury, against the said
Hackwy's consent. Where we may observe, that though at last twelve men did give
a verdict against him, yet those, so put upon him, were not accounted his
Jurors; by reason all, or any of them, who were first sworn to try him, could
not (by ^aw) by removed, and others put in their stead: And that such illegal
alteration was then adjudged a capit^l crime, and forthwith the said Cadwine
was hanged.

2. A second instance I shall give you in the words of the lord chief justice
Coke Coke, 2 part of Inst. fol. 51.
: Against this ancient and fundamental law (and in the face thereof) there was
in the eleventh year of king Henry VII. cap. 3. an act of Parliament obtained
(on fair pretenses, and a specious preamble, as to avoid diverse mischiefs,
etc.) whereby it was ordained, That from thenceforth, as well justices of
assize, as justices of the peace, upon a bare information for the king before
them made, without any finding or presentment by the verdict of twelve men,
should have full power and authority by their d^scretion^, to hear and
determine all offenses and contempts committed or done by any person or persons
against the form, ordinance, or effect of any statute made and not repealed,
etc. By color of which act (says Coke) shaking this fundamental law ( he
means, touching all trials to be by Juries) it is not credible what HORRIBLE
OPPRESSIONS and EXACTIONS, to the undoing of MULTITUDES of people, were
committed by Sir Richard Empson knight, and Edmund Dudley, Esquire (being justices
of the peace) throughout England; and upon this unjust and injurious act (as
commonly in like cases it falls out) a new office was erected, and they made
^^sters of the king's forfeitures.

But not only this statute was justly, soon after the decease of Henry VII.
repealed by the stat, of the 1 Hen. VIII. cap. 6. but also the said Empson and
Dud^ey (notwithstanding they had such an act to back them, yet it being against
Magna Charta, and consequently void) were fairly executed for their pains; and
several of their under-agents, as promoters, informers, and the like, severely
pu^ished, for a warning to all others that shall dare (on any pretense
whatsoever) infringe our English liberties See Sir Rich. Baker's Chron. p 254.
. For so the lord 4 Part Institut fol. 41.
Coke having (elsewhere) with detestation mentioned their story, pathetically
concludes; Qui eorum vestigiis insistant, ^xitus perhorrescant: Let all those
who shall presume to tread their steps, tremble at their dreadful end. Other
instances of a later date might be given, but I suppose these may suffice.


Jurym. Yes, surely; and by what you have discoursed of the long-continued use
of Juries, and the zealous regards our ancestors had not to part with them. I
perceive that they were esteemed a special privilege. Be pleased, therefore, to
acquaint me, wherein the excellency and advantages to the people, by that
method of trial above others, may consist


Bar. This question shows you have not been much conversant abroad, to observe
the miserable condition of the poor people in most other nations, where they
are either wholly subject to the despotic arbitrary lust of their rulers; or at
best under such laws as render their lives, liberties, and estates, liable to
be disposed of at the discretion of strangers appointed their judges; most
times mercenary and creatures of prerogative; sometimes malicious and
oppressive; and often partial and corrupt See all this excellently made ou^,
and more at large, by the L. C J. Fortescue, afterward chance^lor to K. Hen.
VI. in his Book De laudibu^ Legum Anglae, cap. 26, 27, 28, 29
. Or suppose them ever so just and upright, yet still has the subject no
security against the attacks of unconscionable witnesses; yea, where there is
no sufficient evidence, upon bare suspicions, they are obnoxious to the
tortures of the rack, which often make an innocent man confess himself guilty,
merely to get out of present pain. Is it not then an inestimable happiness to
be born, and live under such a mild and righteous constitution, wherein all
these mischiefs (as far as human prudence can provide) are prevented? where
none can be condemned, either by the power of superior enemies, or ^he rashness
or ill will of any judge, nor by th^^^^^ld affirmations of any profligate
evidence: but no less than twelve honest, substantial, impartial men, his
neighbors (who consequently cannot be presumed to be unacquainted either with
the matters chared, the prisoners course of life, or the credit of the
evidence) must first be fully satisfied in their consciences, that he is
guilty; and so all unanimously pronounce him upon their oaths? Are not these,
think you, very material privileges I^ maybe of importance to add one
observation here: -- Th^ugh a parliament to supply the necessities and purpos^s
^f ^n abandoned administration, should oppress us with taxes; while the
constitution remains, in other respect unvi^^ated, the continuance of J^^^es in
their le(...) secure our reputations, our p^^sonal liberties, ou^ limbs, and
our lives.
?


Jurym. Yes, certainly; though I never so well considered them before. But now
I plainly see ourfore-fathers had, and we still have, all the reason in the
world to be zealous for the maintenance and preservation thereof from
subversion or encroachments, and to transmit them entire to posterity. For, if
once this bank be broken down or neglected, an ocean of oppression, and the
ruins of infinite numbers of people, (as in Empson and Dudley's days) may
easily follow, when on any pretense they may be made criminals, and then fined
in vast sums, with pretext to enrich the king's coffers, but indeed to feed
those insatiate vultures that promote such unreasonable prosecutions. But since
you have ^aught me so much of the antiquity and excellency of juries, I cannot
but crave the continuance of your favor, to acquaint me somewhat more
particularly of their office and power by law.


Bar. I shall g^adly comply with so reasonable and just a request. S^e C^k^,
4th Part of I^stit. so^. 84.
A jury of twelve men are by our laws the only proper judges of the matter in
issue before them. As for instance,

1. That testimony which is delivered to induce a jury to believe, or not to
believe, the matter of fact in issu^, is called in law EVIDENCE, because
thereby the jury may, out of many matters of fact, Evidere veritatem; that is,
see clearly the truth, of which they are proper judges.

2. When any matter is sworn, or when a deed is read or offered, whether it
shall be believed, or not, or whether it be true, or false, in point of fact,
the jurors are proper judges.

3. Whether such an act was done, in such, or such a manner, or to such, or
such, an intent, the jurors are judges. For the court is not judge of these
matters, which are evidence to prove, or disprove, the thing in issue. And
therefore the witnesses are always ordered to direct their speech to the jury,
they being the proper judges of their testimony. And in all pleas of the crown
(or matters criminal) the prisoner is said to put himself for trial upon his
country, which is explained and referred by the clerk of the court, to be meant
of the jury, saying to them, Which country you are.


Jurym. Well then, what is the part of the king's justices, or the court? what
are they to take cognizance of, or do, in the trials of men's lives, liberties,
and properties?


Bar. Their office, in general, is to do equal justice and right: particularly,

1. To see that the jury be regularly returned and duly sworn.

2. To see that the prisoner (in cases where it is permitable) be allowed his
lawful challenges.

3. To advise by law, whether such matter may be given in evidence, or not,
such a writing read, or not, or such a man admitted to be a witness, etc.

4. Because by their learning, and experience, they are presumed, to be best
qualified, to ask pertinent questions, and, in the most perspicuous manner,
soonest to sift out truth from amongst tedious impertinent circumstances and
tautologies: they therefore commonly examine the witnesses in the court, yet
not excluding the jury, who of right may, and where they see cause, ought to
ask them any necessary questions; which undoubtedly they may lawfully do with
modesty and discretion, without begging any leave. For if asking leave be
necessary, it implies in the court a right when they list to deny it; and how
then shall the jury know the truth? And since we see, that council, who too
often ( -- Pudet haec opprobria nobis) for their sees strive only to baffle
witnesses, and stif^e truth, take upon them daily to interrogate the evidence;
it is absurd to think that the Jurors should not have the same privilege, who
are upon their oaths, and proper judges of the matter.

5. As a discreet and lawful Assistant to the Jury, V^^ghan's Reports in
^ushell's cas^, fol. 144.
they do often recapitulate and sum up the heads of the evidence; but the
Jurors are still to consider whether it be done truly, fully and impartially,
(for one man's memory may sooner fail than twelve's.) He may likewise state the
law to them, that is, deliver his opinion where the case is difficult, or they
desire it. But since, ex facto jus oritur, all matter of law arises out of
matter of fact, so that till the fact is settled there is no room for law:
therefore all such discourses of a judge to a Jury are, or ought to be,
hypothetical, not coercive; conditional, and not positive: viz. If you find the
fact thus or thus, still leaving the Jury at liberty to find as they see cause)
then you are to find for the plaintiff. But if you find the fact thus, or thus,
then you are to find for the defendant, or the like, Guilty, or not Guilty, in
cases criminal.

Lastly, they are to take the verdict of the Jury, and thereupon to give
judgment according to law. For the office of a judge (as Coke well observes) is
jus dicere not jus dare; not to make any laws by strains of wit, or forced
interpretations; but plainly, and impartially to declare the law already
estalished. Nor can they refuse to accept the Jury's verdict when agreed: for
if they should and force the Jury to return, and any of them should miscarry
for want of accommodation, it would undoubtedly be murder; and in such case
the Jury may, without crime, force their liberty, because they are illegatly
confined, having given in their verdict, and thereby honestly discharged their
office, and are not to be starved for any man's pleasure.


Jurym. But I have been told, that a Jury is only judge of naked matter of
fact, and are not at all to take upon them to meddle with, or regard, matter of
law, but leave it wholly to the court.


Bar. It Is most true, Jurors are judges of matters of fact: that is their
proper province, their chief business; but yet not excluding the consideration
of matter of law, as it arises out of, or is complicated with, and influences
the fact. For to say, they are not at all to meddle with, or have respect to,
law in giving their verdicts, is not only a false position, and contradicted by
every day's experience; but also a very dangerous and pernicious one; tending
to defeat the principal end of the institution of Juries, and so subtly to
undermine that which was too strong to be battered down.

1. It is false: For, though the direction, as to matter of law separately, may
belong to the judge, and the finding the matter of fact does, peculiarly,
belong to the Jury; yet must your Jury also apply matter of fact and law
together; and from their consideration of, and a right judgment upon both,
bring forth their verdict: For do we not see in most general issues, as upon
not guilty -- pleaded in trespass, breach of the peace, or felony, though it be
matter in law whether the party be a trespasser, a breaker of the peace, or a
felon; yet the Jury do not find the fact of the case by itself, leaving the law
to the court; but find the party guilty, or not guilty, generally? So as,
though they answer not to the question singly, what is law? yet they determine
the law, in all matters, where issue is joined. So likewise is it not every
day's practice, that when persons are indicted for murder, the Jury not only
find them guilty, or not guilty; but many times, upon hearing, and weighing of
circumstances, bring them in either guilty of murder, manslaughter, per
infortunium, or se defenderdo, as they see cause? Now do they not, herein,
complicately resolve, both law and fact? And to what end is it, that when any
person is prosecuted upon any statute, the statute itself is usually read to
the Jurors, but only that they may judge, whether, or no, the matter be within
that statute? But to put the business out of doubt, we have the suffrage of
that oracle of law, Littleton, who in his Tenures, Sect. 368. declares, That if
a Jury will take upon them the knowledge of the law upon the matter, they may.
Which is agreed to likewise by Coke in his comment thereupon An able writer of
our own times, before the present disputes arose, considers this, as a settled
and allowed rule. See Blackstone's Commentaries, vol. III. p. 377.378.
particularly vol. IV. p. 364. 355. 4th ed.
. And therefore it is false to say that the Jury has not power, or d^^h not
use frequently to apply the fact to the law; and thence taking their measures,
judge of, and determine, the crime, or issue, by their verdict Not only the
express assertion of lawyers -- and the practice of the courts, prove, that
Juries are authorized to determine the law, so far as it relates to the fact;
but, in the third place, the words, in which verdicts must be given, indicate,
that they have this power. If Juries had been appointed to judge of facts only,
the words ' done,' or ' not done,' or words of a like import, would have been
substituted for the words ' guilty,' or 'not guilty.' However, as our ancestors
have placed it in their option to determine the law, so far as it is connected
with the fact, the language of their verdicts comprehends, when necessary,
their sentiments upon both. If an action is said to be criminal, it is
necessary to determine whether the action happened: -- So that when a Jury
declares that a man is guilty, the fact is implied; because they cannot affix
guilt, where there is no fact. When a Jury declares a man not guilty, the
determination of the fact is left uncertain^ because it is unnecessary; for the
law concerns itself with actions, only so far, as they are criminal.
.

2. As Juries have ever been vested with s^^^ power by law, so, to exclude them
from, or disseise them of the same, were utterly to defeat the end of their
institution From the doctrine, that Juries, in the case of libels, are not
judges of law, as well as fact, necessarily flows the following absurdity, viz.
that it is the duty of Juries to declare men guilty, or not guilty, in whom
they perceive neither guilt, or innocence. Again^ If because a circumstance is
established as a fact, it is to be reputed as a crime, every incident which
happens, is a crime. Now, if printing and publishing only be criminal, it is
criminal to print and publish the Book of Common Prayer, and the Bible.

It is hard to say, on what principles this right of Juries can be disputed.
"If Jurymen, because not bred to the law, are supposed incapable of knowing
what is, or what is not, law; it follows that none but lawyers can justly be
punished for a breach of the law; for, surely, that man is rather unfortun^^^,
than faulty, who ign^rantly transgresses the law." -- Besides, if it is wise to
vest the determination of law, where it concern^ facts, in the Jury when any
civil or criminal suit^ is in question; certainly it is wise to entrust the
Jury with the same power, in all suits which particularly concern the state:
because, in such suits, the determination is always of more consequence, and
judges are more likely to be under an influence, which is injurious to the
rights of the people.


. For then, if a person should be indicted for doing any common innocent act if
it be but clothed, and disguised, in the indictment, with the name of treason
or some other high crime, and proved, by witnesses, to have been done by him;
the Jury, though satisfied in conscience, that the fact is not any such offense
as it is called, yet because (according to this fond opinion) they have no
power to judge of law and the fact charged is fully proved, they shall, at this
rate, be bound to find him guilty: And being so found, the judge may pronounce
sentence against him, for he finds him a convicted traitor. etc. by his peers.
And thus as a certain physician boasted, that he had killed one of his patients
with the best method in the world; so here should we have an innocent man
hanged, drawn, and quartered, and all according to law.


Jurym. God forbid that any such thing should be practiced! and indeed I do not
very fully understand you.


Bar. I do not say it ever has been, and I hope it never will be pract^^^^:
But this I will say, that according to this doctrine, it may be; and
consequently Juries may thereby be rendered, rather a snare, or, engine of
oppression, than any advantage or guardian of our legal liberties against
arbitrary injustice. and made mere properties to do the drudgery, and bear the
blame of unreasonable prosecutions. And since you seem so dull as not to
perceive it, let us put an imaginary case; not in the least to abet any
irreverence toward his majesty, but only to explain the thing, and show the
absurdness of this opinion. -- Suppose then a man should be indicted, For that
he as a false traitor, not having the fear of God before his eyes. etc. did,
traitorously, presumptuously, against his allegiance, and with an intent to
affront his majesty's person, and government pass by such, or such, a royal
statue, or ^ffigies, with his hat^on his head, to the great contempt of his
majesty, and his authority, the evil example of others, against the peace, and
his majesty's crown and dignity. Being hereupon arraigned, and having pleaded
Not Guilty, suppose that sufficient evidence should swear the matter of fact
laid in the indictment, viz. That he did pass by the statue, or picture, with
his hat on; now imagine yourself one of the Jury that were sworn to try him,
what would you do in the matter?


Jurym. Do? why I should be satisfied in my conscience, that the man had not,
herein, committed any crime, and so I would bring him in, not guilty.


Bar. You speak as any honest man would do: but I hope you have not forgot the
point we were upon. Suppose therefore when you thought to do thus, the court,
or one of your brethren, should take you up, and tell you, that it was out of
your power so to do: For took ye (says he) my masters! we Jurymen are only to
find matter of fact, which being fully proved, as in this case before us it is,
we must find the party guilty: whether the thing be treason, or not, does not
belong to us to enquire; it is said so here, you see, in the indictment; and
let the court look to that, they know best; we are not judges of law: shall we
meddle with niceties and punctilio's, and go contrary to the directions of the
court? So perhaps we shall bring ourselves into a Praemunire (as they say) and
perhaps never be suffered to be Jurymen again. No, no the matter of fact you
see is proved, and that is our business; we must go according to our evidence,
we cannot do less: truly it is something hard, and I pity the poor man, but we
cannot help it, etc. After these notable documents, what would you do now?


Jurym. I should not tell what to say to it; for I have heard several ancient
Jurymen speak to the very same effect, and thought they talked very wisely.


Bar. Well then, would you consent to bring in the man guilty?


Jurym. Truly I should be somewhat unwilling to do it; but I do not see which
way it can be avoided, but that he must be found guilty of the fact.


Bar. God keep every honest body from such Jurymen! have you no more regard to
your Oath? to your Conscience? to Justice? to the Life of a man?


Jurym. Hold! hold! perhaps we would not bring him in guilty generally, but
only guilty of the fact Is not this exactly similar to a late verdict given in
the case of the King against Woodfall?
, finding no more, but, guilty of passing by the statue with hi^ hat on.


Bar. This but poorly mends the matter, and signifies little or nothing: for
such a finding has generally been refused by the court, as being no verdict;
though, it is said, it was lately allowed somewhere in a case that required
favor. But, suppose it were accepted, what do you intend should become of the
prisoner? Must not he be kept in prison till all the judges are at leisure, and
willing to meet, and argue the business? Ought you not, and what reason can you
give why you should not, absolutely acquit, and discharge him? Nay, I do aver,
you are bound, by your oaths to do it, by saying with your mouths to the court,
what your conscience cannot but dictate to yourselves, Not Guilty: For pray
consider, are you not sworn, That you will well and truly try, and true
deliverance make? there is none of this story, of matter of fact, distinguished
from law in your oath. But you are, well, that is, sully, and truly, that is,
impartially, to try the prisoner. So that if upon your consciences, and the
best of your understanding, by what is proved against him, you find he is
guilty of that crime wherewith he stands charged, that is, deserving Death, or
such other punishment as the law inflicts upon an offense so denominated; then
you are to say, he is Guilty. But if you are not satisfied, that either the Act
he has committed, was treason, or other crime, (though it be never so often
called so) or that the act itself, if it were so criminal, was not done; then
what remains, but, that you are to acquit him? for the end of Juries is to
preserve men from Oppression; which may happen, as well by imposing, or ruining
them for that as a crime, which indeed is none, or at least not such, or so
great, as is pretended; as by charging them with the commission of that, which,
in truth, was not committed. And how do you well, and truly try, and true
deliverance make, when indeed you do but deliver him up to others to be
condemned, for that, which yourselves do not believe to be any crime?


Jurym. Well; but the supposed case i^ a case unsupposable. It is not to be
imagined, that any such thing should happen; nor to be thought, that the judges
will condemn any man, though brought in guilty by the Jury, if the matter, in
itself, be not so criminal by law.


Bar. It is (...) true, I do not believe that ever that case will happen. I
put it in a thing of apparent absurdity, that you might the more clearly
observe the unreasonableness of this doctrine; but withal I must tell you that
it is not impossible that some other cases may really happen, of the same, or
the like nature, though more fine, and plausible. And, though we apprehend not,
that during the reign of his majesty that now is, (whose life God long
preserve) any Judges will be made, that would so wrest the law; yet what
security is there, but that some successors may not be so cautious in their
choice? and, though our benches of judicature be at present furnished with
gentlemen of great integrity, yet, there may one day happen some Tresilian, or
kinsman of Empson^s, to get in, (for what has been may be) who, Empson like,
too, shall pretend it to be for his master's service to increase the number of
criminals, that his coffers may be filled with fines and forfeitures: and then
such mischiefs may arise. And Juries, having upon confidence parted with their
just privileges, shall then, too late, strive to reassume them, when the
number of ill precedents shall be vouched to enforce that as of right, which in
truth was at first a wrong, grounded on easiness and ignorance. Had our wise,
and wary ancestors, thought fit to depend so far upon the contingent honesty of
judges, they needed not to have been so zealous to continue the usage of Juries
If the reader is desirous of seeing the many unhappy consequences, to which
such a dependence would subject us; let him read the second postscript to the
Letter to Almon in matter of Libel. There are many observations in that
publication, which give great confirmation to the doctrines here laid down, and
show the writer to have been possessed of exceedingly great abilities,
judgment, and learning.
.


Jurym. Yet still I have heard, that in every indictment, or information, there
is always something of form, or law, and, something else, of fact; and it seems
reasonable, that the Jury should not be bound up nicely to find every formality
therein expressed, or else to acquit (perhaps) a notorious criminal. But if
they find the essential matter of the crime, then they ought to find him guilty.


Bar. You say true, and therefore must note, that there is a wide difference
to be made between words of course, raised by implication of law, and essential
words, that either make, or really aggravate, the crime charged. The law does
suppose and imply every trespass, breach of the peace, every felony, murder, or
treason, to be done VIIT ARMIS, with force, and arms, etc. Now, if a person be
indicted for murder by poison, and the matter proved, God forbid the jury
should scruple the finding him guilty upon the indictment; merely because they
do not find that part of it, as to force, and arms, proved! For that is implied
as a necessary, or allowable, fiction of law.

But on the other side, when the matter in issue in itself, and taken as a
naked proposition, is of such a nature, as no action, indictment, or
information will lie for it singly, but it is worked up by special aggravations
into matter of damage, or cime; as that it was done to scandalize the
government, to raise sedition, to affront authority, or the like, or with such,
or such, an evil intent: If these aggravations, or some overt act to manifest
such ^ll design, or intention, be not made out by evidence, then ought the Jury
to find the party, Not Guilty. For example:

Bishop Latimer (afterward a martyr in bloody queen Mary's days, for the
Protestant religion) in his sermon preached before the most excellent king
Edward VI. delivered these words: I must desire your grace to hear poor men's
suits yourself. The saying is now, That money is heard every where: If he be
rich, he shall soon have an end of his matter; others are fain to go home with
weeping tears for any help they can obtain at any judge's hand. Hear men's
suits yourself, I require you in God's behalf, and put them not to the hearing
of these velvet-coats, these upskips. Amongst all others, one especially moved
me at this time to speak: This it is, Sir: A gentlewoman came and told me, that
a great man keeps certain lands of hers from her, and will be her tenant in
spite of her teeth. And that in a whole twelvemonth she could not get but one
day for the hearing of her matter, and the same day, when it should be heard,
the great man brought on his side a great sight of lawyers for his council; the
gentlewoman had but one man of law, and the great man shakes him so, that he
cannot tell what to do. So that when the matter came to the point, the ^^dge
was a means to the gentlewoman, that she should let the great man have a
quietness in her land. -- I beseech your grace, that ye would look to these
matters. And you proud judges! hearken what God says in his holy book; Audite
illos, ita parvum, ut magnum, Hear them (says he) the small as well as the
great; the poor as well as the rich; regard no person, fear no man. And why?
Quia Domini judicium est, The judgment is God's. Mark this saying, thou proud
judge; the devil will bring this sentence against thee at the day of doom. Hell
will be full of these judges, if they repent not, and amend: they are worse
than the wicked judge that Christ speaks of, Luke the 19th, that neither
feared God nor the world. Our judges are worse than this judge was; for they
will neither hear men for God's sake, nor fear of the world, nor
importunateness, nor any thing else; yea, some of them will command them to
Prison.
ward if they be importunate. I heard say, that when a suitor came to one of
them, he said, What fellow is it that gives these folks countel to be so
importunate? He deserves to be punished, and committed toward. Marry, Sir,
p^nish me then; it is even I that gave them counsel; I would gladly be punished
in such a cause; and if you amend not, I will cause them to cry out upon you
still; even as long as I live. -- These are the very words of that good bishop,
and martyr, father Latimer: But nowadays the judges be afraid to hear a poor
man against the rich; insomuch, they will either pronounce against him, or so
drive off the poor man's suit, that he shall not be able to go through with it
See also Latumer's Third Sermon.
.


Jurym. Truly they are somewhat bold, but I think very honest ones. But what
signify they to our discourse?


Bar. Only this; -- Suppose the judges of those times, thinking themselves
aggrieved by such his freedom, should have brought an indictment against him,
setting forth, that falsely, and malicious^y, intending to scandalize the
government, and the administration of justice, in this realm, and to bring the
same into contempt, he did speak, publish, and declare the false, and
scandalous, words before recited.


Jurym. I conceive, the judges had more wit than to trouble themselves about
such a business.


Bar. That is nothing to the purpose; but suppose, I say, by them, or any body
else, it had been done, and his speaking the words had been proved, and you had
then been living, and one of the Jury?


Jurym. I would have pronounced him Not Guilty, and been starved to death
before I would have consented to a contrary verdict; because the words in
themselves are not criminal, nor reflecting upon any particulars; and as for
what is supposed to be laid in the indictment, or information, (that they were
published, or spoken, to scandalize the government, and the administration of
justice, or to bring the same into contempt) nothing of that appears.


Bar. You resolve, as every honest, understanding, conscientious man, would do
in the like case; for when a man is prosecuted for that, which, in itself, is
no crime, how dreadfully soever it may be set out, as the inquisitors in Spain
use to clothe innocent Protestants, whom they consing to the flames with
Sambenito's, garments all over bepaintest with Devils, that the people
beholding them in so hellish a dress, may be so far from pitying them, that
they may rather condemn them in their thoughts as miscreants not worthy to
live, though in truth they know nothing of their cause; -- yet I say,
notwithstanding any such bugbear artifices, an innocent man ought to be
acquitted, and not he and all his family ruined, and perhaps utterly undone,
for words, or matters, harmless in themselves, and possibly very well intended,
but only rendered criminal, by being thus hideously dressed up, and wrested
with some far-fetched, forced, and odious construction.


Jurym. This is a matter well worthy the consideration of all Juries; for
indeed I have often wondered to observe the adverbs in declarations,
indictments, and informations, in some cases to be harmless vinegar and pepper,
and in others, henbane steeped in aqua fortis.


Bar. That may easily happen, where the Jury does not distinguish legal
implications, from such as constitute, or materially aggravate, the crime: for
if the Jury shall honestly refuse to find the latter in cases where there is
not direct proof of them, ( viz. That such an act was done falsely,
scandalously, maliciously, with an intent to raise sedition, defame the
government, or the like,) their mouths are not to be stopped, nor their
consciences satisfied with the court's telling them -- You have nothing to do
with that; it is only matter of form or matter of law: you are only to examine
the fact, whether he spoke such words, wrote, or sold such a book, or the like
A prophet! -- Our modern patriots have often been the subjects of ridicule, on
account of their appre^ensions: however, we have lived to see the comp^etion of
several predictions, here made by me of our ancest^^s; and our po^ie^ity may
(...), have reason to be convinc^ (...) tunes are not e^tirely wi^h (...).
: For now, if they should ignorantly take this for an answer, and bring in the
prisoner Guilty, though they mean and intend, of the naked fact, or bare act,
only; yet the clerk recording it, demands a further confirmation, saying to
them, thus; Well then, you say A. B. ^is guilty of the trespass, or
misdemeanour, in manner, and form, as be stands indicted; and so you say all?
To which the foreman answers for himself and his fellows, Yes. Whereupon the
verdict is drawn up -- Juratores super sacramentum suum dicunt, etc. The Jurors
do say upon their ^aths, that A. B. maliciously, in contempt of the king and
the government, with an intent to scandalize the administration of justice, and
to bring the same into contempt, or to raise sedition, etc. (as the words
before were laid); spoke such words, published such a book, or did such an act,
against the peace of our lord the king, his crown and dignity.

Thus a VERDICT, so called in law, quasi veritatis, because it ought to be the
VOICE, or SAYING, of TRUTH Vere dictum.
itself, may become composed in its material part of falsehood. Thus twelve men
ignorantly drop into a perjury. And will not every conscientious Man tremble to
pawn his soul under the sacred, and dreadful, solemnity of an oath, to attest,
and justify, a lie upon record to all posterity? besides the wrong done to the
prisoner, who thereby perhaps comes to be hanged, (and so the Jury in foro
conscientiae are certainly guilty of his murder;) or at least by fine, or
imprisonment, undone, with all his family; whose just curses will fall heavy on
such unjust Jurymen, and all their posterity, that against their oaths, and
duty, occasioned their causeless misery. And is all this, think you, nothing
but a matter of formality?


Jurym. Yes, really, a matter of vast importance, and sad consideration; yet I
think you charge the mischiefs done by such proceedings a little too heavy upon
the Jurors: Alas, good men! they mean no harm, they do but follow the
directions of the court; if any body ever happen to be to blame in such cases,
it must be the judges.


Bar. Yes, forsooth! that is the Jurymens common plea; but do you think it will
hold good in the court of Heaven? It Is not enough that we mean no harm, but we
must do none neither, especially in things of that moment; nor will ignorance
excuse, where it is affected, and where duty obliges us to inform ourselves
better, and where the matter is so plain and easy to be understood.

As for the judges, they have a fairer plea than you, and may quickly return
the burden back upon the Jurors: For we, may they say, did nothing but our
duty, according to usual practice: the Jury, his ^eers, had found the fellow
guilty upon their oaths, of such an odious crime, and attended with such vile
presumptions, and dangerous circumstances. They are judges; we took him as they
presented him to us; and according to our duty pronounced the sentence, that
the law inflicts in such cases, or set a fine, or ordered corporeal punishment
upon him, which was very moderate, considering the crime laid in the
indictment, or information, and of which they had so sworn him guilty. If he
were innocent, or not so bad as represented, let his destruction lie upon the
Jury, etc. At this rate, if ever we should have an unconscionable judge, might
he argue; and thus the guilt of the blood, or ruin, of an innocent man, when it
is too late, shall be bandied to and fro, and shuffled off from the Jury to the
Judge, and from the Judge to the Jury; but really sticks fast to both, but
especially on the Jurors; because the very end of their institution was to
prevent all dangers of such oppression; and in every such case, they do not
only wrong their own souls, and irreparably injure a particular person, but
also basely betray the liberties of their country in general: for as without
their ill compliance and act, no such mischief can happen; so by it, ill
precedents are made, and the plague is increased; honester Juries are
disheartened, or seduced by custom from their duties; just privileges are lost
by disuser; and perhaps within a while some of themselves may have an hole
picked in their coats, and then they are tried by another Jury just as wise,
and honest, and so deservedly come to smart under the ruinating effects, and
example, of their own folly and injustice.


Jurym. You talk of folly, and blame Jurymen, when indeed they cannot help it.
They would sometimes find such a person Guilty, and such an one Innocent, and
are persuaded they ought so to do; but the court overrules, and forces them to
do otherwise.


Bar. How, I pray?


Jurym. How? why, did you never hear a Jury threatened to be fined and
imprisoned, if they did not comply with the sentiments of the court?


Bar. I have read of such doings, but I never heard, or saw it done; and
indeed I do not doubt but our seats of justice are furnished with both better
men, and better lawyers, than to use any such menaces or duress; for
undoubtedly it is a base, and very illegal, practice. But however, will any man
that fears God, nay, that is but an honest heathen, debauch his conscience and
forswear himself, do his neighbor injustice, betray his country's liberties,
and consequently enslave himself, and his posterity, and all this, merely,
because he is hectored, and threatened a little?


Jurym. I know it should not sway with any: but alas, a prison is terrible to
most men, whatever the cause be; and the fine may be such, if one shall refuse
to comply, as may utterly ruin one's family.


Bar. Fright not yourself; there is no cause for this ague-sit, to shake your
conscience out of frame: if you are threatened, it is but Brutum fulmen,
lightning without a thunderbolt, nothing but big words; for it is well known,
THAT THERE IS NEVER A JUDGE (...) ENGLAND THAT CAN FINE, OR IMPRISON, ANY
JURYMAN IN SUCH A CASE.


Jurym. Good Sir! I am half ashamed to hear a Barrister talk thus: have not
some in our memory been fined and imprisoned? And sure that which has actually
been done, is not altogether impossible.


Bar. Your servant, Sir! under favor of your mighty wisdom, and experience,
when I said no judge could do it, I spoke the more like a Barrister; for it is
a maxim in law -- Id possumus, quod Jure possumus; a man is said to be able to
do only so much, as he may lawfully do. But such fining, and imprisoning,
cannot lawfully be done; the judges have no right, or power, by law, to do it;
and therefore it may well be said, they cannot, or are not able to do it.

And whereas you say, that some Juries in our memory have been fined and
imprisoned, you may possibly say true; but it is as true, that it has been
only in our memory; for no such thing was practiced in ancient times; for so I
find it asserted by a late learned judge Lord chief justice Vaughan in his
Reports, fol. 146.
, in these positive words: No case can be offered, either before attaints
granted in general, or after, that ever a Jury was punished by fine and
imprisonment by any judge, for not finding according to their evidence, and his
direction, until Popham's time; nor is there clear proof, that he ever fined
them for that reason, separated from other misdemeanors. And fol. 152, he
affirms, -- That no man can show, that a Jury was ever punished upon an
information, either at law, or in the Star Chamber, where the charge was only
for finding against their evidence, or giving an untrue verdict; unless
imbracery, subordination, or the like were joined. So that, you see, the
attempt is an innovation as well as unjust; a thing unknown to our
forefathers, and the ancient sages of the law: and therefore so much the more
to be watched against, resisted, and suppressed, whilst young; lest in time
this crafty cockatrice's egg, hatched, and sostered by ignorance, and
pusillanimous compliance, grow up into a serpent too big to be mastered, and so
blast, and destroy the firstborn of our English freedoms. And indeed (blessed
be God) it has hitherto been rigorously opposed as often as it durst crawl
abroad; being condemned in parliament, and knocked of the head by the
resolutions of the judges upon solemn argument: as, by and by, I shall
demonstrate.


Jurym. Well, but are Jurors not liable then to fine or imprisonment, in any
case whatsoever?


Bar. Now you run from the point; we were talking of giving their verdict, and
you speak of any case whatsoever. Whereas you should herein observe a necessary
distinction, which I shall give you in the words of that learned judge last
recited Vaughan's Reports, fol. 152.
: Much of the office of Jurors, in order to their verdict, is MINISTERIAL: as
not withdrawing from their fellows after they are sworn; not receiving from
either side evidence not given in court; not eating and drinking before their
verdict; refusing to give a verdict, etc. wherein if they transgress, they may
be fincable. But the verdict itself when given, is not an act ministerial, but
JUDICIAL, and (supposed to be) according to the best of their judgment; for
which they are not finable, nor to be punished, but by attaint; that is, by
another Jury, in cases where an attaint lies, and where it shall be found that
wilfully, they gave a verdict, false and corrupt.

Now that Juries, otherwise, are in no case punishable, nor can (for giving
their verdict according to their consciences, and the best of their judgment)
be legally fined or imprisoned by any judge, on color of not going according
to their evidence, or finding contrary to the directions of the court; is a
truth, both founded on unanswerable reasons, and confirmed by irrefragable
authorities.


Jurym. Those I would gladly hear.


Bar. They are many, but some of the most evident are these that follow. As
for reasons:

1. A Jury ought not to be fined, or imprisoned, because they do not follow the
judge's directions; for if they do follow his directions, they may yet be
attained: and to say they gave their verdict according to his directions, is no
bar but the judgment shall be reversed, and they punished for doing that, which
if they had not done, they should (by this opinion) have been fined, and
imprisoned by the judge. -- Which is unreasonable.

2. If they do not follow his direction, and be therefore fined, yet they may
be attainted, and so they should be doubly punished by distinct judicatures for
the same offense; which the common law never admits.

3. To what end is the Jury to be returned out of the vicinage (that is, the
neighborhood) whence the issue arises? to what end must hundredors be of the
Jury, whom the law supposes to have nearer knowledge of the fact than those of
the vicinage in general? to what end are they challenged so scrupulously to the
array and poll? to what end must they have such a certain freehold, and be
probi, and legales, homines, and not of affinity with the parties concerned,
etc. if after all this, they implicitly must give a verdict by the dictates,
and authority of another man, under pain of fines, and imprisonment, when sworn
to do it according to the best of their own knowledge? A man cannot see by
another's eye, nor hear by another's ear; no more can a man conclude, or infer,
the thing to be resolved by another's understanding, or reasoning; unless all
men's understandings were equally alike. And if, merely in compliance, because
the judge says thus, or thus, a Jury shall give a verdict; though such their
verdict should happen to be right, true, and just; yet they being not assured
it is so from their own understanding are forsworn, atleast in foro
conscientiae.

4. Were Jurors so finable, then every mayor, and bailiff of corporations, all
stewards of leets, justices of peace, etc. whatever matters are tried before
them, shall have verdicts to their minds, or else fine, and imprison the Jurors
till they have; so that such must be either pleased, humoured, or gatified,
else no justice, or right, is to be had in any court.

5. Whereas a person by law may challenge the sheriff, or any Juryman, if of
kin to his adversary; yet he cannot challenge a mayor, recorder, justice, etc.
who it is possible will have a verdict for their kinsman, or against their
enemy, or else fine and imprison the Jury till they have obtained it: so that
by this means our lives, liberties, and properties, shall be solely tried by,
and remain at the arbitrary disposal of every mercenary, or corrupted justice,
mayor, bailiff, or recorder, if any such should, at any time, get into office.

6. It Is unreasonable that a Jury should be finable on pretense of their going
against their evidence; because it can never be tried whether or no in truth
they did find with, or against, their evidence, by reason no writ of error lies
in the case. And they may of their own knowledge have information of various
matters to exculpate, or condemn, of which the judge is wholly ignorant.


7. Were Jurymen liable to such arbitrary fines, they would be in a worse
condition than the criminals that are tried by them; for in all civil actions,
informations, and indictments, some appeals, or writs of false judgment, or of
error, do lie into superior courts to try the regular proceedings of the
inferior. But here can be no after-trial, or examination; but the Juryman (if
fining at all were lawful) must either pay the fine, or lie by it; without
remedy to decide, whether in his particular case he were legally fined, or not.

8. Without a fact agreed, it is as impossible for a judge, or any other to
know the law, relating to that fact, or direct concerning it, as to know an
accident that has no subject; for as, where there is no law, there is no
transgression, so where there is no transgression, there is no place for law:
for the law (says divine authority) is made for the transgressor. And as Coke
tells us, Ex Facto Jus oritur, upon stating the fact, or transgression, matter
of law does arise, or grow out of the root of the fact. Now the Jury being the
sole judges of fact, and matter in issue before them, not finding the fact on
which the law should arise, cannot be said to find against law, which is no
other than a superstructure on fact; so that to say they have found against the
law, when no fact is found, is absurd; an expression insignificant, and
unintelligible. For no issue can be joined of matter in law, no Jury can be
charged with the trial of matter in law barely, no evidence ever was, or can
be, given to a Jury of what is law, or not: nor can any such oath be given to,
or taken by a Jury, to try matter in law, nor does an attaint lie for such
oath, if false, etc. But if by finding against the directions of the court in
matter of law, shall be understood, that if the judge having heard the evidence
given in court, (for he can regularly know no other, though the Jury may) shall
tell the Jury upon this evidence, the law is for the plaintiff, or for the
defendant, and the Jury are under pain of fine, and imprisonment, to find
accordingly; then it is plain, the Jury ought of duty so to do. Now if this
were true, who sees not that the Jury is but a troublesome delay, of great
charge, much formality, and no real use in determining right, and wrong, but
mere echoes to sound back the pleasure of the court; and consequently, that
trials by them might be better abolished than continued? which is at once to
spit folly in the faces of our venerable ancestors, and enslave our posterity.

9. As the judge can never direct what the law is in any matter controverted,
without first knowing the fact; so, he cannot, possibly, know the fact but from
the evidence which the Jury have: but he can never fully know what evidence
they have; for besides what is sworn in court, (which is all that the judge can
know) the Jury, being of the neighborhood, may, and oft-times do, know
something of their own knowledge, as to the matter itself, the credit of the
evidence, etc. which may justly sway them in delivering their verdict, and
which self-knowledge of theirs is so far countenanced by law, that it supposes
them capable thereby to try the matter in issue, (and so they must) though no
evidence were given, on either side, in court. As when any man is indicted, and
no evidence comes against him, the direction of the court always is, You are to
acquit him, unless of your own knowledge you know him guilty; so that even, in
that case, they may find him guilty, without any witnesses. Now how absurd is
it to think, that any judge has power to fine a jury s^^ going against their
evidence, when he that so fine^^, knows perhaps nothing of their evidence at
a^^ (as in the last case) or at least but some part of (...) For how is it
possible he should lawfully punish them for that, which it is impossible for
him to know?

Lastly, Is any thing more common, than for two lawyers, or judges, to deduce
contrary, and opposite conclusions out of the same case in law? And why then
may not two men infer distinct conclusions from the same testimony? And
consequently, may not the Judge, and Jury, honestly differ in their opinion, or
result from the evidence, as well as two judges may, which often happens? And
shall the Jurymen merely for this difference of apprehension, merit fine, and
imprisonment, because they do that which they cannot otherwise do, preserving
their oath and integrity? especially when by law they are presumed to know
better, and much more of the business, than the judge does, as aforesaid.

Are not all these, gross contradicting absurdities, and unworthy (by any man
that deserves a gown) to be put upon the law of England, which has ever owned
right reason for its parent, and dutifully submitted to be guided thereby?


Jurym. If the law, as you say, be reason, then undoubtedly this practice of
fining of Juries is most illegal since there cannot be any thing more
unreasonable: but what authorities have you against it?


Bar. You have heard it proved to be a modern upstart encroachment, so you
cannot expect any direct, or express condemnation of it in ancient times;
because the thing was not then set on foot. And, by the way, though negative
arguments are not necessarily conclusive, yet that we meet with no precedents
of old of Juries fined, for giving their verdict contrary to evidence, or the
sense of the court, is a violent presumption that it ought not to be done: for
it cannot be supposed, that this (...) did first of all discover, that verdicts
were many times not according to the judge's opinion and liking. Undoubtedly
they saw that as well as we; but knowing the same not to be any crime, or
punishable by law, were so modest and honest, as not to meddle with it.
However, what entertainment it has met with, when attempted in our times, I
shall show you in two remarkable cases.


1. When the late lord chief justice Keeling had attempted something of that
kind, it was complained of, and highly resented by the then parliament; as
appears by this copy of their proceedings thereupon, taken out of their
Journal, as follows.

Die Mercurii, 11 Decembris, 1667.
The house resumed the hearing of the rest of the report touching the matter of
restraint upon Juries, and that upon the examination of diverse witnesses in
several cases of restraints put upon Juries by the lord chief justice Keeling;
and thereupon resolved as follows:

First, That the proceedings of the said lord chief justice, in the cases now
reported, are innovations in the trial of men for their lives, and liberties.
And that he has used an arbitrary, and illegal power, which is of dangerous
consequence to the lives and liberties of the people of England, and tends to
the introducing of an arbitrary government.

Secondly, That in the place of judicature the lord chief justice has
undervalued, vilified, and contemned MAGNA CHARTA the great PRESERVER of our
lives, freedom, and property.

Thirdly, That he be brought to trial in order to condign punishment, in such
manner as the house shall judge most fit, and requisite.

Die Veneris, 13 Decembris, 1667.
Resolved, etc.

That the precedents, and practice of fining, or imprisoning, of Jurors for
giving their verdicts, are illegal.

Here you see it branded in parliament: Next you shall see it formally
condemned on a solemn argument by the judges. The case thus.

At the sessions for London, Sept. 1670, William Pen, and William Mead (two of
the people commonly called Quakers) were indicted, for that they with others,
to the number of three hundred, on the 14th Aug. 22 Regis, in
Gracechurch-Street, did with force, and arms, etc. unlawfully, and
tumultuously, assemble, and congregate themselves together, to the disturbance
of the peace; and that the said William Pen did there preach, and speak, to the
said Mead, and other persons in the open street; by reason whereof, a great
concourse, and tumult, of people in the street aforesaid then, and there, a
long time, did remain, and continue, in contempt of our said lord the king, and
of his law, to the great disturbance of his peace, to the great terror and
disturbance, of many of his liege people, and subjects, to the ill example of
all others in the like case offenders, and against the peace of our said lord
the king, his crown, and dignity.

The prisoners pleading Not Guilty, it was proved, that there was a meeting at
the time in the indictment mentioned, in Gracechurch-Street, consisting of
three, or four hundred people, in the open street; that William Pen was
speaking, or preaching, to them, but what he said, the witnesses (who were
officers and soldiers sent to disperse them) could not hear. -- This was the
effect of the evidence; which Sir John Howel, the then recorder, (as I find in
the print of that trial) was pleased to sum up to the Jury, in these words:

You have heard what the indictment is; it is for preaching to the people in
the street, and drawing a tumultuous company after them, and Mr. Pen was
speaking: if they should not be disturbed, you see they will go on: there are
three or four witnesses that have proved this, -- that he did preach there,
that Mr. Mead did allow of it. After this you have heard by substantial
witnesses what is said against them; Now we are upon the matter of fact, which
you are to keep to, and observe, as what has been fully sworn, at your peril.

This trial began on the Saturday; the Jury retiring, after some considerable
time spent in debate, came in, and gave this verdict. -- Guilty of speaking in
Gracechurch-Street. At which the court was offended, and told them, they had as
good say nothing; adding, -- Was it not an unlawful assembly? You mean he was
speaking to a tumult of people there? But the foreman saying, what he had
delivered was all he had in commission; and others of them affirming, that they
allowed of no such words as an unlawful assembly in their verdict; they were
sent back again, and then brought in a verdict in writing, subscribed with all
their hands, in these words: We, the Jurors hereafter named, do find William
Pen to be guilty of speaking, or preaching, to an assembly met together in
Gracechurch-Street, the 14th of Aug. 1670. And William Mead not guilty of the
said indictment.

Note, Though this Jury, for their excellent example of courage, and constancy,
deserve the commendation of every good Englishman; yet, if they had been better
advised, they might have brought the prisoners in Not Guilty at first, and
saved themselves the trouble, and inconveniences of these two nights
restraint. See State Trials, vol. II. p. 606, in fol. Vide note * to page 15.
This the court resented still worse, and therefore sent them back again, and
adjourned till Sunday morning; but then too they insisted on the same verdict:
so the court adjourned till Monday morning; and then the Jury brought in the
prisoners generally Not Guilty; which was recorded, and allowed of. But
immediately the court fined them forty marks a man, and to lie in prison till
paid.

Being thus in custody, Edward Bushel, one of the said Jurors, on the ninth of
November following, brought his Habeas Corpus in the court of Common Pleas. On
which the sheriffs of London made return, That he was detained by virtue of an
order of sessions, whereby a fine of forty marks was set upon him, and eleven
others, particularly named; and every of them being Jurors sworn to try the
issues joined between the king, and Pen, and Mead, for certain trespasses,
contempts, unlawful assemblies, and tumults, and who then, and there, did
acquit the said Pen, and Mead, of the same, against the law of this kingdom,
and against full, and manifest, evidence, and against the direction of the
court in matter of law, of, and upon the premises openly in court to them
given, and declared; and that it was ordered they should be imprisoned till
they severally paid the said fine, which the said Bushel not having done, the
same was the cause of his caption and detention See Bushel's Case in Vaughan's
Reports at large.
.

The court coming to debate the validity of this return, adjudged the same
insufficient: For, 1. The words, -- against full, and manifest, evidence, was
too general a clause: the evidence should have been fully, and particularly,
recited, else how shall the court know it was so full and evident? they have
now only the judgment of the sessions for it, that it was so: but said the
Judges, Our judgments ought to be grounded upon our own inferences, and
understandings, and not upon theirs.

2. It is not said, that they acquitted the persons indicted against full and
manifest evidence, corruptly, and knowing the said evidence to be full and
manifest; for otherwise it can be no crime: for that may seem full and
manifest, to the court, which does not appear so to the Jury.

3. The other part of the return, viz. That the Jury had acquitted those
indicted against the direction of the court in matter of law, was also adjudged
to be naught, and unreasonable; and the fining the Juries for giving their
verdict in any case concluded to be illegal, for the several reasons before
recited, and other authorities of law urged to that purpose; and all the
precedents and allegations, brought to justify the fine, and commitment,
solidly answered. Whereupon the chief justice delivered the opinion of the
court, That the cause of commitment was insufficient; and accordingly the said
Bushel, and other his fellow prisoners, were discharged, and left to the common
law for remedy and reparation of the damages, by that tortuous illegal
imprisonment, sustained.

Which case is (amongst others) reported by that learned judge Sir John
Vaughan, at that time lord chief justice of the Common Pleas, setting forth all
the arguments, reasons, and authorities, on which the court proceeded therein;
from which I have extracted most of the reasons which I before recited for this
point, and, for the greatest part, in the very words of that reverend author.

Jurym. This resolution has, one would think, (as you said) knocked this
illegal practice on the head, beyond any possibility of revival; but may it not
one day be denied to be law, and the contrary justified?


Bar. No such thing can be done without apparently violating, and subverting
all law, justice, and modesty: for though the precedent itself be valuable, and
without further enquiry is wont to be allowed, when given thus deliberately
upon solemn debate by the whole court; yet, it is not only that, but the sound,
substantial, and everlasting reasons, whereon they grounded such their
resolves, that will, at all times, justify fining of Juries in such cases to be
illegal. Besides, as the reporter was most considerable, both in his quality as
lord chief justice, and for his parts, soundness of judgment, and deep learning
in the law; so such his book of Reports is approved, and recommended to the
world, (as appears by the page next after the epistle) by the right honorable
the present lord chancellor of England; Sir William Scroggs, now lord chief
justice of England; my lord North, chief justice of the Common Pleas; and, in a
word, by all the judges of England at the time of publishing thereof: so that
it cannot be imagined how any book can challenge greater authority, unless we
should expect it to be particularly confirmed by act of parliament.


Jurym. You have answered all my scruples; and since I see the law has made so
good provision for Jurymen's privileges, and safety, God forbid any Juryman
should be of so base a temper, as to betray that, otherwise, impregnable
fortress, wherein the law has placed him to preserve, and defend, the just
rights, and liberties of his country, by treacherously surrendering the same
into the hands of violence, or oppression, though masked under ever so fair
stratagems, and pretenses. For my own part, I shall not now decline to appear
according to my summons; and therefore (though I fear I have detained you too
long already) shall desire a little more of your direction about the office of
a Juryman in particular, that I may uprightly, and honestly, discharge the same.


Bar. Though I think, from what we have discoursed, being digested, and
improved, by your own reason, you may sufficiently inform yourself; yet, to
gratify your request, I shall add a few brief remarks, as well of what you
ought cautiously to avoid, as what you must diligently pursue, and regard, if
you would justly, and truly, do your duty.


First, As to what you must avoid.

1. I am very confident, that you would not willingly violate the oath which
you take; but it is possible that there are such who as frequently break them,
as take them, through their careless custom on the one hand, or slavish sear,
on the other, against whom I would fully caution you; that you may defend
yourself, and others, against any enemies of your country's liberties, and
happiness, and keep a good conscience toward God, and toward man.

2. It is frequent, that when Juries are withdrawn, that they may consult of
their verdict, they soon forget that solemn oath they took, and that mighty
charge of the life and liberty of men, and their estates, whereof then they are
made judges; and that, on their breath, not only the fortunes of the particlar
party, but perhaps the preservation, or ruin, of several numerous families does
solely depend: Now I say, without due consideration of all this; nay sometimes
without one serious thought, or consulted reason, offered pro or con, presently
the foreman, or one, or two, that call themselves ancient Jurymen, though in
truth they never knew what belongs to the place more than a common schoolboy,
rashly deliver their opinions; and all the rest, in respect to their supposed
gravity, and experience, or because they have the bigest estates, or to avoid
the trouble of disputing the point, or to prevent the spoiling of dinner by
delay, or some such weighty reason, forthwith agree blindfold, or else go to
holding up of hands, or telling of noses, and so the major vote carries away
captive both the reason, and the conscience, of the rest: thus trifling with
sacred oaths, and putting men's lives, liberties, and properties (as it were) to
the hap^^azard of cross or pile. This practice, or something of the like kind,
is said to be too customary amongst some Jurors, which occasions such their
extraordinary dispatch of the weightiest, or most intricate, matters; but there
will come a time when they shall be called to a severe account for their baste,
and negligence; therefore have a care of such fellowjurors.

3. Such a slavish fear attends many Jurors, that let but the court direct to
find, Guilty or Not Guilty, though they themselves see no just reason for it;
yea, oft-times though their own opinions are contrary, and their consciences
tell them it ought to go otherwise; yet, right, or wrong, accordingly they will
bring in their verdict; and, therefore, many of them never regard seriously the
course, and force, of the evidence, what, and how, it was delivered, more, or
less, to prove the indictment, etc. but as the court sums it up. they find; as
if Juries were appointed for no other purpose but to echo back, what the bench
would have done Such a base temper is to be avoided, as you would escape being
forsworn, even though your verdict should be right: for since you do not know
it so to be, by your own judgment, or understanding, you have abused your oath,
and hazarded your own soul, as well as your neighbor's life, liberty, or
property; because you blindly depend on the opinion, or perhaps passion of
others, when you were sworn well, and truly, to try them yourselves. Such an
implicit faith is near of kin to that of Rome in religion, and, at least, in
the next degree, as dangerous Though Judges are likely to be more able than
Jurymen, yet Jurymen are likely to be more honest than Judges; especially in
all cales where the power of the prerogative, or the rights of the people, are
in dispute. Our rights, therefore, both as individuals, and as a people, are
more likely to be secure, while Juries follow the result of their own opinion;
for less danger will arise from the mistakes of Jurymen, than from the
corruption of Judges. Besides, improper verdicts will but seldom occur; since
juries will avail themselves of the abilities, and learning, of the Judges, by
consulting them upon all points of law; and thus to the advantage of
information, may add their own impartiality.
.

4. There are some that make a Trade of being Jurymen, that seek for the
office, use means to be constantly continued in it, will not give a disobliging
verdict, lest they should be discharged, and serve no more: these standing
Jurors have certainly some ill game to play. There are others that hope to
signalize themselves, to get a better trade, or some preferment by serving a
turn. There are others that have particular piques, and a humor of revenge
against such, or such, parties: if a man be but miscalled by some odious name,
or said to be of an exploded faction -- straight they cry, hang him, find him
G^ilty, no punishment can be too bad for such a fellow; in such a case they
think it m^rit to st^^^ch an evidence o^ the te^terhooks and (...) a point of
law, because they fancy i^ makes for (...) interest of the government; as if
(...) pression could in any case be for the true interest of government, when
in truth nothing more weakens or destroys it. But this was an old stratagem, if
thou suffer this man to escape, thou shall not be Caesar 's friend: when Caesar
was so far from either needing, or thanking, them for any such base services,
that, had he but truly understood them, he would severely have punished their
partiality and tyranny.

All these, and the like, pestilent biasses, are to be avoided, and abominated,
by every honest Juryman.

But now as to the positive qualifications requisite.

1. You that are Jurymen, should, first of all, seriously regard the weight,
and importance, of the office; your own souls, other men's lives, liberties,
estates, all that in this world are dear to them, are at stake, and in your
hands; therefore, consider things well before hand, and come substantially
furnished, and provided, with sound, and well grounded, consciences, with clear
minds, free from malice, fear, hope, or favor; lest, instead of judging
others, thou should work thy own condemnation, and stand in the sight of
God, the Creator, and Judge, of all men, no better than a Murderer, or
perjured Malefactor.

2. Observe well the record, indictment, or information that is read, and the
several parts thereof, both as to the matter, manner, and form.

3. Take due notice of, and pay regard, to the evidence offered for proof of
the indictment, and each part of it, as well to manner, and form, as matter;
and if you suspect any s^bornation, foul practice, or tampering has been with
the witnesses, or that they have any malice, or sinister design, have a special
regard to the circumstances, or incoherences, of their tales, and endeavor, by
apt questions, to sift out the truth, or discover the villainy. And, for your
better satisfaction, endeavor to write down the evidence, or the heads
thereof, that you may, the better, recall it to memory.

4. Take notice of the nature of the crime charged, and what law the
prosecution is grounded upon, and distinguish the supposed criminal fact, which
is proved, from the aggravating circumstances, which are not proved.

5. Remember that in Juries there is no plurality of voices to be allowed:
seven cannot over rule, or, by virtue of majority, conclude five; no, nor
eleven, one. But as the verdict is given in the name of all the twelve, or else
it is void; so every one of them must be actually agreeing, and satisfied in
his particular understanding, and conscience, of the truth, and righteousness,
of such verdict, or else he is forsworn. And, therefore, if one man differ in
opinion from his fellows, they must be kept together, till either they, by
strength of reason, or argument, can satisfy him, or he convince them. For he
is not to be hectored, much less punished, by the court into a compliance; for
as the lord chief Justice Vaughan says well Rep. fol. 151.
, if a man differ in judgment from his fellows, whereby they are kept a day,
and a night, though his dissent may not in truth be so reasonable as the
opinion of the rest that agree; yet, if his judgment be not satisfied, one
disagreeing, can be no more criminal, than four, or five, disagreeing with the
rest. Upon which occasion the said author recites a remarkable case out of an
ancient (...)
law-book: A Juror would not agree with his fellows for two days, and being
demanded by the judges, if he would agree, said he would first die in prison;
whereupon he was committed, and the verdict of the eleven taken: but upon
better advice, the verdict of the eleven was quashed, and the Juror discharged
without fine; and the Justices said the way was to carry them in carts (this is
to be understood at assizes where the Judges cannot stay, but must remove in
such a time into another county) until they agreed, and NOT BY FINING THEM. And
as the Judges erred in taking the verdict of eleven, so they did in imprisoning
the twelfth. And therefore, you see, on second thoughts released him.

6. Endeavor, as much as your circumstances will permit, at your spare hours
to read, and understand, the fundamental laws of the country; such as Magna
Charta, the Petition of Right, the late excellent act for Habeas Corpus^s,
Horne's Mirror of Justices, Sir Edw. Coke, in his 2d, 3d, and 4th Parts of the
Institutes of the Law of England (...) Judge Vaughan's Reports: these are books
frequent to be had, and of excellent use to inform any reader, of competent
apprehension, of the true liberties, and privileges, which every Englishman is
justly entitled unto, and estated in, by his birthright; as also the nature of
crimes, and the punishments severally, and respectively, inflicted on them by
law; the office, and duties, of Judges, Juries, and all officers, and
ministers, of justice, etc. which are highly necessary for every Juryman, in
some competent measure, to know; for the law of England has not placed trials
by Juries, to stand between men, and death, or destruction to so little
purpose, as to pronounce men Guilty, without regard to the nature of the
offense, or to what is to be inflicted thereupon.

For want of duly understanding, and considering, these things, Juries, many
times, plunge themselves into lamentable perplexities; as it befell the Jury who
were the triers of Mr. Udal, a minister, who in the 32d year of queen Eliz. was
indicted, and arraigned, at Croydon in Surry See State-Trials, fol. Vol. 1. P.
161.
, for high treason, for defaming the queen, and her government, in a certain
book entitled, A Demonstration of the Discipline, etc. And though there was no
direct, but a scambling shadow of proof, and though the book, duly considered,
contained no matter of treason, but certain words which by a forced
construction were laid to tend to the defamation of the government, and so the
thing prosecuted under that name; yet the Jury not thinking that in pronouncing
him guilty, they had upon their oath pronounced him guilty of treason, and to
die as a traitor; but supposing that they had only declared him guilty of
making the book; hereupon they brought him in guilty; but when after the
Judge's sentence of death against him, which they never in the least into ^ded,
they found what they had done; they were confounded in themselves, and would
have done any thing in the world to have revoked that unwary pernicious
verdict, when, alas! it was too late. Dr. Ful^er has this witty note on this
gentleman's conviction, that it was conceived rigorous in the greatest, which
at best (says he) is cruel in the ^east degree. And it seems so queen
Elizabeth thought it, for she suspended execution, and he died naturally. But
his story survives, to warn all succeeding Jurymen to endeavor better to
understand what it is they do, and what the consequences thereof will be.

7. As there is nothing I have said intended to encourage you to partiality, or
tempt any Juryman to a connivance at sin, and malefactors, whereby those pests
of society should avoid being brought to condign punishment, and so the law
cease to be a terror to evil doers, which were in him an horrible perjury, and
indeed a foolish pity, or Crudelis Misericordia, a cruel mercy; for he is
highly injurious to the good, that absolves the bad, when real crimes are
proved against them: so I must take leave to say, that in cases where the
matter is dubious, both lawyers, and divines, prescribe rather favor than
rigor. An eminent and learned Judge Fortescue, Cap. 27.
of our own, has in this advice and wish gone before me; Mallem revera viginti
facinoresos mortem pietate evadere, quam justum unum injuste condemnari. I
verily (says he) had rather twenty evil doers should escape death through
tenderness, or pity, than that one innocent man should be unjustly condemned.

I shall conclude with that excellent advice of my lord Coke In the Epilogue of
his 4th Part of Institutes.
, which he generally addresses to all Judges, but may no less properly be
applied to Jurors. --

Fear not to do right to all, and to deliver your verdicts justly according to
the laws; for fear is nothing but a betraying of the succors that reason
should afford: and if you shall sincerely execute justice, be assured of three
things:

1. Though some may malign you, yet God will give you his Blessing.

2. That though thereby you may offend great men, and favorites, yet you shall
have the favorable kindness of the Almighty, and be his favorites.

And lastly, That in so doing, against all scandalous complaints, and
pragmatical devices, against you. God will defend you as with a shield. -- For
thou, Lord, wilt give a blessing unto the righteous, and with thy favorable
kindness will thou defend him as with a shield. Psalm v. ^5.

FINIS.

