The Practice of the Churches in NEW ENGLAND, relating to BAPTISM, VINDICATED.

The general PRACTICE of the Churches of NEW ENGLAND, relating to BAPTISM,
VINDICATED: OR, SOME ESSAYS ON THIS IMPORTANT QUESTION, Whether the Practice of
Persons owning or renewing the Covenant, and having Baptism for their Children
without coming immediately into full Communion, be warrantable? Delivered at
several Church-Meetings in PLYMOUTH. WITH SOME LETTERS THAT PASSED ON THE
SUBJECT.

By JOHN COTTON, A. M. of PLYMOUTH.

Acts x. 47. Can any Man forbid Water, that these should not be baptized?

Prove. xxxi. 8. Open thy Mouth in the Cause of the Dumb.

Finis Baptismi praeter caeteros ei cum Sacra Caena communes, est Receptionis
seu Insitionis in Familiam Dei Obsignatio. Ut Naturae ordine prius est nasci
quam pasci: Ita prior est Baptismus Caena Domini.

WOLLEB. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by EZEKIEL RUSSELL, next the Cornfield, in
Union-Street.

PREFACE.
PROVIDENCE seems to render the present publication necessary. The interest of
CHRIST'S kingdom, my own reputation, and the importunity of friends concurring,
I could not withstand the motion, although I am exceeding loath to engage in a
religious controversy in my advanced state of life. The first of these Essays
was thrown together in haste without strict order or method, being partly
collected, and partly what occurred to my mind in reading the scriptures; and
in solemn reflection. The other Essays (especially the second and the last)
were written with more deliberation, and are in the same method, and are nearly
in the same words as they were delivered. The last piece which should have been
more properly the first, in order to exact stating of the controversy, lays the
foundation upon which the whole is built. But the reason of this was, that
children's membership was acknowledged in the first church-meetings, and
accordingly my arguments were founded on this concession. But in the
church-meetings last March, their membership, or at least the continuance of it
at adult age was openly denied; and all the relat^^ they had to the church was
said to be this, that they were laid under bonds to enter into covenant
personally at adult age and to come to full communion; which if they failed to
do, their relation to the church wholly ceased. This occasioned my last Essay.
I have had thoughts of reducing the whole that I have said in the controversy
into one piece, which would have considerably shortened the work: But this
would have taken up as much time as the first composure, which I had not
leisure for; and therefore the whole comes forth in the present form. Some of
the same arguments recur in the following that were brought in the first piece,
but they are set forth in a manner so differing as serves to throw light on the
subject. I shall conclude this Preface with one caution. That whereas some
expressions taken singly may seem to carry the matter too far in favor of
unregenerates (openly such) I desire the reader always to take such passages in
connection with what is said elsewhere, and then the seeming repugnancy will
wholly vanish. I leave the whole to the Reader's candor; and hope the divine
blessing will attend it, as it was really meant to serve the cause of CHRIST in
a point which I apprehend of great importance.

THE FIRST ESSAY.
QUEST. WHETHER the practice of persons owning or renewing the covenant, and
having baptism for their children, without coming immediately to full
communion, be warrantable?

Arguments for the affirmative.

I. I THINK the famous Mr. Mitch^ll's argument unanswerable. 1st. The whole
visible church under the new testament is to be baptized. 2d. If a man be once
in the church (whether admitted at age or in infancy) nothing less than
censurable evil can put him out. 3d. If the parent be in the visible church,
his infant child is also.

This was the chief argument that convinced Dr. Increase Mather. It is
impossible to get over this argument, but by saying, that not coming
immediately to the LORD'S table is a censurable evil, a sin that deserves
excommunication. But did any church ever hold this? Who has heard or read of
any person's being laid under the church-censure merely on this account? I
grant, that the contempt of this ordinance deserves excommunication, but not
the mere abstaining from it for a while. That may proceed from too high
thoughts of the ordinance, and low thoughts of themselves. To cut off such
would be a breaking the bruised reed with a witness, as Mr. Le^nard justly
observes in the church records. We would bear with a communicant for not coming
to the LORD'S table if he declares it is from scruples of conscience respecting
his state, and not from contempt of the ordinance: Much more should we bear
with a member, that never communicated. Such should be dealt with in the
ministry of the word and from the pulpit, and not by church consure. They
should not be treated as delinquent members (as in the case of heresy or
scandal) but be used with all tenderness.

II. All the arguments brought for infant baptism in general do prove that
baptism ought to be admin^stred in the latitude pleaded for. These arguments
all center in this, that if the parents be in the covenant, the children are so
likewise, and so ought to have the seal of the covenant. Now it is granted on
all hands, that the parents in question are in the covenant, consequently then
children are so too; why then should they not be baptized? To deny the validity
of this way of arguing is to give up the cause entirely to the Anabaptists; and
there is no way left to confute them, and their demand is just when they call
for a direct scripture for infant baptism; as some demand a direct scripture in
this case, which is exactly to tread in their steps. In short, there is as much
proof for this point, as for infant baptism; we argue by scripture-consequence
both in the one case and the same consequences prove both points.

III. CHRIST says, Luke xviii. 16. Su^^r little children to come unto me, and
forbid them no^; for of such as the kingdom of GOD, i. e. Such are of my
church. (This is the ground of the rebuke.) The same may be said of the
children in question. They are the children of men le^t, therefore members. And
here we may observe, That CHRIST was never so angry with his ^^^d disciples
upon any occasion, as for this deba^ring of the subjects of his Kingdom being
brought to him. Let us fear lest he be as angry with us, if we do the same. The
disciples thought that they were not good men that brought these children; they
exhibited no positive evidence of grace to their view; neither does CHRIST so
much as intimate that they were gracious. But the ground he seems to go upon
was, that as they were members of the church, they had a right to bring their
children; thereby letting us know, that it is visible ^^^bership gives the
right. If you say, their bringing their children was evidence enough of their
faith in CHRIST, the same I say of the persons in question. If you say ^ei^^er,
CHRIST would never have commended then for bringing their children, if they had
not been (...) this is plainly begging the question, and it renders CHRIST'S
answer to the disciples improper, which should have been (according to their
notion) an express declaration of the parent's fitness, and not of the
children's interest in the covenant o^ visible membership.

IV. "When a man according to scripture rule is become a member of the visible
church, and there is no rule in the word to cast him out of the church, such a
person has a right to have his children baptized."

V. If these persons are subject to the rod or to church government, they are
entitled to the privilages of CHRIST'S kingdom. We ought not to separate what
God has joined together. And we have no business to judge them that are
without, as we really do if they are entitled to no privileges at all.

VI. Those that submit to CHRIST'S discipline cannot with any color of reason
be excluded from discipleship. And if disciples, they have a right to baptism
for their children. And here I would mention that famous text so much alleged
by Anabaptists and their opponents, Matt. xxviii. 20. Go disciple So the word
runs in the original Greek.
all nations, baptizing them, etc. Here infants (as part of nations) are to be
discipled and baptized. And if discipled, all the privileges of disciples
belong to them; and when demanded (after they are grown up) cannot justly be
withheld from them, without they put a bar in their own way by their
wickedness. Their discipleship is also proved from several other texts by all
the writers for infant baptism. To be discipled is to be admitted into CHRIST'S
school and family in order to be taught when capable, etc.


VII. If you exclude baptized persons (of regular lives) from bringing their
children to baptism, you treat them as Pagans and Infidels; you practically
say, they have no part in the LORD; you in effect excommunicate them and (...)
them all out of heaven; for there is no salvation out of the church: You make
them visible members of Satan's kingdom; for there is no medium here, a man
must be of the one or the other.

VIII. CHRIST says, feed my lambs; but this, instead of feeding them, is a
thrusting them out of the fold: Instead of carrying them in our arms we cut off
their heads. And how dreadful is the thought!

IX. If this rigid principle should prevail, in a few years (according to human
prospect) nine tenths of the inhabitants will be in the condition of Pagans and
Infidels; and even the name of Christianity will be in danger of being lost
among this people. It is to me a confirmation to observe de facto (says Mr.
Mitchell) that in the way of successive baptizing the children of all that had
a standing in the visible church (though with too much laxness and corruption
for want of discipline) the LORD has continued religion among christian people
from age to age: Whereas the like continuance and preservation of true religion
could not have been hoped for, nor probable in the contrary way. It was never
heard of in the world from Abraham to this day (since GOD appointed an ^^^ing
sign, or such a livery to be worn by his people to distinguish them from the
world;) that a people did continue for any length of time to be religious, who
were either all, or the greater part of them uncircumcised or unbaptised. The
laying aside of circumcision among the Midianites. (for they did by times lay
it aside, may be plainly gathered from Exodus iv. 24, 26.) was quickly followed
with the utter loss of all true religion among them, and other of the posterity
of Abraham and Keturah. I know the bare having of baptism does not always keep
true religion; but sure it is, that the want of it will quickly lose religion
among a people. To say that a people may be religious well enough without
baptism. would be to reflect upon the wisdom of CHRIST, in appointing such an
external sign of Christianity, which surely was no needless thing. It is easy
to see that in the way yourself and some others go, the bigger half of the
people in this country will in a little time be ^n-baptised. Letter to Inc.
Mather, p. 4. 5.


But this would be better (some say) than to come with a lie in their mouths. I
answer, they do not come with a lie in their mouths, if they act
conscientiously in what they do, if they come out of a sense of the command,
and if (as far as they know their own hearts) they are sincere in what they
profess, though they cannot say it is a gracious fincerity. It is the wilful
hypocrite that lies to GOD and perjures himself, who (conscious of his
insincerity) does all to be seen of men, etc. I am persuaded and it may be
easily proved from the word of GOD, that the former sort do not offend GOD so
much by coming in this manner though they have no real grace, as they would do
by wholly neglecting the duty. The total neglect is worse than the undue
performance. And the same may be said of every duty.

This makes way for the considering some other objections.

I. It is objected, but these persons do not come immediately to the LORD'S
supper; and therefore they ought to be shut out from other privileges until
they will partake of the whole. I answer,

1st. The church in all ages has been larger in admitting to baptism, than the
LORD'S supper. In the primitive church there were three sorts. 1st. Catechumeni
or well disposed Heathens under instruction. 2d. Initiati or baptized persons.
3d. Confirmati, confirmed members. They used to baptized, before they admitted
them to the holy mysteries.
And I might prove the point from the practice of all churches since; but it
would take up too long a time.

2d. I would mention some maxims or principles of famous divines, which carry
their own weight with them. As 1st. Baptism belongs to the disciples as such;
the LORD'S supper to self-examining disciples. 2d. Baptism is a sacrament of
initiation or entrance into the church; the other of confirmation or growth in
grace. 3d. Membership in the universal church gives a right to baptism; but
membership in a particular church to the LORD'S supper. Those that the Apostles
baptized as it were at large, must be joined to a particular church before they
could receive the LORD'S supper. 4th. Covenant interest alone gives right to
baptism, but not to the LORD'S supper. It is a great mistake to think, that the
parents immediate fitness for the LORD'S supper is the ground of baptizing
their children; but it is the parents and so the childrens being in the
covenant. We often have reason to think that some communicante are unfit for
the LORD'S supper; but we cannot exclude them from that ordinance or from
baptism for their children, being neither heretical or scandalous. The reason
is, because they are under the covenant. The same may be said in the other
case. 5th. That uncleanness would debar from coming to the passover, which did
not unfit for the other ordinance of circumcision. These several particulars
import, that we should not be altogether so strict in admission to baptism, as
to the LORD'S supper.


3d. I answer, "A man's not joining to a particular church may be owing to the
weakness of his tender conscience, which scrupleth his fitness for the LORD'S
supper; and yet would gladly have himself and his consecrated to the LORD, yea
and rejoice to be under the government and laws of CHRIST in particular
churches."

4th. If the knowledge of a man's good estate (as they hold) is a necessary
qualification for the LORD'S supper, it is his duty to stay away until he has
this knowledge; and yet not neglect other duties in the mean time.

5th. If such persons are real and hearty in renewing covenant they will soon
come further; if they are not, they had better remain where they are. It will
be more for the honor of the church; for how often do those who are only under
a common work of the spirit, lose their convictions, and (by their apostasy)
become a scandal to religion and to the church that admits them? And hence we
may see the impropriety of vehemently urging persons to come immediately into
full communion, when they do not find a freedom in themselves to do it.

6th. We ought rather to encourage persons to come as far as they see light in
the path of duty, than to lay discouragements and stumbling blocks in their
way. This is truly to carry the lambs in our arms.

II. It is objected, But if all baptized persons are members already, why do
they own the covenant? Is it not that, that makes them members? I answer, no: A
person does not become any more a member than he was before by renewing the
covenant. It is only a recognition or taking possession of his right in the
manner the church thinks proper. It is like an officer's taking an oath for the
faithful discharge of his office: It is not the oath that constitutes the
office, but the commission which he had before. There is no impropriety in
calling all baptized persons complete members, as our ancient Divines and the
Synod expressly do. Membership is a thing that cannot be increased or
diminished; there is no magis or minus (more or less) here: A man is a member
or no member; there is no medium: But their CAPACITIES of ACTING are not the
same; they may be widely different. An infant or a communicant (become
non-compos) cannot receive the LORD'S supper; yet they are complete members.
And there is no such a thing as halfmembership or half-covenanting, and it is
injurious to use such an expression. But what advantage is it to renew covenant
then? I answer, This is a mere prudential of the church, to make the more deep
and more durable impressions on the persons concerned; to give them proper
ideas of the solemnity of the affair; and also to impress on others a solemn
sense of their covenant-engagements, by a repetition of the covenant in their
hearing. They have the same end in it that whole churches have, when they renew
covenant openly and explicitly, as the churches were wont to do formerly, and
this church more than once in my Grandfather's days. But it never entered into
their hearts, that they made any addition to their membership by it. So it is
in the present case. I am sorry to see that this custom of renewing covenant is
so misunderstood by many; they seem to have got a notion, that by renewing
covenant they are made members. But this is a mistake; they are no more members
than they were before: And the practice had better be laid aside, than to be
thus abused by such gross apprehensions.

III. But it is further objected, it is only grace that gives a right to either
seal; and therefore a person ought not to come until he knows his grace. I
answer,

1st. This objection does not reach the case of those that were baptized in
infancy; but those only that come for baptism at adult age. The former are
members already, and therefore if we go to purge the church of them, or refuse
to let them renew covenant, (which is the same thing) let them be ever so
blameless in their walk, we must go further still, and purge the communicants
likewise (who renew covenant every time they come to the sacrament) and turn
out all that we think have not grace, or that dare not say they are converted.
And where we must slop no man can say. In short, this is running directly into
the most rigid principles of the Separates, who are for purging the church. We
have no more warrant to cast baptized persons out of the church than
communicants: And if we do the one we must do the other also, when there is the
same ground for it, that is, reason to fear they are graceless. Indeed if
heresy or scandal can be proved upon either sort, let them be cast out in GOD'S
name; but not otherwise.

2d. These Persons in question exhibit those signs of grace which our opponents
set up as the only standard for the church to judge by. They explode an account
or relation of experiences, at least think them unnecessary; and make
profession and practice the only criterion of judgment. Thus Mr. Green, one of
the Connecti^^t champions for the new scheme; he says in his late treatise, p.
57.8 In the admission of persons, we are not to judge from the account of
inward experiences: This is not laid down in scripture as the rule of public
judgment, but profession and practice. To this we entirely agree with respect
to baptism. Why then will they not suffer persons of regular practice to renew
the covenant, when they desire it (...) or in other words, to add profession to
their practice, which (according to them, is all that is necessary; and so to
have baptism for their children? this would put an end to the controversy.

Here, by the way, I cannot help observing, how ridiculous it is to insist that
none but gracious persons ought to partake of the seals; and yet at the same
time to say, that it is unnecessary to give an account of the a^ings of grace
in their souls, which is what we call experiences. This seems to me to be a
direct contradiction. Such an account is really essential to their scheme; and
if separated from it, it falls to the ground; and they really (after all their
noise about grace) take up with lesser evidences than we do in regard of the
LORD'S supper.

3d. If this doctrine be true, then it will follow, that no believer while in
the dark ought to come to either ordinance, or even present his child to
baptism; for then he implicitly renews covenant; which must not be done in a
state of darkness. And what confusion would this bring into the church? We
should have but thin communions, it the members every time they come must know
they have grace.

4th. According to this scheme, no person ought to engage in any duty
whatsoever, until he knows he has grace. For he is in danger of lying to GOD,
or dealing falsely in the discharge of it; which is the grand objection in the
present case.

5th. According to this scheme, Hezekiah and Josiah were to blame for bringing
their people in general to renew covenant, when they had reason to sear that
the greater part of them would come with a lie in their mouths, and they had
better have let it alone.

6th. I have observed before; if persons know not that they have grace, yet are
conscious of their sincerity in what they do, they had better come than stay
away. And if they should be really destitute of grace, their coming will be
less offensive to GOD than the omission would be. Reformation and renewings of
covenant when only proceeding from a common work of GOD'S spirit, have been a
means of removing or preventing judgments, as is evident from many places of
scripture.

And here I would mention one thing; I should be glad to hear as much of the
danger of the total omission of these duties, as of the performing them in a
wrong manner. The Jew that did not circumcise his child was to be cut of from
GOD's people, i. e. put to death: But no such severe judgment was threatened
against the unregenerate person, that circumcised his child. And Moses himself
had like to have lost his life, for the omission of this duty.

7th. John the Baptist and CHRIST'S disciples did not ask those they baptized,
whether they knew they had grace. But upon their confession of their sins and
promising reformation, they immediately baptized them, Matt. 3, 6.

8th. If this church should agree to renew covenant at this day openly and
explicitly as churches did formerly for the strengthening their covenant
engagements, it would be proper and necessary to call upon all the children of
the church to join with us in it, as our Fathers did, as we may find on our
church-records. And who in this case would dare to forbid or exclude them,
though they did not come immediately to the LORD'S table? And if not why should
they be excluded when they come ous by one?

9th. If the knowledge of our good estate be necessary in order to partaking of
the seals, it must amount to a certain knowledge. For how can a mere hope
entitle us to it? How know we but it is the hope of the hypocrite? Suppose a
king should give such and such privileges to persons so and so qualified, it
will not do for persons to come and say they hope they have those
qualifications; they must certainly make out to their own and others
satisfaction that they have them, or they have no business to put in their
claim. So that this doctrine is come to this at last, that nothing but full
assurance will warrant our coming either to baptism or the LORD'S supper. And
if we have this before we come, what need we come at all? At least we need not
come for this end, to get our evidences and comforts strengthened; they being
already come to their full strength.

IVth objection. But why do you exclude any baptized person at all from
bringing their children to baptism, if they are all members? I answer, the
reason is, because of their vicious lives. If a person be a liar, swearer,
sabbath-breaker, whoremonger, etc. he ought to be dealt with, and if he remain
impenitent to be cut off. In this case he forfeits his privilege. And this is
the reason why persons are propounded, that if any know they are guilty of such
things, they may object and get them excluded.

Vth and last objection. This will bring in impurity into the church. I answer,
Diligent attendance to discipline, and not curtailing the covenant will keep
the churches pure. The contrary doctrine rather tends to impurity: For persons,
if debarred from renewing covenant and bringing their children, will be tempted
from their great fondness for their offspring, to come too rashly to the LORD'S
table. And the church will likewise be tempted to be lax in their admissions,
to prevent the complaints of such persons, and to remove the reproach that such
swarms of children among them are in a state of heathenism.

Several other weighty considerations might have been mentioned, but I forbear.
I shall firish with observing, That this was the principle of almost all the
first Fathers in the country; my Great-grandfather Cotton, Mr. Norton, the
famous Mr. Shepard, Messi'rs Wilson, Mather, Allen, Rogers, and many others.
And the practice was recommended by a Synod of all the churches of the
Massachusetts Colony in the year 1662. And it was agreeable to the sentiments
of my Grandfather Cotton the former Minister of this church, as I find by a
manuscript written by his own hand. And it has been practiced by the generality
of the churches for more than an hundred years past.

THE SECOND ESSAY.
Further CONSIDERATIONS illustrating the point.

I. IF the foundation be taken away, what will the righteous do? What signifies
it to keep contending who are the church, or who shall or shall not be
received, when the very foundation of the church is struck at, though not
designedly? We are in reality no church, nor any of us members of a church, if
this proposition be not true, That these who are in the visible covenant have a
right to the seal of the covenant for themselves and children. The very being
of the church depends upon it; the whole controversy turns here: If it be
denied, our cause is betrayed to the Baptists, and we cease to be a church: If
it be granted, then our opponents give up their cause, and the children in
question are to be baptized. It is strange therefore that this way of arguing
is so little taken notice of, when every thing dear to us plainly depends upon
it.

II. Upon the same foundation I argue, If the church should vote to disannul
this practice, I should think they wholly disannulled infant baptism; for the
ground of it would be wholly taken away: If this way of arguing be not
conclusive, they that are in the covenant have a right to the seal of it for
themselves and children, there is no defense against them left, and we become
downright Baptists without knowing it; at least we hold infant baptism by mere
tradition, without understanding the grounds of it.

No doubt it will be said in answer to this, That, as according to the
constitution of the churches, a person has no immediate ^ight to bring his
children to baptism notwithstanding he was baptized in infancy, until he has
solemnly renewed the covenant; and this the church ought not to suffer until
they are fully satisfied he has grace. I answer, The foundation of this
objection was taken away in my first Essay; in which I observed, 1st. That this
renewing covenant did not make them any more members than they were before: but
was only a taking possession of their right in the manner the church thought
fir. 2d. That this taking possession could not be denied them, unless heresy or
scandal could be proved upon them. And now add, 3d. That no other evidences of
grace are necessary with respect to those who are members already, than mere
negative ones, unless the church assume an authority of purging the church upon
the plan of the Separates. As negative evidences are sufficient in regard of
those already in full communion, so also with respect to these in question. I
also add, 4th. There is no divine appointment, that persons should renew
covenant in this explicit manner, when they become adult; but it is a mere
prudential of the church to make the more solemn impressions.
Accordingly I find, that the two famous Mr. Henrys (Father and Son) did not
propose any explieit covenant to baptized persons in public at adult age: So
far were they from thinking it essential to membership. And we read nothing of
circumcised Israelites thus renewing covenant in order to partake of any of the
privileges of that church. But yet there is great propriety in it for the end
just mentioned. And if the church should order a general explicit owning the
covenant by us all every time we come to the sacrament or once a year, there
would be nothing amiss in it, but it would tend to make the greater
impressions, though not make us more members.

III. We find in scripture, that all the Israclitish nation, old and young,
were baptized by GOD himself in the cloud and in the sea, I Cor. x. 2. Here the
children of unregenerate persons had this rite administered to them by the
highest authority; and it was afterward blessed to them, though the parents were
cut off. From this we may infer, that it is not contrary to the mind of GOD
that children of persons unregenerate should have this ordinance administed to
them, if their parents be in covenant relation to him. This seams to be a type
of what was to be done in gospel times. The Apostle plainly speaks of it in
allusion to the christian baptism.

IV. I cannot be of the sentiments of those that are for altering the practice,
unless I held that baptized infants are no members; or if they were, they lose
their membership when they grow up, unless they come to the LORD'S table. They
would be consistent, though not true. But to grant that they were members then,
and continue members still, and as such ought to be dealt with for
misdemeanors, and yet that their children are not members and have no right to
the feal, is a strange inconsistency, and what can never be it reconciled.

As all children are part of their parents, and make but one person by the laws
of GOD and men; so christian infants are one person with their christian
parents, and make but one body with them, as the root and branches are but one
tree; and this by divine ordination, and especially in obligations to duties,
and right unto favors and privileges spiritual, so far as they are capable.
Leigh's System of Divinity.


V. If the church should alter this practice, what would become of those who
have already owned the covenant? part of their children baptized and part
unbaptized, when they have the same right they had before: A motley mixture
indeed, part of the church and part of the world. Here would be an
excommunication with a witness.

But they may be remedied by looking upon them as persons in full communion,
and allowing them without further ceremony to come to the LORD'S table: But
this cannot be right. For, 1st. This would be to give them a privilege which
they neither ask for or desire, and perhaps will not consent to. Such may
properly be called pressed men, not volunteers in GOD'S service.

2d. To be members in full communion and not communicants is a contradiction in
terms.

3d. Here will be some in full communion that never made any relation of their
acquaintance with experimental religion, which will either make two sorts of
members in full communion, the one admitted without a relation and the other
with; or it will cause the total laying aside the relation of experiences. In
the former case, what confusion will it make in the church, relations exacted
from one sort and not from the other? In the latter case, the total laying
aside of relations would deprive the church of one proper means of judging of
their good estate. Without some account of their sense of divice things we
shall not know but all their religion is a piece of mechanism, merely external:
We shall have nothing left to judge by but blamelesness of life, which all
acknowledge may be separate from grace; and as to many we should have no more
than negative evidences of grace, that is, that we never heard any thing bad of
them, their manner of life being little known to the greater part of the
church, which must be frequently the case in great towns. This would do upon
Mr. Stoddard's scheme, that the LORD'S supper was a converting ordinance, and
to be used, by regular livers, as the other means of grace: But for those that
hold that the church should receive none but gracious persons, for them to
consent to abolish relations, and to make such negative and external evidences
the only standard of judging appears to me a palpable contradiction. With
regard to relations, I acknowledge that some of them are not very edifying, and
others are too particular; we do not want (...) man to give a history of his
life: But for the Minister to pen down some of the principal answers to the
questions proposed by him to candidates, expressing their sense of the evil of
sin, love to CHRIST, and the like essential acts of grace would be far from
being useless and unedifying, especially in some remarkable instances.

VI. The children of those in the covenant are God's; they are born unto me,
says God; they are my children. Ezekiel. xvi. 20, 21. That is, within my church
and covenant: This is spoken of the children of unregerate Israelites.
Certainly then we rob God of his portion, if we deny them the seal; and there
will be no difference between the infants of such as are in covenant, and the
infants of Turks, which is not to be admitted: God himself claims a right to
the one, but not to the other.

VII. It is the Baptist's grand plea against baptizing infants, that they do
not exhibit any positive evidences of grace.

And how do these that are for the new scheme tally with them? Negative
evidences are sufficient in both cases. As baptism is a sacrament of entrance;
so the lowest degree of evidence is to be admitted in this case. Certainly
fuller evidences are to be expected from those that are admitted to the table,
than from those that only approach the threshold; from proficients than
incipients or first beginners at CHRIST'S school.

VIII. Dr. Tailor and others inform us, that the primitive church administered
the holy communion to newly baptized infants, after the example of the Jewish
church, all their circumcised children eating the passover with their parents.
This practice was as early as St. Cyprian's time, who lived about 240 or 250
year after CHRIST, and for aught appears much earlier; and it was continued
universally in the church above 600 years, and in some of the castern churches
it continues to this day: St. Austin writes in defense of it. But although we
judge them wrong in this, because infants are incapable of examining themselves
or of discerning the LORD 'S body: Yet from this practice we may infer that it
was their general sense that baptized persons merely by virtue of their
baptism, were entitled to all church privileges, and that nothing but their
open wickedness could justly debar them from it.

IX. Those who oppose this practice, lay the whole stress of the controversy
upon this, that baptism is the seal of the covenant of grace; consequently, say
they, none but gracious persons have a right to partake of it, and if they have
grace, they ought also to come to the LORD'S supper, which is another seal of
the covenant; and it is wrong to admit any adult person to the one, without
they will immediately come to the other: The seals are not to be divided.

It is granted on all hands that baptism is a seal of the covenant of grace:
The Synod that recommended the present practice universally held this; and so
did the two Dr. Mathers, Mr. Willard, and others, and so did Mr. Leonard; and
yet they were all zealous for administering baptism in this latitude; they could
see no inconsistency between these two principles. But how can they be
reconciled? Ans. 1st. They admitted the lowest evidences of grace, even
nagative ones, and supposed them sufficient with respect to those already in
covenant. And to prevent scandalous persons from bringing their children to
baptism, they were always propounded before hand, that objections might in that
case be made against their coming.

2d. With respect to those without, that offered themselves to baptism at adult
age, they admitted the first dawnings and glimmerings of good as intitling them
to that ordinance; as we find John Baptist did. Matt. iii. What multitudes did
John Baptize? All Judea and Jerusalem, etc. went out to him, except the
Pharisees, says the text; and yet how few true converts among them! They
rejoiced in his light but for a season. John v. 35; the generality soon fell
off. This shows that John was not very strict in his examination: As soon as
any appeared to be affected with the sense of sin and were brought to
confession and promises of amendment, he administered the ordinance. And the
disciples who baptized more than John, ( John iv. 1.) no doubt went upon the
same plan. See this point further cleated by Dr. Inc. Mather in his treatise on
the subjects of baptism. p. 37.
And the Apostle likewise. But they thought, that more solid, substantial, and
positive evidences of grace were necessary for the confirming ordinance of the
LORD'S supper, or that they should bring forth fruits meet for repentance,
before they partook of it. Matt. iii. 8.

Dr. C. Mather says, The purest churches of the LORD JESUS, have generally not
been so large, or so scon in the administration of the LORD'S supper, as of
baptism. One has been given as milk; when the other like strong meat. has been
withheld; and the ancients usually detained the baptized a while before they
were confirmed. Companion for Communicants, p. 34.
3d. If after all they were really unregenerate, they held their baptism was no
nullity to them or their children, but of use in various respects.

Before I leave this head, I cannot help expressing my surprise to hear the
names of several Ministers mentioned as patronising the contrary scheme, when
it is notoriously known that the sentiments of most of them were as large as
ours with respect to the subject of baptism; and I rather think it was so as to
all of them, except Mr. Edwards, who was too apt to run into extremes. Though I
acknowledge, that none of them agree with Mr. Stoddard's notion of the
sacraments being converting ordinances; neither did the Syned, that introduced
this practice into our churches. This, by the way, leads me to observe, that
there are too controversies blended in this dispute, which should be carefully
separated, though there is no occasion for me to do it at present, as both
parties agree in this, that baptism is of larger extent than the LORD'S supper.

Here for further clearing this point, we may observe.

1 st. That though baptism be a seal of the covenant of grace; yet, as grace
respects sinners, the virtue and efficacy of it is not confined to regenerate
persons only. The sacraments are seals of the whole covenant; baptism
particularly is a seal in these respects. 1 st. It is a seal of membership, a
badge of discipleship, to distinguish GOD'S professing people from the world.
2d. It is a seal of the truth and reality of the covenant; it exhibits to
sinners the certainty of a way of mercy. Circumcision which was of the same
nature with baptism is called a seal of the righteousness of faith. Romans iv. 2.
That is, a seal of CHRIST'S righteousness, which is apprehended and applied by
faith; it assures us, that there is such a righteousness provided for the
relief of miserable sinners, and seals the efficacy of it unto salvation: How
encouraging then is this, to draw forth an act of faith? In circumcision and
baptism the truth of the convenant is sealed, which is a great means to beget
in the soul a persuasion of the truth of it. "And if a man be but convinced of
these things" says Mr. Stoddard, he is gained." The sacraments, says another,
are not properly seals of the truth of our faith, but of the truth of the
convenant; they are only seals of our faith by consequence, because as seals
confirm a thing, so faith is confirmed and strengthened by receiving; but they
are not, in a proper sense, seals unto any thing but the covenant. Leigh.
3d. As baptism seals a sense of our natural filthiness and pollution; so it is
a seal to Kind us to seek to GOD for the spiritual washing. One end of this
ordinance is to quicken our dullness, and excite our diligence in performing
gospel duties, viz. our endeavors to believe, repent and obey, in confidence
of GOD'S help and assistance. Leigh.
4th. It is a sed to assure us, that if we seek it in a right manner, we shall
be washed in the blood and spirit of CHRIST. Many Divines hold, that baptism is
a sacrament for the begetting of life in elect infants; it is doubtless so to
the children of the faithful, that die in their infancy. But as for those that
grow up, it is a seal at least that they shall not only have the offer of
CHRIST, but the striving of his Spirit; which if not resisted will prove
effectual to their conversion. And what an advantage is even this? The LORD
will as assuredly, says one, ingraff us into CHRIST and cloth us with his
righteousness, as we have the outward washing, if we deprive not ourselves
thereof by our own carelessness. Leigh, p. 918.
5th. Baptism is also a seal of saving blessings to believers. And it even
seals these to the unregenerate, though not absolutely, but conditionally. In
all these respects baptism is a seal to regenerate persons, and in most of them
it may be a seal to the unregenerate, and so of great use to them through the
blessing of GOD. Circumcision was a seal to Abraham of saving mercies, but not
so to Ishmael, and perhaps not so to sundry others of Abraham's family, which
was numerous. In regard of these latter, it was a seal only in part; that is,
of the other things I just mentioned, which must be acknowledged to be a great
benefit. Why then should we be so anxious to exclude every unregenerate person
from this seal?

2d. Though baptism and the LORD'S supper be seals of the same covenant, yet
there is to impropriety of administering the one sometime before the other. And
this in two cases especially; 1st. When the person has been very ignorant or
scandalous before; In this case it is best to stay until they are better
instructed, or give fuller evidence of their reformation, otherwise they may
prove a great blemish to religion and the church. This the primitive church
did. Or 2d. When they themselves are kept back by sears or scruples; so that
the seals may be lawfully divided.


3d. If grace be absolutely necessary in order to baptism, what inference can
be more just, and even ratural, than this? Then I must certainly know that I
have grace before I come to this ordinance, or bring my children. This
consequence hangs like a dead weight upon this opinion, and can never be got
over. All the talk about prevailing hopes, or any lesser degree of evidence
still serves to make the contradiction the more glaring. Without I am sure, I
have no business to come; the ordinance is not for me. All the hopes in the
world never gave a man any right to one privilege, civil or sacred; it is the
qualification of itself and our being able to make out with certainty that we
have it, that intitles us.

But if I should grent for arguments sake that a lesser degree of evidence will
do, how high must it rise? If it be prevailing hopes, what must become of the
believer that has preponderating fears? Surely he must stay away. If it be
lesser evidence still that will be admined, who then will be excluded? Surely
none but those who absolutely know that they are unconverted; and we shall find
but sew that will own that, or that are wholly destitute of hopes. So that the
door is opened as wide for almost every body to come as the most sanguine of
Mr. Stoddard's followers could wish. This leads me to observe.

4th. That though Micislers appear to differ widely in their sentiments about
the subjects of baptism, yet when they come to practice they nearly agree, and
seem disposed on each side to admit the same sort of persons. Those in Dr.
Mather's and Mr. Stoddard's principles both say, That this ordinance is not to
be ad^nin^shed to scandalous persons remaining such, or indeed to any that
stake open profession of their unregeneracy. But here seems to be the main
difference, the one take blame lesness of life with profession for evidence of
grace; the other do not, but suppose it may be separated from grace, and yet
that we have no business to prevent their coming, because the ordinance is
often blessed to those in a state of unregeneracy. The difference then appears to
be very small, or rather it may be looked upon as a mere logomachy or strife
about words.

5th. I observe, That the children's membership is a dis^iact thing from that
of their parents, though coming through their means, as is made evident beyond
contradiction by the Synod and others of our Fathers; and to punish them
because their parents do not immediately approach to the LORD'S table is hard
and injurious.

6th. Le^ baptism be called a seal or what you will, what reason can they
assign why grace is more necessary in order to a persons bringing his children
to it, than in order to praying, coming to meeting, etc? Prayer is a seal in
some respects, and so is bearing; and all the sacrifices under the law were
seals of the covenant of grace, as well as the passover. (So Dr. Watts
expressly asserts, and it may be easily proved) And yet who ever dreamed of
excluding all unregenerate persons from them? The sin lay not in performing the
duty, but in performing it in a wrong manner, which is the utmost that can be
said with respect to baptism.

7th. GOD himself has divided the seals, as in the case of infants: And shall
we make ourselves wiser than GOD, in saying the seals shall not be divided? And
he also in some cases divided circumcision and the passover. And if they may be
divided in one case they may in another, as the church has thought in all
ages, who have always been more large in the administration of baptism than of
the other seal, even with respect to adults.

The case of infants plainly shows it to be the divine pleasure, that some
unregenerates should be baptized; for he requires it to be done if they are
under the covenant, and yet it is his pleasure at the same time not to give
them, that is, most of them, the grace of the covenant, though there be no
resistance or opposition on their parts. And it is the divine pleasure likewise
that the church should be so constituted, that of necessity we are obliged to
receive many adult unregenerates into it, let us be ever so careful and
cautious. This thought pursued in its full latitude, and the genuine
conseqences from it duly considered, methinks might case the scruples of any,
about administering the ordinance to such as give but stander evidences of
grace: A prevailing fear of their unregeneracy should not prevens it, if it be
possible after all that they may have the root of the matter in them; but if
the marks and evidences of unregeneracy be plain and open, and leave us without
doubt, in that case once for all I declare my opinion, they are not to be
admitted. This leads me to say.

Lastly, and upon the whole here, I apprehend none of the church would be
uneasy if persons of some regular lives and behavior could be admitted to
bring their children, though such as are of a contrary character be excluded.
Here prudence should direct, and caution should be used not to prostitute the
ordinances to unmeet subjects. That profane persons are out of the question is
granted by all. And if such should be shut out, it would remove the repreach of
our having fallen from the method proposed by the Synod, who first brought in
this practice into these churches. Which if true, is more owing to the
carelessness of Ministers, than to an alteration of principles.

X. It has been suggested. That the method we have been in has a tendency to
hurt the candidates that offer themselves by promoting a careless secure
spirit, which may be fatal to their best interest. This I rather think true of
the contrary scheme. When a Minister has peremptorily declared, that no
unregenerate person ought to come to either sacrament, and has charged them
upon their peril not to come, and yet earnestly to urge particular candidates
for baptism immediately to come to the LORD'S supper is as much as to tell them
that he is fully satisfied they have grace, though he does not say so in words.
And what is the tendency of this but to make them easy in their present
condition without further examination? The corrupt hearts of many will flatter
them last enough with hopes, and having the Minister's sanction to back them,
they will be in the utmost danger of being staked down in delusion.

XI. It has been suggested further. That we received this practice by tradition
from our Fathers without examination, and have gone on in a loose way without
being able to give any good reason for it. I answer, that neither our Fathers
introduced it, nor we received it in this light manner. The question was
started in the country soon after grandchildren were born to the first comers,
and the point agitated for twenty or thirty years by the ablest Divines, until
at last the Synod of all the Ministers and churches, came to a solemn decision
about it in the year 1662, after much prayer, study, and converse, and gave
such weighty reasons for it as were never yet answered. I suppose one main
reason why Plymouth church did not join the Synod was, because they were
without a Minister ten years together about that time; but the Synod's
principles were certainly agreeable to some of the church as appears by the
pious Secretary Morton's mentioning Mr. Wilson's dying speech with approbation
in the New England Memorial, wherein Mr. Wilson lament^ it as one cause of
GOD'S controversy with the land that the baptizing of the children of the
church was so much ^eglected. And this was my Grandfather Cotton's principle,
as I noted in my so.mer Essay. Perhaps the reason why they did not practice
upon it was, because none of this sort applied to have their children baptized.
I find no motion toward it in the church-records.
Neither did many of their posterity receive it thus lightly: Mr. Leonard in
particular had occasion and thoroughly studied the controversy, as appeared by
several sermons on the point; and the same may be said of many others. And I am
sorry there is such occasion to retort the argument; I am persuaded it is owing
to the superficial remarks of some of our younger Divines, lately appearing in
print, that this practice has been questioned, when as they had never
thoroughly studied the grounds and reasons our Fathers went upon, or even the
point of infant baptism, which gives great light to the controversy, and is
really the foundation it is built upon, so that they must both stand or fall
together.

XII and lastly. The expedient to reconcile us, viz. For the persons in
question to be admitted to full communion, and then for the church to dispense
with their coming to the LORD'S table for a while. I say this expedient
proposed by the Pastor is quite unsatisfactory to me. For.

Is It. This scheme goes upon this supposition, that by renewing covenant they
are made members, which is wrong as I have proved before. All baptized persons
are members, whether they renew covenant or no, and are under obligations to
all christian duties. This renewing covenant is never thought to make persons
members in other cases: When a church is embodied in a new parish they enter
into covenant anew, but are no more members than before; and just so it is when
churches renew covenant in order to promote a reformation.

2d. The term of members in full communion has been always appropriated to
persons who immediately communicate, to distinguish them from those who do not
communicate, though in other respects they are equally members. But b^ this new
proposed method all distinction will be confounded, and to be members in full
communion and not in full communion will be the same thing, which, as I
observed will be a contradiction in terms; and it will make such confusion in
language, that when we become habituated to this practice we should not be able
to understand one another speech when conversing with those of another town
about members in full communion. And what difficulty would it cause about a
form of dismission and recommendation, in case any of these new sort of members
should remove to other towns before they communicated? Or must we set up
ourselves as a model or standard for other churches to copy after our example,
and that even without consulting them at all (...) Surely we have need of
another Synod to advise, before we rashly run into this new scheme.

3d. This I look upon to be a right Popiso dispensation, viz. a dispensing with
the command of GOD, which is one of the worst things that we charge upon the
Remish church. The utmost the church can do is passively to connive at those
who are kept away by fears and scruples, and not to lay any censure upon them,
which is the case according to the present mode. But to give open toleration,
by an actual vote, for members to come or stay away at their pleasure is
unjustifiable by any rules of scripture or reason.

4th. If our baptized members should be averse to this new method, as I rather
think they will, and none should come, it will be just the same thing as if no
door was opened to them at all: Or if they should like it, and should come in
multitude^, then the church would be in danger of being overrun with a laxer
fort of members who would carry all before them; for who would deny them the
privilege of voting if they be members in full? And who would choose to have
the affairs of CHRIST'S kingdom wholly in such hands, in the hands of
non-communicants? For they would soon become the majority; or must we bargain
with them not to claim a privilege justly belonging to them, until they
actually communicate? Or shall we by m^^^ arbitrary power without just warrant
exclude them from voting? In that case they would not be members in full, but
only ^^sar^, contrary to what the church promises them at their admission; or
in other words, they would be only nominal, and ^^^t^er^ members in full
communion.

5th. How long must we stay with these new sort of members? If they are limited
to a certain time which they are not to exceed, then the church must censure
them if they do not come within that time. And what confusion would this bring
us into? And even how unjust would it be, if the same reason subsists that
hindered their coming at first? If it be left to them to come when they think
proper, this would be to leave the matter just as it is now, and they may stay
away as long as upon the other scheme.

If it be said, this would give the Minister a warrant the more frequently to
call upon them, I answer, not more warrant than he has by the present method.
For these persons in covenanting promise to use diligence in their preparations
for an access to the LORD 'S table: And what better ground can a Minister or
others have to stir them up to such preparations?

6th. This method has a tendency to destroy all order, and to bring in the
utmost confusion. For if we dispease with one, though he has laid himself
under immediate obligations to come, we may as well dispense with another, and
so with all, What then would become of the communion? Even those that are now
communicants may think themselves warranted by such liberty given to absent
themselves when they please: And how know we but by and by the effect of it may
be that we should have no communicants at all? And what a case would this be? A
church without communicants? Many in full communion, and yet no communion?
Members professing to serve the LORD in all his ordinances, and yet no
ordinances? What an absurdity to open such a door as this?

7th. In this new scheme all the same difficulties recur, which are objected to
the present method. This is a halfway practice as well as the other: This
divides the seals as well as the other, which has been declared "unwarrantable
and unlawful:" This equally encourages unregenerate persons to come: This has a
like tendency to keep persons along in their mistakes, in their doubts and
scruples as the other mode. This as fully tolerates persons in living in the
neglect of "one essential duty of the covenant," as it is called, as the method
proposed by the Synod. In a word, I know of nothing that may be objected
against the present practice but what with equal force militates against the
way proposed. It is called indeed by a new name, but that does not alter the
nature of the thing; the styling them members in full communion does not make
them one jot the more so, than if they owned the covenant in the common form.

8th. There seems to be a downright inconsistency in this way of covenanting.
They doubt whether they ought to come to the LORD'S table in their present
circumstances, and yet they must promise to come: They are to promise it, and
then the church will dispense with the performance; or in other words, will
allow them to break their promise for a while, or perhaps as long as they live
if the same reason continues, that is, if they do not get over their doubts
before. How jarring and incoherant does this appear upon the bare mentioning:
For my part, I think they had better not immediately promise, than not to
perform. These promises in futuro are looked upon in other cases as meet
evasions to avoid a present duty; like a sinner's promising to repent
hereafter, which he has no thoughts of at present. And then further, as they
promise it to GOD as well as to the church, they must have GOD'S dispensation
as well as the church's, or they are obliged to come immediately,
notwithstanding any thing the church can do. When thou have vowed a view unto
GOD defer not to pay it. Eccl. v. 12.

9th. The introducing this new scheme will either cause the wholly laying by a
relation of experiences, or this new fort of members must submit to this
practice, or we must have two different methods of admitting persons to full
communion: And great inconveniences would arise by either of these different
ways. With respect to relations I have spoken before. I would only add, that if
these non-communicants in full communion should be obliged to bring a relation,
I believe it would as effectually put a stop to their coming, as any of the
most rigid methods the church could possibly take: I dare say we should have no
members of these sort: They would carry their children to other churches that
are not so strait.

10th. The most material difference between this and the present method seems
to be this, that in the one case the convenant is proposed twice, and in the
other case but once: Which, it is strange to me, should occasion any Jeruples
of conscience, since it only adds to the solemnity of the affair, and does but
little, if at all, diminish their obligations of coming to the LORD'S table; in
the one method they promising diligently to seek preparations for it, and in
the other, that they will come when they have got over their scruples, and are
better satisfied that they are prepared for the ordinance; which certainly is
the same thing in effect: And there is as much danger on the one side as the
other, of their using it merely as a formality, especially after a while, to
get their children baptized.

As for the suggestion, that by this twofold repetition of the covenant,
persons are led into the mistaken notion, that there are two different
covenants, and that the first is of a laxer nature than the last: it is
impossible for a person that hears both forms read rationally to entertain such
a thought; but if any of the weaker sort are in danger of it, they may be
easily set right from the pulpit, or by conversation. As for their being made
twice member; by it, enough has been said before, when it was observed that
this renewing covenant does not make them members, etc.

11th. If the difficulty lies here, the proposing of the covenant twice, as
being thought superfluous and unnecessary, for peace sake I should not object
against the first proposing of it being wholly laid aside; I mean with respect
to those already in the covenant or persons baptized; and that they, after
being propounded a competent time and no objection made to their lives and
morals, should be allowed to bring their children to baptism. Though after all
I should be sorry to see the church abate any thing from the solemnity of the
affair, which certainly is of good tendency both in regard of the candidate and
spectators, and intitles the former to the prayer of the church, etc.

Upon the whole, I should be glad of any proper expedient to remove the
difficulties among us, and to preserve peace and harmony; but as for the
expedient under consideration, I cannot see my way clear to come into it at
present. And if the majority of the church should approve of it, I am afraid
that we should become an object of ridicule to the whole country for our
singularity, and for our introducing such an inconsistent jumbled scheme, which
was never heard of in the churches before this day; and even now I do not find
it so much as hinted, that above one church practices any thing like it.

THE THIRD ESSAY.
SOME THINGS have occurred to my mind since the last church-meeting, relating
to the subjects of baptism.

1. I shall take notice of some positions that have been advanced, and
objections made.

1st. It is objected, that many make a formality of the practice merely to get
their children baptized. Answer. I sear it is too true. But how shall this new
regulation remedy the difficulty? If this door were entirely shut, is there not
as much danger of making a formality of the LORD'S suppot rather than their
children should go without baptism. But as to some there is no doubt they do it
not formally, but sincerely: And shall we keep them away, because others abuse
the privilege? For my part, I am of my Great-grandfather Cotton's mind, that it
is better to admit ten bypocrites, than to excluae one sincere child of GOD.

And I would add, if they are such persons who make a formality of it that
chiefly come to renew convenant for their children's sake, how comes it to pass
that the door is op^^ed for their admission to the LORD'S supper? For i^ has
been once and again said, that the purport of the new scheme is to enlarge and
not to curtail and diminish their privileges, viz. by obliging them to come
immediately into full communion.

2d. It is objected, Mr. Leonard's great difficulty in bringing in the
practice, and that he was seven years about it. (...) answer, Mr. Leonard was
indeed so long about it; but the reason was not because he could not gain a
major vote before; for he had the major part of the church with him, (I think)
^t first, at least for years before the point was brought to a public
decision. But this arose, 1st. From his prudence because he would not grieve
two or three respectable member^ but would wait until he had gained their
acquiescence at least. 2d. In this he acted according to the ancient practice
and constitution of this church. For in the records we find they would not vote
in affairs of importance, especially in alterations of any part of worship,
until they had gained the consent of every brother, at least so far as to
acquiesce in the church procced^^e. Th^se were the real causes of his delay in
putting (...) to vote.

And if any thing may be argued from Mr. Leonard's being seven years about it,
it is this, that we ought to be as long at least in considering before we cast
this practice out, proceeding in the same gradual manner, and not to do any
thing of such importance rashly and in haste.

3d. It is said our Fathers of this church admitted not the practice. I answer,
they admitted that upon which this practice is grounded, that is, they admitted
all the children of the church to renew covenant in a body, and that more than
once, without coming to the LORD'S table. Which is further than our Pastor
would have us go. And I appeal to him, after they had gone so far, whether they
ought not to have gone farther, and baptized their children, as he does now the
children of them who have formerly owned the covenant.

The Rev. Mr. Thacther of Middleborough after such general renewing of covenant
in his church, baptized all their children without any further step; and
perhaps our Fathers would have done the same, if any of these renewers of
covenant had applied to have their children baptized, which does not appear
from the records that ever they did. Further, I find they had higher thoughts
of infant's membership than many now a days have; they looked upon them as
members; they dealt with them as such; they dismissed and recommended them to
other churches when they removed, and sent admonitions after them, if not
dismissed, when they misbehaved.

4th. It is said that none but visible Christians or Believers, should partake
of special privileges. I readily grant it, and say, that all baptized persons
are visible Christians or Believers, unless they carry the Devil's mark, a
profane life, or are known infidels. This and nothing else should exclude them
from the privilege of baptism, if they ask for it. If we can prove by scripture
marks to the satisfaction of the church, that they are wicked persons, or if
they make an open profession of unregeneracy, that is, know and acknowledge
themselves to be unregenerate, we desire not their admission. It would be
preposterous indeed to apply CHRIST'S seal to those that are visibly the
Devil's children, and own themselves to be such without any compunctions of
conscience. But if we have only fears and scruples about them and cannot say
but that after all they may have some good thing in them toward the LORD, an
Abijah had in the house of Jeroboam, how dare we s^ot them out or say they
shall not do their duty as far as they at present see light for it? Read Matt.
xviii. 6.

If seems to me that the distinction between visible and invisible believers is
too much blended and confounded in the present dispute. If it is visible grace
only that intitles in the sight of the church, then all the talk about real
grace is nothing to the purpose.

5th. It is said, if visible grace entitles to the seals, why ought we to make
a distinction, and admit some to one ordinance and others to both? I answer,
1st. That it is the candidates themselves generally speaking that make the
distinction, and not the church; and we ought to admit them to the discharge of
their duty as far as they see light to go, and not to lay stumbling blocks in
their way. 2d. I am fully of Mr. Robbins's mind, that baptism as well as the
LORD'S supper are seals of the convenant of grace. But the consequence he draws
from it I deny, that baptism and the LORD'S supper are of equal extent. It is
and has been my settled principle and practice, to be more strict in admissions
to the LORD'S table than to baptism. And I have the example of almost all
churches from the beginning to patronize me in it. If there be but a hare
possibility that a person has grace, I think he ought not to be excluded from
baptism for himself or children. But more positive evidences of grace were
necessary for the LORD'S supper. And this for several reasons: These two among
the rest; 1st. Because baptism is a sacrament of entrance, but the LORD'S
supper a sacrament of growth. 2d. Because if afterward they were backsliders,
it would bring less reproach on religion or the church than if they were
admitted to full communion.


6th. It is said that the persons in question have only an infant-membership
which differs from that of the adult. I answer, it differs not in the
essentials of it. All membership comes by divine institution; and is as real
membership, and as complete in the one as in the other, that is, in the
children as in the parents. Paul was as real and complete a Roman citizen as
the Chief Captain, though the one came to it by birth and the other by purchase
at adult age. Original sin comes in a different manner from other sins, viz. by
the mediation of our parents, yet it is as really a sin in us as any that we
actually commit. The like may be said in the present case. But after all, if it
be a reproach to have only an infant-membership, we may easily take it away by
this church's renewing covenant, as our ancestors d^d, and calling upon the
children of the church to join with us in it in a body. And then surely none
will deny them to be adult members.

II. I shall now make some OBSERVATIONS for the further clearing the point, etc.

1st. I think this is a point of the greatest importance that ever came before
this church. The question is, whether our children shall be treated as
outcasts, as strangers to the covenants of promise, or in orher words, as
Infidels, as Pagans, without GOD in the world and without hope! If the act
establishing this practice should be repealed, I should look upon it that all
our children are this day unchurched and excommunicated, and that the church
has nothing more to do with them in a way of discipline. The brethren had need
consider what they do before they act: Your children are no doubt dear to you;
and will you, blindfold, this day cast them out of the heritage of the LORD?
Will you with your own hands, lifted up to Heaven, deliver them to Satan? I
cannot possibly put any other construction on the matter: They must either be
within the church or without; either dogs, or lambs of CHRIST'S flock: If they
are within, that is, members, they are certaily entitled to some privilege; and
what privilege have they left, if their children must not be baptized? Did we
not learn this in our earliest infancy, that the enfants of such as are members
of the visible church are to be baptized? But if they must be discovenanted and
cast out after all, I cannot help turning myfelf to them, as many such are
present, and saying to such as are of good conversation, as in Isa. lxvi. 5.
Your brethren that cast you out, for my name's sake, said, let the LORD be
glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed. The
reason of this apostrophe was, I had been informed of two or three that had
applied to own the covenant, but were denied, though at the same time urged to
come to full communion.


2d. But why are we to do this? The plea or pretense is grace. But I dare say
it will be found a most ungracious scheme in the issue: It will bring in a
carnal generation into the church, I mean into the number of communicants:
other doors being shut they will after a while rush into it as the horse to the
battle, rather than not have their children baptized. And Ministers and
churches will be more lax in admissions, rather than to have a generation of
heathens growing up among them. This it seems begins already to be the case,
where this alteration takes place, as some serious people complain.

3d. I would query, whether it is probable Abraham had grounds to think that
all his numerous family were converted, when they entered into solemn covenant?
Genesis xvii. and whether he would have been justified if upon his fearing the
contrary, he had withheld the seal from them? Abraham's family was the only
church in the world, and a type of the gospel church; and what was done in it,
ought to be done in gospel times. We should not be stricter than Abraham the
father of the faithful, especially since we are in the same covenant with him.
Romans iv. and xi. and Gel. iii.

4th. If this new scheme takes place, the next step may be a total laying aside
of relations. This it seems is done in Connecticut, by the most zealous
promoters of this new method. And Mr. Robbins owns, that it is matter of
indifferency, or at least, that a church may be rightly constituted without
them: If so, they may be laid aside. And what will be the consequence of this?
Why, 1st. the knowledge of experiences will be left to the sole cognizance of
Ministers: And must the church trust implicitly to them? 2d. The church will
have nothing left to judge by, but external evidences. And then, as to many,
they will have only negative evidences: And as to the candidates most known,
blamelesness of life will be the sum total of the evidence. Every one that can
say with the Pharisee, I am no extertioner, unjust, etc. or with the young man,
all these have I kept, etc. must be admitted to the LORD'S supper. What then
will become of the scheme of real grace being essential? Or how will they free
themselves from inconsistency, as I noted before?

5th. I would observe, that the Synod were of the same mind with Mr. Robbins,
that it is real grace that entitles a person to the ordinances in the sight of
GOD, and that it is visible grace that entitles them in the sight of the
church; and yet they administered baptism in this latitude: They could see no
inconsistency between these things; and how came we at this day to be more
clear-sighted?

6th. Further, with respect to the Synod that introduced this practice
generally, (for it was introduced by some particular Ministers and churches
before) I would observe two things. 1st. The famous Ministers that came into
the country at the first settlement were most of them alive and present at the
Synod. and mostly joined in it. And those that were dead, as my
Great-grandfather Mr. Cotton, Mr. Sheppard, and others, were for it, as appears
by their writings. And as for those Ministers that opposed the Synod, they
afterward almost to a man sell in with it, insomuch that Mr. Mitchell in his
letter to D^. Inc. Mather, five years after the Synod, tells him that he was
lest almost alone: And he afterward fell in; from what motives his writings
tell. 2d. I think it an observation of some weight, that the temptation that
lay before our Fathers was rather to be too rigid than lax in admissions.
For they were justly and greatly offended with the church of England, from
which they had just broke away, for their admitting every one, yea the
profanest to gospel ordinances, as members of the national church. This is one
of the reasons they always give of their separation, viz. promiscuous
administrations: And yet they so far got over their prejudices as to come into
such a result as we have in the Synod-Book. And as to Mr. Davenport in
particular, the grand opposer of the Synod, we find in his life, that he was
not only prejudiced by the loose administrations in the church of England, but
by what he saw in Holland, when he was Minister there; they requiring his
baptizing all children belonging to his assembly, let their parents or
guardians be eve^ so ignorant or scandalous, which he refusing, was forced to
leave his ministry among them. And he was afraid if he joined with the Synod it
would come to this at length in New England. As to President Chauncy the other
great opposer of the Synod, (formerly Minister of this church) we know how
rigid he was about the dipping of infants; he would neither baptize them in the
common way himself, nor suffer it to be done by other Ministers, which
occasioned his leaving this place. No wonder then that he was as rigid in the
present case. These two with Dr. Inc. Mather, were the chief opposers and
writers against the Synod; but Dr. Mather altered his mind, as you have heard.

7th. I think it a good observation of the worthy and ingenious Mr. Neal, who
was formerly in New England, (but now or lately a Minister in London) in his
New England History, speaking of the Synod in 1662 he says, I must confess, for
my own part, that it looks but like an odd assertion to me to call a person a
member of a church, who has no right to any of its privileges, and yet remains
exposed to its censures. A strange sort of membership indeed!

8^h. If the church must be purged in this sort, that is, so considerable a
number of members must be declared incapable of any privilege, and in effect
discovenanted, I would move that the church would begin higher in this purging
work. Let us begin with the communicants; let all be examined; let them be
asked one by one whether they have grace, or whether they love the LORD JESUS
in sincerity? And if they have not assurance of this, or good evidence, let
them be rendered incapable of any privilege or discovenanted until it is
otherwise with them. In a word, let us turn downright Separates, and set up a
pure church, this would be acting consistently, and not turning our artillery
against the weaker part of the members only.

Lastly, As to the manner the church should act in this affair. I would ask the
members, as it were one by one, whether they can say upon their consciences and
according to the word of GOD, that the practice is wrong and erroneous, or in
other words, that it sprung from Hell? If the major part can say this without
any doubt or hesitation upon their minds, I would ask further, what right the
scripture gives them to impose their sentiments upon their fellow members, who
think the practice agreeable to the will of GOD? Ought there not rather to be
some way found out in which our consciences may remain inviolate, and none of
our christian rights invaded, and we continued in communion together in charity
and love? And is not the method I proposed at the last church-meeting of this
nature?

Whether the major part of the church be for or against the practice I know
not, having conversed with but few. But if any alteration takes place, I
apprehend two things necessary.

1st. That those who vote for the alteration should have clear evidence, if not
assurance of their own regenerate estate. The new plan supposes it necessary
that all candidates for baptism or the LORD'S supper have such evidence. And
shall candidates be excluded by those who have it not themselves? As our
Savior said, He that is without sin let him cast the first stone; so I say,
let him that has good evidence of his own gracious state cast a stone at our
baptized members; and let none else presume to do it by voting in this ^ase. If
they do they condemn themselves; they pull the mote out of their brother's eye,
and leave the beam in their own, contrary to our Savior's command; they
require that of others, which their consciences tell them they are destitute of
themselves. And what an absurdity is this? What a presumption? What a
self-condemning mark? It was to such cases as this the Apostle had reference in
Romans ii. 1. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that
judge; for wherein thou judge another thou condemnest thyself.

2d. The other thing necessary is, that the church should be unanimous in the
alteration, at least that all opposition should cease.

Our church records inform us, That before any vote was called in affairs of
importance, care was always taken to gain the consent of every Brother: And in
case any could not actually vote; yet expressing, that they could rest in the
act of the church, it was satisfying: And this was a great preservation of the
peace of the church. This is the constitution of the church. How then can this
practice be abolished, when about half the church at least, are zealous for it?
This would be an imposition with a witness; such as was never heard of, since
the church had a foundation.

But how is it possible then, that this affair should ever be settled? I
answer, it can be settled no other way, than by mutual toleration and
forbearance. The church may, if they think proper, passively acquiesce in Mr.
Robins's forbearing the practice, until he has more light to act in the
affair. This is the utmost that they can do, without a general concurrence and
consent, or while our different sentiments remain.

And if the church thus far condescend to Mr. Robbins, I think at least he
ought as far to condescend to those of different apprehensions; that is, by
passively acquiesing at baptism being administered among us by other Ministers,
as has been already proposed, and not to imitate Mr. Chauncy in his rigidness,
or lay stumbling blocks in the way to prevent or discourage Ministers coming.
Thus by mutual forbearance, the affair may be peaceably accommodated, and no
violation of conscience on either side. But if the matter be drove on with
violence, who can tell what the consequence will be: GOD only knows.

And I would finally say, that if a vote of repeal be obtained, it would be
null in itself, unless by a previous vote the constitution of the church be
altered, and a new constitution established, wherein the major part should have
a right granted them of ruling the consciences of their Brethren; which GOD
forbid should ever be the fate of this once famous, but now declining church.
AMEN.

This third Essay was delivered to the church at their fourth meeting on this
affair, March 31, 1772. The same week on Friday evening I received the
following Letter from Mr. R --
Plymouth, April 3, 1772. Sir,
I Was called to go to Middleborough the day after our church meeting, and the
Fast being the next day prevented the until now communicating to you some
thoughts relative to what was read, as well as said at said meeting: But there
is this advantage has arisen from it, viz. I have had more time and opportunity
to think and to weigh matters in my own mind. And on the whole, I am still of
the same mind I was, that what you read in your last Puce was a most injurious,
unchristian, ungentleman-like, gross misrepresentation of the sentiments of
your brethren who are on the other side of the question in debate. You, Sir, do
certainly know, that neither I not they hold to such things as you there
advanced as being our sentiments; neither can any of your frightful
consequences be with the least appearance of justice or fairness, drawn from
our principles. To what purpose then, were those passionate exclamations and
pathetic addresses to the people, both church and congregation, but to
prejudice their minds against us and our opinions, without any scriptural or
rational grounds? Is this a fair or christian treatment of your Pastor and
Brethren? Can you think either to carry your point by such methods as these; or
if you could, that it would be upright and agreeable to the mind of CHRIST?
You, Sir, have more sense, I am persuaded, than to imagine men of tolerable
penetration can look upon such popular harangues and appeals to men's passions,
as sound reasoning, or fair scriptural argumentation. However I find that
notwithstanding its seeming affectionateness and popularity, it has been far
from accomplishing the end for which you must have evidently designed it. For I
have heard numbers speak of it since, and those of your side the question too,
who are by no means pleased with it, nor with the manner in which it was
delivered, but spoke of it with great dislike: And I rather think your cause,
which I am persuaded is not the cause of GOD, will suffer by it. I think, Sir,
you have reason, as a Christian, also to reflect, whether your being so free in
dealing out implicitly the curses of GOD'S Book upon those of us who think
differently from you was quite agreeable to that meek and lowly spirit, which
becomes the followers of the LAME of GOD. It appears to me, when you come
calmly to reflect upon it, it must excite penitential shame, and be matter of
deep humiliation before GOD. It no doubt flowed from the heat of your zeal to
support your cause, and to prepossess the minds of the multitude in favor of
it; but I think it very ill became a professor of godl^^^, (...) you could not
be so inconsiderate as to imagine to affrighten your opponents by such a
misapplication of scripture. However, I think, Sir, it is truly an awful thing
when GOD'S word is wrested to serve the purposes of any party merely: More
awful still when men attempt to turn GOD'S artillery against his own cause and
interest as I think, has been too much the case here, though not designedly. I
mean not, as was hinted above, to attempt to terrify or affrighten you hereby,
but only pray that it may excite in you reflection and serious thought. It is
no small satisfaction to me, Mr. Cotton, to find, that most of those Christians
among us, both men and women, who are justly looked upon to live near to GOD,
and to enjoy most of the life, power, and sweetness of experimental religion,
are on our side of this question. I much question whether you have four women
in the whole church with you, which I think is of some consideration in this
affair, though they cannot vote. I am sensible, Sir, indeed, and believe you
are aware too, that yours is the most popular side of the question.

The practice you attempt to support, and the argu^^^s made use of, do
perfectly accord with the natural pride of the unregenerate heart, and their
self-justifying spirit and disposition. It relishes exceeding well with the
generality of men, to hear that baptism in infancy and negative evidences of
grace are enough to ground a christian charitable belief that such persons are
good folks, and may be admitted to covenant with GOD: Whence they will
naturally conclude their state is safe enough, in spite of all the ministerial
instructions and warnings that can be given them. It suite graceless hearts
special well to be told that unregenerate men may safely say, they avouch the
LORD for their GOD, etc. as you publicly asserted in your first Piece. Having
omitted the argument in my first Piece, in which the passage here referred to,
is included, because it comes in more properly in my last Piece, I think it
best to insert the passage here, lest Mr. Robbins should make a noise about it.
It runs thus, Returning Ephraim uses this plea with GOD, when he begs for
converting grace, Turn thou me, etc. for thou art the LORD my GOD. Jer. xxxi.
Not that he thought that he had a special saving interest in GOD at this time;
(he was far from thinking so) but what he means is, that GOD was his GOD by
covenant relation: He was early dedicated to GOD by circumcision, and therefore
he begs of GOD, that the blessings of the covenant may be imparted to him. And,
by the way, this may answer the argument that (...) brought from those words
used in our covenant at this day, you avouch the LORD JEHOVAH to be your GOD; a
man may safely say it, though he has preponderating sears that he is not
converted. If a sensibly distressed sinner may use this expression in prayer to
GOD, he may as well do it upon any other occasion, though he dare not s^y or
think he has grace.
This is laying a broad foundation with a witness for sinners to build their
false hopes upon. However, this I must tell you, Sir, that so long as I have my
senses, by divine help, I will oppose to the utmost of my power, such notions,
both respecting doctrine and discipline, and that however solemnly,
passionately, or seriously they are advanced, or let the names or characters of
their propagators be what they will. Neither can I in conscience encourage the
INSTRUCTIONS of those who hold and advance such doctrines among a people, the
charge of whose immortal interests is committed to me. The direct and
unavoidable tendency of your opinions, as they have been here discovered,
appears to me to overthrow the grand calvinistic doctrines of the gospel, and
to establish the most dangerous tenets of the Arminians. For, notwithstanding
any precaution you can use, they will inevitably be led to think there is
something in a graceless finner that is pleasing to GOD; that he is not quite
so bad as many have represented him; that he is not an utter enemy to GOD and
CHRIST and the covenant, but has same good thing in him, at least, toward the
LORD GOD of Israel. But it is needless for me to enlarge on this head at
present. The most godly amongst us plainly see these to be the consequences of
your arguments and plan, as it has been hitherto pushed. For, whatever may be
urged, it is too evident that those who do in these days practice the
half-covenant or encourage baptized children owning covenant, etc. in the
common way, have wretchedly deviated and gone off from the original design of
the Synod. But enough has been said of this in public. As to the poor plea of
making Pagans, Heathens, etc. of our children, it appears to me it is as wicked
as it is unreasonable to call those who have been born and brought up under the
gospel, and still enjoy ordinances, calls, means of grace, etc. to call them, I
say, Pagans, merely because they are destitute of the outward badge, though
precious privilege I own, of discipleship, If baptized persons are disciples,
then they ought to have the privilege, the precious privilege of all disciples,
viz, to have their children baptized as well as themselves.
that is, remain unbaptized! Is this the return of thanks we give to GOD for
the precious gospel and means of salvation, to call those that enjoy them, if
unbaptized, Pagans, Infidels, and Heathens? I have not so learned to speak, I
acknowledge, of the gift and mercy of GOD to poor unworthy sinners.

On the whole Sir, I trust it is in vain for you or any one else to pretend to
urge the plan, or attempt to support a scheme, which I am satisfied, never had
the least foundation in scripture: For magna est verites is prevaleb^t. And to
have one church-meeting after another, I am persuaded will be of no
significancy. The Brethren's eyes seem to be more and more opened; and not only
their's, but others of the congregation too. So that I sincerely hope and
believe all struggles to keep alive a practice unwarranted by the word of GOD
will be in vain. The more I think of it and canvass the arguments and methods
taken to support it, the more satisfied I am, that they can never finally avail
to keep it in existence. I am always for peace when consistent with purity, and
none shall strive more for it; but if repugnant to it, I would contend
earnestly for the latter, though the consequence should be a diminution of the
former.

With proper respects, I am your Friend and Servant, C. ROBBINS.
P. S. When I mention in the above, "the most godly among us," as being grieved
at the conduct of those who are so strenuous for the half-covenant, as it is
called, I by no means intend, or would be thought to intimate that I think
those of our brethren of your way are not truly godly, and I hope and trust
real friends to CHRIST in heart, though I think not in their judgment in this
point. But I allude there more particularly to the godly amongst us, whose
circumstances are such as renders it impossible, most of them, to be very
active, or vote, etc. in the affair. I mention this to avoid any imputation of
uncharitableness.


C.R. --.


The ANSWER.
Plymouth, April 9, 1772. SIR,
I WILL not be led into a paper controversy; neither my present hurry of
business, nor inclination will permit it. One answer for all. I read your long
Epistle with astonishment and surprise, and all the while I was reading, my
conscience told me, that I was not the man.

You represent my discourse at the church-meeting as a mere popular harangue
and appeal to men's passions, as if this was the main scope and substance of
it. I have looked it over caresully and find little of this nature contained in
it. It consists of eleven pages, and about ten of those eleven are taken up in
reasoning closely, as I thought, on the point, or in relating matter of fact
respecting the Synod, Mr. Davenport, Mr. Leonard, etc. or in declaring the
constitution of the church, and what was proper for the church to do in the
matter, etc. And I scarce know what you refer to, except it be what I said
about our children's being excommunicated, and my quoting Isa. lxvi. 5. As to
the latter, you may remember that I addressed those baptized persons only who
were of good conversation, not the profane; and herein I had respect
particularly to Mr. Ichabed S -- w, and one or two more, whom I had heard you
would not admit to own the covenant, and yet were willing to receive to full
communion. It was, I suppose, my mentioning this text, that occasions your
asserting that I was free in dealing out implicitly the curses in GOD'S Book
upon those who thought differently from me, for I find nothing else that looks
that way. Whether any curses were thus denounced, a brief paraphrase of the
text will discover: It runs thus, your Brethren that (hated you and; these
words I left out because in no sense applicable) cast you out; (this was really
the case in my apprehension) said, let the LORD he glorified. This is the very
thing you urge, that the new scheme is for the glory of GOD. But he shall
appear to your joy. (That is, Providence will keep the door open for your
admitance) and they shall be ashamed. That is, they shall be convined of their
error in being so strait, and conviction is always accompanied with shame. This
was my real intent and meaning in using this text, and the sense, I believe, in
which the hearers generally took it. But taking the text in a greater latitude,
I do not see how it can be called a dealing out of GOD'S curses against you or
your adherents. As to the propriety of my mentioning this text, (in the
allusive sense in which it was meant and taken) I have not the least doubt. But
as to the prudence of it, that is another question: It might perhaps be an
imprudent step because it tended rather to irritate than enlighten. As to my
charging you with sentiments, which I know you disclaim, I know not what you
mean, except my saying, The new plan supposes it necessary that all candidates
for baptism or the LORD'S supper have clear evidence, if not assurance of their
regenerate estate. Whether you hold this or not, let your Sermons speak; except
one, wherein you endeavored to remove the scruple arising from 1 Cor. xi. 29.
In which you brought down the terms so low, that scarce any need be afraid of
coming. How you can reconcile this to your other Discourses, I know not.

If you further mean, that I charge you with a direct design of excommunicating
the children of the church: I charge you with no such thing; but that it is the
direct consequence of your opinion, I then and now, and I believe always shall
assert. And I held up this consequence before you, that you might see the
absurdity of your opinion. What can be more natural than such reasoning as
this? If the act establishing this practice should be repealed, I should look
upon it that all our children are this day unchurched and excommunicated, and
that the church has nothing more to do with them in a way of discipline. I
cannot possibly put any other construction on the matter: They must either be
within the church or without; either dogs, or lambs of CHRIST'S flock: If they
are within, that is, members, they are certainly entitled to some privilege;
and what privilege have they left, if their children must not be baptized? Did
we not learn this in our earliest infancy, That The infants of such as are
members of the visible church are to be baptized. You yourself must necessarily
see the force of this way of reasoning, and would readily own the consequence
to be unavoidable, if baptized persons adult were members of the church. But
this you now deny, although you owned it in all our church-meetings formerly;
Which is the reason why I never yet attempted fully to prove that point.
and you must of necessity deny it, to be consistent. And in this you accompany
Mr. Davenport and a few others formerly, and Mr. Bellamy and some more in our
day, though contrary to the sentiments of all churches and almost all Divines
in all ages.

You say, that you think the cause I maintained will suffer by my managament of
it: If so, so much the better for you. You say, you mean not to attempt to
terrify or affrighten me: I am not so easily affrighted out of my duty. You
say, that the most experienced Christians among us are on your side. Ans. I do
not pretend to judge the heart; but I apprehend you are mistaken here. And in
your comparisons, I think you are guilty of great uncharitableness and
censoriousness; and I must in faithfulness tell you that I verily fear, you
converse too-little with your flock to pass any judgment who are the most godly
and experienced Christians, or who enjoy most of the presence of GOD and the
sweetness of religion. You say, that you do not think there are four women in
the whole church with me. If this be true, which I question, this shows that
you are more a favorite with the women than I am, but does not prove your
point. And here I would observe, as far as my knowledge reaches, or I have
information, that there are very few, if any, men or women, but would be easy
and contented to have the practice continued, if they were not afraid of
grieving or losing you. You say, "that it perfectly accords with the pride of
the unregenerate heart, to hear that baptism in infancy and negative evidences
are sufficient gound for christian charity." What I astert is, that negative
evidences are so far sufficient, that if a baptized persons, of whom the church
knows nothing amiss, should desire to own the covenant, or in other words, to
take possession of the right given him in baptism, the church could not
regularly deny him. Is this such a dangerous doctrine as you represent, and
attended with such dreadful consequences?

You add, "it suits graceless persons spedial well to be told, that
unregenerate men may safely say they avouch the Lord for their God, etc." I did
not use the word unregenerate; but what I said was, that a man may safely say
it, who has p^^pondorating fears that he is not converted; as Ephraim did in
his prayer for converting grace. Jer. xxxi. 18. Turn thou me, etc. for thou art
the LORD my GOD. He avencheth the LORD for his GOD, while he verily thought
himself unregenerate. He did this upon account of his covenant relation, or
early dedication to GOD in circumcision. And suppose any other sinner, sensibly
distressed like him, should use the like words, while he thought himself
destitute of grace, would this be a profanation? Or would it lay a foundation
for him to build false hopes upon? A mighty foundation indeed! The premises
are, GOD is ^y GOD, because I was early given to him in baptism; the
consequence according to you is, therefore I may safely conclude I have grace.
If you draw such consequences as these, it is time for you to go to school
again, to learn better logic. And by the way, this text in Jer. confutes your
notion of infant membership's not remaining at adult age.

Next follows your thundering Anathema, authoritatively denounced against me,
for advancing such pernitions, soul-da^^^ing, destructive doctrines. I cannot
in conscience, say you, encourage the instructions of those who hold and
advance such doctrines among a people, the charge of whose immortal interests
is committed to me. That is, in other words, I forbid your preaching any more
in my pulpit or parish. But why so? It follows, The direct and unavoidable
tendency of your opinions, as they have born here discovered, appears to me to
overthrow the grand ca^vinistic doctrines of the gospel, and to establish the
most dangerous tenets of the Arminians. So that it seems I am not only inclined
to the Arminians, but am become at once one of the worst sort of Arminians,
without knowing it, establishing their most dangerous doctrines. And if so,
certainly unworthy, not only of ministerial, but of christian communion. Mr.
Robbins, I must tell you, I scorn: the charge; I know what is Arminianism as
well as you do, and am as free from it as yourself. And you might with as much
propriety call me an Arian, a Muggletonian, yea, a Deist as an Arminian.

But you forgot, that while you were drawing this charge against me, you
equally involved my Brethren in the same charge, who all think as I do, and,
saving the quotation from Isa. lxvi. which I take wholly to myself) are as
verily guilty as I am, and some of them more so, who carry the point of baptism
much further than I do: So that here is not only a virtual excommunication of
our children, but of half the church at once. And this was not done suddenly in
a passion upon the breaking up of the church-meeting, for which some allowance
might be made, but deliberately after three or four days consideration, and
immediately after a day of solemn Fasting and Prayer, in which we might justly
expect our passions would be composed. I cannot think Mr. Conant advised you to
this step. The reason of this clause was, because Mr. R. -- went to
Middleborough the day after the church-meeting.


But, Mr. Robbins, what is worse than all, you were all this while condemning
yourself: for you are certainly more for resting: upon outward evidences than I
am, as a passage in my last Piece will evince, which, I omitted as well as some
others, because it grew so late: The words are these, If this new scheme takes
place, then the next step. I apprehend, will be a total laying aside of
relations. And so on in the same terms as it is expressed in the fourth
observation of the third Essay, p. 30, 31, which I desire the reader to turn to.

You know that Mr. Green, your favorite Author, whom you read at
church-meeting, explodes experiences. He says, In the admission of persons we
are not to judge from the account of inward experiences, this is not laid down
in scripture as the rule of public judgment; but profession and practice. Mr.
Bellamy accords with him, and I suppose others of your plan in Connecticut. And
some of this church know, that you have always spoke slightingly of relations,
and wished them laid aside. The church then, according to you and your
Brethren, must regulate her judgment solely by practice, that is, external
evidence, whether negative or positive it matters not.

This with you is a sufficient foundation for christian charity, without any
knowledge of their experiences, that is, on the part of the church. Here then I
might exclaim, This perfectly accords with the natural pride of the
unregenerate heart, and their self justifying spirit; this relishes exceedingly
with the generality of men to hear that baptism with profession and a moral
regular practice are enough to ground a christian charitable belief that such
persons are good folks, and may be admitted to covenant with GOD: Whence they
will naturally conclude their state is safe enough, in spite of all the
ministerial instructions that can be given them! And so as to all the rest of
the dreadful consequences, which you attribute to my scheme. Mr. Robbins, Who
is the Arminian now? When experiences are set aside, what is all this but
arminian evidence? But be not affrighted; after all, neither you nor I are
Arminians. But all this rhapsody sprung from a strange confusion of ideas, or
from not duly distinguishing between what is proper evidence for the church to
act upon, and what for the party or candidate himself, which are certainly
dificient, at least in part, as I doubt not you will acknowledge, when you come
to consider.

You further say, that Ministers and churches in these days have wretchedly
deviated from the design of the Synod. If this be the case, which I question,
why did you not endeavor to restore the practice to the original design of it,
and not seek the total abolition of it? This, I doubt not, might have been
easily effected without one church-meeting. It lay entirely in your own breast
whom to propound or not, and I make no doubt you would have been so large in
your practical charity, however strict in your notional or speculative, that
there would have been but little objection; but few persons, I believe,
especially those of note, would have been excluded: But it seems the door is
shut against every one, let him be ever so well qualified, unless he sees his
way clear to come to the LORD'S table. How in this case you can read such texts
as that, Matt. xviii. 6, without trembling, I cannot imagine. And here I would
advise you not to keep perpetually harping upon qualifications, as if this was
the chief point in dispute: If this was yielded to you, another grand point
remains, Whether it be not sinful to exclude any from the privilege of baptism
whom we could charitably receive to the LORD'S supper, merely because they
scruple their fitness for that ordinance? This I look upon as a greater point
than the other.

You next charge me with wickedness in calling them Pagans and Heathens who
were never baptized or made any profession, although they come to meeting, or
have opportunity for it if they will. Wherein the wickedness of this consists,
I know nor: Divines frequently do it. Mr Watson, in his body of divinity, calls
the children of such, sucking Paga^. Scripture instances may be adduced. You
almost every Sabbath make them worse than Heathen, in saying, they shall have a
more aggravated doom. Yea, if I remember right, you either in direct terms or
in effect called them Heathens in treating from Jer. x. 25. But supposing the
phrase improper, how can it justly be called wicked?

As for your concluding triumphs, as if certain of the victory, and that your
scheme will finally prevail; read 1 Kings, xx. 11. But I hope it is not victory
that either side is seeking; but truth. There are some other things in your
Letter that deserve animadversion; but I forbear.

Upon the whole. I look upon your Letter as a most unchristian and injurious
reflection on me and on a great part of the church; and as you profess yourself
a Christian, I think myself in duty bound to demand satisfaction for the
following articles. 1st. Your assuming, lordly, imperious style throughout your
whole performance; contrary to 1 Timothy v. 1. and 1 Pet. v. 3. 2d. Your styling
my last Piece a most injurious unchristian, ungentleman-like, gross
representation of the sentiments of the Brethren, etc. without assigning
wherein. 3d. Your charging me, more than implicitly, with a crafty,
hypocritical, deceitful way of carrying on my cause, as you call it, as if
being conscious of the weakness of it, I took such p^ssionate and popular
methods to gain my point. 4th. Your charging me with wresting the word of GOD
to serve ^ad purposes. 5th. Your charging me with wickedness, for calling those
Heathens or Pagans, who remain unbaptized and never made any profession of
religion. 6th. Above all, your charging me with Arminianism, and with the
grossest sort of Arminianism, such as ^s destructive to the souls of men, etc.
And this without the least foundation. 7th. The judgment you pass upon me; that
I had rendered myself totally unworthy of all ministerial communion by what I
had done so that it would be a most dangerous thing to the souls of this people
to let me preach or instruct any more, and what you could not in conscience do:
Which judgment, if right, renders me as unworthy of christian, as of
ministerial communion. 8th and finally. That my Brethren appear to be involved
in the some doom, who sto^d b^ and consented to what I said; universally
approving it, as far as I can learn, except that passage in Isaiah; so that
they must be as gross Arminians, etc. as myself.
These things I charge you with, and hope, "when you come calmly to reflect,
will excite penitential shame, and be matter of deep humiliation before GOD."
And not only so, but induce you to make due acknowledgments to your injured
Brethren. In expectation of which, I subscribe myself your real Friend, as far
as you will suffer me to be so, and humble Servant,

J. COTTON.
P. S. I cannot but think, that one design of your writing this Letter, and the
timing of it, was to prevent my coming to the sacrament; so that you have begun
to purge the church already, as is indeed accessory upon your plan* And I am
really suspicious, that you had a further reach in this Letter than barely to
vent your resentment. Mr. Robbins, let me ask you seriously, Have you not a
mind to get away from poor Plymouth? And have you not some favorite parish in
view? I would not be uncharitable; but your several provoking Letters to the
Precinct Committee about your salary, without just grounds; the open
declaration of your Brother; some hints of the same nature from your Father;
your refusing any method of accommodation; your management at the
church-meeting, and especially this last stroke, which aflects not me only, but
above half the church and congregation. I say, all these give grounds of
suspicion, that there is something of that nature in view; I cannot otherwise
account for your conduct.

I desire to know how it comes about that six or seven lines of your Father's
Letter to me are erased. It is not done with the same sort of ink that your
Father used, but with ink exactly resembling your Letter. Are such proceedings
fair or handsome? If you send any account to Connecticut, I desire you would
send a full copy of your and my Letter, and not let it go in that hideous dress
in which it has been hitherto represented.

Looking over your Letter more critically and comparing passages, the charge of
hypocrisy and deceit appeared to me more glaring and gross than ever. Is not
this the whole scope and run of your first page? "I gres^ly and wittingly
misre^ resent your sentiments, say you; I charge you with what I know you do
not hold; I draw unfair consequences from your opinions; my passionate
exclamations and pathetic addresses designed to prejudice people's minds,
unjustly, against you and your opinions; my treatment of you unfair and
unchristian; I sought to carry my point by methods not consistent with
uprightness; my discourse a mere popular harangue and appeal to men's passions,
destitute of scripture or reason; my affectionateness but seeming; I had missed
of my evident design, viz. to carry my cause by noise instead of argument; men
of but tolerable penetration could see through my management; I endeavored to
prepossess the minds of the multitude by ways ill becoming a professor of
godlines^: I misapplied scripture; I wrested GOD'S word to serve the purposes
of a party; you believe I was aware that I was on the popular side, etc." All
which put together amounts to this, that I merely acted a part; that all was
but grimace and farce; that my discourse was calculated to impose upon the
auditory; that I endeavored to make them believe what I knew was not true;
that knowing myself destitute of argument I substituted in their room
passionate exclamations, etc. to answer my purposes and gain my point. In a
word, that I was a designing finished hypocrite, endeavoring, Lawyer like, to
gain that by craft, which I knew I could not by scriptural argumentation and
sound reasoning; but that after all I was frustrated in my evident design. And
in addition to this, I note, that while (in your Postscript) you are expressing
some little charity to the misled Brethren of my way, as you term it, you
express none for me; having before given me up as a soul-destroying Arminian
and a deceiver, unfit ever to preach any more. Mr. Robbins, what gross
uncharitableness is here? What assuming the prerogative of the Almighty? The
rankest Separate never exceeded you in censoriousness. It is strange that my
earnestness in urging what I verily thought to be an immortal truth of CHRIST
should have such a base construction put upon it by a professor of godliness. I
might with as much propriety apply these epithets to your fiery headstrong zeal
and management. But I have not so learned CHRIST.

I also remark, your amazing confidence as if infallibly certain you had truth
on your side. St. Paul himself, with his infallible spirit, could not be more
confident. How unbecoming is this? What vanity in a raw unstudied If he had not
been raw and unstudied in controversial divinity, he would have known better
than to have charged (...) with arminianism, etc.
young man, who has almost the whole christian world against him, and near all
the first Fathers in New England? Certainly more diffidence and humility
becomes you; especially since you have heretofore been obliged to retract
opinions that, for years, you were as confident of as this, and that you had
preached up with zeal and emphasis, and even with passionate exclamations. I
mean those doctrines you had learned from Bellamy. You must indeed judge for
yourself; but such assuming is intolerable.

I would also inform you, for I find you but little read in history, that while
you are branding me with destroying calvinism you yourself are flying in the
face of Calvin; for he was against you in this point of baptism, as appears by
the articles of the French Protestant churches, which were drawn up by him, and
afterward enlarged by his advice and approbation.

April 12. This Letter was finished April 9, but not sent, because Mr. Robbies
was at Boston, and he not returning until the latter end of the week, I would
not serve him as he did me, to send it just before the Sabbath; so that he had
it not until Monday in raing April 13, which gave me opportunity of waiting
this on the Sabbath Evening.
I observe you prayed in the morning with words redoubled, That Ministers might
not shun to declare the whole counsel of GOD, and to withstand error in
doctrine and discipline, etc. The words were spoken in a sort of fever, as his
manner is when moved, Let them not shun, let them not shun to declare, etc.
I would observe upon it, that if you make not faster progress in declaring the
whole counsel of GOD to this people, it will require near the age of Methuselah
to do it: since there are, I believe, fifteen twentieths or more of the heads
of divinity that you have but little or nothing ^o ^ched upon. ^aver this to be
fact, that he has not particularly handled the greater part of the heads of
divinity, and it is in my power to prove it, as I have all the texts he has
preached from, set down in my interleaved Almanacks. This has been matter of
grievance to me for years; so that my mentioning of it was not a sudden
ebullition of passion, but what I thought recessary: For, if men will bring
their passions with them into the pulpit, especially in prayer, they must
expect to hear disagreeable truths.
Look into a Body of Divinity and you will find it so.

J. C --




Mr. ROBBINS'S Answer to the preceding Letter.
Plymouth, April 14, 1772. SIR,
I Received your very obliging, polite, calm, and ingenious Letter yesterday
morning, and noted the contents: Am particularly pleased to find it so free
from an " assumed, lordly, and imperious style," which certainly must be an
instance of great condescension in one of such eminent eruditition and superior
knowledge, when speaking or writting to a "ra^e, unstudied young man," and one
so "little read in history." Had I thought it would have been such assuming and
arrogance in me to presume to write to you, Sir, I do not think I should have
dared to have done it. But I must say, I never knew before that it was a crime,
or would be looked upon such presumption in me to communicate my thoughts
freely to you, or make remarks upon your public conduct and writings. Mr.
Robbins told ore of the Brethren, that in the first part of this Letter he
followed the example of Eli^ah, viz. in his treatment of Deal's Prophets.
What I wrote to you contained my real thoughts of your LAST PIECE. I thought
verily it was my duty to write it; I did it not in passion or anger, I
considered myself as one that had the charge of the souls of this people
committed to me, and who must give an account of the various parts of my
ministerial conduct. I considered the things you advanced, as being of
dangerous tendency to the souls of this people; and I still aix of the some
mind: I fully believe their tendency to be, to subvert some of the grand
doctrines of the gospel and of calvinism, and to establish some of the most
dangerous tenets of Arminiarism; and therefore should be guilty of the greatest
unfaithfulness to GOD and them, if I did not oppose them. And to oppose them
behind your back, without opening my mind freely to you, I and you might justly
look upon as mean, base, and unchristian. These, therefore, are the
considerations, that moved me to write to you, Sir. I acted conscienciously and
I think uprightly. "I withstood you, because, I think, you was to be blamed:" I
think so still. And should look upon myself as a poor soldier indeed in the
ministerial warfare, if I was afraid to oppose and expose error merely because
it came from one superior in age. As to the grand point in dispute, I am sure I
have seen no cause to alter my opinion, from your last Letter. As to the
construction you put upon many parts of my Letter, besides your misquotations,
which are many, I would only say, that it is very far from my meaning or
intention; however, if you choose to construe and under^land it so, I cannot
help it. As to some inconsistencies in your Letter, though they are glaring, it
might give you some pain and uneasiness, perhaps, to have them pointed out, and
therefore I sorbear. As to the Brethren being involved in the same doom, as you
call it, and that they universally consented to your doctrines in this matter,
the contrary is so notorious to almost the whole town, that even you yourself,
Sir, if but moderately conversant with the people, cannot think it worth while
for me to make any reply to it. What he meant by this I know not. My assertion
is as true, as that there is such a man as Mr. Robbins; but this is agreeable
to his usual policy. He had a mind to detach me from my Brethren, and make them
believe that ^hey were no way concerned, that they might leave me alone, or
almost alone, to be worried by him at his pleasure. All his endeavors of late
seem to center in this point.
As to the ungenerous, as well as unjust assertions about my Father and
Brother. I think you, Sir, and whoever else may have assisted you with
intelligence, might have taken pains to be better informed, before you asserted
it. I choose to say nothing here of ingratitude on your part, Sir. As to my
having a mind to leave "poor Plymouth," as you call it, I choose to say no more
about it, after you and the church and others have heard me declare, that such
suspicions are without the least foundation in truth. As to my designing to
prevent your coming to the sacrament, I had no such thought in my heart. As to
the many low, mean reflections upon me in your Letter, about going to school,
etc. I acknowledge that I am too " raw and unstudied" in scurrility to make any
adequate answer to them, nor would I return railing for railing. I could give
many other instances of Mr. Robbins's great neckness and forbearance: Take a
sample of a sew. His frequent and audible ^issing when he sat as Moderater, as
my second Piece was in reading; his praving, at the opening of the last
church-meeting in June, That the wild boar out of the wilderness might not be
j^ssered to worry and devour the flock. His declaration at the same meeting,
upon reading my last Piece, that I d^rkned ^^^nsel with words without
knowledge; his giving me the lie at the same time; his pointed Psalms; his
Sermon of triumph in July, after the church had committed the power into his
hands, (which is since recalled) from Isa. live. 17. In which he showed how the
enemies of the church sought its destruction. viz. by promoting false
profession; by prejudicing people's minds against their Ministers by sowing
discord among Brethren, by magrifying the inf^^mities (...) the g^^lly etc. All
which his adherants took to be levelled against those that were differently
minded from him. To which we may add, his usual phrase in common conversation,
both now and heretofore, when speaking of those who will or will not humor him
in all his notions. My friends and my enemies, etc. etc. These things I
mention, not so much to expose him as to prevent the like for time to come.
As to the last part of your Letter, which was wrote upon the Sabbath, and
which is as full of the spirit of the Letter as any other part; all I say is, I
think you might go to the house of GOD with a better temper of mind than to
carp and find sault, especially in our joint solemn addresses to Heaver. And I
do not wonder you stayed from the sacrament, if you felt the same temper then,
that you did at this time. As to " d^claring the council of GOD," I have cause
enough to be ashamed before GOD for my great barrenness, unfaithfulness, and
unprofitableness: But as to man, I think my people have no just cause to find
fault, when I have done my utmost to discharge my duty in that regard. As to
several articles of charge you mention in the last page of your first Letter,
if what has been said above is not a sufficient answer to them, I can hardly
look upon it my duty, Sir, to make further reply to them, until you discover a
spirit somewhat different from that which runs through great part of your
Letter. For though I am less than the least of GOD'S Servants, and far inferior
in age, knowledge, and grace; yet you ought to consider, that Providence has
placed me in some respects in a station above you, and such as demand respect
from you, in as much as I am, through the providence of GOD, your Pastor, as
well as

Friend and Humble Servant, C. ROBBINS.


A Reply to this last Letter, wrote immediately.
Plymouth, April 14, 1772. SIR,
I TOLD you I would not enter into a paper controversy. But I must tell you,
that you have not answered my Letter: You cannot answer it: You dare not
attempt it. And I impute your answering me in the manner you have done, (which
is after the model of L. Bryant) to a consciousness of your inability that way:
And rest,

Your Friend and Servant, J. COTTON.
P. S. I know no more harm in writing on the Sabbath Evening a line or two,
than in marrying people, or in spending the Evening in trifling discourse.




This Letter was sent back opened.

On these Letters I remark,

1st. That it was the first of these Letters that began our personal
difference: Before this, we held a good co^^^spondence, notwithstanding our
different sentiments about baptism; and might have done so still, if he had
managed the controversy with argument instead of abuse; And whether I gave him
suficient ground for turning the dispute into this channel by the preceding
Essay, I leave to the Reader's consideration.

2d. What could be Mr. Robbins's real motive in writing his first Letter? His
excuse is, that he had not time to answer my Piece at the church-meeting, it
grew so late, which rendered it necessary for him to write. If this was the
case, why did he not argue the point like a man, and endeavor to refute me,
and not write like a Momus? Or did he think it too great a condescension for
one in " a station so far above me," for one of his superior penetration and
sagacity to deign to argue the point with such a mean Antagonist? Why, in this
case, a ^^^ens contempt would have been the most proper answer. Or did he write
^^^rly to v^nt his indignation? He tells us, "he wrote not in a passion." Or
did he do it purposely to pick a quarrel with me? This surely could not be the
case with a man of Mr. Robbin^'s consummate meekness, a grace that he has so
much recommended of late; or was it done to chastize me for my presumption in
daring to oppose a men of his consequence? This, I dare say, he will not own.
Or did he write to terrify me from any further opposition? He says, in his
Lo^^^, ^^he meant not to attempt "to terrify or affrigh^^ the." Or did he think
it best to finish the controversy with a butcher-stroke to knock me down at one
blow, (to use a vulgar phrase?). These things I must leave. The real motive of
this conduct is beyond my penetration: It fills me with surprise every time I
think of it. As to the second Letter, the design of it is not so mysterions; it
is ^^pare^^tly to let me know the suparlative contempt he had for me. There is
certainly nothing in either Letter that tends to administer con^iction, if I
had been ever so wrong; nothing but a torrent of abuse, a rumbling sound of
hard words; an overflow of gall and bitterness. If I had wrote such Letters to
Mr. Robbins, I should have been afraid to walk the streets. This leads me to
ask,

3d. Which has written with the greatest asperity? Mr. Robbins says, "I have
^^ronged him in my Letter thirty times is more than he has me in both his."
Here it must be remembered, that he began the quarrel, and if, by his
reflections and abuses, I have been provoked to speak sometimes too harshly. he
may thank himself for it, by giving such needless provocation. But how do the
reflections on each side appear upon the comparison? Why, if what he says of me
be true, I am certainly a grand knave, and a dangerous beretick, wholly unfit
to instruct or preach any more. But in what light have I represented him? Why,
the whole amounts to no more than this, that he has partly forgot his school
logic; that he is no great Divine; that he is not so much conversant in history
as some scholars are; that he does not visit his people enough to know who are
the most experienced Christians; that there are many points of divinity that he
has neyer fully and particularly handled; that he has spoke slightingly of
relations, not of experiences, as he is pleased to turn it, which I never
accused him of; that his discourse was a rhapsady, etc. If these things be
true, where is the fault of telling him of them in the manner I have brought
them in? which I desire may be noticed. If any of the particulars be magnified
beyond bounds, or the expressions too strong, is the injury done him a
thousandth part so great as the injury to me? The difference, I apprehend, is
as great, as between the scratch of a pin and a stab through the vitals.
Surely, if any one, that was an utter stranger to us both, should read his
Letters, and know no more of me than what is contained in them, he would think
me a vile wretch indeed. And if they do me no hurt where I am known, no thanks
to him.

4th. What satisfaction is proper in this case; and whether the satisfaction
offered be sufficient? As Mr. Robbins has brought particular charges against
me, I think the satisfaction ought to be particular, and that a general
acknowledgment, or amnesty, is not sufficient to answer the gospel rule, etc.
But what satisfaction has been offered? Mr. Robbins offered this in general,
upon our meeting with some Brethren, refusing so much as to talk of
particulars, viz. "You think I have injured you, and I think you have injured
me thirty times more by your Letter: Let us make mutual concessions to each
other; let us bury the hatchet, and forget and forgive, and for the future live
in love and peace." Here is no acknowledgment either general or particular; but
only a bare proposal to let the matter drop, without saying any more about it;
or in other words, to make something of a balance, and leave off on equal
terms, with intimations at the same time, that he thought it a condescension in
him to come down so low. This was the case; and yet I understand I am much
blamed by many for not making up on these terms, and represented as unforgiving
implacable, etc. Even the pulpit has not been free from censure. If I had
accepted this, it would have been an implicit concession. 1st. That I was wrong
in ever manifesting any dissatisfaction at all. 2d. That the charges against me
were well grounded and just. 3d. That I acquiesced in the doom he had
pronounced upon me, as unfit to instruct, etc. And 4th. That I had really
wronged him, and that in the degree he mentioned, or at least in equal degrees,
when I was not conscious I had wronged him at all. In short, the terms offered
appeared to me a further insult, rather than any thing that looked like
acknowledgment. If he thought proper to insist upon a general making up, what
less could he have said, than that his Letters were rash, hasty, and unguarded,
and that he was sorry that ever he wrote them? Or something of the like tenor;
but not so much as this, could be obtained.


But I am weary with remarking, and would give myself and the Reader some
relief, by proceeding to the next Essay; in which, if I have treated him with
greater severity, in public, than before, I trust I have not exceeded
christian bounds; if I have, which I am not at present conscious of, I desire
to stand corrected.

THE FOURTH AND LAST ESSAY.
QUEST. WHETHER the practice of this church respecting the subjects of Baptism
be warrantable?

The Affirmative further urged; June 30, 1772.

1. I shall endeavor to remove some of the mountains that have been laid in
the way, or in other words, to solve some difficulties that have been newly
alleged against this practice.

1st. It is said, that the baptism of children, and of adult persons is of
quite a different nature; persons baptized when adult are indeed complete
members, and have a right to all church privileges by virtue of their baptism;
but it is not so with respect to baptized infants; their relation to the church
at first is but incomplete and partial, and merely mediate; all the end and
intent of it, is to lay them under bonds to be the LORD'S when they grow up;
but they are not entitled to the least privilege by virtue of their baptism;
and when they come to years of understanding, their relation to the church, or
this incomplete membership, if it may be so called, wholly ceases, let them be
ever so serious and regular in their lives, unless they make it their own act
by taking the covenant personally upon themselves in a gracious manner.

This position I look upon as absurd and irrational and directly contrary to
scripture. That childrens membership is of the same nature, as full and
complete and as lasting as that of persons baptized at adult age, and that they
can forfeit it no other way but by bad principles or vicious lives, may be
proved by the following arguments.

1st. From the nature of baptism, which is, according to all Divines, the door
of entrance into the church. And if it is the door of entrance, then certainly
all baptized persons, whether admitted in infancy, or adult age are members,
and there cannot possibly be any specific difference between the membership of
the one and the other. The scripture no where assigns any such difference; and
shall we be wiser than GOD? The following scriptures may further illustrate
this point. As 1st. The Apostle says, Gal. iii. 25. As many as have been
baptized into CHRIST, have put on CHRIST; that is, have put on the profession
of his religion; they are become members of his church; they are in visible
covenant delation to him: Let them be children or grown persons, their standing
in the church is the same. This place seems exactly parallel with that, 1. Cor.
xii. 13. We are all baptized into one body; we are all, whether infants or
adult, received into the bosom of the church; we are equally become parts of
this body, which is but one.

Again, the Apostle tells us, Ephesians. iv. 5. There is but one LORD, one says, one
baptism. But according to this new notion, there are two baptisms specifically
distinct; the one only lays persons under bonds, but the other entitles them to
all privileges; which is certainly absurd. This new doctrine, if true, would
inset the necessity of rebaptization. Accordingly, Dr. Inc. Mather observes,
that rebaptization is the necessary consequence of it: For it seems, says he,
according to this plan the covenant which the child was in when an infant is
become a mere nullity; so that now being adult, he must not renew his covenant
but enter into a new and other kind of covenant, which he was never i^ before:
Now it is necessary, that when a man does enter into covenant, he should be
initiated by baptism. There was lately a sot in the world, as Mr. Baxter tells
us, who upon this very ground, although they did acknowledge baptism of infants
as lawful, yet did rebaptize themselves when adult. Thus Dr. Mather; subject of
baptism, p. 65.

2d. We may argue this point further from the nature of the covenant. This
includes the children equally with the parents; their visible covenant relation
is the same. Accordingly the Apostle says, Romans xi. 17. If the root be holy, so
are the branches. That is, according to all our Divines that are for infant
baptism, if the parents, who are the root, be federally holy, that is, in
covenant with GOD, so are the children, which are the branches, equally so: The
^e^^ive hol^^^ss of the one and the other, are of the same nature and extent,
and not specifically distinct: They are equally church mem^^rs. If it is said,
that by the holiness of the root is meant (...) holiness; consequently the
holiness of the root and of the branches is of a different nature. I answer,
this cannot be the meaning; for it is such a holiness is spoken of as may be
l^st; it may be broken off by unbelief, as the context shows: From w^^^ce it is
evident, that covenant holiness of visible membership is what is meant, and not
real holiness. To the same purpose the Abostle says, 1 Cor. vii. 14. Else were
your children unclean, but now am they holy. That is, are in covenant with GOD;
they are members of the church as well as their parents: There is no difference
between the visible relation of the one and the other. To the like effect is
that declaration, Acts ii. 39. The promise is unto you and to your children.
Infant baptism is strongly argued by all our Divines from this text; and if the
argument is good, it proves infant'^ visible membership to be equal to that of
their parents: They are both alike interested in the promise, so far as to have
a standing in GOD'S church. And we read Genesis xvii. 13. That the covenant of
circumcision was given for an everlasting covenant; so that children do not
grow out of it by their becoming adult.

3d. We may argue the point from the claims of this covenant relation as still
subsisting, made by several particular persons after they arrived at adult age.
How frequent is this plea in the Old Testament, thou art the GOD of my Fathers?
Importing their present covenant relation to GOD through their parents means;
otherwise there would be no force in the plea: For what benefit would it be if
he were only the Father's GOD, and not the childrens too, by virtue of the
covenant? David pleads, Psalm. cxvi. 16. I am thy Servant the son of thy
Handmaid. He was far from thinking that his covenant relation to GOD by virtue
of his circumcision ceased, when he became capable of acting for himself; he
still holds it to be in is full force as ever; I am the Son of thy Handmaid. I
was early given to GOD in circumcision; that relation or membership still
continues; and upon this ground I beg for covenant blessings. Distressed
Ephraim uses the same plea; Jer. xxxi. 18. Turn thou me, etc. for thou art the
LORD my GOD. He does not call GOD his GOD, because he thought he had a special
saving interest in GOD at this time; for he verily thought himself unconverted;
but pleads his covenant relation to GOD by virtue of circumcision, as an
argument for special grace which shows that that relation still subsisted when
he was grown up. The pious Mr. Vincent, in his Treatise of Conversion,
interprets the text thus. Says he, Under the Old Testament every Israelite that
in infaa^y had been circumcised in the flesh, might go unto GOD for converting
grace, for a circumcised heart; and go to him as unto a GOD, who had sealed a
covenant to him. Ephraim upon this score calls the LORD, his GOD, when he cries
to him to be turned, Jer. xxxi. 18. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for
thou art the LORD my GOD: As if he should say, LORD! I have been circumcised
and dedicated unto thee, and laid under an obligation to be thine: Ob
circumcise and turn my heart, that I may be thine indeed. Do the children of
believers under the gospel want such an help to conversion as the Jewish
children under the law had? Did CHRIST come to turn infants out of covenant,
who were once taken in; and to lessen the saints privileges, instead of
enlarging and augmenting them? No, no; he that has been baptized and received
this seal of the New Testament, may with confidence address unto GOD, and say;
LORD! I have been baptized with water; Ob sprinkle me with the blood of JESUS;
baptize me with his Spirit; wash me thoroughly from my iniquity; cleanse and
turn my heart to thee, and make me faithful and fledfast in thy covenant. Thus
Mr. Vincent, p. 79. And the great Mr. Williams formerly of Hatfield, interprets
this text in Jer. in the same manner in his Sermon on Infant Baptism, p. 19,
25. And I believe it is the sense that Divines generally put upon it. The
reason why I enlarge on this text is, that it being mentioned by me in my first
Piece, the sense I put on it was denied, which rendered such enlargement
necessary. It is omitted there, to avoid needless repetitions. I would observe
further here, how incongruous the new sense put on the text is; according to
that it must run thus, Turn thou me, for I am turned already; give me faith,
for I am now in the exercise of faith; become my GOD, for thou art my GOD at
this present. Which construction let him receive who will.


4th. We may argue this point from many other divine declarations. The kingdom
of GOD shall be token from you, says CHRIST, and given to a nation bringing
forth the fruits thereof. Matt. xxi. 43. That is, they should be deprived of
their covenant relation to GOD by virtue of circumcision; they should be cut
off from their membership in the visible church, which is here called the
kingdom of GOD, and the Gentiles should be admitted in their flead. To the same
purpose is Romans xi. The Apostle there declares at large how the Jews were
broken off. That is, unchurched, and the Gentiles grassed in their room, to
partake of the root and fatness of the olive tree. Their visible relation to
GOD by means of circumcision was at an end. And innumerable declarations of the
like nature are to be found in the Old Testament. That text is remarkable, Jer.
iii. 14. Turn, O backsliding children, says the LORD; for I am married to you.
We were in effect told the Sabbath after this Piece was delivered even in
public Prayer, and since that in a Sermon, that this text was addressed to
backsliding believers: But this could not be; the address was made to the whole
people of Israel, and they were almost universally corrupt at this time: Read
not only the context, but Jer. V. 1. and ix. 2 and indeed the whole prophecy.
That this is spoken of unregenerates is abundantly evident from the context;
and yet GOD calls them children; that is, children of the covenant, within the
pale of the church; and the expression, I am married to you, is still more
strong: He does not say, I will be married to you if you turn; but, I am
married to you; to denote their present covenant relation to GOD. They had not
lost their membership received in circumcision, notwithstanding their vile
degeneracies; and this he urges as one of the strongest motives to repentance
and conversion. GOD was willing to receive them, notwithstanding their repeated
adulteries and breaches of wedlock; though ye have played the harlot with many
lovers, yet return unto me, says the LORD, ver. 1. Again, how often does GOD
call the Israelites his people, from one generation to another, even in the
time of the greatest degeneracy; and this upon account of their visible
covenant relation to him, or being members of his church by virtue of
circumcision. And this relation continued until GOD gave them a bill of divorce
at the Assyrian and Babylonish captivities, when he pronounced lo-ammi upon
them. That is, they should be no longer his people nor be their GOD. Hos. i. 9,
and Jer. iii. 8. And the same doom was pronounced upon the Jews, sometime after
CHRIST'S death, by the Apostles, when they were wholly unchurched and deprived
of their visible covenant relation or membership. Romans xi. and elsewhere. All
this serves to show, that membership received in infancy by circumcision or
baptism never ceases but continues in adult age, until a people or particular
person be regularly cut off or cast out by some immediate act of GOD, or by the
act of the church in the exercise of discipline.

We may also prove, that infant-membership continues after they arrived to such
years, as to be capable of ministerial teachings, consequently of personal
covenanting, from John xxi. 15. Feed my lambs, says CHRIST to Peter. They who
are given to me in circumcision or baptism, are my lambs; they have my mark
upon them; I own them still as part of my flock; they have not lost their
membership, now they begin to be capable of acting for themselves: Therefore
feed them as belonging to my fold; feed them as well as the more adult sheep;
they are all equally members. And Peter tells the numerous congregation to
which he preached, Act. iii. 25. Ye are the children of the covenant, which GOD
made with our Fathers. He here plainly supposes their covenant relation
received in infancy, still to remain; and urges it as a motive to repentance.
And we may observe, that the terms circumcised and uncircumcised are used
through all the Old Testament, to distinguish those who are of the visible
church and who not; which plainly denotes, that infants membership ever remains
in adult age, unless persons are regularly cut off for their wickedness by son
e judicial act of GOD or the church; in which case their circumcision becomes
uncircumcision, that is, they cease to be members. Hence the city of Jerusalem
is called the holy city, at the time of CHRIST'S death, upon the account of
this federal holiness, or their being in covenant with GOD by circumcision,
when there was scarce a real holy person in it. Matt. xxvii. 53.

5th. This doctrine is attended with great inconveniences, and several gross
consequences result from it, which are not to be admitted. 1st. It puts
baptized and unbaptized persons all upon a par or level: They seem to be
exactly in the same situation, if the former are grown out of the church, and
all relation ceases at adult age; we may well then object as those did of old;
Romans iii. 1. What advantage then has the Jew? Or what profit is there of
circumcision? The answer according to this scheme must be, the advantage or
profit is none at all: But the Apostle was of another mind; he answers Romans v.
ii. The profit is much every way. For to them pertains the adoption, and the
glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law and the service of GOD, and
the promises, says he in another place Romans ix. 4. And indeed it has been
always esteemed a great privilege by the people of GOD for themselves and
theirs to be under the covenant. And Mr. Robbins himself calls the baptism of
infants an inestimable privilege; which cannot be true, if they are entitled to
no privilege at all by virtue of their baptism. This leads me to observe, 2d.
This doctrine tends to sadden the hearts of godly parents. It is a comfortable
consideration to them, whether living or dying, that their children or
relatives are under the wing of the covenant, although not as yet converted;
they hope covenant mercy will reach them in due time; they look upon this as a
weighty plea with GOD in prayer, and accordingly use it; as David did for his
son Solomon. 1. Chron. xxix. 19. The pious Mr. David Jennings, in his Sermon on
this text, says, David's argument here is, give unto Solomon, MY SON. His being
David's Son was not only the reason that David was so much concerned for him,
and so desirous that GOD would bless him, and make him good; but I conceive
that he mentions it as an argument which he pleads with GOD in behalf of
Solomon: He is my Son. As David had laid hold of GOD'S covenant for himself; so
here he pleads it for his Son too. Solomon had been consecrated to GOD in the
ordinance of circumcision; thereby he was received to the visible church, and
GOD'S mark was set upon him. This might very well afford David an encouraging
argument to plead in prayer, LORD, I have given up this my Son unto thee; I
have done it by thine own appointment and command; I have solemnly consecrated
him to thy service; behold thy mark is upon him! LORD, cast him not off
utterly, own him for thy Son, and make him thine forever. LORD, give him a
perfect heart.
And all their hopes of good for their unregenerate offspring, when they lie a
dying, is bottomed upon this foundation. As a precious man, when dying, called
his children about him said, children, I have nothing to leave you, but a GOD,
and a gracious covenant, and that is enough for you: And shall we dash all
these hopes and pleas at once by telling them, that their children have no part
in the LORD; that they have no more right to his covenant, than the worst
Indian or Heathen in the land, who are within the sound of the gospel? GOD
forbid. 3d. This doctrine in effect condemns the practice of GOD'S people in
their prayers for reformation. How frequent is this plea in scripture, and that
in the worst times of degeneracy, LORD, we are thy people; we are called by thy
name, etc. The meaning is, we are thy people in visible covenant; we were
devoted to thee in circumcision; this relation still continues at adult age;
therefore give this people the grace of the covenant. But how vain and futile
does this place appear to be, if infant membership be wholly lost, when persons
become capable of acting for themselves, or of personal covenanting. 4th. This
doctrine in effect makes infant baptism a mere nullity; or at most a mean,
little insignificant rite, which may near as well be let a lone, as done.
Agreeable whereto it was said at last church-meeting, What signifies it to have
an infant sprinkled with a little water? An expession that made me shudder.

My Brethern, I beg to know what infants are baptized for, if they are not made
members of GOD'S church? To what end is this ordinance? Of what benefit and
advantage? And are not the Baptists right in laying it aside? If you say, it is
to lay them under stronger bands to be the LORD'S when they grow up. Pray, what
scripture have you to prove, that this is the only end of baptism? If the
greater arguments from the consideration of GOD'S being our Creator, Preserver,
Governor, and Redeemer, will not prevail, how little can be expected from this?
I must profess, that, if I thought these bonds were all that was imported in
infant's baptism, and that there was no consideration to ^^e had of the
privileges accompanying the relation, and of the expectation we may rationally
have of GOD'S blessing attending his own institution, I should not think those
much to blame who wholly rejected infant baptism. I am sure those who are for
the new doctrine would make but a poor figure in encountering the Anabaptists,
if ever they should be called to engage in that controversy; and they must
certainly lay aside some of their present favorite opinions, or they could
never expect any success, in their opposition.

I conclude this head with a quotation or two: The pious President Wadsworth,
after explaining some scriptures, concludes thus; these things plainly show,
that children of the covenant do not cease to be in GOD'S covenant merely by
their growing up from an infant to an adult state; as some are apt to imagine.
No indeed; GOD will be ever mindful of his covenant; He has commanded his
covenant forever, Psalm. iii. 5, 9. I swear unto thee, and entered into covenant
with thee, says the LORD GOD, and thou becamest mi^e. En^^^ xvi. 18. Those in
GOD'S covenant are his; he will not alienate his right to them, and none else
have authority to do it. Bonds of Baptism. p. 27, 28.
Again, he says, these children admitted in minority, when grown up, do
continue in GOD'S covenant, visible members of his visible church, unless
justly excommunicated for their wickedness. Treatise of Baptism, p. 38.


What the sentiments of our Fathers were relating to this point will appear
from the New England Memorial, where Secretary Morton cites the following words
from Governor B^adford's manuscript History. In 1629, the two Ministers of
Salem being seriously studious of reformation, they considered of the state of
their children, together with their parents; concerning which, Letters did pass
between Mr. Higginson and Mr. Brewster, the reverend Elder of the church of
Plymouth; and they did agree in their judgments, viz. concerning the church
membership of the children with their parents, and that baptism was a seal of
their membership: Only when they were adult, they being not scandalous, they
were to be examined by the church officers, and upon their approbation of their
fitness, and upon the children's public and personal owning of the covenant,
they were to be received unto the LORD'S supper. Accordingly Mr. Higginson's
eldest Son, being about fifteen years of age, was owned to have been received a
member together with his parents; and being privately examined by the Pastor,
Mr. Shelton, about his knowledge in the principles of religion, he did present
him before the church, when the LORD'S supper was to be administered; and the
child then publicly and personally owning the covenant of the GOD of his
Father, he was admitted unto the LORD'S supper. It being then professedly
owned, according to 1 Cor. vii. 14. That the children of the church are holy
unto the LORD, as well as their parents: Accordingly, the parents owning and
retaining the baptism which they themselves received in their infancy in their
native land; as they had any children born, baptism was administered unto them.
Treatise of Baptism, p. 105.


But it would be endless to cite human testimonies, since this has been the
universally received opinion of Ministers and churches from CHRIST'S time to
this day; except Mr. Davenport, Mr. Street, and two or three others in the time
of the Synod, and a few Connecticut Ministers, etc. in our days; who are forced
to advance the contrary absurd doctrine, in order to uphold their opposition to
the practice recommended by the Synod.

Upon the whole, as Mr. Robbins expressly granted at the last church-meeting,
that, according to our Catechism, the infants of such as are members of the
visible church are to be baptized; and, as I have fully proved that baptized
persons are members of the visible church, it undeniably follows, that their
children are to be baptized; and none can lawfully deny them this privilege,
unless they have forfeited it by their wickedness. What an amazing thing then
is it, that any are so fond of principles, urging them with so much heat and
vehemence, that tend so directly to unchurch their posterity, and leave them in
the state of outcasts and aliens to GOD'S covenant?

If what has been said, does not satisfy, I desire that Dr. Inor. Mather's
twelve arguments in proof of the point may be read, as also the arguments of
the Synod; with which what I have alleged does but little interfere; so
fruitful is the scripture of arguments, to prove children's membership and its
continuance at adult age.

II. It is objected, "that this Practice and the arguments made use of to
support it, have an unavoidable tendency to subvert some of the grand doctrines
of the gospel and of calvinism, and to establish some of the most dangerous
tenets of arminianism." What a bugbear? What a scarecrow is here thrown out,
either to stop my ^ou^h, or to make people imagine I hold something very
dreadful, to prevent their listening to me, or duly weighing the arguments that
I bring? But I trust the Brethren have more understanding, than to be imposed
upon in this sort. There is really no more connection between this practice and
arminianism, than between it and atheism. And I challenge all the world to show
the contrary. If there is such a connection, then Mr. Leonard, your former
beloved Paster, was an Arminian; then this church have been Arminians for forty
one years, ever since they introduced this practice, and Mr. Robbins was an
Arminian for the first nine years of his ministry, while he held to this
practice. Yea, Mr. Stoddard and almost all the Ministers and churches in the
country are Arminians: Yea, Calvin himself was an Arminian, who was with us in
this point of baptism. Yea further, St. James the Apostle was an Arminian, who
held justification by works before ^en as much as we. Here let me give a
specimen how this charge may be supported against the Apostle, St. James holes,
that we are justified by works, that is, by our lives and conversations, in the
sight of men, in the sight of the church and there is. Hence they will unavoidably
be led to think, that (...) are likewise justified by works in the sight of
GOD. consequently St. James holds doctrines of an arminian tendency. What
trisling is this? What an absurd consequence indeed? And yet, this is exactly
the argument that is produced to prove me an Arminian. Methinks the boldest
face may be justly ashamed ever to mention it any more.

III. I now pass to make some ODOERVATION for the surther illustrating the
point, etc.

1st. I think the controversy is greatly mis^stated. By Mr. Robbins's
management and arguments, one would think that the dispute here is the same
that subsisted at North-Hampton some years ago between Mr. Edwards and his
people. But this is not the case; for Mr. Edwards meddles little or nothing
with baptism, but the LORD'S supper; and all his discourse is about
qualifications for that, which I never yet pretended to disclaim; neither did
it ever enter into my heart, that the chief design of our church-meetings was
to determine, whethes Mr. Stoddard's doctrine about the LORD'S supper was right
or not. The dispute here relates entirely to the initiating ordinance of
baptism. And even as to this, the controversy is not; whether they should be
visible Christians that offer themselves or not; we agree that they should be
such. In what then do we differ? Why, 1st. our opponents say, that the highest
sort of evidence of grace is necessary in this case; we say the lowest is
sufficient, especially with respect to persons already baptized, as baptism is
a facrament of entrance.

But what is this highest sort of evidence that they insist on? Why, this is a
mystery that I could never yet unfold. Is it a particular relation of
experiences? No; this, they say, is not absolutely necessary; this is not the
standard that the scripture gives for the church to judge by. What then is it?
Why, profession and practice, or the life and conversation. To this we again
agree: In what then do we differ but in words? But if Mr. Robbins now says,
contrary to all his former declarations, that a relation is absolutely
necessary, how can he look upon those, who have already owned the covenant as
members in full communion, as he says he does, that never made any such
relation? What an inconsistency would be here? 2d. They say, that none should
come to baptism, but they should immediately come likewise to the LORD'S
supper. But we say, they may come to the one ordinance and not to the other in
some cases; that baptized persons, of regular conversations, have right to
come, and none have right to deny them: Here then the dispute chiefly lies, and
not so much about qualifications. Why then do we hear so much concerning them,
as if the hinge of the controversy lay here? If Mr. Robbins would only receive
those whom he calls qualified, to own the covenant, etc. he would meet with
little opposition. But it seems they must be excluded without they will come
immediately to full communion, let their scruples be what they will, which is
what I think he cannot answer to GOD or the church. Wherefore I desire to hear
no more about qualifications, about moral and gracious sincerity, which are
terms I never used, until this point be settled.

2d. I observe, that it is peculiar to those of the congregational way to have
a church, as it were, within a church; to make distinction between members at
large, and members in particular, between communicants and others. All other
persuasions reckon bapt^zed persons such members, as to be entitled to all
church privileges whenever they demand them, if they lay no bar in the way by
their wickedness: Which is the reason why we read of no disputes in such
churches about the subjects of baptism, such as subsist among the
congregationists.

3d. I observe, our Brethren of the other side of the question, are exactly
like those Disciples, who because the Jews, we read of in scripture, did not
follow CHRIST so fully and in the manner they expected and required, forbad
them to bring their children to CHRIST. But CHRIST says, sorbid them not, for
of such is the kingdom, etc.

4th. I observe, that if a person baptized says, that as far as he knows his
own heart, he is sincerely willing to give up himself and his children to GOD,
that is enough. The Minister should go no further. He has no business to puzzle
and confound him with a long discourse about moral and gracious sincerity,
which it is likely the candidate will understand little of.

5th. I observe, that if a man offers himself to either ordinance, only to be
seen of men, etc. and knows it, nothing that can be said to him about grace
will hinder him: He will come, let the Minister say what he will. But it is
only the tender conscienced, that have been under so^e^^^k of the Spirit, that
will be scared and terrified away by the present harsh method of treating the
subjects. So here is the utmost danger, as I have observed heretofore, of
breaking the bruised read, and quenching the smoking flax, etc.

6th. I observe it as a certain maxim of truth, that if a man declares upon
oath more than he knows, he is guilty of perjury, though it should happen
afterward to be true. If a man then publicly professes, that GOD is his GOD,
and that he has saving faith, and does not know it to be so, though it should
appear afterward to be the case, he certainly goes beyond the line of truth;
he solemnly, and, as it were, upon oath declares that to be true, which he does
not know but may be false; which is the very essence of a lie. Consequently
there can be no covenanting with GOD upon this new s^^^me, without a certain
knowledge of a ma^'s gracious state. And in addition to this I observe, that
Mr. Robbins, according to his plan, must necessarily tell every candidate that
offers, that it is saving faith he prefesses, when the covenant is propounded
to him; and he must necessarily tell him further, that if he has not saving
faith, he cannot profess it. How then can such a candidate proceed one step
further, without he knows he has saving faith? Or further, where is the
consistency to tell a man that it is enough for him to say that he hopes he has
saving faith, when discoursed with in private; if, when he comes into public,
he must absolutely profess saving faith, without any hope so in the case? How
can these things hang together? But what are these prevailing hopes. founded on
scripture evidence, so much talked of? Are they not in effect the same with
assurance? Prevailing hopes may be accompanied with doubes and fears; and so
may assurance: Full assurance I know excludes all doubts, but not so the other;
there are degrees of assurance. So that I do not see why they need start so
much at the word assurance, when they hold the same thing in other words. Mr.
Bellamy uses the word, knowledge or knowing in this case, which is certainly as
strong a term as assurance.

7th I observe, that the word soul is much used in this controversy; and indeed
it seems that almost all the arguments used on the other side of the question
are founded on this word: People are so continually dinned and drowned with it,
that they imagine there is more in it than there is. Therefore I shall add a
little on this point. There is no gospel ordinance whatsoever but carries the
nature, the very essence of a seal. Prayer is a seal of the covenant of grace.
When we say, our Father which art in Heaven in sincerity, we set to our seal
that GOD is our Father. Hearing is a seal; when we heartily believe the truths
delivered, we set to our seal that GOD is true. John iii. 33. Reading the word
is a seal; when we apply the law or gospel to our souls, we seal the truth of
it. Must then all unregenerate men be debarred from these ordinances, because
these, properly used, are seals, always seals, of the covenant of grace? No,
say they, these are moral duties, and therefore ought to be performed by all;
but baptism and the LORD'S supper are positive special institutions, and are
only to be performed by true believers. Here then the argument from the nature
of a seal is given up: It is in effect granted, that unregenerate men may
partake of some of the seals of the covenant of grace, though not of others;
and the reason why they are excluded from the one and not from the other, is
not taken from the nature of a seal, but from a different ground, viz. the
one's being of a moral and the other of positive institution. How absurd then
is this way of reasoning taken merely from the nature of a seal? But to follow
then the argument a lit le further. The argument from the nature of a seal
being given up, and another foundation established in its room, let us see how
far this will hold. The sacraments, say they, are positive special
institutions, and therefore confined to believers. But does not this prove too
much? May not the same be said of all the sacrifices under the law, as well as
of the passover, baptism, etc? They were not of a moral nature, but of positive
special institution. Must not then an unregenerate Jew engage in the daily
sacrifice, or the sacrifices offered every Sabbath, because of positive
institution? Why, this would have destroyed all public worship at once among
the Jews. If none but regenerates must have come to the temple, (which were so
few generally) what thin assemblies would they have had. It follows then that
as ordinances being merely of positive special institution, is not in it self a
sufficient bar to unregenerates attending ^on them. So that both their grounds
here fail them. But what does all this arguing tend to, will they say, but to
encourage unregenerate men, knowing themselves to be such, to come to both
sacraments? I answer, this is not my design in it, but only to show the
weakness of the argument taken from the nature of a seal, etc. There are some
other considerations which render it not proper, that baptism and the LORD'S
supper should be made as common as the other ordinances; but the argument for
their restrictive use, taken merely from the rature of a seal, proves nothing
either one way or the other.
But thus much I say, if a person under ferious religious impressions should
out of a sense of duty come to either ordinance, he sins less in coming than in
staying away, though it should afterward appear that he was unregenerate at
the time. This leads me,

8th. To take notice of some absurd doctrines delivered by the chief promoter
of the new scheme. These are Mr. Bellamy's words When a natural man owns the
covenant, or pretends to own it, for it is impossible for such a man to own the
covenant of grace really, he sins against GOD in a more provoking manner than
if he had committed drunkenness, fornication, and adultery; p. 48. And the
reason he gives is, because such are guilty of lying to GOD and perjury: This,
we may observe, is spoken not only of wilful hypocrites, who do all to be seen
of men, etc. but of all unregenerate men whatsoever let them be under ever so
great religious impressions, ever so serious or conscientious in what they do.
This I stick not to call horrible doctrine, contrary to scripture and r^ason.
According to this, 1st. Ahab sinned more in humbling himself and walking
softly, which necessarily implies his confessing his sin and promising
reformation; I say, that he sinned more in doing this than in murdering Naboth
and taking away his vineyard by injustice and violence. 2d. According to this
doctrine, Hezekiah and Josiah sinned more in promoting, and the people in
joining in renewing covenant, than they would have cone in murdering a whole
city, or all turning drunkards and adulterers: For, it is evident by the
peoples after apostasy, that their hearts were not generally right with GOD in
the transaction. 3d. According to this doctrine, the King and the people of
Niacvah sinned more provokingly in repenting and reforming in the manner they
did, than they would have if they had murdered Jonah and bid defiance to the
GOD of Israel. 4th. According to this doctrine, if a sinner unconverted in a
time of sickness or other great distress, should acknowledge his sins and
premise reformation with all appearing earnestness, he is all the while
committing a greater sin in promising, than drunkenness or adultery. What a
figure, would a Minister make, if he should stop the sinner's month by telling
him this? Is it not rather the Minister's duty to encourage him, though at the
same time teiling him that he must go to CHRIST for strength, otherwise all his
resolutions and premises will come to nothing?

For my part, I always thought, and it is the opinion of almost all Divines,
that a particular persons or a peoples persorming a duty with any sort of
sincerity, was a less^r sin than a total neglect, etc. And as to special
ordinances, particularly, although I think they ought to be visible Christians
that come; yet that if they do come coasciencionsly, though unconcerted, their
sin is not so great and provoking, as a contemptuous turning their back upon
the ordinance. The scriptures tell us, that he that was not circumcised, or did
not eat the passover, was to be out off from his people; that is, put to death:
But no such punishment was threatened to an untegenerate man that performed tue
duty.

But what signifies men's coming to special ordinances, if their hearts be not
engaged in the duty? What is here but mere form? And what can be more provoking
than that? I answer, the form of religion compared with the power, is a little
thing; but in itself it is a great thing: But where that remained, GOD has
graciously returned many and many a time to his people. But when both form and
power were gone, there never was an instance of GOD'S remaining with that
people, but they were made examples of vengeance.

9th. I observe, that we seem to be agreed in this, that none but visible
Christians or believers should be admitted to either ordinance. But when they
come to explain themselves, it is evident that by visible Christians they mean
real Christians; so confounding all distinction between the visible and
invisible church, in direct contradiction to almost all Divines. And herein
they talk just as the Baptists do, who destroy all difference between the
external and internal parts of the covenant.

10th. I observe, that Mr. Davenport, the great writer against the Synod, was
consistent with himself: He professedly acknowledges that the church had
nothing to do with the baptized immediately in a way of discipline, as not
being immediate members. But our Pastor called the church together at their
first meeting, partly to discipline the baptized children of the church; which
implies, that he thought them to be immediate members: And this is a matter
that yet lies under our consideration underermined If he has since altered his
mind he ought publicly to declare that he was then in an error, and that he
did wrong in proposing discipline to the church, or our calling those to
account with whom we have nothing to do, according to his present principles.
This would be ingenuous, and what the church have a right to expect, if he has
led them in a wrong path, or proposed what ought not to be proposed. For what
have we to do to judge them that are without? 1 Cor. v. 12.

11th. I would observe, upon a passage that sell from Mr. Robbins at last
church-meeting. He said, that some who had taken the pains to turn to the
passages of scripture that were produced of the Synod, said, they found them
nothing to the purpose to prove their point; which shows, that he takes upon
trust what is alleged on that side, and that he never examined them himself.
Is this an impartial way of proceeding? Is this the manner of a lover of truth,
to see with others eyes? On the contrary. I assert that these texts are much to
the purpose, and that he would have found them so, if he had given them an
impartial examina^ion.

12^h. I would observe, the policy of some to get this practice abolished. They
endeavor to instill into people, that the whole design of the opposition is to
get Mr. Robbins away; hoping, if such a notion be once imbibed, it will put
then into such a ferment, that they will join in abolishing the practice right
or wrong, in order to keep Mr. Robbins. But how unjust is this? And what gross
uncharitableness does it involve in it? Pray, who was it first brought this
dispute into the church? Not we, sure. Who is it that are for innovation? Not
we: And must we submit to innovations, for fear our Minister should run away
from us? Not we, unless our consciences were convinced. If Mr. Robbins is
resolved to leave us, if he cannot gain his point, we cannot help it; we must
do our duty, and leave the event to GOD. As for any direct design to get him
away, it never entered into my heart; and I never heard any thing lisped by my
Brethren tending that way: All our design is, I can speak it for myself, and
believe it of my Brethren; I say, all our design is to discharge our
consciences and do our duty: We think the point of very great importance, and
cannot give it up. And in order to promote peace, we have alrealy proposed an
expedient that would make all easy, and hurt no man's conscience. But with what
contempt was it rejected. As soon as I had finished reading this Piece to the
church; Mr. Robbins, instead of answering the argument, made a few general
reflections a The substance was, That I darkened counsel with words without
knowledge; that I dressed him up in bearskins; that the whole of my Piece was
calculated to represent him in a ridiculous light; that he suspected it before,
but was now confirmed in it, that our whole design was to get him away. Thus,
in direct terms in the face of the church, giving me the lie after such solemn
asseverations.


If we patiently submit in this point, merely to please or keep Mr. Robbins,
who will ever dare to speak against innovations again, let them come ever so
fast? We have had something new started to trouble the churches peace, I think,
every two or three years since his settlement; And who can assure us, that it
will not be so hereafter, until the whole of the Canazdicut disciplins be
brought in upon us? Scare any are ignorant that the discipline in Connecticut
verges toward Presyterianism; and it is natural for those brought up under
such a constitution to be blassed in his favor; and therefore we may expect it
will be thoust in upon us, if we tamely submit in other things.
If any make the least, opposution, why they will be immediately branded with a
design of getting away Mr. Robbins; and then it must pass without control. But
I trust the Brethren are better fortified than to be led away by suth
insinuations; and hope that whisperers, talc bearers, and s^^ers of discord
among Brethren will be disappointed of their aim, according to the directions
we had last Sabbath, and agreeable to the Apostle's advice; Romans xvi. 17. Mark
them which cause divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine which we have
learned, and avoid them.

Upon the whole, I hope whatever the Brethren do in this matter will be founded
upon full conviction of conscience; I say, full conviction of conscience; and
that they will not be influenced one way or the other merely to please any man
whatsoever; and that they will not hold the doctrine of CHRIST with respect of
persons; but with all impartiality will pass their judgment, as they will
answer it at the bar of CHRIST.

I shall conclude with some PROPOSALS. And my.

1st proposal is, instead of contending what privileges belong to the children
of the church, we had better unite in granting them some privilege; and then
set upon the vigorous exercise of discipline: And we may hope for GOD'S
blessing in reforming, or at least in restraining our licencious youth.

2d. I would propose this churches solemnly renewing covenant on a day of
fasting and prayer, according to the model of our Fathers. This has been found
a happy expedient of reviving religion in timer of great degeneracy; the divine
blessing usually accompanying it; as we see in the time of Kings Hezeki^h and
Jos^^h, and in the days of our Fathers. This tends to revive a ^^nse of
covenant vows and enpagements, both in communicants and the children of the
church, and excites a more strict and circumspect walk.

3d. I would propose that the church, by a formal vote, adopt the method I
proposed the last town-meeting, viz. for a neighboring Minister to baptize the
children of the church, as long as Mr. Robbins's scruples remain: By which it
will appear, that we have no design of soreing Mr. Robbins to act against his
conscience, as the matter is represented abroad, or of getting him away. We are
willing to give him liberty of conscience; and expect the same liberty from
him. And should think it hard, if he endeavors to prevent any Minister's
coming.

4th. and lastly, I would propose, that seeing Mr. Robbins's chief stick is
about qualifications, if he will go on with the practice, he may examine the
candidate as much as he pleases (...) though we think there is no divine
warrant for it, with respect to persons baptized; but we would by no means have
the practice wholly laid aside.

As to the method proposed, of receiving the candidates to full communion, and
then dispensing with their coming to the LORD'S table, which is again reurged,
I have said enough before. I would only add, that I look upon It as the old
practice spoiled: A few circumstances must be added to reader it nonsensial,
ridiculous and contradictory in itself. No church in the province practices any
thing like it. A report indeed we have, that one church in Co^necticut have
adopted some such scheme, whether true or not we cannot tell; And if there be
something in it, we have no particular account of the plan; and shall we merely
upon such a vague report, without consulting one Minister or church, make such
a material alteration as this? What presumption? What headlong Jehu-like act
would it be? I am confident, not one man that should vote for it, but would be
ashamed of it before a twelvemonth came about. May the LORD keep us from wrong
paths: May he lead us into all truth, and direct us in the way of duty. May
this church still retain its precious privileges, and transmit them inviolate
to the latest posterity: And may no weapon formed against its welfare prosper.

Perhaps those who live at a distance may be desirous to know how this dispute
terminated. Why, in short, the church, with a view to peace, have voted to
"dissolve the meeting and to drop the affair for the present, and to reassume
the confideration thereof when they shall think proper." Thus the matter is
left in suspense. The practice remains unrepealed, and the Minister as much
unsatisfied with it as ever. So that the door seems at present strut against
all comers. How things will finally issue, is beyond me to say. But I trust GOD
will overrule all to his glory, and the best good of his church and people, and
bring this controversy at last to a happy

END

