THE PLAN of a SOCIET^ FOR Making Provision for Widows, by Annuities for the
remainder of Life; AND For granting Annuities to Persons after certain Ages,
WITH THE Proper TABLES for calculating what must be paid by the several
Members, in order to secure the said advantages.

By WILLIAM GORDON.

BOSTON: Sold by Joseph Edwards and John Fleeming. MDCCLXXII.

THE PREFACE.
THE painful circumstances in which numbers are involved, when aged, or
deprived of that, or those, on whom their support chiefly depended, are too
notorious to require a recital. But that same Divine Wisdom, which allows and
orders the existence of these calamities, has mercifully, and in proof of his
providence, so directed its manner, as to admit of their being greatly
alleviated, by the joint endeavors of mankind. Casualties, decays and death
cannot be prevented, and separately considered appear to be under no particular
regulation; and yet, when viewed collectively, are in a certain proportion, as
has been confirmed by long and repeated observation; so that many, by
cooperating with each other, may secure individuals from those hardships they
must otherwise experience; and that, on terms with which a reasonable and
humane person will readily comply, for the relief it must afford him to
recollect, that he and his family are thereby insured, though in the other way
they should never be benefited. An attention to these particulars has given
rise to various Societies in Great Britain, which within a few years have
multiplied apace, chiefly in London. Though such Societies have been formed
with a good design, yet having in general gone upon mistaken principles, they
must at length, if not speedily regulated, be productive of much disappointment
and calamity.

A benevolent desire of informing the public what calculations might be
depended upon, and of averting that distress which was otherwise to be
expected, has induced the Rev. Dr. Price, an eminent Mathematician, to publish
Observations on Reversionary Payments on schemes for providing Annuities, for
Widows, and for persons in Old Age, etc. Being possessed of this help, a
manuscript copy of the whole Constitution of the London Annuity Society,
established by deed enrolled in 1765, to make annual provision for widows; and
a printed Abstract of the Deed of Settlement of the Laudable Society, for the
benefit of widows, begun in 1761 -- understanding, that there were no general
Societies of this nature in America, and that the erection of such was wished
for by many -- and having a desire of contributing my mite toward the
happiness of the Colonists, more especially since a personal acquaintance with
and numerous obligations to them, have here collected together, and do present
to the public, materials for forming such Societies, wishing that the same may
prove of extensive service, at least hoping that they will meet with a
favorable reception. The first part contains the plan for the erection,
continuance and government of the Society, with the various reasons: the
second, the payments to be made by each member, according to his respective
age, and the advantages he proposes to obtain. The scheme is larger than those
of the London Societies, as it admits of the purchasing annuities to be
enjoyed, either by the purchaser after such a period, or by another after his
death in case of survivorship; and, notwithstanding difference of age, upon
proper allowance -- affords parents the opportunity of purchasing for their
children, brethren for their sisters and the like -- does not exclude females
from becoming purchasers -- nor debar military and seafaring persons, from
securing annuities to be enjoyed by them after such an age, though from
purchasing annuities for others after their own decease.

Should such a Society be attempted and formed, shall cheerfully afford it what
further assistance may at any time be in my power; and, that none may be misled
by errors in any spurious edition of this pamphlet, shall subscribe my name to
every copy.

Many might decline forming themselves, notwithstanding their desires, of
having such a Society established, and of belonging thereto, from an
apprehension of their being too few. To obviate so plausible an objection, let
it be noted, that the London Annuity Society when it first formed, the
beginning of 1765, consisted of no more than twenty-one members. The beginning
of this year it consisted of 335. Would not with to begin such a Society with
more than forty, or fifty persons at most, as it will probably be far more easy
for that number, than a much greater, to regulate every matter, to be concluded
upon at its formation.

The honest fears of some, and the interested views of others, may lead many to
assert that a Society of this nature cannot be carried on without the immediate
assistance of able mathematicians; especially as Dr. Price thus expresses
himself, p. 131, speaking of the Society for equitable Assurances on Lives,
viz. I would observe, that it is of great importance to the safety of such a
Society, that its affairs should be under the inspection of able
mathematicians. Melancholy experience shows, that none but mathematicians are
qualified for forming and conducting schemes of this kind. It Is indisputable,
that this passage was hastily worded, and that the Doctor had forgot for a
moment what he himself had been doing, for in p. 133, he says, I have, with a
particular view to this Society, given rules, by which may be formed every
Table it can want, for showing the values of assurances on the whole duration,
or any terms, of any one or two lives, in all possible cases; and nothing but
care and attention can be necessary to enable any good arithmetician to
calculate from them. By the Doctor's own rules any such arithmetician may try
the calculations in this performance, may correct any mistakes, may supply all
defects, and may adopt other terms at pleasure.

It may be agreeable to the reader of Dr. Price's work, to be told, that after
its publication the last year, several gentlemen of London were engaged in
obtaining information as to the duration of life, both in men and women; and
found that men in London, of good common health and exposed to no particular
dangers, from twenty-four to the extremity of old age, die at the rate of one
in thirty-one annually; and that, according to the registers of the Million
Bank, widows may live eighteen years; according to those of the Mercer's
Company (which in the year 1690 adopted a scheme for paying annuities to
widows) twenty-one years on an average.

Such Societies, besides being serviceable to individuals, will, after a while,
prove of great public utility; not only by encouraging matrimony, but by
furnishing large sums of money to be loaned out; through the help of which,
young industrious planters may push their improvements to the further
enrichment of the community; others may be assisted in large and profitable
undertakings; and interest may be reduced to a more moderate state, or the
exacting userer's methods of increasing it beyond what is legal, be prevented.

It being a public advantage, that there should be a full supply of money to
loan out; and the nature of the country (comparatively, but little settled) not
allowing the thought of a redundancy, it may be prudent to extend the limits,
comprehending the members of the Society, beyond the bounds of a particular
Colony, as far as an equal degree of healthiness and safety will admit, that so
the cash of individuals, in those provinces where such Societies do not exist,
may center where they do.

Though foreign to the present purpose, yet as it may be pleasing to the
generality of readers, who may have no opportunity of seeing Dr. Price's
performance, the following particulars are added.

The Doctor writes, p. 204, 205. The original number of persons, who in 1643,
had settled in New England was 21,200. Ever since it is reckoned, that more
have left them than have gone to them. In the year 1760, they were increased to
half a million. They, have, therefore, all along doubled their own number in
twenty-five years. And if they continue to increase in the same rate, they
will, seventy years hence, in New England alone, be four millions; and in all
North America, above twice the number of inhabitants in Great Britain. The
Doctor subjoins in a note, Since writing the above -- I have seen a particular
account, grounded chiefly on surveys lately taken with a view to taxation and
for other purposes, of the number of males between 16 and 60, in the four
provinces. According to this acacount, the number of such males is 218,000. The
whole number of people therefore between 16 and 60, must be nearly 436,000. In
order to be more sure of avoiding excess, I will call them only 400,000. The
Doctor proceeds, and upon a moderated calculation infers that -- the whole
number of people will be 720,000. But supposing that there was this number when
the surveys were made, and that the inhabitants double in the time specified,
they will be more than four millions in New England in less than 60 years: and
in fifty, the Colonists of all North America, what by internal population and
settlers from Europe, will probably be more than double to the then inhabitants
of Great Britain. For it appears from Dr. Price's Supplement, lately published,
that Old-England and Wales are depopulating apace, and that the inhabitants are
now a million and a half fewer than in the year 1690, see p. 21. He further
says, p. 60, the number of houses in the kingdom (meaning England and Wales) in
1766 was 980,692. Call them however a million, and the number of people in
England and Wales will be four millions and a half, allowing 4 to a house; and
five millions allowing five to a house. The former is probably too large an
allowance; but the latter is certainly so. The number of people in the kingdom
may, therefore, be stated as probably not more than four millions and a half;
but certainly not five millions.

When the Colonists shall have become thus numerous, and shall so far exceed in
people the mother country, they must either be easy and happy, in the secure
and confirmed enjoyment of their respective liberties, being closely united in
one common cause; or be miserable in object slavery, through divisions and
cowardice; or be convulsed in dangerous struggles. The period is so nigh, that
the parent may look upon his new born infant, as a future actual partaker in
the happiness or misery thereof; and must therefore be animated in exerting his
several powers, that so it may be a day of joy and gladness.

William Gordon
Roxbury, May 20 th, 1772.
PART I. Containing the Plan for the Erection, Continuance and Government of
the SOCIETY, with the various reasons.
THE design being to establish -- not a company of a few members, who shall
make a particular advantage, and enrich themselves, by insuring smaller
benefits to others; but -- a Society, where all shall be joint proprietors, in
one common stock formed from their respective contributions; and have equal
rights, and receive their full advantage in proportion to their several
payments: And as the Society should be large, that so the casualties, by being
greatly divided, may the less affect its capital, and the annual contingencies
may come the nearer to an equality; and yet not too large, left its good
government should be prevented, or the greatness of its stock in a distant
period, should induce persons of power, having no right, to interfere in its
concerns: And that it may be the more extensively useful, let it be agreed by

ARTICLE I.
The Society may consist of, but not more than, two thousand persons; and each
to be admitted shall by himself or agent, subscribe one common deed, upon that
commence a member, and be bound by the agreements and covenants therein
mentioned. The members shall form two classes, the first of which shall
comprehend those who propose securing annuities, after their own decease, to
wives or others, in case of survivorship; the second, those who are for
purchasing to themselves an annuity after a certain age, for the remainder of
life.

All persons, at admission, should, in point of age, be clear of either
extreme, and inhabit within certain limits. Prudence and equity require, that
they of the first class should not be exposed, from their residence, calling or
manner of life, to peculiar dangers, beyond what belong to mankind in general;
and yet, that no objection should arise from serving in the militia, that being
the constitutional defense of the whole community, and so implying the safety
of the smaller societies. No danger arises to the Society, from any increased
hazards to which they of the second class may be exposed; and therefore those,
who cannot with safety be admitted into the first, may with advantage be taken
into the second. A person admitted into the first class, may be allowed, when
not too far advanced in life, to bold also under the second. And therefore let
it be

ARTICLE II.
Every person at admission shall not be younger than twenty-one, nor older than
sixty years; and shall reside within the limits of -- [ Here the limits to be
specified, as may be concluded on, after mature deliberation, by the first
members.] No one of the first class shall follow a seafaring life, or be
engaged in the land service as an officer, soldier or otherwise, by reason of
the superior risk of his employment; but may belong to, and serve in the
militia. One, who cannot be of the first class, on account of his calling and
manner of life; or, whom the directors may refuse admitting into it, because of
bad health or other threatening circumstances; may become a member in the
second. A person admitted into the first, may at any time, when not too aged,
join himself also to the second, subject to the limitation of acting only as a
single member, in all the management of the Society's affairs.

That the Society, may be secured from frauds and impositions, let it be

ARTICLE III.
Every person, proposing to be a member, shall give in, his name, residence,
age, title or profession; and mention whether married or single; if married and
intending to secure the benefit of a survivorship to his wife, her age,
christian and former name -- and wherever such benefit is intended, the age,
christian and surname, and residence of the party for whom it is designed -- to
the directors at one of their meetings, and at some subsequent one, shall, if
residing within twenty miles, appear personally to be examined by them, as to
the state of his health, readiness to conform to and be bound by the rules of
the Society, and the like; and upon their having obtained all needful
satisfaction, and agreed upon his admission, he shall upon paying the
stipulated premium become a member, and, upon signing the deed by himself or
agent, receive, without any farther charge, a policy setting forth, that he the
holder thereof, in consideration of his complying with the terms therein
mentioned, shall himself receive, or secure to another the proposed benefits,
in case he shall have lived one whole calendar year from the time of his
admission, but that otherwise all he may have paid shall be forfeited, and go
to the Society's capital. Should the person proposed live at a greater distance
than twenty miles, then the directors may be satisfied in any other way that
shall be agreed upon. The policy shall be invalidated where obtained by fraud,
deceit, and imposition.

To counteract any partiality by which directors may be induced to reject a
proper candidate: to rid the Society of such as may become offensive and
scandalous: and to secure it from being burdened with payments, before the
natural course of things require them; and from paying improper persons, it may
be stipulated by

ARTICLE IV.
Any person rejected by the directors may appeal to the Society when assembled
at any general meeting, and upon the majority's voting for his admission, he
shall be put up again at the next general meeting, and upon then having the
votes of the majority shall be forthwith admitted, upon his complying with the
usual requirements. Should it happen that a member becomes injurious,
disgraceful, or obnoxious to the generality, the expulsion of such person shall
be lawful, provided that the orders for the same be made at a general meeting
of the society and confirmed at the next successive one, either assembled of
course or called on purpose, and at each, by the unanimous consent of all
present, or, in case of a division, of three fourths; but upon such expulsion
the party shall receive back all the net principal moneys paid by him, upon his
peaceably agreeing to surrender up his policy; and on his refusing to do it
shall forfeit both. Was the person expelled entitled to, or an actual receiver
of, an annuity, in consequence of his having been a member of the second class,
the full time required, he shall not be deprived of his annuity, which shall be
paid, notwithstanding his expulsion. Should a member become a felon, die or
have his death occasioned in or by a duel; or feloniously make away with
himself; or should he make a voyage exceeding twenty English leagues from port
to port, without license first obtained from the directors, and die in such
voyage; or should he go beyond the limits agreed upon without a license, and
there die; or should he betake himself to a seafaring life; or engage in the
land service, as an officer, soldier or otherwise; in any such case the benefit
of survivorship intended to have been secured to another by his policy shall be
forfeited. Should the wife be divorced for adultery, or in any other way have
her relation dissolved; or should the receiver of an annuity live in an
unlawful cohabitation, or be guilty of felony, the right to the annuity shall
cease.

That persons may have ample encouragement for becoming members, and still the
society be secured against any unfair practices; and that none of either sex
may be unnecessarily excluded, let it be

ARTICLE V.
A bachelor or widower may become a member for the benefit of a future wife;
but, in that case, to preserve the society from being injured by marriages of
designing persons in a dying condition, or deceived by any one's pretending to
be the widow of such member after his decease, and to ascertain the certainty
of the members being legally married, be it agreed, that no person claiming as
the widow of such member shall be entitled to any annuity, unless such member,
whose widow she claims to be, shall, at least three months before his death,
have delivered in to the directors, or some one of them, a satisfactory
certificate of his marriage with such person, together with her true age; and
they shall have approved thereof, and settled for the same. Women way be
admitted into either class, under similar restrictions with those already, or
hereafter to be mentioned, and be allowed to vote in all the Society's affairs
either in person or by proxy.

Where the individual intended to be benefited by a future annuity, dies before
the time of it is becoming due, the member purchasing the same may possibly
think, that, without paying afresh as though newly admitted, he should have a
right of substituting another in the place of the deceased, in consequence of
what he may have already paid; but as the decease of such persons is one of the
chances the society must avail itself of, in order to its paying the proposed
annuities where they become due, it is needful that the member should pay
afresh, as though newly admitted, on his proposing to secure an annuity to
another individual: however, if he has accomplished, or upon his accomplishing,
his probation year, the renewal of that may be dispensed with; he may have the
right of continuing a member, and the payments he may make after the decease of
one individual till he settles for another, may be discounted in such future
settlement; and it may be

ARTICLE VI.
Upon the decease of the party, for whom the annuity proposed in the policy was
designed, the member forfeits the moneys paid, to the use of the Society; and
must settle as a new admitted member, for any fresh person proposed as a future
annuity-receiver, and take out another policy; but, having accomplished, or
upon accomplishing, the probation-year, the renewal of that shall be dispensed
with: he shall also have the right of continuing a member, and all the net
principal moneys paid by him, in the intermediate space, between the decease of
one individual and his settling for another, shall be discounted in such
settlement.

It Is essential to the existence of the Society, that the payments should be
bothfully and regularly made; but, as experience abundantly proves, that,
whatever time is allowed, many will delay performance to the last period, and,
if not compelled by a forfeit, exceed; and yet should the time allowed be very
short, or the forfeiture large, there will be a perpetual litigation; and as,
after repeated refusal or neglect upon notice given, an absolute exclusion
should take place, it may be the purport of

ARTICLE VII.
The member shall pay what annual sum he has stipulated for, in half yearly
payments, reckoning from the time of his admission, within thirty days after
becoming due, on penalty of sixpence for every day he exceeds the thirty; and
in case he shall not pay the half yearly sum with the forfeitures due thereon,
within two calendar months from the day of its becoming due, notice in writing
or print shall be delivered to ^^ch person so making default, or left for him
at his last place of abode, or if that cannot be conveniently done, then an
advertisement shall be inserted in some one of the public papers requiring
payment of the same, on pain of forfeiting his policy, and being excluded by a
limited time, not less than twenty days from the date of such advertisement,
and in case the same shall not be paid together with the forfeitures and all
charges attending such default, within the space of three calendar months from
the time when the same became due, or within the time advertised, his policy
shall be forfeited, and he be totally excluded, and all his former payments go
to the use of the Society: but should a member who has neglected paying, happen
to die before the end of the three calendar months, or the time appointed by
such notice or advertisement, so as not to be at his decease actually excluded,
in such case the person to be benefited by his policy shall receive all the
advantages of it, upon paying the moneys due to the Society, with all the
forfeitures and charges attending the same.

The Society is supposed to be actuated by principles of honesty, honor, and
humanity, and to have no design, of inducing persons to secure advantages to
themselves or relations, by coming into it at the expense of creditors; or, of
obtaining benefits to itself from the misfortunes of its members, therefore let
it be

ARTICLE VIII.
The party who was to have received an annuity, but, which has been forfeited
from a failure of payment, through the late member's becoming a bankrupt or
public insolvent, may, in case such person was a member and made his payments
for the space of three years and upwards, have paid to him or her, in lien of
such annuity, at the rate of ten per cent; for all the net principal moneys
received from him: and should it happen, that any individual member, or
proposed, or actual receiver of an annuity, should, by the operation of the
Society's general rules, sustain any particular hardship, such person may apply
to the body when assembled, who shall have power to grant what relief shall be
judged reasonable and consistent with the true interest of the Society, and the
ability thereof.

The deaths of the members should be timely and satisfactorily notified, and
the lives of the annuity-receivers properly ascertained, that the Society may
guard against frauds, and proceed regularly in its accounts; let it be provided
for, in

ARTICLE IX.
Notice of the death and burial of every deceased member, shall be left with
the secretary or directors of the Society, one month next after his decease,
under the penalty of five shillings, to be deducted out of the first payment of
the annuity to be received, and the annuity-receiver shall by oath,
affirmation, or in some other way that may be thought sufficient, give proof to
the directors of the time and place of such members decease, and of the cause
of his death, or of the distemper of which he died; and satisfaction shall be
given, when required, of the annuity-receiver's being living, and not having
forfeited the annuity, at the time the payment applied for became due.

Let

ARTICLE X, contain,
The substance of 2d pt. specifying the considerations to be made by the
members, and the benefits to be secured, and that the annuities shall be paid
half yearly, and begin upon the second of the four usual quarter days, that
shall happen next after the annuity-receiver becomes entitled thereto, on his
having complied with what is required by the other articles. Here it may be
provided, in order to accommodate all, that a person upon making an half
payment, a full payment and an half, or a double payment, though it may not be
prudent to admit more, shall secure a proportionable annuity; as also that a
member may, with the allowance of the directors, take out a fresh policy, till
his whole right amounts to a double annuity, but no further.

To guard against all possible events, however improbable and unexpected, and
to prevent the Society or annuity-receiver's being greatly or unfairly injured
thereby, let

ARTICLE XI, express, that,
If, in case of an unusual mortality among the members, any heavy losses, or
calamities that may befall the Society, the directors shall find upon inquiry,
that the capital with the half yearly payments is not sufficient to answer the
present annuities and also to secure the like for future annuity-receivers,
they shall then be empowered to call upon the members for an additional sum,
not amounting in the whole to more than at the rate of two shillings for the
half year on every pound to be paid; nor from the members who paid the whole
consideration money at entrance, more than at the rate of five shillings half
yearly on a future thirty pound purchased annuity: Should not this call fully
answer, then the annuities shall be gradually reduced in equal proportions,
till such reduction together with the call, shall have balanced for the
deficiency, occasioned by the calamity with which the Society may have been
overtaken, when the annuities shall be raised again to their first height.

Should the Society by the utmost improvement of its moneys, and remarkable
prosperity, be found, after a trial of twenty years, upon the strictest
examination, made by persons appointed thereto, to have a surplus capital
beyond what is needful, it may be agreed by

ARTICLE XII.
The interest of the surplus shall be appropriated annually for raising the
annuities, where the annuity-receivers shall be fifty years old or upwards, and
the persons through whom they became entitled had been twenty and one years
members before the commencement of such title.

The necessity and advantage of securing the annuities unalienable to the
intended receivers named in the policies, are very apparent; by that means the
beneficial designs of the plan are more secure of taking place, and the society
itself is guarded against litigious claims by virtue of assignments; let it
therefore be resolved by

ARTICLE XIII.
For the better securing the several annuities, to the proper use of the
intended receivers named on the policies, no annuity shall be transferable, or
assignable, or liable to be charged, either by the members holding the policy,
or the proposed annuity-receiver, so as to convey away the benefit designed to
be secured to such receiver: such assignment, transfer or encumbrance shall be
in itself void; and whenever made by the intended or actual annuity-receiver,
the Society shall have power, at a general meeting, either of declaring the
annuity forfeited, or of appointing the payment of it, by order of the
directors, as these may conclude upon, to one or more, for the sole benefit of
the annuity-receiver named in the policy.

That the annuity-receiver may be subject to no unnecessary trouble, and yet
the Society be safe, let it be settled by

ARTICLE XIV.
The policy shall be brought to the place appointed for payment, and the
annuity be received, by the person therein named and intended to be benefited
thereby; but in case of sickness, infirmities, distant residence, or any other
sufficient obstacle, the annuity may and shall be paid to such person whom the
annuity-receiver may depute; which person shall be approved of by the
directors, and shall bring the policy, together with an order signed by the
annuity-receiver, and a certificate from two credible witnesses inhabiting the
place of the annuity-receiver's residence, declaring that such annuity-receiver
signed such order, and was then living.

Whereas every member is equally concerned in the affairs of the Society,
though the policies may be of different value, the lowest being (it must be
supposed) of like importance, with the highest, to the respective holders; and
that the baneful influence of ambition, superiority, dependence, connections,
assurance and impetuosity, may not lessen the freedom of individuals, engross
the management to a certain set, and exclude others hour qualified and desired
by the generality, let it be stipulated by

ARTICLE XV.
Every person shall have one vote, and no more, be the value of his policy what
it will: the admission of members, and the choice of individuals to fill up the
different offices shall be always by ballot; and the determination of all
questions, whether at a general meeting, or among the directors, when not
unanimous, shall be also by ballot, if demanded by any two present. Fifteen
directors and a treasurer shall be chosen at the general meeting appointed for
that purpose, any or all of whom shall be liable to a removal at the pleasure
of the Society, duly called or regularly coming together in a general meeting.
The treasurer may be continued from year to year without being changed; but the
directors shall not any of them be continued longer than three years
successively; five shall go out every year, and five new ones, who shall not
have been in the direction for full three years back, shall be chosen in their
room. Should the increase of the Society and other circumstances require it,
their number may be enlarged to twenty four, and eight, old ones go out, and
new be chosen in, annually.

Should the legislature of any particular government, in which such a Society
may be formed, concur in promoting a scheme, confined to no party, and
calculated for public as well as private utility, and bestow upon it an
incorporation, there will be no call for trustees; but should any motives of
mistaken policy prevent their doing it, let it be concluded on by

ARTICLE XVI.
Till an incorporation can be obtained, five trustees shall be chosen annually,
to hold in their joint names the Society's effects and moneys, such only
excepted as may be in the hands of the treasurer for current use; the number or
sets of whom may be increased as the stock of the Society enlarges, that so no
set may hold too great a value. These trustees shall be continued removed or
changed at the pleasure of the Society: and every policy shall be signed by
three of them. No person shall be a trustee, who has any of the Society's money
on interest.

N. B. Societies are not illegal for want of incorporation: such societies are
very common in London, and are allowed to form themselves by deed of
settlements, which are enrolled in the highest courts of the kingdom. The deed
of settlement of the Laudable Society, for the benefit of Widows, was enrolled
in the High Court of Chancery, bearing date the 18th of March, 1761. That of
the London Annuity Society, in the Court of Common Pleas by order of Lord
Cambden, bearing date the 1st of January, 1765. Some of the first public
societies in London are unincorporated, and though possessed of very large
capitals hold them safely, and without fear, by the help of faithful trustees.

Let it be

ARTICLE XVII.
The trustees and treasurer shall from time to time execute to the directors,
proper and sufficient declarations of trust, to evidence that the several sums
in their hands, and securities by them taken, and purchases made, are for the
use and benefit of the Society, and to be disposed of according to the rules
and orders thereof, and from time to time made concerning the same. They shall
also respectively enter into and give that security which shall be reasonably
required of them, for the due execution of the trusts in them reposed; which
security shall be given to such person or persons as shall be nominated by the
members at a general meeting.

That the rights of the body may not be encroached upon, and at length
surreptitiously lessened, by those elected for and entrusted with the
management of its affairs; that every individual in his private capacity may
have his full share of power, and may receive all due information of what has
been done or is doing, and that the executive part may have the opinion of the
whole when wanted, and may be under a proper check, let it be declared in

ARTICLE XVIII.
There shall be two stated annual general meetings, half a years distance from
each other; the first to be as near as convenient after the Society's having
been formed six calendar months, at which, vacancies occasioned by death,
absence, neglect or resignation, shall be filled up for the remainder of the
year; and five members, being neither trustee, treasurer nor director, shall be
chosen for auditors to examine and audit the Society's accounts, as near down
to the next stated general meeting as possible; at which, being the second, to
be held soon after the anniversary of the Society's formation, the, or the
major part of the, auditors shall report to the body the state of its accounts,
and of the capital stock, and the directors, treasurer and trustees for the
year ensuing shall be chose agreeable to what has been before mentioned. At
these stated general meetings, no matter of consequence, and only business of
course or necessity shall be transacted, unless notice of the same shall have
been given full three weeks before, in the summonses advising of such meeting.
The directors may and shall at their discretion summon general meetings, as
often as affairs require it, and also whenever any nine members shall request
the same in writing; and in case of the directors neglecting to comply with
such request for the space of one calendar month, then the said nine members
may, by letters and public advertisements signed by themselves, summon within
three weeks a general meeting, which shall be equally valid as though called by
the directors. The particular business, to be transacted at those general
meetings which are not stated, shall be mentioned in the summonses and
advertisements, and no one thing shall be finally concluded upon relative
thereto, unless absolutely necessary for saving the being, liberty, or property
of the Society, at a first general meeting, but shall stand over for
confirmation to a second, distant at least one calendar month. At every general
meeting, the minutes of the former, together with the proceedings of the
directors, shall be read over, the last for the information of the body, the
others for their confirmation amendment or rejection.

The disposal of the capital is an affair of too much consequence, and too
essential, to be lodged with any other than the whole body met in a general
assembly. Should it be said, that the directors must be best acquainted with
the Society's affairs, and therefore must be best judges; granting it to be
true, the directors make a part of the whole, the body in their general
assembly can avail themselves of their knowledge, and at the same time form
some judgment, whether other motives than public good have influenced their
opinion; besides, the directors, from their superior knowledge, and the respect
the Society is likely to have for the persons whom they have chosen to conduct
their affairs, can scarce fail of supporting any scheme relative thereto, which
they may form, unless manifestly improper, let it therefore be

ARTICLE XIX.
So much of the moneys of the Society, as shall be judged necessary by the
directors to answer the current demands thereof, shall be kept in the hands of
the treasurer; the rest shall be paid at their order into the hands of the
trustees, to be by them vested in, or secured upon or by, government or other
public or real securities, or laid out in the purchase of lands, tenements or
hereditaments in their names, in such manner as shall be directed, by order
made and confirmed at two general meetings of the Society.

The reasonableness and justice of the subsequent article are self-evident.

ARTICLE XX.
The directors, treasurer and trustees, and all acting under them, shall be
indemnified in performing all lawful acts in pursuance of these presents, and
of the rules and regulations made concerning the same, out of the stock of the
Society, which is in the first place charged therewith, and the reimbursement
of all costs that they, their heirs, executors and administrators may have
sustained, by the legal performance of their respective offices, provided that
in case of causes and suits relative thereto, the same are carried on and
defended, by the consent and under the direction and approbation of the
directors, until there is a general meeting of the Society, to the control or
direction of which the same shall be subject. The directors, treasurer,
trustees and all acting under them, their respective heirs, executors or
administrators, shall be answerable for no more moneys or effects than what
were actually received by them respectively, or by another on their express
order without the direction, consent or license of the directors; nor shall any
of them be answerable for the default, or neglect, or misdoings of the other or
others of them, but only each one for his own respective acts and conduct.

Let the power and business of the directors be expressed in

ARTICLE XXI.
The directors for the time being shall have the care and management of all the
Society's affairs, according to the rules and orders contained in the deed, and
hereafter to be made by the body; shall admit members; issue orders for the
signing of policies, the lending calling in or paying of moneys; shall appoint,
and vary as needful, the time and place of their own meetings, the choice,
suspension, removal and government of the Society's servants, together with the
salaries and wages and all disputes or doubts concerning the same; shall meet
at least once in every six weeks; shall compose a legal board for the
transacting all business, when and while amounting to seven; shall declare a
vacancy among themselves, when any one has been absent from their meetings for
four successive months, without assigning a satisfactory reason for the same;
shall grant licenses for going and abiding beyond the limits allowed by the
deed; shall receive the surrender of policies of persons quitting the Society;
shall examine claims and determine the same; shall compound, adjust and settle
disputes relating to the policies and the annuities intended to be secured
thereby; shall see that the accounts be carefully kept and all proceedings
regularly entered in proper books, all which books, excepting what contain the
loans of money to private persons, and the ages of the members and
annuity-receivers, wherein secresy ought to be observed, may be inspected by
the several members at proper seasonable times; and shall give all needful
directions for accommodating themselves and the Society at their respective
meetings, and for securing their deeds, books of accounts, etc. and shall take
care of the regular and punctual payments of the annuities; and every director,
who shall dissent from the proceedings of the Society or of the directors, may
have his dissent with his reason for the same entered in the minute book of the
Society.

It Is to be hoped, that there will, for a long time to come, be members
sufficiently qualified, whose circumstances will allow it, and whose public
spirit will incline them, to serve the Society as trustees, treasurer and
directors, without requiring any pecuniary consideration, though such in some
future period may be highly reasonable. Servants must be paid, but they should
be allowed no fees, which in too many instances have proved introductory to
various abuses and abominable impositions, let it be then

ARTICLE XXII.
No trustee, treasurer or director shall receive any salary, fee or reward, for
his services or attendance on the Society or their affairs, unless hereafter it
shall be found requisite to appoint any sum of money for such purpose, and the
same shall have been agreed upon and confirmed at two general meetings. No
clerk, agent or servant of the Society shall take any fee or reward, from any
person transacting business with the Society, or receiving annuities from it,
under penalty of being immediately discharged for so doing.

Human foresight like human knowledge is confined within narrow bounds, and
when united are very incapable of forming regulations suitable to the several
exigences future time may produce, so that it should be concluded by

ARTICLE XXIII.
For the more effectual completing the benevolent intention of the Society, and
to provide for all exigences, a general meeting may make such orders and rules,
for the better executing the agreements herein contained, for supporting the
Society and extending the plan and rendering it more useful, as may be deemed
proper, provided that such rules and orders shall, before they become binding,
be confirmed by a subsequent meeting, called for that purpose and held at the
distance of one calendar month, and are not repugnant to the fundamental rules
of the Society, but consonant to their true intents and meaning.

PART II.
TABLE I. Showing what a person must pay in purchasing a twenty pound annuity,
to be enjoyed, in case of survivorship, by another for life, the latter not
being younger than the former.
Age. In present payment without an annual one, interest being at Where there
is an annual payment of 5 L. subject to failure on either of their deaths,
interest being at Would he secure an additional L 10, so as to make the annuity
L 3^, upon living 10 years after admission, and paying annually L 5 as before,
he must add to the sum in the immediately preceding columns, Interest being at
4 prCt. 4 prC 5 prCt. 4 prCt. 4 prC 5 prCt. 4 prCt. 4 perC. 5 prCt. 21 71 62 13
56 12 4 17 -- - -- -- 18 2 15 4 10 4 25 70 12 62 14 56 18 6 14 1 14 -- -- 17 10
15 2 12 1 30 70 62 13 57 2 9 2 4 8 1 8 16 11 14 8 12 14 35 68 19 62 4 56 19 11
6 6 17 4 15 8 13 10 12 40 67 8 61 6 56 9 13 5 9 4 6 8 13 19 12 8 11 1 45 65 3
59 16 55 8 14 17 11 4 8 12 12 6 11 9 18 50 62 3 57 12 53 15 16 12 17 10 9 10 6
9 6 8 10 55 58 6 54 10 51 5 16 13 14 11 18 8 2 7 8 6 15 60 53 6 50 7 47 15 16
11 14 9 12 15 5 12 5 4 4 16

From the above table it appears, that, money yielding an uninterrupted
compound interest of 4 per. cent. a person of 35, in order to secure an annuity
of 20 l. for the life of another of the same age, in case of survivorship, must
give in present payment 62 l. 4 s. but should he choose to make an annual
payment of 5 l. subject to a failure at his own death or that of the intended
annuity-receiver, then he will have to pay down only 6 l. 17 s. the value of
such annual payment being the difference between 62 l. 4 s. and 6 l. 17 s. or
55 l. 7 s. But would he secure an additional 10 l. so making the annuity 30 l.
in case he should live ten years after admission, besides the annual payment of
5 l. he must pay down 13 l. 10 s. more than the 6 l. 17 s. or in all 20 l. 7 s.
Does he prefer paying at once the whole value of the increasing annuity, he
must to 62 l. 4 s. add 13 l. 10 s. that being the worth of an additional 10 l.
annuity after ten years, N. B. The worth of an annual payment of 5 l. for the
life of a person, subject to the above mentioned failure, is, the difference
between the sum to be paid at admission when there is no such payment, and the
sum to be paid when there is: And the value of an additional 10 l. after ten
years is the sum mentioned in the last set of columns. An attendance to this
observation may help a Society in varying its terms to accomodate different
persons: and thus, a member may be admitted to secure a 10 l. annuity after ten
years, when he is 35 years old, to one of the like age in case of survivorship,
on his paying down only 13 l. 10 s. or a 20 l. annuity after the said term of
ten years on paying 27 l. but in this case should he die before the ten years,
the intended annuity-receiver reaps no benefit from what has been paid, which
goes to the use of the Society.

TABLE II. Showing what a purchaser must pay, more than in the the preceding
table, upon every year he is older than the intended annuity-receiver,
supposing interest to be at 4 per cent.
Age of the person to be benefited. Age of the purchaset. For the 20 L. annuity
where the payment is made at once. For the 20 L. annuity where there is an
annual payment of 5 L. For the 30 L. annuity after ten years, where there is an
annual payment of 5 L. L. s. d. L. s. d. L. s. d. 15 21 0 18 0 0 12 0 0 18 6 20
25 1 0 0 0 15 0 1 2 6 15 25 0 19 6 0 15 0 1 2 0 25 30 1 3 0 0 18 0 1 6 0 15 30
1 2 0 0 17 0 1 4 6 30 35 1 7 0 1 1 0 1 10 6 20 35 1 5 0 1 0 0 1 9 0 15 35 1 4 6
1 0 0 1 8 6 35 40 1 11 0 1 5 0 1 15 0 30 40 1 10 6 1 5 0 1 15 0 20 40 1 8 0 1 3
6 1 13 6 15 40 1 7 0 1 3 0 1 12 6 40 45 1 16 0 1 9 6 2 1 0 35 45 1 15 0 1 9 6 2
1 0 30 45 1 14 0 1 9 0 2 0 0 25 45 1 13 0 1 8 0 1 19 0 20 45 1 12 0 1 7 0 1 18
0 15 45 1 10 6 1 6 6 1 17 0 45 50 2 2 0 1 15 0 2 7 6 40 50 2 1 0 1 15 0 2 7 6
30 50 1 18 6 1 13 6 2 6 0 20 50 1 16 0 1 11 6 2 3 0 40 55 2 7 0 2 1 0 2 15 0 30
55 2 4 0 1 19 0 2 12 0 20 55 2 0 6 1 16 6 2 9 0 55 60 2 18 0 2 10 0 3 4 0 50 60
2 17 6 2 10 6 3 5 0 40 60 2 14 0 2 8 6 3 3 0 30 60 2 10 0 2 5 6 2 19 6 20 60 2
6 0 2 2 6 2 15 6

TABLE III. Showing what annuity the purchaser may become entitled to, after a
certain period, for the remainder of life, upon a given sum.
Age. Annuity. When arrived at. Upon paying, interest being at 4 perCt. 4 perCt
5 perCt. 21 30 45 90 19 77 65 7 25 20 75 11 65 4 56 9 30 20 100 3 88 11 78 9 21
40 50 80 11 66 18 55 13 25 40 100 8 85 72 2 30 30 99 16 86 11 75 4 35 20 88 18
78 19 70 5 36 20 94 6 84 3 75 5 37 20 100 1 89 15 80 12 38 20 106 5 95 15 86 8
39 20 112 17 102 3 92 13 40 20 119 18 109 2 99 8 40 20 55 76 13 68 9 61 3 41 20
81 10 73 2 65 13 42 20 86 14 78 2 70 10 43 20 92 5 83 11 75 15 44 20 98 4 89 7
81 8 45 20 104 13 ^5 14 87 12 40 30 60 69 15 61 2 53 12 41 30 74 3 65 5 57 10
42 30 78 18 69 15 61 15 43 30 ^3 19 74 12 66 7 44 20 59 12 53 4 47 11 45 20 63
10 56 19 51 3 46 20 67 13 61 55 1 47 20 72 3 65 8 59 6 48 20 77 1 70 2 63 18 49
20 82 6 75 5 68 18 50 20 87 19 80 17 74 7

TABLE IV. Showing what the purchaser must give down, besides making a payment
annually of 5 L. till he becomes entitled to the annuity.
Age. Annuity. When arrived at. INTEREST. 4 perCt. 4 perCt 5 perCt. 21 30 45 27
4 16 3 7 4 25 20 17 17 9 17 3 4 30 20 51 15 41 15 33 2 21 50 50 7 10 21 40 11
14 1 11 25 40 36 8 23 19 13 16 30 30 43 32 22 15 35 20 41 4 32 16 25 11 36 20
48 15 40 32 8 37 20 56 14 47 12 39 14 38 20 65 4 55 16 47 11 39 20 74 5 64 11
56 40 20 83 18 73 19 65 2 40 20 55 29 17 23 2 17 5 41 20 36 15 29 14 23 10 42
20 44 2 36 14 30 5 43 20 51 18 44 6 37 10 44 20 60 5 52 7 45 6 45 20 69 4 61 1
53 15 40 30 60 15 8 8 17 3 6 41 30 21 7 14 9 8 12 42 30 27 15 22 10 14 4 43 30
34 10 26 18 20 5 44 20 11 19 7 3 3 45 20 17 15 12 13 8 5 46 20 23 18 18 11 13
17 47 20 30 10 24 18 19 19 48 20 37 11 31 14 26 10 49 20 45 2 39 33 11 50 20 53
4 46 18 41 4

Let it be noted that the purchasers only become entitled to their annuities at
the respective ages of 45, 50, 55 and 60, and are not to begin receiving them
in half yearly payments, till half a year after.

Though the preceding Tables are in Sterling money, they may be changed into
any currency whatsoever.

In forming the preceding tables, the calculations have been made down to the
fourth decimal inclusive, and all needful exactness been attended to; so that
they may be safely depended upon, for the solution of other questions, than
those to which they are direct answers.

In working the probabilities of the given lives, the process has been carried
on according to Mr. De Moivre's Hypothesis, as recommended by Dr. Price, note,
p. 23. which is probably the reason of the difference in the value of the
annuities (interest at 4 per cent) as in Table III, and as given by Dr. Price,
p. 109.

According to the Doctor. By, Table III. to Annuities of to be enjoyed after by
persons aged amount to 40 50 21 85 12 80 11 40 25 103 15 100 8 30 30 101 1 99
16 20 35 88 18 88 18 20 40 119 1 119 18 20 55 40 74 12 76 13 20 45 101 15 104
13 30 60 40 67 69 15 20 45 60 17 63 10 20 50 85 2 87 19

The Doctor calculated on the probabilities of the duration of life, as deduced
by Dr. Halley, and given in the appendix p. 316.

The purchaser of an annuity, to be enjoyed, after his decease, by another in
case of survivorship, being a year upon probation, wherein he hazards all he
has advanced, the calculation for the annual payments gives him some credit for
the same, by reckoning as though they began to be made on his commencing a
member, instead of a year after.

In calculating the value of the additional 10 l. the reckoning goes upon nine
years instead of ten, as it will be but nine years after the 20 l. has been
secured, before the right to that addition will be obtained; by this means the
purchaser is charged somewhat more than had it went upon ten years; but far
less than is allowed for, by reckoning the annual payment as though made when he
becomes a member. Should it be thought that in justice the calculation should
have gone upon ten instead of nine years, it is only determining that he shall
not pay for the additional 10 l. till he has passed through his probation year;
which may be more agreeable than the paying for the whole together.

The tables suppose that the money is put out immediately, accumulates
continually by an uninterrupted compound interest, is never lost, nor
diminished in value; now, as in fact it must often lie by, cannot accumulate at
that rate, and will be subject to a diminution through losses, failure of
interest and the like, it may be most advisable to reckon upon no more than 4
per cent, certain compound continued interest, and therefore Table II. goes
only upon that estimate. They, who are otherwise minded from considering the
height of legal interest, may be convinced upon reading the following
quotations from Dr. Price, viz. p. 8. In equal ages the mortality of males has
been found to be greater than the mortality of females. P. 271, 272, the
greater mortality of males appears on the whole to be a fact well established.
P. 106. The issue of the best schemes of this kind must be in some degree
uncertain. For want of proper observations, it is not possible to determine
what allowances ought to be made, on account of the higher probabilities of
life among females than males. No prudence can prevent all losses in the
improvement of moneys; nor can any care guard against the inconveniences to
such schemes, which must arise from those persons being most ready to fly to
them, who, by reason of concealed disorders, feel themselves most likely to
want the benefit of them. It Is vain to form such establishments with the
expectation of seeing their fate determined soon by experience. P. 107. No
experiments of this sort should be tried hastily. An unsuccessful one must be
productive of very pernicious effects. All inadequate schemes lay the
foundation of present relief on future calamity, and afford assistance to a few
by disappointing and oppressing multitudes. P. 111. Certainly a Society that
means to be a permanent advantage to the public, ought always to take higher
rather than lower values, for the sake of rendering itself more secure, and
gaining some profits to balance losses and expenses. P. 129. In matters of
chance, it is impossible to say, that an unfavourable run of events will not
come, which may hurt the best contrived scheme. The calculations only determine
probabilities; and, agreeably to these, it may be depended on, that events will
happen on the whole. But at particular periods, and in particular instances,
great deviations will often happen; and these deviations at the commencement of
a scheme, must prove either very favorable, or very unfavourable.

Should a better interest then be made of the money than allowed for, the
advantages arising from it will tend to give establishment to the Society,
security against unexpected ills, besides an ample supply for all necessary
expenses.

It Is of importance, in calculating annuities, to determine whether the lives
of females are universally better than those of males; and how much better: And
his Honor, the Lieutenant Governor, having very obligingly communicated to me,
some manuscripts containing an account of the number of inhabitants, etc. in
Massachusett's-Bay, taken by order in 1764, the result was such as induced me
at first sight to conclude, that in this colony, as in many other places, the
lives of females were better than those of males: For it appeared from them,
that there were 33438 houses; 41110 families; 59090 white males above 16 years
old, and 64755 females, making together 123845; -- and that there were 58390
white males under 16, and 55945 females, in all 114335. The whole number of
males and females was 238180. Though the males under 16 exceeded the females by
2445, yet the females above 16 exceeded the males by 5665. The number of towns
that sent in accounts was 196: some few declined, or neglected doing it. In 46
of these towns the males above, as well as under 16, exceeded the females. In
47 of them the females exceeded the males under as well as above 16. In 18 of
them the males above 16 exceeded the females, and the females under 16 exceeded
the males. In the remainder the males under 16 exceeded the females, and the
females above 16 exceeded the males. But notwithstanding this appearance in
support of the better lives of females here as well as elsewhere, when
information had been obtained -- that the order appeared mysterious, occasioned
an alarm in many places, was disagreeable to multitudes, was not enforced by
any penalty, and was not carefully complied with -- that different towns
purposely took such loose accounts, as should prevent its being known how
numerous they were -- that it was highly probable that the return of the males
was lower than the truth, and that all who were at sea, amounting to some
hundreds from various ports, were left out of the account -- and that the
colony had lost full five, if not near ten thousand men by the war immediately
preceding -- could not but conclude, on further thought, that the full number
of the white inhabitants was not to be determined from the return, and that the
males in the Massachusett's were not only more, but better lives, Since writing
the above, have been confirmed in my conclusion, by what Dr. Price mentions in
his Supplement, p. 15, 16, 17. There is a difference between the mortality of
males and females. -- I must however observe, that it may be doubted, whether
this difference so unfavourable to males, is natural; and the following facts
will prove, that I have reason for such doubts.

It appears, from several registers in Susmilch's works, that this difference
is much less in the country parishes and villages of BRANDENBURGH, than in the
towns. And, agreeable to this, it appears likewise, from the accounts of the
same curious writer, that the number of males in the country comes much nearer
to the number of females.

At the time the accounts were taken of the inhabitants in the province of
NEW JERSEY in AMERICA, they were distinguished particularly into males and
females under and above sixteen.

In 1738, the number of males under 16 was, 10639; females. 9700: males above
16 -- 11631; females 10725. In 1745, these numbers were, males under 16 --
14523; females 13754: males above 16 -- 15087; females 13704.

The inference is obvious; that human life in males is more brittle than in
females, only in consequence of adventitious causes, or of some particular
debility, that takes place in polished and luxurious Societies, and especially
in great towns.


than those of the females. The number of negroes returned, was, males 3020,
females 2226; the disproportion between the sexes may be accounted for, upon
the far greater import of males. The Indians were 728 males, 953 females; but
nothing decisive can be gathered from hence, unless it could be known, whether
any, and how many males had perished by the war; whether numbers might not be
absent upon hunting, fishing or other engagements, who were not in the account;
and what was the disproportion between the sexes, of those that had perished by
the excessive drinking of that artificial American poison -- Rum. There was no
taking the ages of either Negroes or Indians.

Much exactness, and an attention to every circumstance, are requisite in
communicating accounts, that may be used by other's as a foundation for
calculations; or the whole may be extremely erroneous. Thus Dr. Price
concludes, p. 198, that, at Boston the inhabitants would decrease were there no
supply from the country; if the account given in the Gentleman's Magazine of
1753, p. 413, from 1731 to 1752, of births and burials in the town was just;
seeing that the burials all along exceeded the births. Have examined the
Magazine, and observe, that it is not an account of births and burials, but of
baptisms and burials -- that the number of burials in the time specified was
13384; of baptisms 11850; -- that the baptisms were therefore less than the
burials by 1534 -- and that in the burials were included 2011 blacks, so that
the number of whites buried was only 11^73. Now it must be noted, that these
accounts of burials and baptisms were most probably taken from the newspapers
-- that little stress is to be laid upon their authority in this matter, as
it is notorious to the ministers, that their lists, especially in the article of
baptism, are very imperfect and below the truth, though likely to be much more
correct in the other -- that great numbers are born, who from various causes
are not baptized -- and that the marriages and births among the negroes,
cannot, by reason of their peculiar circumstances, bear the same proportion
with their burials to those of the inhabitants. Nothing positive concerning the
decrease of the inhabitants at Boston, can then be concluded upon, from the
accounts given in the Gentleman's Magazine.

Would gentlemen who have time and opportunity communicate by the help of
newspapers, or any other way, the proper intelligence, calculators might be at
a much greater certainty; especially, were they to observe the like exactness
with what appears in the following letter, viz.

Rowley, March 12, 1772. Messi'rs FLEETS,
BY one of your late Boston Evening Posts, we had intelligence of a remarkable
instance of the shortness of human life; of 100 persons born the same year, one
only remained alive the 76th year after. And by far the greater part of them
died many years before.

"Be pleased, ther^^^re, on the contrary, to take this account of longevity
from the records of the first Church in Rowley; wherein, from September 10,
1682, until January 25, 1691, the space of eight years and nearly five months,
there were 246 persons baptized. And February 4, 1771, there were twenty four
of them living.

"Now, divide 246 by 24, and you will find that more than one of ten lived to
be between 80 and 89 years old.

"Of the said 24, males and females being in number equal, three were baptized
Anno 1682, turned therefore into their 89th year, four in 84, one in 85, one in
86, two in 87, two in 88, two in 89, eight in 90, and one in 1691. And there
being but thirty two baptized in 1690, and eight of them living February 1771,
shows that one of four baptized that year, have lived to be turned into their
81st year. A rare instance indeed!

"And there is a person now living in a neighboring town, baptized in this,
October, 1681, Aet. 91. And there are now living, in the first parish in the
town, nine persons between 80 and 90 years of age, and probably about so many
more in the other parts of the town.

"And there have died in the town, the two last years, eleven aged people,
including but three of the said 24 (which three died a few months past) one
Aet. 81, three 83, one 87, four 88, one 90, one 93.

"It may be added, that there lived in the place now called the first parish in
Rowley, four persons, the first of whom died Anno 1716, and the last 1729, and
each of the four, by the best accounts that could be had, died an 100 years old
and upwards.

"There were but about 220 (...) ^^tween these four, and scarce (...) them unto
this time.

"It has been a common remark, that (...) New England do not live so long as in
Old. Judge how just an one. You will rarely find in accounts from thence, that
more than one of 1000 live to be 100 years old or upwards. Here are four in
less than 1000.

"You may depend upon the above account as genuine and certain, unavoidable
human errors excepted."


FINIS.

