THE VICAR OF WAKEFIELD: A TALE.

Supposed to be written by HIMSELF.

Sperate miseri, cavete foelices.

VOL. I.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR WILLIAM MENTZ, AND SOLD BY MOST OF THE BOOKSELLERS
IN AMERICA. M,DCC,LXXII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THERE are an hundred faults in this Thing, and an hundred things might be said
to prove them beauties. But it is needless. A book may be amusing with numerous
errors, or it may be very dull without a single absurdity. The hero of this
piece unites in himself the three greatest characters upon earth; he is a
priest, an husbandman, and the father of a family. He is drawn as ready to
teach, and ready to obey, as simple in affluence, and majestic in adversity. In
this age of opulence and refinement whom can such a character please? Such as
are fond of high life, will turn with disdain from the simplicity of his
country fire side. Such as mistake ribaldry for humor, will find no wit in his
harmless conversation; and such as have been taught to deride religion, will
laugh at one whose chief stores of comfort are drawn from futurity.

OLIVER GOLDSMITH.

CHAP. I. The description of the family of Wakefield; in which a kindred
likeness prevails as well of minds as of persons.
I WAS ever of opinion that the honest man who married and brought up a large
family, did more service than he who continued single, and only talked of
population. From this motive, I had scarce taken orders a year, before I began
to think seriously of matrimony, chose my wife as she did her wedding gown, not
for a fine glossy surface, but such qualities as would wear well. To do her
justice, she was a good natured notable woman: and as for breeding, there were
few country ladies who at that time could show more. She could read any English
book without much spelling, and for pickling, preserving, and cookery, none
could excel her. She prided herself much also upon being an excellent contriver
in housekeeping; yet I could never find that we grew richer with all her
contrivances.

However, we loved each other tenderly, and our fondness increased with age.
There was in fact nothing that could make us angry with the world or each
other. We had an elegant house, situated in a fine country, and a good
neighborhood. The year was spent in moral or rural amusements; in visiting our
rich neighbors, or relieving such as were poor. We had no revolutions to fear,
nor fatigues to undergo; all our adventures were by the fireside, and all our
migrations from the blue bed to the brown.

As we lived near the road, we often had the traveller or stranger come to
taste our gooseberry wine, for which we had great reputation; and I profess
with the veracity of an historian, that I never knew one of them find fault
with it. Our cousins too even to the fortieth remove, all remembered their
affinity, without any help from the Herald's office, and came very frequently
to see us. Some of them did us no great honor by these claims of kindred; for
literally speaking we had the blind, the maimed, and halt amongst the number.
However, my wife always insisted that as they were the same flesh and blood,
with us, they should sit with us at the same table. So that if we had not very
rich, we generally had very happy friends about us; for this remark will hold
good through life, that the poorer the guest, the better pleased he ever is with
being treated: and as some men gaze with admiration at the colors of a tulip,
and others are smitten with the wings of a butterfly, so I was by nature an
admirer of happy human faces. However, when any one of our relations was found
to be a person of very bad character, a troublesome guest, or one we desired to
get rid of, upon his leaving my house for the first time, I ever took care to
lend him a riding coat, or a pair of boots, or sometimes an horse of small
value, and I always had the satisfaction of finding he never came back to re^
them. By this the house was cleared of such as we did not like; but never was
the family of Wakefield known to turn the traveller or the poor dependant out
of doors.

Thus we lived several years in a state of much happiness, not but that we
sometimes had those little rubs which Providence sends to enhance the value of
its favors. My orchard was often robbed by schoolboys, and my wife's custards
plundered by the cats or the children. The 'Squire would sometimes fall asleep
in the most pathetic parts of my sermon, or his lady return my wife's
civilities at church with a mutilated curtesy. But we soon got over the
uneasiness caused by such accidents, and usually in three or four days we began
to wonder how they vexed us.

My children, the offspring of temperance, as they were educated without
softness, so they were at once well formed and healthy; my sons hardy and
active, my daughters dutiful and blooming. When I stood in the midst of the
little circle which promised to be the supports of my declining age, I could
not avoid repeating the famous story of Count Abensberg, who, in Henry II's
progress through Germany, when other courtiers came with their treasures,
brought his thirty two children and presented them to his sovereign as the most
valuable offering he had to bestow. In this manner, though I had but six, I
considered them as a very valuable present made to my country, and consequently
looked upon it as my debtor. Our eldest son was named George, after his uncle,
who left us ten thousand pounds. Our second child, a girl, I intended to call
after her aunt Grissel; but my wife, who during her pregnancy had been reading
romances, insisted upon her being called Olivia. In less than another year we
had a daughter again, and now I was determined that Grissel should be her name;
but a rich relation taking a fancy to stand godmother, the girl was, by her
directions, called Sophia; so that we had two romantic names in the family; but
I solemnly protest I had no hand in it. Moses was our next, and after an
interval of twelve years, we had two sons more.

It would be fruitless to deny my exultation when I saw my little ones about
me; but the vanity and the satisfaction of my wife were even greater than mine.
When our visitors would usually say, Well, upon my word, Mrs. Primrose, you
have the finest children in the whole country. -- "Ay, neighbor," she would
answer, they are as heaven made them, handsome enough, if they be good, enough;
for handsome is that handsome does. And then she would bid the girls hold up
their heads; who, to conceal nothing, were certainly very handsome. Mere
outside is so very trifling a circumstance with me, that I should scarce have
remembered to mention it, had it not been a general topic of conversation in
the country. Olivia, now about eighteen, had that luxuriancy of beauty with
which painters have generally drawn Hebe; open, sprightly, and commanding.
Sophia's features were not so striking at first; but often did more certain
execution; for they were soft, modest, and alluring. The one vanquished by a
single blow, the other by efforts successively repeated.

The temper of a woman is generally formed from the turn of her features, at
least it was so with my daughters. Olivia wished for many lovers, Sophia to
secure one. Olivia was often affected from too great a desire to please. Sophia
even represt excellence from her sears to offend. The one entertained me with
her vivacity when I was gay, the other with her sense when I was serious. But
these qualities were never carried to excess in either, and I have often seen
them exchange characters for a whole day together. A suit of mourning has
transformed my coquet into a prude, and a new set of ribbands given her younger
sister more than natural vivacity. My eldest son George was bred at Oxford, as
I intended him for one of the learned professions. My second boy Moses, whom I
designed for business, received a sort of miscellaneous education at home. But
it would be needless to attempt describing the particular characters of young
people that had seen but very little of the world. In short, a family likeness
prevailed through all, and, properly speaking, they had but one character, that
of being all equally generous, credulous, simple, and inoffensive.

CHAP. II. Family misfortunes. The loss of fortune only serves to increase the
pride of the worthy.
THE temporal concerns of our family were chiefly committed to my wife's
management, as to the spiritual, I took them entirely under my own direction.
The profits of my living, which amounted to but thirty- five pounds a year, I
gave to the orphans and widows of the clergy of our diocese; for having a
sufficient fortune of my own, I was careless of temporalities, and felt a
secret pleasure in doing my duty without reward. I also set a resolution of
keeping no cura^e, and of being acquainted with every man in the parish,
exhorting the married men to temperance, and the batchelors to matrimony? so
that in a few years it was a common saying, that there were three strange wants
at Wakefield, a parson wanting pride, young men wanting wives, and alehouses
wanting customers.

Matrimony was always one of my favorite topics, and I wrote several sermons
to prove its utility and happiness: but there was a peculiar tenet which I made
a point of supporting; for I maintained with Whiston, that it was unlawful for
a priest of the church of England, after the death of his first wife, to take a
second, or, to express it in one word, I valued myself upon being a strict
monogamist.

I was early initiated into this important dispute, on which so many laborious
volumes have been written. I published some tracts upon the subject myself,
which, as they never sold, I have the consolation of thinking are read only by
the happy Few. Some of my friends called this my weak side; but alas! they had
not like me made it the subject of long contemplation. The more I reflected
upon it, the more important it appeared. I even went a step beyond Whiston in
displaying my principles: as he had engraven upon his wife's tomb, that she was
the only wife of William Whiston; so I wrote a similar epitaph for my wife,
though still living, in which I extolled her prudence, economy and obedience
till death; and having got it copied fair, with an elegant frame, it was placed
over the chimney-piece, where it answered several very useful purposes. It
admonished my wife of her duty to me, and my fidelity to her; it inspired her
with a passion for fame, and constantly put her in mind of her end.

It was thus, perhaps, from hearing marriage so often recommended, that my
eldest son, just upon leaving college, fixed his affections upon the daughter
of a neighboring clergyman, who was a dignitary in the church, and in
circumstances to give her a large fortune: but fortune was her smallest
accomplishment. Miss Arabella Wilmot was allowed of all, except my two
daughters, to be completely pretty. Her youth, health, and innocence, were
still heightened by a complexion so transparent, and such an happy sensibility
of look, that even age could not gaze with indifference. As Mr. Wilmot knew
that I could make a very handsome settlement on my son, he was not averse to
the match; so both families lived together in all that harmony which generally
precedes an expected alliance. Being convinced by experience that the days of
courtship are the most happy of our lives, I was willing enough to lengthen the
period; and the various amusements which the young couple every day shared in
each other's company, seemed to increase their passion. We were generally
awakened in the morning by music, and on fine days rode a hunting. The hours
between breakfast and dinner, the ladies devoted to dress and study: they
usually read a page, and then gazed at themselves in the glass, which even
philosophers might own, often presented the page of greatest beauty. At dinner
my wife took the lead; for as she always insisted upon carving every thing
herself, it being her mother's way, she gave us upon these occasions the
history of every dish. When we had dined, to prevent the ladies leaving us, I
generally ordered the table to be removed; and sometimes, with the music
master's assistance, the girls would give us a very agreeable concert. Walking
out, drinking tea, country dances, and forfeits, shortened the rest of the day,
without the assistance of cards, as I hated all manner of gaming, except
backgammon, at which my old friend and I sometimes took a two-penny hit. Nor
can I here pass over an ominous circumstance that happened the last time we
played together. I only wanted to fling a quatre, and yet I threw deuce ace
five times running.

Some months were elapsed in this manner, till at last it was thought
convenient to fix a day for the nuptials of the young couple, who seemed
earnestly to desire it. During the preparations for the wedding, I need not
describe the busy importance of my wife, nor the sly looks of my daughters: in
fact, my attention was fixed on another object, the completing a tract which I
intended shortly to publish in defense of monogamy. As I looked upon this as a
master piece both for argument and style, I could not in the pride of my heart
avoid showing it to my old friend Mr. Wilmot, as I made no doubt of receiving
his approbation: but too late I discovered that he was most violently attached
to the contrary opinion, and with good reason; for he was at that time actually
courting a fourth wife. This, as may be expected, produced a dispute attended
with some acrimony, which threatened to interrupt our intended alliance: but on
the day before that appointed for the ceremony, we agreed to discuss the
subject at large.

It was managed with proper spirit on both sides: he asserted that I was
heterodox. I retorted the charge: he replied, and I rejoined. In the mean time,
while the controversy was hottest, I was called out by one of my relations,
who, with a face of concern, advised me to give up the dispute, and allow the
old gentlemen to be a husband, if he could, at least till my son's wedding was
over. "How," cried I, relinquish the cause of truth, and let him be an husband,
already driven to the very verge of absurdity. You might as well advise me to
give up my fortune as my argument. "That fortune," returned my friend, I am now
sorry to inform you is almost nothing. Your merchant in town, in whose hands
your money was lodged, has gone off, to avoid a statute of bankruptcy, and it
is thought has not left a shilling in the pound. I was unwilling to shock you
or the family with the account till after the wedding: but now it may serve to
moderate your warmth in the argument; for, I suppose, your own prudence will
enforce the necessity of dissembling, at least, till your son has the young
lady's fortune secured. -- "Well," returned I, if what you tell me be true, and
if I am to be a beggar, it shall never make me a rascal, or induce me to
disavow my principles. I Will go this moment and inform the company of my
circumstances; and as for the argument, I even here retract my former
concessions in the old gentleman's favor, nor will I allow him now to be an
husband either de jure, de facto, or in any sense of the expression.

It would be endless to describe the different sensations of both families when
I divulged the news of my misfortunes; but what others felt was slight to what
the young lovers appeared to endure. Mr. Wilmot, who seemed before sufficiently
inclined to break off the match, was by this blow soon determined: one virtue
he had in perfection, which was prudence, too often the only virtue that i^
left us unimpaired at seventy-two.

CHAP. III. A migration. The fortunate circumstances of our lives are generally
found at last to be of our own procuring.
THE only hope of our family now was, that the report of our misfortunes might
be malicious or premature: but a letter from my agent in town soon came with a
confirmation of every particular. The loss of fortune to myself alone would
have been trifling; the only uneasiness I felt, was for my family, who were to
be humble without such an education as could render them callous to contempt.

Near a fortnight passed away before I attempted to restrain their affliction;
for premature consolation is but the remembrance of sorrow. During this
interval my thoughts were employed on some future means of supporting them; and
at last a small Cure of fifteen pounds a year was offered me in a distant
neighborhood, where I could still enjoy my principles without molestation.
With this proposal I joyfully closed, having determined to increase my salary
by managing a little farm.

Having taken this resolution, my next care was to get together the wrecks of
my fortune; and all debts collected and paid, out of fourteen thousand pounds
we had now but four hundred remaining. My chief attention therefore, was next
to bring down the pride of my family to their circumstances; for I well knew
that aspiring beggary is wretchedness itself. You cannot be ignorant, my
children, cried I, that no prudence of ours could have prevented our late
misfortune; but prudence may do much in disappointing its effects. We are now
poor, my fondlings, and wisdom bids us conform to our humble situation. Let us
then, without repining, give up these splendours with which numbers are
wretched, and seek in humbler circumstances that peace with which all may be
happy. The poor live pleasantly without our help, and we are not so imperfectly
formed as to be incapable o^ living without theirs. No, my children, let us
from this moment give up all pretensions to gentility; we have still enough
left for happiness, if we are wise, and let us draw upon content for the
deficiencies of fortune.

As my eldest son was bred a scholar, I determined to send him to town, where
his abilities might contribute to our support and his own. The separation of
friends and families is, perhaps, one of the most distressful circumstances
attendant on penury. The day soon arrived on which we were to disperse for the
first time. My son, after taking leave of his mother and the rest, who mingled
their tears with their kisses, came to ask a blessing from me. This I gave him
from my heart, and which, added to five guineas, was all the patrimony I had
now to bestow. "You are going, my boy," cried I, to London on foot, in the
manner Hooker, your great ancestor, traveled there before you. Take from me
the same horse that was given him by the good bishop Jewel, this staff, and
take this book too, it will be your comfort on the way: these two lines in it
are worth a million, I have been young, and now am old; yet never saw I the
righteous man forsaken, or his seed begging their bread. Let this be your
consolation as you travel on. Go, my boy, whatever be thy fortune let me see
thee once a year; still keep a good heart, and farewell. As he was possessed of
integrity and honor, I was under no apprehensions from throwing him naked into
the amphitheatre of life; for I knew he would act a good part whether he rose
or fell.

His departure only prepared the way for our own, which arrived a few days
afterward. The leaving a neighborhood in which we had enjoyed so many hours
of tranquillity, was not without a tear, which scarce fortitude itself could
suppress. Besides, a journey of seventy miles to a family that had hitherto
never been above ten from home, filled us with apprehension, and the cries of
the poor, who followed us for some miles, contributed to increase it. The first
day's journey brought us in safety within thirty miles of our future retreat,
and we put up for the night at an obscure inn in a village by the way. When we
were shown a room, I desired the landlord, in my usual way, to let us have his
company, with which he complied, as what he drank would increase the bill next
morning. He knew, however, the whole neighborhood to which I was removing,
particularly 'Squire Thornhill, who was to be my landlord, and who lived within
a few miles of the place. This gentleman he described, as one who desired to
know little more of the world than the pleasures it afforded, being
particularly remarkable for his attachment to the fair sex. He observed that no
virtue was able to resist his arts and assiduity, and that scarce a farmer's
daughter within ten miles round, but what had found him successful and
faithless. Though this account gave me some pain, it had a very different
effect upon my daughters, whose features seemed to brighten with the
expectation of an approaching triumph, nor was my wife less pleased and
confident of their allurements and virtue. While our thoughts were thus
employed, the hostess entered the room to inform her husband that the strange
gentleman, who had been two days in the house, wanted money, and could not
satisfy them for his reckoning. Want money! replied the host, that must be
impossible; for it was no later than yesterday he paid three guineas to our
beadle to spare an old broken soldier that was to be whipped through the town
for dog-stealing. The hostess, however, still persisting in her first
assertion, he was preparing to leave the room, swearing that he would be
satisfied one way or another, when I begged the landlord would introduce me to
a stranger of so much charity as he described. With this he complied, showing
in a gentleman who seemed to be about thirty, dressed in clothes that once were
laced. His person was well formed, though his face was marked with the lines of
thinking. He had something short and dry in his address, and seemed not to
understand ceremony, or to despise it. Upon the landlord's leaving the room, I
could not avoid expressing my concern to the stranger, at seeing a gentleman in
such circumstances, and offered him my purse to satisfy the present demand. I
take it with all my heart, Sir, replied he, and am glad that a late oversight
in giving what money I had about me, has shown me that there is still some
benevolence left among us. I must, however, previously entreat being informed
of the name and residence of my benefactor, in order to remit it as soon as
possible. In this I satisfied him fully, not only mentioning my name and late
misfortunes, but the place to which I was going to remove. "This" cried he,
happens still more luckily than I hoped for, as I am going the same way myself,
having been detained here two days by the floods, which, I hope, by to morrow
will be found passable. I testified the pleasure I should have in his company,
and my wife and daughters joining in entreaty, he was prevailed upon to stay to
supper. The stranger's conversation, which was at once pleasing and instructive
induced me to wish for a continuance of it; but it was now high time to retire
and take refreshment against the fatigues of the following day.

The next morning we all set forward together: my family on horseback, while
Mr. Burchel, our new companion, walked along the foot-path by the road-side,
observing, with a smile, that as we were ill mounted, he would be too generous
to attempt leaving us behind. As the floods were not yet subsided, we were
obliged to hire a guide, who trotted on before, Mr. Burchel and I bringing up
the rear. We lightened the fatigues of the road with philosophical disputes,
which he seemed perfectly to understand. But what surprised me most was, that
though he was a money borrower, he defended his opinions with as much obstinacy
as if he had been my patron. He now and then also informed me to whom the
different seats belonged that lay in our view, as we traveled the road.
"That," cried he, pointing to a very magnificent house which stood at some
distance, belongs to Mr. Thornhill, a young gentleman who enjoys a large
fortune, though entirely dependant on the will of his uncle, Sir William
Thornhill, a gentleman, who content with a little himself, permits his nephew
to enjoy the rest, and chiefly resides in town. "What!" cried I, is my young
landlord then the nephew of a man whose virtues, generosity, and singularities
are so universally known? I have heard Sir William Thornhill represented as one
of the most generous, yet whimsical, men in the kingdom; a man of consummate
benevolence. -- Something, perhaps, too much so, replied Mr. Burchel, at least
he carried benevolence to an excess when young; for his passions were then
strong, and as they all were upon the side of virtue, they led it up to a
romantic extreme. He early began to aim at the qualifications of the soldier
and scholar; was soon distinguished in the army, and had some reputation among
men of learning. Adulation ever follows the ambitious; for such alone receive
most pleasure from flattery. He was surrounded with crowds, who showed him only
one side of their character; so that he began to lose a regard for private
interest in universal sympathy. He loved all mankind; for fortune prevented him
from knowing that there were rascals. Physicians tell us of a disorder in which
the whole body is so exquisitely sensible, that the slightest touch gives pain:
what some have thus suffered in their persons, this gentleman felt in his mind.
The slightest distress, whether real or fictitious, touched him to the quick,
and his soul labored under a fickle sensibility of the miseries of others.
Thus disposed to relieve, it will be easily conjectured, he found numbers
disposed to solicit: his profusions began to impair his fortune, but not his
goodnature; that, indeed, was seen to increase as the other seemed to decay;
he grew improvident as he grew poor; and though he talked like a man of sense,
his actions were those of a fool. Still, however, being surrounded with
importunity, and no longer able to satisfy every request that was made him,
instead of money he gave promises. They were all he had to bestow, and he had
not resolution enough to give any man pain by a denial. By this means he drew
round him crowds of dependants, whom he was sure to disappoint; yet wished to
relieve. These hung upon him for a time, and left him with merited reproaches
and contempt. But in proportion as he became contemptible to others, he became
despicable to himself. His mind had leaned upon their adulation, and that
support taken away, he could find no pleasure in the applause of his heart,
which he had never learnt to reverence itself. The world now began to wear a
different aspect; the flattery of his friends began to dwindle into simple
approbation, that soon took the more friendly form of advice, and advice when
rejected ever begets reproaches. He now found that such friends as benefits
has gathered round him were by no means the most estimable: it was now found
that a man's own heart must be ever given to gain that of another. I now found,
that -- but I forget what I was going to observe: in short, Sir, he resolved to
respect himself, and laid down a plan of restoring his shattered fortune. For
this purpose, in his own whimsical manner he traveled through Europe on foot,
and before he attained the age of thirty, his circumstances were more affluent
than ever. At present, therefore, his bounties are more rational and moderate
than before; but still he preserves the character of an humourist, and finds
most pleasure in eccentric virtues.

My attention was so much taken up by Mr. Burchel's account, that I scarce
looked forward as we went along, till we were alarmed by the cries of my
family, when turning. I perceived my youngest daughter in the midst of a rapid
stream, thrown from her horse, and struggling with the torrent. She had sunk
twice, nor was it in my power to disengage myself in time to bring her relief.
My sensations were even too violent to permit my attempting her rescue; she
would have certainly perished had not my companion, perceiving her danger,
instantly plunged in to her relief, and, with some difficulty, brought her in
safety to the opposite shore. By taking the current a little farther up; the
rest of the family got safely over; where we had an opportunity of joining our
acknowledgments to here is. Her gratitude may be more readily imagined than
described: she thanked her deliverer more with looks than words, and continued
to lean upon his arm, as if still willing to receive assistance. My wife also
hoped one day to have the pleasure of returning his kindness at her own house.
Thus, after we were all refreshed at the next inn, and had dined together, as
he was going to a different part of the country, he took leave; and we pursued
our journey. My wife observing as we went, that she liked Mr. Burchel
extremely, and protesting, that if he had birth and fortune to entitle him to
match into such a family as our's, she knew no man she would sooner fix upon. I
could not but smile to hear her talk in this strain: one almost at the verge of
beggary thus to assume language of the most insulting affluence, might excite
the ridicule of ill- nature; but I was never much displeased with those
innocent delusions that tend to make us more happy.

CHAP. IV. A proof that even the humblest fortune may grant happiness and
delight which depend not on circumstance, but constitution.
THE place of our new retreat was in a little neighborhood, consisting of
farmers, who tilled their own grounds, and were equal strangers to opulence and
poverty. As they had almost all the conveniences of life within themselves,
they seldom visited towns or cities in search of superfluity. Remote from the
polite, they still retained a primaeval simplicity of manners, and frugal by
long habit, scarce knew that temperance was a virtue. They wrought with
cheerfulness on days of labor; but observed festivals as intervals of idleness
and pleasure. They kept up the Christmas carol, sent true love-knots on
Valentine morning, eat pancakes on Shrove-tide, showed their wit on the first
of April, and religiously cracked nuts on Allhollow eve. Being apprized of our
approach, the whole neighborhood came out to meet their minister, dressed in
their finest clothes, and preceded by a pipe and tabor: also a feast was
provided for our reception, at which we sat cheerfully down; and what the
conversation wanted in wit, we made up in laughter.

Our little habitation was situated at the foot of a sloping hill, sheltered
with a beautiful underwood behind, and a prattling river before; on one side a
meadow, on the other a green. My farm consisted of about twenty acres of
excellent land, having given an hundred pounds for my predecessor's good will.
Nothing could exceed the neatness of my little enclosures: the elms and hedge
rows appearing with inexpressible beauty. My house consisted of but one story,
and was covered with thatch, which gave it an air of great snugness: the walls
on the inside were nicely white-washed, and my daughters undertook to adorn
them with pictures of their own designing. Though the same room served us for
parlour and kitchen, that only made it the warmer. Besides, as it was kept with
the utmost neatness, the dishes, plates, and coppers, being well scoured, and
all disposed in bright rows on the shelves, the eye was agreeably relieved, and
did not seem to want rich furniture. There were three other apartments, one for
my wife and me, another for our two daughters, within our own, and the third,
with two beds, for the rest of my children.

The little republic to which I gave laws, was regulated in the following
manner; by sunrise we all assembled in our common apartment: the fire being
previously kindled by the servant. After we had saluted each other with proper
ceremony, for I always thought fit to keep up some mechanical forms of good
breeding, without which, freedom ever destroys friendship, we all bent in
gratitude to that Being who gave us another day. This duty being performed, my
son and I went to pursue our usual industry, while my wife and daughters
employed themselves in providing breakfast, which was always ready at a certain
time. I allowed half an hour for this meal, and an hour for dinner; which time
was taken up in innocent mirth between my wife and daughters, and in
philosophical arguments between my son and me.

As we rose with the sun, so we never pursued our labors after it was gone
down, but returned home to the expecting family, where smiling looks, a neat
hearth, and pleasant fire, were prepared for our reception. Nor were we without
other guests: sometimes farmer Flamborough, our talkative neighbor, and often
the blind piper, would pay us a visit, and taste our gooseberry wine; for the
making of which we had lost neither the receipt nor the reputation. These
harmless people had several ways of being good company, while one played the
pipes, another would sing some soothing ballad, Jonny Armstrong's last good
night, or the cruelty of Barbara Allen. The night was concluded in the manner
we began the morning, my youngest boys being appointed to read the lessons of
the day, and he that read loudest, distinctest, and best, was to have an
halfpenny on Sunday to put in the poor's box.

When sunday came it was indeed a day of finery, which all my sumptuary edicts
could not restrain. How well soever I fancied my lectures against pride had
conquered the vanity of my daughters: yet I still found them secretly attached
to all their former finery: they still loved laces, ribbands, bugles and
catgut; my wife herself retained a passion for her crimson paduasoy, because I
formerly happened to say it became her.

The first sunday in particular their behavior served to mortify me: I had
desired my girls the preceding night to be dressed early the next day; for I
always loved to be at church a good while before the rest of the congregation.
They punctually obeyed my directions; but when we were to assemble in the
morning at breakfast, down came my wife and daughters, dressed out in all their
former splendor: their hair plaistered up with pomatum, their faces patched to
taste, their trains bundled up into an heap behind, and rustling at every
motion. I could not help smiling at their vanity, particularly that of my wife,
from whom I expected more discretion. In this exigence, therefore, my only
resource was to order my son, with an important air, to call our coach. The
girls were amazed at the command; but I repeated it with more solemnity than
before. -- Surely, my dear, you jest, cried my wife, we can walk it perfectly
well: we want no coach to carry us now "You mistake, child," returned I, we do
want a coach; for if we walk to church in this trim, the very children in the
parish will hoot after us for a show. -- Indeed, replied my wife, I always
imagined that my Charles was fond of seeing his children neat and handsome
about him. -- You may be as neat as you please, interrupted I, and I shall love
you the better for it; but all this is not neatness, but frippery. These
rufflings, and pinkings, and patchings, will only make us hated by all the
wives of all our neighbors. No, my children, continued I, more gravely, those
gowns may be altered into something of a plainer cut; for finery is very
unbecoming in us, who want the means of decency. I don't know whether such
flouncing and shredding is becoming even in the rich, if we consider, upon a
moderate calculation, that the nakedness of the indigent world may be clothed
from the trimmings of the vain.

This remonstrance had the proper effect: they went with great composure, that
very instant, to change their dress; and the next day I had the satisfaction of
finding my daughters, at their own request, employed in cutting up their trains
into Sunday waistcoats for Dick and Bill, the two little ones, and what was
still more satisfactory, the gowns seemed improved by being thus curtailed.

CHAP. V. A new and great acquaintance introduced. What we place most hopes
upon generally proves most fatal.
AT a small distance from the house my predecessor had made a seat, over-shaded
by an hedge of hawthorn, and honeysuckle. Here when the weather was fine, and
our labor soon finished, we usually all sat together, to enjoy an extensive
landscape in the calm of the evening. Here too we drank tea, which now was
become an occasional banquet; and as we had it but seldom, it diffussed a new
joy, the preparations for it being made with no small share of bustle and
ceremony. On these occasions, our two little ones always read for us, and they
were regularly served after we had done. Sometimes, to give a variety to our
amusements, the girls fung to the guitar; and while they thus formed a little
concert, my wife and I would stroll down the sloping field, that was
embellished with blue bells and centaury, talk of our children with rapture,
and enjoy the breeze that wasted both health and harmony.

In this manner we began to find that every situation in life might bring its
own peculiar pleasures: every morning waked us to a repetition of toil; but the
evening repaid it with vacant hilarity.

It was about the beginning of autumn, on a holiday, for I kept such as
intervals of relaxation from labor, that I had drawn out my family to our
usual place of amusement, and our young musicians began their usual concert, as
we were thus engaged, we saw a stag bound nimbly by, within about twenty paces
of where we were sitting, and by its panting, it seemed pressed by the hunters.
We had not much time to reflect upon the poor animal's distress, when we
perceived the dogs and horsemen come sweeping along at some distance behind,
and making the very path it had taken. I was instantly for returning in with my
family, but either curiosity or surprise, or some more hidden motive, held my
wife and daughters to their seats. The huntsman who rode foremost, past us with
great swiftness, followed by four or five persons more, who seemed in equal
haste. At last a young gentleman of a more genteel appearance than the rest
came forward, and for a while regarding us, instead of pursuing the chase,
stopped short, and giving his horse to a servant who attended, approached us with
a careless superior air. He semeed to want no introduction, but was going to
salute my daughters as one certain of a kind reception; but they had early
learnt the lesson of looking presumption out of countenance. Upon which he let
us know that his name was Thornhill, and that he was owner of the estate that
lay for some extent round us. He again, therefore, offered to salute the female
part of the family, and such was the power of fortune and fine clothes, that he
found no second repulse. As his address, though confident, was easy, we soon
became more familiar; and perceiving musical instruments lying near, he begged
to be favored with a a song. As I did not approve of such disproportioned
acquaintances, I winked upon my daughters, in order to prevent their
compliance; but my hint was counteracted by one from their mother; so that with
a cheerful air they gave us a favorite song of Dryden's. Mr. Thornhill seemed
highly delighted with their performance and choice, and then took up the guitar
himself. He played but indifferently; however, my eldest daughter repaid his
former applause with interest, and assured him that his tones were louder than
even those of her master. At this compliment he bowed, which she returned with
a curtesy. He praised her taste, and she commended his understanding: an age
could not have made them better acquainted. While the fond mother too, equally
happy, insisted upon her landlord's stepping in, and tasting a glass of her
gooseberry. The whole family seemed earnest to please him: my girls attempted
to entertain him with topics they thought most modern, while Moses on the
contrary, gave him a question or two from the ancients, for which he had the
satisfaction of being laughed at; for he always ascribed to his wit that
laughter which was lavished at his simplicity: my little ones were no less
busy, and fondly stuck close to the stranger. All my endeavors could scarce
keep their fingers from handling and tarnishing the lace on his clothes, and
lifting up the flaps of his pocket holes, to see what was there. At the
approach of evening he took his leave; but not till he had requested permission
to renew his visit, which, as he was our landlord, we most readily agreed to.

As soon as he was gone, my wife called a council on the conduct of the day.
She was of opinion that it was a most fortunate hit; for that she had known
even stranger things at last brought to bear. She hoped again to see the day in
which we might hold up our heads with the best of them; and concluded, she
protested she could see no reason why the two Miss Wrinkles should marry great
fortunes, and her children get none. As this last argument was directed to me,
I protested I ^ould see no reason for it neither, nor why one got the ten
thousand pound prize in the lottery, and another sat down with a blank. "But
those," added I, who either aim at husbands greater than themselves, or at the
ten thousand pound prize, have been fools for their ridiculous claims, whether
successful or not. I protest, Charles, cried my wife, this is the way you
always damp my girls and me, when we are in spirits. Tell me Sophy, my dear,
what do you think of our new visitor? Don't you think he seemed to be
good-natured? -- "Immensely so, indeed, Mamma," replied she. I think he has a
great deal to say upon every thing, and is never at a loss; and the more
trifling the subject, the more he has to say; and what is more, I protest he is
very handsome. -- "Yes," cried Oliva, he is well enough for a man; but, for my
part, I don't much like him, he is so extremely impudent and familiar, but on
the guitar he is shocking. These two last speeches I interpreted by contraries.
I found by this, that Sophia internally despised, as much as Olivia secretly
admired him. -- Whatever may be your opinions of him, my children, cried I, to
confess a truth, he has not prepossest me in his favor. Disproportioned
friendships ever terminate in disgust; and I thought notwithstanding all his
case that he seemed perfectly sensible of the distance between us. Let us keep
to companions of our own rank. There is no character among men more
contemptible than that of a fortune hunter, and I can see no reason why
fortune-hunting women should not be contemptible too. Thus, at best, it will be
contempt if his views are honorable; but if they are otherwise! I should
shudder but to think of that; for though I have no apprehensions from the
conduct of my children, I think there are some from his character. -- I would
have proceeded, but for the interruption of a servant from the 'Squire, who
with his compliments, sent us a side of venison and a promise to dine with us
some days after. This well-timed present pleaded more powerfully in his savor,
than any thing I had to say could obviate. I therefore continued silent,
satisfied with just having pointed out danger, and leaving it to their own
discretion to avoid it. That virtue which requires to be ever guarded, is
scarce worth the sentinel.

CHAP. VI. The happiness of a country fireside.
AS we carried on the former dispute with some degree of warmth, in order to
accommodate matters it was universally concluded upon, that we should have a
part of the venison for supper, and the girls undertook the task with alacrity.
"I am sorry," cried I, that we have no neighbor or stranger to take a part in
this good cheer: feasts of this kind acquire a double relish from hospitality.
-- Bless me, cried my wife, here comes our good friend Mr. Burchell, that saved
our Sophia, and that run you down fairly in the argument. -- "Confute me in
argument, child!" cried I. You mistake there, my dear. I believe there are but
few that can do that: I never dispute your abilities at making a goose-pye, and
I beg you will leave argument to me, -- As I spoke, poor Mr. Burchell entered the
house, and was welcomed by the family, who shook him heartily by the hand,
while little Dick officiously reached him a chair.

I was pleased with the poor man's friendship for two reasons; because I knew
that he wanted mine, and I knew him to be friendly as far as he was able. He
was known in our neighborhood by the character of the poor Gentleman that
would do no good when he was young, though he was not yet above thirty. He
would at intervals talk with great good sense; but in general he was fondest of
the company of children, whom he used to call harmless little men. He was
famous, I found, for singing them ballads, and ^ling them stories; and seldom
went without something in his pockets for them, a piece of ginger-bread, or a
ha^^penny whistle. He generally came into our neighbou^hood once a year, and
lived upon the neighbors hospit^^^y. He sat down to supper among us, and my
wife was not sparing of her gooseberry wine. The tale went round: he ^ng us old
songs, and gave the children the story of the ^uck of Beverland, with the
history of Patient Grissel. The adventures of Catskin next entertained them,
and then Fair Rosamond's bower. Our cock, which always crew at eleven, now told
us it was time for repose; but an unforeseen difficulty started about lodging
the stranger: all our beds were already taken up, and it was too late to send
him to the next alehouse. In this dilemma, little Dick offered him his part of
the bed, if his brother Moses would let him lie with him; And I, cried Bill,
will give Mr. Burchell my part, if my sisters will take me to theirs -- "Well
done, my good children," cried I, hospitality is one of the first christian
duties. The beast retires to its shelter, and the bird flies to its nest; but
helpless man can only find refuge from his fellow creature. The greatest
stranger in this world, was he that came to save it. He never had an house as
if willing to see what hospitality was left remaining amongst us. Deborah, my
dear, cried I, to my wife, give those boys a lump of sugar each, and let Dick's
be the largest, because he spoke first.

In the morning early I called out my whole family to help at saving an
after-growth of hay, and our guest offering his assistance, he was accepted
among the number. Our labors went on lightly, we turned the swath to the wind,
I went foremost, and the rest followed in due succession. I could not avoid,
however, observing the assiduity of Mr. Burchell, in assisting my daughter
Sophia in her part of the task. When he had finished his own, he would join in
here is, and enter into a close conversation: but I had too good an opinion of
Sophia's understanding* and was too well convinced of her ambition, to be under
any uneasiness from a man of a broken fortune. When we were finished for the
day, Mr. Burchell was invited as on the night before; but he refused, as he was
to lie that night at a neighbor's to whose child he was carrying a whistle.
When gone, our conversation at supper turned upon our late unfortunate guest.
What a strong instance. said I, is that poor man of the miseries attending a
youth of levity and extravagance. He by no means wants sense, which only serves
to aggravate his former folly. Poor forlorn creature, where are now the
revellers, the flatterers, that he could once inspire and command! Gone,
perhaps, to attend the bagnio pander, grown rich by his extravagance. They once
praised him, and now they applaud the pander: their former raptures at his wit,
are now converted into sarcasms at his folly: he is poor, and perhaps deserves
poverty; for he has neither the ambition to be independent, nor the skill to be
useful. Prompted, perhaps, by some secret reasons, I delivered this observation
with too much acrimony, which my Sophia gently reproved. Whatsoever his former
conduct may be, papa, his circumstances should exempt him from censure now. His
present indigence is a sufficient punishment for former folly; and I have heard
my papa himself say, that we should never strike our unnecessary blow at a
victim over whom providence already holds the scourge of its resentment. --
"You are right, Sophy," cried my son Moses, and one of the ancients finely
represents so malicious a conduct, by the attempts of a rustic to flay Marsyas,
whose skin, the fable tells us, had been wholly stripped off by another. Besides,
I don't know if this poor man's situation be so bad as my father would
represent it. We are not to judge of the feelings of others, by what we might
feel if in their place. However dark the habitation of the mole to our eyes,
yet the animal itself, finds the apartment sufficiently lightsome. And to
confess a truth, this man's mind seems fitted to his station; for I never heard
any one more sprightly than he was today, when he conversed with you. -- This
was said without the least design, however it excited a blush, which she strove
to cover by an affected laugh, assuring him that she scarce took any notice of
what he said to her; but that she believed he might once have been a very fine
gentleman. The readiness with which she undertook to vindicate herself, and her
blushing were symptoms I did not internally approve; but I represt my
suspicions.

As we expected our landlord the next day, my wife went to make the venison
pasty; Moses sat reading, while I taught the little ones: my daughters seemed
equally busy with the rest; and I observed them for a good while cooking
something over the fire. I at first supposed they were assisting their mother;
but little Dick informed me in a whisper, that they were making a wash for the
face. Washes of all kinds I had a natural antipathy to; for I knew, that
instead of mending the complexion, they spoiled it. I therefore approached my
chair by sly degrees to the fire, and grasping the poker, as if it wanted
mending, seemingly by accident, overturned the whole composition, and it was
too late to begin another.

CHAP. VII. A town wit described. The dullest fellows may learn to be comical
for a night or two.
WHEN the morning arrived on which we were to entertain our young landlord, it
may be easily supposed what provisions were exhausted to make an appearance. It
may also be conjectured, that my wife and daughters expanded their gayest
plumage upon this occasion. Mr. Thornhill came with a couple of friends, his
chaplain and feeder. The servants, who were numerous, he politely ordered to
the next alehouse: but my wife, in the triumph of her heart, insisted on
entertaining them all; for which, by the bye, the family was pinched for three
weeks after. As Mr. Burchell had hinted to us the day before, that he was
making some proposals of marriage to Miss Wilmot, my son George's former
mistress, this a good deal damped the heartiness of his reception: but
accident, in some measure relieved our embarrassment; for one of the company
happening to mention her name, Mr. Thornhill observed with an oath, that he
never knew any thing more absurd than calling such a fright a beauty: "for
strike me ugly," continued he, if I should not find as much pleasure in
choosing my mistress by the information of a lamp under the clock at St.
Dustan's. At this he laughed, and so did we: -- the jests of the rich are ever
successful. Olivia too, could not avoid whispering, loud enough to be heard,
that he had an infinite fund of humor.

After dinner, I began with my usual toast, the church; for this I was thanked
by the chaplain, as he said the church was the only mistress of his affections.
-- "Come tell us honestly, Frank," said the 'Squire, with his usual archness,
"suppose the church, your present mistress, dressed in lawn sleeves, on one hand,
and Miss Sophia, with no lawn about her on the other, which would you be for?"
"For both, to be sure," cried the chaplain. -- "Right Frank," cried the
'Squire; "for may this glass suffocate me but a fine girl is worth all the
priestcraft in the nation. For what are tithes and tricks but an imposition,
all a confounded imposture, and I can prove it." -- "I wish you would," cried
my son Moses, "and I think," continued he, "that I should be able to combat in
the opposition." -- "Very well, Sir," cried the 'Squire, who immediately
smoaked him, and winking on the rest of the company, to prepare us for the
sport, "if you are for a cool argument upon that subject, I am ready to accept
the challenge. And first, whether are you for managing it analogically, or
dialogically? "I am for managing it rationally," cried Moses, quite happy at
being permitted to dispute. "Good again," cried the 'Squire, and firstly, of
the first. I hope you will not deny that whatever is is. If you don't grant me
that, I can go no further." -- Why," returned Moses, "I think I may grant that,
and make the best of it." -- "I hope too," returned the other, "you will grant
that a part is less than the whole." "I grant that too," cried Moses, "it is
but just and reasonable." -- "I hope, cried the 'Squire, "you will not deny,
that the two angles of a triangle are equal to two right ones." -- "Nothing can
be plainer," returned the other, and looked round with his usual importance. --
"Very well," cried the 'Squire speaking very quick, "the premises being thus
settled, I proceed to observe, that the concatenation of self existences,
proceeding in a reciprocal duplicate ratio, naturally produce a problematical
dialogism, which in some measure proves that the essence of spirituality may be
referred to the second predicable." -- "Hold, hold," cried the other, "I deny
that: Do you think I can thus tamely submit to such heterodox doctrines?" --
"What," replied the 'Squire, as if in a passion, "not submit! Answer me one
plain question; Do you think Aristotle right when he says, that relatives are
related?" undoubtedly," replied the other. -- "If so then," cried the 'Squire,
"answer me directly to what I propose; Whether do you judge the analytical
investigation of the first part of my enthymem deficient secundum quoad, or
quoad minus, and give me your reasons, too: give me your reasons I say,
directly," "I protest," cried Moses, I don't rightly comprehend the force of
your reasoning; but if it be reduced to one simple proposition, I fancy it may
have an answer," -- "O then sir," cried the 'Squire, "I am your most humble
servant, I find you want me to furnish you with argument and intellects both.
No, Sir, there I protest you are too hard for me." This effectually raised the
laugh against poor Moses, who sat the only dismal figure in a groupe of merry
faces: nor did he offer a single syllable more during the whole entertainment.

But though all this gave me no pleasure, it had a very different effect upon
Olivia, who mistook this humor, which was a mere act of the memory, for real
wit. She thought him therefore a very fine gentleman: and such as consider what
powerful ingredients a good figure, fine clothes, and fortune, are in that
character, will easily forgive her. Mr. Thornhill notwithstanding his real
ignorance, talked with ease, and could expatiate upon the common topics of
conversation with fluency. It is not surprising then, that such talents should
win the affections of a girl, who by education was taught to value an
appearance in herself, and consequently to set a value upon it when found in
another.

Upon his departure, we again entered into a debate upon the merits of our
young landlord. As he directed his looks and conversation to Olivia, it was no
longer doubted but that she was the object that induced him to be our visitor.
Nor did she seem to be much displeased at the innocent raillery of her brother
and sister upon this occasion. Even Deborah herself seemed to share the glory
of the day, and exulted in her daughter's victory as if it were her own. "And
now, my dear," cried she to me, "I Will fairly own, that it was I that instructed
my girls to encourage our landlord's addresses. I had always some ambition, and
you now see that I was right; for who knows how this may end?" Ay, who knows
that indeed? answered I, with a groan: "for my own part I don't much like it;
and I could have been better pleased with one that was poor and honest, than
this fine gentleman with his fortune and infidelity, for depend on it; if he be
what I suspect him, no free-thinker shall ever have a child of mine.

"Sure, father," cried Moses, "you are too severe in this; for heaven will
never arraign him for what he thinks, but for what he does. Every man has a
thousand vicious thoughts, which arise without his power to suppress. Thinking
freely of religion, may be involuntary with this gentleman; so that allowing
his sentiments to be wrong, yet as he is purely passive in their reception, he
is no more to be blamed for their incursions, than the governor of a city
without walls for the shelter he is obliged to afford an invading enemy."

"True, my son," cried I; "but if the governor invites the enemy, there he is
justly culpable. And such is always the case with those who embrace error. The
vice does not lie in assenting to the proofs they see; but in being blind to
many of the proofs that offer. Like corrupt judges on a bench, they determine
right on that part of the evidence they hear; but they will not hear all the
evidence. Thus, my son, though our erroneous opinions be involuntary when
formed, yet as we have been wilfully corrupt, or very negligent in forming
them, we deserve punishment for our v^e, or contempt for our folly."

My wife now kept up the conversation, though not the argument: she observed,
that several very prudent men of our acquaintance were free thinkers, and made
very good husbands; and she knew some sensible girls, that had skill enough to
make converts of their spouses: "And who knows, my dear," continued she, "what
Olivia may be able ^o? The girl has a great deal to say upon every subject, and
to my knowledge is very well skilled in controversy."

"Why, my dear, what controversy can she have read?" cried I. "It does not
occur to my memory that I ever put such books into her hands: you certainly
over-rate her merit," "Indeed, papa, replied Olivia, "she does not: I have read
a great deal of controversy. I have read the disputes between Thwackum and
Square; the controversy between Robinson Crusoe and Friday the savage, and I am
now employed in reading the controversy in the Religious courtship." -- "Very
well," cried I, "that is a good girl, I find you are perfectly qualified for
making converts, and so go help your mother to make the gooseberry-pye."

CHAP. VIII. An amor, which promises little good fortune, yet may be
productive of much.
THE next morning we were again visited by Mr. Burchell, though I began, for
certain reasons, to be displeased with the frequency of his return; but I could
not refuse him my company and fireside. It is true, his labor more than
requited his entertainments; for he wrought among us with vigor, and either in
the meadow or at the hay-rick, put himself foremost. Besides, he had always
something amusing to say, that lesse^ed our toil, and was at once so out of the
way, and yet so sensible, that I loved, laughed at, and pitied him. My only
dislike arose from an attachment he discovered to my daughter: he would, in a
jesting manner, call her his little mistress, and when he bought each of the
girls a set of ribbands, her'^ was the finest. I knew not how, but he every day
seemed to become more amiable, his wit to improve, and his simplicity to assume
the superior airs of wisdom.

Our family dined in the field, and we sat, or rather reclined, round a
temperate repast, our cloth spread upon the hay, while Mr. Burchel seemed to
give cheerfulness to the feast. To heighten our satisfaction two blackbirds
answered each other from opposite hedges, the familiar red-breast came and
pecked the crumbs from our hands, and every sound seemed but the echo of
tranquillity. "I never sit thus," says Sophia, "but I think of the two lovers,
so sweetly described by Mr. Gay, who were struck dead in each other's arms
under a barley mow. There is something so pathetic in the description, that I
have read it an hundred times with new rapture." -- "In my opinion," cried my
son, "the finest strokes in that description, are much below those in the Acis
and Galatea of Ovid. The Roman poet understands the use of contrast better, and
upon that figure artfully managed all strength in the pathetic depends." -- "It
is remarkable," cried Mr. Burchell, "that both the poets you mention, have
equally contributed to introduce a false taste into their respective countries,
by loading all their lines with epithet. Men of little genius found them most
easily imitated in their defects, and English poetry, like that in the latter
empire of Rome, is nothing at present but a combination of luxuriant images,
without plot or connection; a string of epithets that improve the sound, without
carrying on the sense. But, perhaps, madam, while I thus reprehend others,
you will think it just that I should give them an opportunity to retaliate, and
indeed I have made this remark, only to have an opportunity of introducing to
the company a ballad, which, whatever be its other defects, is, I think, at
least free from those I have mentioned."

A BALLAD.
"TURN, gentle hermit of the dale,
"And guide my lonely way,
"To where you taper cheers the vale,
"With hospitable ray.
"For here forlorn and lost I tread,
"With fainting steps and slow;
"Where wilds immeasurably spread,
"Seem lengthening as I go."
"Forbear, my son," the hermit cries,
"To tempt the dangerous gloom;
"For yonder phantom only flies
"To lure thee to thy doom.
"Here to the houseless child of want,
"My Door is open still;
"And though my portion is but scant,
"I give it with good will.
"Then turn tonight, and freely share
"Whatever my cell bestows;
"My rushy couch and frugal fare,
"My blessing and repose.
"No flocks that range the valley free,
"To slaughter I condemn:
"Taught by that power that pities me,
"I learn to pity them.
"But from the mountain's grassy side,
"A guiltless feast I bring;
"A scrip with ^bs and fruits supplied,
"And water from the spring.
"Then, pilgrim, turn, thy cares forego;
"For earth born cares are wrong:
"Man wants but little here below,
"Nor wants that little long."
Soft as the dew from heaven descends,
His gentle accents fell;
The grateful stranger lowly bends,
And follows to the cell.
Far sheltered in a glade obscure
The modest mansion lay;
A refuge to the neighboring poor,
And strangers led astray.
No stores beneath its humble thatch
Required a master's care;
The door just opening with a latch,
Received the harmless pair.
And now when worldly crowds retire
To revels or to rest,
The hermit trimmed his little fire,
And cheered his pensive guest:
And spread his vegetable store,
And gayly pressed, and smiled;
And skilled in legendary lore,
The lingering hours beguiled.
Around in sympathetic mirth
Its tricks the kitten tries
The cricket chirrups in the hearth;
The crackling faggot flies.
But nothing could a charm impart
To sooth the stranger's woe;
For grief was heavy at his heart,
And tears began to flow.
His rising cares the hermit spied,
With answering care oppressed:
"And whence, unhappy youth," he cried,
"The sorrows of thy breast?
"From better habitations spurned,
"Reluctant do thou rove:
"Or grieve for friendship unreturn'd,
"Or unregarded love?
"Alas! the joys that fortune brings,
"Are trifling and decay;
"And those who prize the paltry things,
"More trifling still than they.
"And what is friendship but a name,
"A charm that lulls to sleep;
"A shade that follows wealth or fame,
"But leaves the wretch to weep?
"And love is still an emptier sound,
"The haughty fair ones jest:
"On earth unseen, or only found
"To warm the turtle's nest.
"For shame, fond youth, thy sorrows hush,
"And spurn the sex," he said:
But while he spoke a rising blush
The bashful guest betrayed.
He sees unnumber'd beauties rise,
Expanding to the view;
Like clouds that deck the morning skies,
As bright, as transient too.
Her looks, her lips, her panting breast,
Alternate spread alarms:
The lovely stranger stands confessed
A maid in all her charms.
"And, ah, forgive a stranger rude,
"A wretch forlorn," she cried;
"Whose feet unhallowed thus intrude
"Where heaven and you reside.
"But let a maid thy pity share,
"Whom love has taught to stray;
"Who seeks for rest, but finds despair
"Companion of her way.
"My father lived beside the Tyne,
"A wealthy lord was he;
"And all his wealth was marked as mine,
"He had but only me.
"To win me from his tender arms,
"Unnumber'd suitors came;
"Who praised me for imputed charms,
"And felt, or feigned a flame.
"Each ^orn the gay phantastic crowd,
"With richest proffers strove:
"Among the ^est young Edwin bowed,
"But never talked of love.
"In humble, simplest habit clad,
"No wealth n^r power had he;
"A constant heart was all he had,
"But that was all to me.
"The blossom opening to the day,
"The dews of heaven refined,
"Could naught of purity display,
"To emulate his mind.
"The dew, the blossom on the tree,
"With charms inconstant shine;
"Their charms were his, but woe to me,
"Their constancy was mine.
"For still I tried each fickle art,
"Importunate and vain;
"And while his passion touched my heart.
"I triumphed in his pain.
"'Till quite dejected with my scorn,
"He left me to my pride;
"And sought a solitude forlorn,
"In secret, where he died.
"But mine the sorrow, mine the fault,
"And well my life shall pay;
"I Will seek the solitude he sought,
"And stretch me where he lay.
"And there forlorn despairing hid,
"I Will lay me down and die:
"'It Was so for me that Edwin did,
"And so for him will I."
"Thou shall not thus," the hermit cried,
And clasped her to his breast:
The wondering fair one turned to chide,
'Twas Edwin's self that pressed.
"Turn, Angelina, ever dear,
"My charmer, turn to see,
"Thy own, thy long-lost Edwin here,
"Restored to love and thee.
"Thus let me hold thee to my heart,
"And every care resign:
"And shall we never, never part,
"O thou -- my all that is mine.
"No, never, from this hour to part,
"We'll live and love so true;
"The sigh that rends thy constant heart,
"Shall break thy Edwin's too."
While this ballad was reading, Sophia seemed to fix an ear of tenderness with
her approbation. But our tranquillity was soon disturbed by the report of a gun
just by us, and immediately after a man was seen bursting through the hedge, to
take up the game he had killed. This sportsman was the 'Squire's chaplain, who
had shot one of the black birds that so agreeably entertained us. So loud a
report, and so near, startled my daughters; and I could perceive that Sophia in
the fright had thrown herself into Mr. Burchell's arms for protection. The
gentleman came up, and asked pardon for having disturbed us, affirming that he
was ignorant of our being so near. He therefore sat down by my youngest
daughter, and, sportsman like, offered her what he had killed that morning. She
was going to refuse, but a private look from her mother soon induced her to
correct the mistake, and accept his present, though with some reluctance. My
wife, as usual discovered her pride in a whisper, observing, that Sophy had
made a conquest of the chaplain, as well as her sister had of the 'Squire. I
suspected however, with more probability, that her affections were placed upon
a different object. The chaplain's errand was to inform us, that Mr. Thornhill
had provided music and refreshments, and intended that night giving the young
ladies a ball by moonlight, on the grass-plot before our door. "Nor can I
deny," continued he, but I have an interest in being first to deliver this
message, as I expect for my reward to be honored with miss Sophia's hand as a
partner." To this my girl replied, that she should have no objection, if she
could do it with honor: "But here," continued she, "is a gentleman," looking
at Mr Burchell* "who has been my companion in the task for the day, and it is
fit he should share in its amusements." Mr. Burchell returned her a compliment
for her intentions; but resigned her up to the chaplain, adding, that he was to
go that night five miles, being invited to an harvest supper. His refusal
appeared to me a little extraordinary, nor could I conceive how so sensible a
girl as my youngest, could thus prefer a middle aged man of broken fortune, to
a sprightly young fellow of twenty-two. But as men are most capable of
distinguishing merit in women, so the ladies often form the truest judgments
upon us. The two sexes seem placed as spies upon each other, and are furnished
with different abilities, adapted for mutual inspection.

CHAP. IX. Two ladies of great distinction introduced. Superior finery ^ver
seems to confer superior breeding.
MR. Burchell had scarce taken leave, and Sophia consented to dance with the
chaplain, when my little ones came running out to tell us that the 'Squire was
come, with a crowd of company. Upon our return, we found our landlord, with a
couple of under gentlemen and two young ladies richly dressed, whom he introduced
as women of very great distinction and fashion from town. We happened not to
have chairs enough for the whole company; but Mr. Thornhill immediately
proposed that every gentleman should sit in a lady's lap. This I positively
objected to, notwithstanding a look of disapprobation from my wife. Moses was
therefore dispatched to borrow a couple of chairs; and as we were in want of
ladies also to make up a set at country dances, the two gentlemen went with him
in quest of a couple of partners. Chairs and partners were soon provided. The
gentlemen returned with my neighbor Flamborough's rosy daughters, flaunting
with red top-knots. But there was an unlucky circumstance which was not
adverted to; though the Miss Flamboroughs were reckoned the very best dancers
in the parish, and understood the jig and the round-about to perfection; yet
they were totally unacquainted with country dances. This at first discomposed
us: however, after a little shoving and dragging, they beg^n to go merrily on.
Our music consisted of two fiddles, with a pipe and ^^bor. The moon shone
bright, Mr. Thornhill and my eldest daughter led up the b^ll, to the great
delight of the spectators; for the neighbors hearing what was going forward,
came flocking about us. My gi^ moved with so much grace and vivacity, that my
wife could not avoid discovering the pride of her heart, by assuring me, that
though the little chit did it so cleverly, all the steps were stolen from
herself. The ladies of the town strove hard to be equally easy, but without
success. They swam, sprawled, languished, and frisked; but all would not do:
the gazers indeed owned that it was fine; but neighbor Flamborough observed,
that Miss Livy's feet seemed as pat to the music as its echo. After the dance
had continued about an hour, the two ladies, who were apprehensive of catching
cold, moved to break up the ball. One of them, I thought, expressed her
sentiments upon this occasion in a very coarse manner, when she observed, that
by the living jingo, she was all of a muck of sweat. Upon our return to the
house, we found a very elegant cold supper, which Mr. Thornhill had ordered to
be brought with him. The conversation at this time was more reserved than
before. The two ladies threw my girls quite into the shade; for they would talk
of nothing but high life, and high lived company; with other fashionable
topics, such as pictures, taste, Shakespeare, and the musical glasses. It Is true
they once or twice mortified us sensibly by slipping out an oath; but that
appeared to me as the surest symptom of their distinction, (though I am since
informed swearing is now perfectly unfashionable.) Their finery, however, threw
a viel over any grossness in their conversation. My daughters seemed to regard
their superior accomplishments with envy; and what appeared amiss was ascribed
to tip-top quality breeding. But the condescension of the ladies was still
superior to their other accomplishments. One of them observed, that had miss
Olivia seen a little more of the world, it would greatly improve her. To which
the other added, that a single winter in town would make her little Sophia
quite another thing. My wife warmly assented to both; adding, that there was
nothing she more ardently wished, than to give her girls a single winter's
polishing. To this I could not help replying, that their breeding was already
superior to their fortune; and that greater refinement would only serve to make
their poverty ridiculous, and give them a taste for pleasures they had no right
to possess." -- "And what pleasures," cried Mr. Thornhill, "do they not
deserve, who have so much in their power to bestow? As for my part," continued
he, "my fortune is pretty large, love, liberty, and pleasure, are my maxims;
but curse me if a settlement of half my estate could give my charming Olivia
pleasure, it should be here is; and the only favor I would ask in return, would
be to add myself to the benefit." I was not such a stranger to the world as to
be ignorant that this was the fashionable cant to disguise the insolence of the
basest proposal; but I made an effort to suppress my resentment. "Sir," cried
I, "the family which you now condescend to favor with your company, has been
bred with as nice a sense of honor as you. Any attempts to injure that, may be
attended with very dangerous consequences. Honor, Sir, is our only possession
at present, and of that last treasure we must be particularly careful." -- I
was soon sorry for the warmth with which I had spoken this, when the young
gentleman, grasping my hand, swore he commended my spirit, though he
disapproved my suspicions. "As to your present hint, continued he," "I protest
nothing was farther from my heart than such a thought. No, by all that is
tempting, the virtue that will stand a regular siege was never to my taste; for
all my amors are carried by a coup de main."

The two ladies, who affected to be ignorant of the rest, seemed highly
displeased with this last stroke of freedom, and began a very discreet and
serious dialogue upon virtue: in this my wife, the chaplain, and I, soon
joined; and the 'Squire himself was at last brought to confess a sense of
sorrow for his former excesses. We talked of the pleasures of temperance, and
the sunshine in the mind unpolluted with guilt. I was well pleased that my
little ones were kept up beyond the usual time to be edified by such good
conversation. Mr. Thornhill even went beyond me, and demanded if I had any
objection to giving prayers. I joyfully embraced the proposal, and in this
manner the night was passed in a most comfortable way, till at last the company
began to think of returning. The ladies seemed very unwilling to part from my
daughters; for whom they had conceived a particular affection, and joined in a
request to have the pleasure of their company home. The 'Squire seconded the
proposal, and my wife added her entreaties: the girls too looked upon me as if
they wished to go. In this perplexity I made two or three excuses, which my
daughters as readily removed: so that at last I was obliged to give a
preremptory refusal; for which we had nothing but sullen looks and short
answers the whole day ensuing.

CHAP. X. The family endeavors to cope with their betters. The miseries of the
poor when they attempt to appear above their circumstances.
I NOW began to find that all my long and painful lectures upon temperance,
simplicity and contentment, were entirely disregarded. The distinctions lately
paid us by our betters awaked that pride which I had laid asleep, but not
removed. Our windows now again, as formerly, were filled with washes for the
neck and face. The sun was dreaded as an enemy to the skin without doors, and
the fire as a spoiler of the complexion within. My wife observed, that rising
too early would hurt her daughter's eyes, that working after dinner would
redden their noses, and convinced me, that the hands never looked so white as
when they did nothing. Instead therefore of finishing George's shirts we now
had them new modelling their old Gauzes, or flourishing upon catgut. The poor
Miss Flamboroughs, their former gay companions, were cast off as mean
acquaintance, and the whole conversation ran upon high life and high lived
company, with pictures, taste, Shakespeare, and the musical glasses.

But we could have borne all this, had not a fortune- telling gypsey come to
raise us into perfect sublimity. The tawny sybil no sooner appeared, than my
girls came running to me for a shilling a-piece to cross her hand with silver.
To say the truth, I was tired of being always wise, and could not help
gratifying their request, because I loved to see them happy. I gave each of
them a shilling; though, for the honor of the family, it must be observed,
that they never went without money themselves, as my wife always generously let
them have a guinea each, to keep in their pockets: but with strict injunctions
never to change it. After they had been closetted up with the fortune tellers
for some time, I knew by their looks, upon their returning, that they had been
promised something great. -- "Well, my girls, how "have you sped? Tell me,
Livy, has the fortune tellers given thee a pennyworth?" -- "I protest, papa,"
says the girl with a serious face, "I believe she deals with some body that is
not right; for she positively declared, that I am to be married to a great
'Squire in less than a twelvemonth? -- "Well now Sophy, my child," said I,
"and what sort of a husband are you to have?" "Sir, replied she, "I am to have
a Lord soon after my sister has been married to the 'Squire." -- "How," cried
I, "is that all you are to have for your "two shillings! Only a Lord and a
'Squire for two shillings! You fools, I could have promised you a prince and
Nabob for half the money."

This curiosity of theirs, however was attended with very serious effects; we
now began to think ourselves designed by the stars for something exalted, and
already anticipated our future grandeur."

It has been a thousand times observed, and I must observe it once more, that
the hours we pass with happy prospects in view, are more pleasing than those
crowned with fruition. In the first case we cook the dish to our own appetite;
in the latter nature cooks it for us. It is impossible to repeat the train of
agreeable reveries we call up for our entertainment. We looked upon our
fortunes as once more rising; and as the whole parish asserted that the 'Squire
was in love with my daughter, she was actually so with him; for they persuaded
her into passion. In this agreeable interval, my wife had the most luckly
dreams in the world, which she took care to tell us every morning, with great
solemnity and exactness. It was one night a coffin and cross bones, the sign of
an approaching wedding, at another time she imagined her daughter^s pockets
filled with farthings, a certain sign of their being one day stuffed with gold.
The girls had their omens too: they felt strange kisses on their lips; they saw
rings in the candle, purses bounced from the fire, and true love-knots lurked
at the bottom of every tea-cup.

Toward the end of the week we received a card from the town ladies; in which,
with their compliments, they hoped to see all our family at church the Sunday
following. All Saturday morning I could perceive, in consequence of this, my
wife and daughters in close conference together, and now and then glancing at
me with looks that betrayed a latent plot. To be sincere, I had strong
suspicions that some absurd proposal was preparing for appearing with splendour
the next day. In the evening they began their operations in a very regular
manner, and my wife undertook to conduct the siege. After tea, when I seemed in
spirits, she began thus -- "I fancy, Charles, my dear, we shall have a great
deal of good company at our church tomorrow." -- "Perhaps we may, my dear,"
returned I; though you need be under no uneasiness about that, you shall have a
sermon whether there be or not." -- "That is what I expect," returned she; "but
I think, my dear, we ought to appear there as decently as possible, for who
knows what may happen?" "Your precautions," replied I, "are highly commendable.
A decent behavior and appearance in church is what charms me. We should be
devout and humble, cheerful and serene." -- "Yes," cried she, "I know that: but
I mean we should go there in as proper a manner as possible; not altogether
like the scrubs about us." "You are quite right, my dear," returned I, "and I
was going to make the very same proposal. The proper manner of going is, to go
there as early as possible, to have time for meditation before the service
begins." -- "Phoo, Charles," interrupted she, "all that is very true; but not
what I would be at. I mean, we should go there genteelly. You know the church
is two miles off, and I protest I don't like to see my daughters trudging up to
their pew all blouzed and red with walking, and looking for all the world as if
they had been winners at a smock race. Now, my dear, my proposal is this: there
are our two plow horses, the colt that has been in our family these nine years,
and his companion Blackberry, that that have scarce done an earthly thing for
this month past, and are both grown fat and lazy. Why should not they do
something as well as we? And, let me tell you, when Moses has trimmed them a
little, they will not be so contemptible."

To this proposal I objected, that walking would be twenty times more genteel
than such a paltry conveyance, as Blackberry was wall-eyed, and the Colt wanted
a tail: that they had never been broke to the rein; but had an hundred vicious
tricks; and that we had but one saddle and pillion in the whole house. All
these objections, however were overruled; so that I was obliged to comply. The
next morning I perceived them not a little busy in collecting such materials as
might be necessary for the expedition; but as I found it would be a business of
much time, I walked on to the church before, and they promised speedily to
follow. I waited near and hour in the reading desk for their arrival; but not
finding them come as expected, I was obliged to begin, and went through the
service, not without some uneasiness at finding them absent. This was increased
when all was finished, and no appearance of the family. I therefore walked back
by the horseway, which was five miles round, though the foot-way was but two,
and when got about half way home, perceived the procession marching slowly
forward toward the church; my son, my wife, and the two little ones exalted
upon one horse, and my two daughters upon the other. I demanded the cause of
their delay; but I soon found by their looks they had met with a thousand
misfortunes on the road. The horses had at first refused to move from the door,
till Mr. Burchell was kind enough to beat them forward for about two hundred
yards with his cudgel. Next the straps of my wife's pillion broke down, and
they were obliged to stop to repair them before they could proceed. After that,
one of the horses took it into his head to stand still, and neither blows nor
entreaties could prevail with him to proceed. It was just recovering from this
dismal situation that I found them; but perceiving every thing safe, I own
their present mortification did not much displease me, as it might give me many
opportunities of future triumph and teach my daughters more humility.

CHAP. XI. The family still resolves to hold up their heads.
ALLHALOWS eve happening on the next day, we were invited to burn nuts and play
tricks at neighbor Flamborough's. Our late mortifications had humbled us a
little, or it is probable we might have rejected such an invitation with
contempt: however, we suffered ourselves to be happy. Our honest neighbor's
goose and dumplings were fine, and the lamb's-wool, even in the opinion of my
wife, who was a connoisseur, was thought excellent. It is true, his manner of
telling stories was not quite so well. They were very long, and very dull, and
all about himself, and we had laughed at them ten times before: however, we
were kind enough to laugh at them once more.

Mr. Burchell, who was of the party, was always fond of seeing some innocent
amusement going forward, and set the boys and girls to blind man's buff. My
wife too was persuaded to join in the diversion, and it gave me pleasure to
think she was not yet too old. In the mean time, my neighbor and I looked on,
laughed at every feat, and praised our own dexterity when we were young. Hot
cockles succeeded next, questions and commands followed that, and last of all,
they sat down to hunt the slipper. As every person may not be accquainted with
this primaeval pastime, it may be necessary to observe, that the company at
this play plant themselves in a ring upon the ground, all, except one who
stands in the middle, whose business it is to catch a shoe, which the company
shove about under their hams from one to another, something like a weaver's
shuttle. As it is impossible* in this case for the lady who is up to face all
the company at once, the great beauty of the play lies in hitting her a thump
with the heel of the shoe on that side least capable of making a defense. It
was in this manner that my eldest daughter was hemmed in, and thumped about,
all blowzed, in spirits, and bawling for fair play, fair play, with a voice
that might deafen a ballad singer, when, confusion on confusion, who should
enter the room but our two great acquaintances from town, Lady Blarny and Miss
Carolina Wilelmina Amelia Skeggs! Description would but beggar, therefore it is
unnecessary to describe this new mortification. Death! To be seen by ladies of
such high breeding in such vulgar attitudes! Nothing better could ensue from
such a vulgar play of Mr. Flamborough's proposing. We seemed struck to the
ground for some time, as if actually petrified with amazement.

The two ladies had been at our house to see us, and finding us from home, came
after us hither, as they were uneasy to know what accident could have kept us
from church the day before. Olivia undertook to be our prolocutor, and
delivered the whole in a summary way, only saying, "We were thrown from our
horses." At which account the ladies were greatly concerned: but being told the
family received no hurt, they were extremely glad: but being informed that we
were almost killed by the fright, they were vastly sorrow; but hearing that we
had a very good night, they were extremely glad again. Nothing could exceeed
their complaisance to my daughters; their professions the last evening were
warm, but now they were ardent. They protested a desire of having a more
lasting acquaintance. Lady Blarny was particularly attached to Olivia; Miss
Carolina Wilelmina Amelia Skeggs (I love to give the whole name) took a greater
fancy to her sister. They supported the conversation between themselves while
my daughters sat silent, admiring their exalted breeding. But as every reader,
however beggarly himself is fond of high lived dialogues, with anecdotes of
Lords, Ladies, and Knights of the Garter, I must beg leave to give him the
concluding part of the present conversation.

"All that I know of the matter," cried Miss Skeggs, "is this, that it may be
true, or it may not be true: but this I can assure your Ladyship, that the
whole rout was in amaze; his Lordship turned all manner of colors, my lady
fell into a swoon; but Sir Tomkyn, drawing his sword, swore he was here is to the
last drop of his blood."

"Well replied our Peeress, "this I can say, that the Duchess never told me a
syllable of the matter, and I believe her Grace would keep nothing a secret
from me. But this you may depend upon as fact, that the next morning my Lord
Duke cried out three times to his valet de chamber, Jernigan, Jernigan
Jernigan, bring me my garters."

But previously I should have mentioned the very impolite behavior of Mr.
Burchell, who, during this discourse, sat with his face turned to the fire,
and at the conclusion of every sentence would cry out fudge, an expression
which displeased us all, and in some measure damped the rising spirit of the
conversation.

"Besides, my dear Skeggs," continued our Peeress, "there is nothing of this in
the copy of verses that Dr. Burdock made upon the occasion."

"I am surprised at that," cried Miss Skeggs; "for he seldom leaves any thing
out, as he writes only for his own amusement. But can your Ladyship favor me
with a sight of them?"

"My dear creature," replied our Peeress, "do you think I carry such things
about me? Though they are very fine to be sure, and I think myself something of
a judge; at least I know what pleases myself. Indeed I was ever an admirer of
all doctor Burdock's little pieces; for except what he does, and our dear
Countess at Hanover-Square, there is nothing comes out but the most lowest stuff
in nature; not a bit of high life among them."

"Your Ladyship should except," says the other, 'your own things in the Lady's
Magazine. I hope you will say there is nothing low lived there; but I suppose we
are to have no more from that quarter."

"Why, my dear," says the lady, "you know my reader and companion has left me,
to be married to captain Roach, and as my poor eyes will not suffer me to write
myself, I have been for some time looking out for another. A proper person is
no easy matter to find, and to be sure thirty pounds a year is a small stipend
for a well bred girl of character, that can read, write, and behave in company;
as for the chits about town, there is no bearing them about one.

"That I know," cried Miss Skeggs, by experience. For of the three companions I
had this last half year, one of them refused to do plain work an hour in the
day, another thought twenty-five guineas a year too small a salary, and I was
obliged to send away the third, because I suspected an intrigue with the
chaplain. Virtue, my dear Lady Blarny, virtue is worth any price; but where is
that to be found?"

My wife had been for a long time all attention to this discourse; but was
particularly struck with the latter part of it. Thirty pounds and twenty-five
guineas a year, made fifty-six pounds five shillings English money, all which
was in a manner going a-begging, and might easily be secured in the family. She
for a moment studied my looks for approbation; and, to own a truth, I was of
opinion, that two such places would fit our two daughters exactly. Besides, if
the 'Squire had any real affection for my eldest daughter, this would be the
way to make her every way qualified for her fortune. My wife therefore was
resolved that we should not be deprived of such advantages for want of
assurance, and undertook to harrangue for the family. "I hope," cried she, your
Ladyships will pardon my present presumption. It is true, we have no right to
pretend to such favors; but yet is natural for me to wish putting my children
forward in the world. And I will be bold to say, my two girls have had a pretty
good education, and capacity, at least the country cannot show better. They can
read, write, and cast accounts; they understand their needle, breadstich, cross
and change, and all manner of plain work; they can pink, point, and frill; and
know something of music; they can make up small clothes, work upon catgut; my
eldest can cut paper, and my younge^^^ has a very pretty manner of telling
fortunes upon the cards*

When she had delivered this pretty piece of eloquence, the two ladies looked
at each other a few minutes in silence, with an air of doubt and importance. At
l^^^ Miss Carolina Wielmina Amelia Skeggs condescended to observe, that the
young ladies from the opinion she (...) form of them from so slight an
accquaintance, seemed very fit for such employments: "But a thing of this kind,
Madam," cried she, addressing my spouse, "requires a thorough examination into
characters, and a more perfect knowledge of each other. Not Madam," continued
she, "that I in the least suspect the young ladies virtue, prudence and
discretion; but there is a form in these things, Madam, there is a form."

My wife approved her suspicions very much, observing, that she was very apt to
be suspicious herself; but referred her to all the neighbors for a character:
but this our Peeress declined as unnecessary, alleging that her cousin
Thornhill's recommendation would be sufficient, and upon this we rested our
petition.

CHAP. XII. Fortune seems resolved to humble the family of Wakefield.
Mortifications are often more painful than real calamities.
WHEN we were returned home, the night was dedicated to schemes of future
conquest. Deborah exerted much sagacity in conjecturing which of the two girls
was likely to have the best place, and most opportunities of seeing good
company. The only obstacle to our preferment was in obtaining the 'Squire's
recommendation; but he had already shown us too many instances of his
friendship to doubt of it now. Even in bed my wife kept up the usual theme:
"Well, faith, my dear Charles, between ourselves, I think we have made an
excellent day's work of it." -- "Pretty well," -- cried I, not knowing what to
say. -- "What, only pretty well!" returned she. "I think it is very well.
Suppose the girls should come to make accquaintances of taste in town! and this
I am assured of, ^at London is the only place in the world for all manner of
husbands. Besides, my dear, stranger things ha^pen every day: and as ladies of
quality are so taken with my daughters, what will not men of quality be! Enter
nous, I protest I like my lady Blarny vastly, so very obliging. However, (...)
Carolina Wilelmina Amelia Skeggs has my warm heart. But yet, when they came to
talk of places in town, you saw how at once* I nailed them. Tell me, my dear,
don't you think I did for my children there? -- " Ay," returned I, not knowing
well what to think of the matter, heaven grant they may both be the better for
it this day three months!" This was one of those observations I usually made to
impress my wife with an opinion of my sagacity; for if the girls succeeded,
then it was a pious wish fulfilled: but if any thing unfortunate ensued, then
it might be looked upon as a prophecy. All this conversation, however, was only
preparatory to another scheme, and indeed I dreaded as much. This was nothing
less than, that as we were now to hold up our heads a little higher in the
world, it would be proper to sell the Colt, which was grown old, at a
neighboring fair, and buy us an horse that would carry single or double upon
an occasion, and make a pretty appearance at church or upon a visit. This at
first I opposed stoutly; but it was as stoutly defended. However, as I
weakened, my antagonist gained strength, till at last it was resolved to part
with him.

As the fair happened on the following day, I had intentions of going myself;
but my wife persuaded me that I had got a cold, and nothing could prevail upon
her to permit me from home. "No, my dear," said she, "our son Moses is a
discreet boy, and can buy and sell to very good advantage; you know all our
great bargains are of his purchasing. He always stands out and higgles, and
actually tires them till he gets a bargain."

As I had some opinion of my son's prudence, I was willing enough to entrust
him with this commission, and the next morning I perceived his sisters mighty
busy in fitting out Moses for the fair; trimming his hair, brushing his
buckles, and cocking his hat with pins. The business of the toilet being over,
we had at last the satisfaction of seeing him mounted upon the Colt, with a
doal box before him to bring home groceries in. He had on a coat made of that
cloth they call thunder and lightening, which though grown too short, was much
too good to be thrown away. His waistcoat was of gosling ^n, and his sisters
had tied his hair with a broad black riband. We all followed him several paces
from the door, bawling after him good luck, good luck, till we could see no him
longer.

He was scarce gone, when Mr. Thornhill's butler came to congratulate us upon
our good fortune, saying that he overheard his young master mention our names
with great commendations.

Good fortune seemed resolved not to come alone. Another footman from the same
family followed with a card for my daughters, importing, that the two ladies
had received such a pleasing account from Mr. Thornhill of us all, that after a
few previous enquires more they hoped to be perfectly satisfied. "Ay," cried my
wife, "I now see it is no easy matter to get into the families of the great;
but when one once gets in, then as Moses says, they may go sleep." To this
piece of humor, for she intended it for wit, my daughters assented with a loud
laugh of pleasure. In short, such was her satisfaction at this message, that
she actually put her hand to her pocket, and gave the messenger seven pence
halfpenny.

This was to be our visiting-day. The next that came was Mr. Burchell, who had
been at the fair. He brought my little ones a pennyworth of gingerbread each,
which my wife undertook to keep for them, and gave them by letters at a time..
He brought my daughters also a couple of boxes, in which they might keep
wafers, snuff, patches or even money, when they got it. My wife was usually fond
of a weesel skin purse, as being the most lucky; but this by the bye. We had
still a regard for Mr. Burchell, though his late rude behavior was in some
measure displeasing: nor could we now avoid communicating our happiness to him,
and asking his advice: although we seldom followed advice, we were all ready
enough to ask it. When he read the note from the two ladies, he shook his head,
and observed, that an affair of this sort demanded the utmost circumspection.
-- This air of diffidence highly displeased my wife. "I never doubted, Sir,"
cried she, "your readiness to be against my daughters and me. You have more
circumspection than is wanted. However, I fancy when we come to ask advice, we
will apply to persons who seem to have made use of it themselves." -- "Whatever
my own cond^ may have been, madam," replied he, "is not the present question;
though as I have made no use of advice myself, I should in conscience give it
to those that will." -- As I was apprehensive this answer might draw on a
repartee, making up by abuse what it wanted in wit, I changed the subject, by
seeming to wonder what could keep our son so long at the fair, as it was now
almost night-fall. -- Never mind our son," cried my wife, depend upon it he
knows what he is about. I Will warrant we'll never see him sell his hen of a
rainy day. I have seen him buy such bargains as would amaze one. I Will tell you
a good story about that, that will make you split your sides with laughing. --
But as I live, yonder comes Moses, without an horse, and the box at his back."

As she spoke, Moses came slowly on foot, and sweating under the deal box,
which he had strapt round his shoulders. -- "Welcome, welcome Moses; well, my
boy, what have you brought us from the fair?" -- "I have brought you myself,"
cried Moses with a sly look, and resting the box on the dresser. -- "Ay Moses
cried my wife, that we know, but where is the horse?" "I have sold him," cried
Moses, "for three pounds five shillings and twopence." -- Well done, my good
boy," returned she, "I knew you would touch them off. Between ourselves, three
pounds five shillings and twopence is no bad days work. Come, let us have it
then." -- "I have brought back no money," cried Moses, again. I have laid it
all out in a bargain, and here it is," pulling a bundle from his breast: "here
they are; a groce of green spectacles, with silver rims and shagreen cases." --
"A groce of green spectacles!" repeated my wife in a faint voice. And you have
parted with the Colt, and brought us back nothing but a groce of green paltry
spectacles!" -- "Dear, mother," cried the boy, why will not you listen to reason?
I had them a dead bargain, or I should not have bought them. The silver rims
alone will sell for double the money." -- "A fig for the silver rims, cried my
wife* in a passion: "I dare swear they will not sell for above half the money at
the rate of broken silver, five shillings an ounce." -- "You need be under no
uneasiness," cried I, "about ^^lling the rims; for I perceive they are only
copper varnished over." -- What," cried my wife, "not silver, the rims not
silver!" "No," cried I, "no more silver than your sauce-pan." -- "And so,"
returned she, we have parted with the Colt, and have only got a groce of green
spectacles, with copper rims and shagreen cases! A murrain take such trumpery.
The blockhead has been imposed upon, and should have known his company better."
-- "There, my dear," cried I, "you are wrong, he should not have known them at
all." -- "Marry, hang the idiot," returned she again, "to bring me such stuff,
if I had them, I would throw them into the fire." "There again you are wrong,
my dear," cried I "for though they be copper we will keep them by us, as copper
spectacles, you know, are better than nothing."

By this time the unfortunate Moses was undeceived. He now saw that he had
indeed been imposed upon by a prowling sharper, who observing his figure, had
marked him for an easy prey. I therefore asked the circumstances of his
deception. He sold the horse, it seems and walked the fair in search of
another. A reverend looking man brought him to a tent, under a pretense of
having one to sell. "Here," continued Moses, we met another man, very well
dressed, who desired to borrow twenty pounds upon these, saying, that he wanted
money and would dispose of them for a third of the value. The first gentleman,
who pretended to be my friend, whispered me to buy them and cautioned me not to
let so good an offer pass. I sent for Mr. Flamborough, and they talked him up
as finely as they did me, and so at last we were persuaded to buy the two groce
between us.

CHAP. XIII. Mr. Burchell is found to be an enemy; for he has the confidence to
give disagreeable advice.
OUR family had now made several attempts to be fine; but some unforeseen
disaster demolished each as soon as projected. I endeavored to take the
advantage of every disappointment, to improve their good sense in proportion as
they were frustrated in ambition. "You see, my children," cried I, "how little
is to be got by attempts to impose upon the world, in coping with our betters.
Such as are poor and will associate with none but the rich, are hated by those
they avoid, and despised by those they follow. Unequal combinations are always
disadvantageous to the weaker side: the rich having the pleasure, and the poor
the inconveniences that result from them. But come, Dick, my boy, and repeat
the fable that you were reading today, for the good of the company."

"Once upon a time," cried the child, "a Giant and a Dwarf were friends, and
kept together. They made a bargain that they would never forsake each other,
but go seek adventures. The first battle they fought was with two Saracens, and
the Dwarf, who was very courageous, dealt one of the champions a most angry
blow. It did the Saracen but very little injury, who lifting up his sword
fairly struck off the poor Dwarf's arm. He was now in a woeful plight; but the
Giant coming to his assistance, in a short time left the two Saracens dead on
the plain, and the Dwarf cut off the dead man's head out of spite. They then
traveled on to another adventure. This was against three bloody minded Satyrs,
who were carrying away a damsel in distress. The Dwarf was not quite so fierce
now as before; but for all that, struck the first blow, which was returned by
another, that knocked out his eye: but the Giant was soon up with them, and had
they not fled, would certainly have killed them every one. They were all very
joyful for this victory, and the damsel who was relieved fell in love with the
Giant, and married him. They now traveled far, and farther than I can tell,
till they met with a company of robbers. The Giant, for the first time, was
foremost now: but the Dwarf was not far behind. The battle was stout and long.
Wherever the Giant came, all fell before him; but the Dwarf had like to have
been killed more than once. At last the victory declared for the two
adventurers; but the Dwarf lost his leg. The Dwarf was now without an arm, a
leg, and an eye, while the Giant, who was without a single wound, cried out to
him, Come on my little hero; this is glorious sport; let us get one victory
more, and then we shall have honor for ever. No, cries the Dwarf, who was by
this time grown wiser, no, I declare off, I Will fight no more: for I find in
every battle, that you get all the honor and rewards, but all the blows fall
upon me."

I was going to moralize this fable, when our attention was called off to a
warm dispute between my wife and Mr. Burchell, upon my daughter's intended
expedition to town. My wife very strenuously insisted upon the advantages that
would result from it. Mr. Burchell, on the contrary, dissuaded her with great
ardor, and I stood neuter. His present dissuasions seemed but the second part
of those which were received with so ill a grace in the morning. The dispute
grew high, while poor Deborah, instead of reasoning stronger, talked louder,
and at last was obliged to take shelter from a defeat in clamor. The
conclusion of her harangue, however, was highly displeasing to us all: she knew
she said, of some who had their own secret reasons for what they advised; but,
for her part, she wished such to stay away from her house for the future. --
"Madam," cried Burchell, with looks of great composure, which tended to inflame
her the more, "as for secret reasons, you are right: I have secret reasons,
which I forbear to mention, because you are not able to answer those of which I
make no secret: but I find my visits here are become troublesome* I Will take my
leave therefore now, and perhaps come once more to take a final farewell, when
I am quitting the country." Thus saying, he took up his hat, nor could the
attempts of Sophia, whose looks seemed to upbraid his precipitancy, prevent his
going.

When gone, we all regarded each other for some minutes with confusion. My
wife, who knew herself to be the cause, strove to hide her concern with a
forced smile, and an air of assurance, which I was willing to reprove: "How,
woman," cried I to her, "is it thus we treat strangers? Is it thus we return
their kindness? Be assured, my dear, that these were the harshest words, and to
me the most unpleasing that ever escaped your lips! -- "Why would he provoke me
then," replied she, "but I know the motives of his advice perfectly well. He
would prevent my girls from going to town, that he may have the pleasure of my
youngest daughter's company here at home. But whatever happens, she shall choose
better company than such low-liv'd fellows as he." -- "Low-liv'd, my dear, do
you call him," cried I, "it is very possible we may mistake this man's
character: for he seems upon some occasions the most finished gentleman I ever
knew. -- Tell me, Sophia, my girl, has he ever given you any secret instances
of his attachment?" -- "His conversation with me, Sir," replied my daughter,
"has ever been sensible, modest, and pleasing. As to aught else, no, never.
Once, indeed, I remember to have heard him say, he never knew a woman who could
find merit in a man that seemed poor." "Such, my dear," cried I, "is the common
cant of all the unfortunate or idle. But I hope you have been taught to judge
properly of such men, and that it would be even madness to expect happiness
from one who has been so very bad an oeconomist of his own. Your mother and I
have now better prospects for you. The next winter, which you will probably
spend in town, will give you opportunities of making a more prudent choice."

What Sophia's reflections were upon this occasion, I cannot pretend to
determine; but I was not displeased at the bottom, that we were rid of a guest
from whom I had much to fear. Our breach of hospitality went to my conscience a
little: but I quickly silenced that monitor, by two or three specious reasons,
which served to satisfy and reconcile me to myself. The pain which conscience
gives the man who has already done wrong, is soon got over. Conscience is a
coward, and those faults it has not strength enough to prevent, it seldom has
justice enough to punish by accusing.

CHAP. XIV. Fresh mortifications, or a demonstration that seeming calamities
may be real blessings.
THE journey of my daughters to town was now resolved upon, Mr. Thornhill
having kindly promised to inspect their conduct himself, and inform us by
letter of their behavior. But it was thought indispensably necessary that
their appearance should equal the greatness of their expectations, which could
not be done without some expense. We debated therefore in full council, what
were the easiest methods of raising money, or, more properly speaking, what we
could most conveniently sell. The deliberation was soon finished, it was found
that our remaining horse was utterly useless for the plow, without his
companion, and equally unfit for the road, as wanting an eye. It was therefore
determined that we should dispose of him for the purposes abovementioned, at
the neighboring fair, and to prevent imposition, that I should go with him
myself. Though this was one of the first mercantile transactions of my life,
yet I had no doubt about acquitting myself with reputation. The opinion a man
forms of his own prudence is measured by that of the company he keeps, and as
mine was mostly in the family way, I had conceived no unfavourable sentiments
of my worldly wisdom. My wife, however, next morning, at parting, after I had
got some paces from the door, called me back, to advise me, in a whisper, to
have all my eyes about me.

I had, in the usual forms, when I came to the fair, put my horse through all
his his paces; but for some time had no bidders. At last a chapman approached,
and after he had for a good while examined the horse round, finding him blind
of one eye, would have nothing to say to him: a second came up; but observing
he had a spavin, declared he would not take him for the driving home: a third
perceived he had a windgall, and would bid no money: a fourth knew by his eye,
that he had the botts: a fifth, more impertinent than all the rest, wondered
what a plague I could do to the fair with a blind, spavined, galled hack, that
was only fit to be cut up for a dog kennel. By this time, I began to have a
most hearty contempt for the poor animal myself, and was almost ashamed at the
approach of every new customer; for though I did not entirely believe all the
fellows told me; yet I reflected that the number of witnesses was a strong
presumption they were right, and St. Gregory, upon good works, professes
himself to be of the same opinion.

I was in this mortifying situation, when a brother clergyman, an old
acquaintance, who had also business to the fair, came up, and shaking me by the
hand, proposed adjourning to a public-house, and taking a glass of whatever we
could get. I readily closed with the offer, and entering an alehouse, we were
shown into a little back room, where there was only a venerable old man, who
sat wholly intent over a large book, which he was reading. I never in my life
saw a figure that prepossessed me more favorably. His locks of silver gray
venerably shaded his temples, and his green old age seemed to be the result of
health and benevolence. However, his presence did not interrupt our
conversation; my friend and I discoursed on the various turns of fortune we had
met: the Whistonian controversy, my last pamphlet, the archdeacon's reply, and
the hard measure that was dealt me. But our attention was in a short time taken
off by the appearance of a youth, who, entering the room, respectfully said
something softly to the old stranger. "Make no apologies, my child," said the
old man, "to do good is a duty we owe to all our fellow creatures: take this, I
wish it were more: but five pounds will relieve your distress, and you are
welcome." The modest youth shed tears of gratitude, and yet his gratitude was
scarce equal to mine. I could have hugged the good old man in my arms, his
benevolence pleased me so. He continued to read, and we resumed our
conversation, until my companion, after some time, recollecting that he had
business to transact in the fair, promised to be soon back; adding, that he
always desired to have as much of Dr. Primrose's company as possible. The old
gentleman hearing my name mentioned, seemed to look at me with attention, and
when my friend was gone, most respectfully demanded if I was any way related to
the great Primrose, that courageous monogamist, who had been the bulwark of the
church. Never did my heart feel sincerer rapture than at that moment. "Sir,"
cried I, "the applause of so good a man, as I am sure you are, adds to that
happiness in my breast which your benevolence has already excited. You behold
before you, Sir, that Doctor Primrose, the monogamist, whom you have been
pleased to call great. You here see that unfortunate Divine, who has so long,
and it would ill become me to say, successfully, fought against the deuterogamy
of the age." "Sir," cried the stranger, struck with awe, "I fear I have been
too familiar; but you will forgive my curiosity, Sir: I beg pardon." "Sir," cried
I, grasping his hand, "you are so far from displeasing me by your familiarity,
that I must beg you will accept my friendship, as you already have all my
esteem." -- "Then with gratitude I accept the offer," cried he, squeezing me by
the hand, "thou glorious pillar of unshaken orthodoxy; and do I behold -- I
here interrupted what he was going to say; for though, as an author, I could
digest no small share of flattery, yet now my modesty would permit no more.
However, no lovers in romance ever cemented a more instantaneous friendship. We
talked upon several subjects: at first I thought he seemed rather devout than
learned, and began to think he despised all human doctrines as dross. Yet this
no way lessened him in my esteem; for I had for some time begun privately to
harbor such an opinion myself. I therefore took occasion to observe that the
world in general began to be blameably indifferent as to doctrinal matters, and
followed human speculations too much. -- "Ay, Sir," replied he, as if he had
reserved all his learning to that moment, "Ay, Sir, the world is in its dotage,
and yet the cosmogany or creation of the world has puzzled philosophers of all
ages. What a medly of opinions have they not broached upon the creation of the
world? Sanconiathon, Manetho, Berosus, and Ocellus Lucanus, have all attempted
it in vain. The latter has these words, Anarchon ara kai atelutaion to pan,
which imply that all things have neither beginning nor end. Manetho also, who
lived about the time of Nebuchadon-Asser, Asser being a Syriac word, usually
applied as a surname to the kings of that country, as Teglat Phael-Asser,
Nabon-Asser, he, I say, formed a conjecture equally absurd; for as we usually
say, ek to bib lion kubernetes, which implies, that books will never teach the
world; so he attempted to investigate -- But, Sir, I ask pardon, I am straying
from the question." -- That he actually was; nor could I for my life see how
the creation of the world had any thing to do with the business I was talking
of, but it was sufficient to show me, that he was a man of letters, and I now
reverenced him the more. I was resolved therefore to bring him to the
touchstone; but he was too mild and too gentle to contend for victory.
Whenever I made any observation that looked like a challenge to controversy, he
would smile, shake his head, and say nothing; by which I understood he could
say much, if he thought proper. The subject therefore insensibly changed from
the business of antiquity to that which brought us both to the fair; mine, I
told him, was to sell an horse, and very luckily, indeed, his was to buy one
for one of his tenants. My horse was soon produced, and in fine we struck a
bargain. Nothing now remained but to pay me, and he accordingly pulled out a
thirty pound note, and bid me change it. Not being in a capacity of complying
with his demand, he ordered the landlady to call up his footman, who made his
appearance in a very genteel livery. "Here, Abraham," cried he, "go and get
gold for this; you will do it at neighbor Jackson's, or any where." While the
fellow was gone, he entertained we with a pathetic harrangue on the great
scarcity of silver, which I undertook to improve, by deploring also the great
scarcity of gold; and by the time Abraham returned, we had both agreed that
money was never so hard to be come at as now. Abraham returned to inform us,
that he had been over the whole fair and could not get change, though he had
offered half a crown for doing it. This was a very great disappointment to us
all; but the old gentleman having paused a little, asked me if I knew one
Solomon Flamborough in my part of the country: upon replying that he was my
next door neighbor, "If that be the ^ase then," returned he, "I believe we
shall deal. You shall have a draught upon him, payable at sight; and let me
tell you, he is as warm a man as any within five miles round him. Honest
Solomon and I have been acquainted for many years together. I remember, I
always beat him at three jumps; but he could hop upon one leg farther than I."
A draught upon my neighbor was to me the same as money; for I was sufficiently
convinced of his ability: the draught was signed and put into my hands, and Mr.
Jenkinson, the old gentleman, his man Abraham, and my horse, old Blackberry,
trotted off very well pleased with each other.

Being now left to reflection, I began to recollect that I had done wrong in
taking a draught from a stranger, and so prudently resolved upon having back my
horse, and following the purchaser. But this was now too late: I therefore made
directly homewards, resolving to get the draught changed into money at my
friend's as fast as possible. I found my honest neighbor smoking his pipe at
his own door, and informing him that I had a small bill upon him, he read it
twice over. "You can read the name, I suppose," cried I, "Ephraim Jenkinson."
Yes, returned he, "the name is written plain enough, and I know the gentleman
too, the greatest rascal under the canopy of heaven. This is the very same
rogue who sold us the spectacles. Was he not a venerable looking man, with gray
hair, and no flaps to his pocket-holes? And did he not talk a long string of
learning about Greek and cosmogony and the world?" To this I replied with a
groan. "Aye," continued he, "he has but that one piece of learning in the
world, and he always talks it away whenever he finds a scholar in company: but
I know the rogue, and will catch him yet."

Though I was already sufficiently mortified, my greatest struggle was to come,
in facing my wife and daughters. No truant was ever more afraid of returning to
school, there to behold the master's sweet visage, than I was of going home. I
was determined, however, to anticipate their fury, by first falling into a
passion myself.

But, alas! upon entering, I found the family no way disposed for battle. My
wife and girls were all in tears, Mr. Thornhill having been there that day to
inform them, that their journey to town was entirely over: The two ladies
having heard reports of us from some malicious person about us, were that day
set out for London. He could neither discover the tendency, nor the author of
these: but whatever they might be, or whoever might have broached them, he
continued to assure our family of his friendship and protection. I found,
therefore, that they bore my disappointment with great resignation, as it was
eclipsed in the greatness of their own. But what perplexed us most was to
think, who could be so base as to asperse the character of a family so harmless
as ours, too humble to excite envy, and too inoffensive to create disgust.

CHAP. XV. All Mr. Burchell's villainy at once detected. The folly of being
over-wise.
THAT evening and a part of the following day was employed in fruitless
attempts to discover our enemies: scarce a family in the neighborhood but
incurred our suspicions, and each of us had reasons for our opinion best known
to ourselves. As we were in this perplexity, one of our little boys, who had
been playing abroad, brought in a letter-case, which he found on the green. It
was quickly known to belong to Mr. Burchell, with whom it had been seen, and,
upon examination, contained some hints upon different subjects; but what
particularly engaged our attention, was a sealed note, superscribed, The Copy
of a Letter to be sent to the two Ladies at Thornhill-Castle. It instantly
occured, that he was the base informer, and we deliberated whether the note
should not be broke open. I was against it; but Sophia, who said she was sure,
that of all men, he would be the last to be guilty of so much baseness,
insisted upon its being read. In this she was seconded by the rest of the
family, and, at their joint solicitation, I read as follows:

LADIES,
THE bearer will sufficiently satisfy you as to the person from whom this
comes: one at least the friend of innocence, and ready to prevent its being
seduced. I am informed for a truth, that you have some intentions of bringing
two young ladies to town, whom I have some knowledge of, under the character of
companions. As I would neither have simplicity imposed upon, nor virtue
contaminated. I must offer it as my opinion, that the impropriety of such a
step will be attended with dangerous consequences. It has never been my way to
treat the infamous or the lewd with severity; nor should I now have taken this
method of explaining myself or reproving folly, did it not aim at guilt. Take
therefore the admonition of a friend, and seriously reflect on the consequences
of introducing infamy and vice into retreats where peace and innocence have
hitherto resided.


Our doubts were now at an end. There seemed indeed something applicable to
both sides in this letter, and its censures might as well be referred to those
to whom it was written, as to us; but the malicious meaning was obvious, and we
went no farther. My wife had scarce patience to hear me to the end, but railed
at the writer with unrestrained resentment, Olivia was equally severe, and
Sophia seemed perfectly amazed at his baseness. As for my part, it appeared to
me one of the vilest instances of unprovoked ingratitude I had met with. Nor
could I account for it in any other manner, than by imputing it to his desire
of detaining my youngest daughter in the country, to have the more frequent
opportunities of an interview. In this manner we all sat ruminating upon
schemes of vengeance, when our other little boy came running in to tell us that
Mr. Burchell was approaching at the other end of the field. It is easier to
conceive than describe the complicated sensations which are felt from the pain
of a recent injury, and the pleasure of approaching revenge. Though our
intentions were only to upbraid him with his ingratitude; yet it was resolved
to do it in a manner that would be perfectly cutting. For this purpose we
agreed to meet him with our usual smiles, to chat in the beginning with more
than ordinary kindness, to amuse him a little; but then in the midst of the
flattering calm to burst upon him like an earthquake, and overwhelm him with
the sense of his own baseness. This being resolved upon, my wife undertook to
manage the business herself, as she really had some talents for such an
undertaking. We saw him approach, he entered, drew a chair, and sat down. --
"A fine day, Mr. Burchell." "A very fine day, Doctor; though I fancy we shall
have some rain (...) the shooting of my corns." -- "The shooting of your
horns," cried my wife, in a loud fit of laughter, and then asked pardon for
being fond of a joke. -- "Dear madam," replied he, "I pardon you with all my
heart; for I protest I should not have thought it a joke till you told me." --
" Perhaps not, Sir," cried my wife, "winking at us, and yet I dare say you can
tell us how many jokes go to an ounce." -- "I fancy, madam,," returned
Burchell, "you have been reading a jest book this morning, that ounce of jokes
is so very good a conceit; and yet, madam, I had rather see half an ounce of
understanding," -- "I believe you might," cried my wife, still smiling at us,
though the laugh was against her; "and yet I have seen some men pretend to
understanding that have very little." "And no doubt," replied her antagonist,
"you have known ladies set up for wit that had none." -- I quickly began to
find that my wife was likely to gain but little at this business; so I resolved
to treat him in a style of more severity myself. "Both wit and understanding,"
cried I, "are trifles, without integrity: it is that which gives value to every
character. The ignorant peasant, without fault, is greater than the philosopher
with many; for what is genius or courage without an heart? An honest man is the
noblest work of God."

"I always held that favorite maxim of Pope," returned Mr. Burchell, "as very
unworthy a man of genius, and a base desertion of his own superiority. As the
reputation of books is raised not by their freedom from defect, but the
greatness of their beauties; so should that of men be prized, not for their
exemption from fault, but the size of those virtues they are possessed of. The
scholar may want prudence, the statesman may have pride, and the champion
ferocity; but shall we prefer to these men the low mechanic, who laboriously
plods on through life, without censure or applause? We might as well prefer the
tame correct paintings of the Flemish school to the erroneous, but sublime
animations of the Roman pencil."

"Sir," replied I, "your present observation is just, when there are shining
virtues and minute defects; but when it appears that great vices are opposed in
the same mind to as extraordinary virtues, such a character deserves contempt."

"Perhaps," cried he, "there may be some such monsters as you describe, of
great vices joined to great virtues; yet in my progress through life, I never
yet found one instance of their existence: on the contrary, I have ever
perceived, that where the mind was capacious, the affections were good. And
indeed, Providence seems kindly our friend in this particular, thus to
debilitate the understanding where the heart is corrupt, and diminish the power
where there is the will to do mischief. This rule seems to extend even to other
animals: the little vermin race are ever treacherous, cruel, and cowardly,
whilst those endowed with strength and power are generous, brave, and gentle."

"These observations found well," returned I, "and yet it would be easy this
moment to point out a man," and I fixed my eye steadfastly upon him," whose head
and heart form a most detestable contrast. Ay, Sir, continued I, raising my
voice, "and I am glad to have this opportunity of detecting him in the midst of
his fancied security. Do you know this, Sir, this pocketbook?" -- "Yes, Sir"
returned he with a face of impenetrable assurance, "that pocketbook is mine,
and I am glad you have found it." -- "And do you know," cried I, "this letter?
Nay, never falter, man; but look me full in the face: I say, do you know this
letter?" -- "That letter returned he, "yes, it was I that wrote that letter."
-- "And how could you," said I, so basely, so ungratefully presume to write
this letter?" -- "And how came you," replied he, with looks of unparallelled
effrontry, "so basely to presume to break open this letter? Don't you know, now
I could hang you all for this? All that I have to do, is to swear at the next
justice's, that you have been guilty of breaking open the lock of my pocket
book, and so hang you all up at his door." This piece of unexpected insolence,
raised me to such a pitch, that I could scarce govern my passion. "Ungrateful
wretch, begone, and no longer pollute my dwelling with thy baseness. Begone,
and never let me see thee again; go from my doors, and the only punishment I
wish thee, is an alarmed conscience, which will be a sufficient tormentor! so
saying, I threw him his pocketbook, which he took up with a smile, and
shutting the clasps with the utmost composure, left us, quite astonished at the
serenity of his assurance. My wife was particularly enraged that nothing could
make him angry, or make him seem ashamed of his villainies, "My dear," cried I,
willing to calm those passions that had been raised too high among us, we are
not to be surprised that bad men want shame; they only blush at being detected
in doing good, but glory in their vices."

"Guilt and shame says the allegory, were at first companions, and in the
beginning of their journey inseparably kept together. But their union was soon
found to be disagreeable and inconvenient to both; guilt gave shame frequent
uneasiness* and shame often betrayed the secret conspiracies of guilt. After
long disagreement, therefore, they at length consented to part for ever. Guilt
boldly walked forward alone, to overtake fate, that went before in the shape of
an executioner: but shame being naturally timorous, returned back to keeep
company with virtue, which, in the beginning of their journey, they had left
behind. Thus, my children, after men have traveled through a few stages in
vice, they no longer continue to have shame at doing evil, and shame attends
only upon their virtues."

CHAP. XVI. The family use art which is opposed with still greater.
WHATEVER might have been Sophia's sensations, the rest of the family was
easily consoled for Mr. Burchell's absence, by the company of our landlord,
whose visits now became more frequent and longer. Though he had been
disappointed in procuring my daughters the amusements of the town, as he
designed, he took every opportunity of supplying them with those little
recreations which our retirement would admit of. He usually came in the
morning, and while my son and I followed our occupations abroad, he sat with
the family at home, and amused them by describing the town, with every part of
which he was particularly acquainted. He could repeat all the observations that
were retailed in the atmosphere of the play houses, and had all the good things
of the high wits by rote, long before they made way into the jest books. The
intervals between conversation were employed in teaching my daughters piquet,
or sometimes in setting my two little ones to box, to make them sharp, as he
called it: but the hopes of having him for a son-in-law, in some measure
blinded us to all his defects. It must be owned, that my wife laid a thousand
schemes to entrap him, or, to speak it more tenderly, used every art to magnify
the merit of her daughter. If the cakes at tea eat short and crisp, they were
made by Olivia: if the gooseberry wine was well knit, the gooseberries were of
her gathering: it was her fingers gave the pickles their peculiar green; and in
the composition of a pudding, her judgment was infallible. Then the poor woman
would sometimes tell the 'Squire, that she thought him and Olivia extremely
like each other, and would bid both stand up to see which was tallest. These
instances of cunning, which she thought impenetrable, yet which every body saw
through were very pleasing to our benefactor, who gave every day some new proofs
of his passion, which though they had not arisen to proposals of marriage, yet
we thought fell but little short of it; and his slowness was attributed
sometimes to native bashfulness, and sometimes to his fear of offending a rich
uncle. An occurrence, however, which happened soon after, put it beyond a
doubt, that he designed to become one of the family, my wife even regarded it
as an absolute promise.

My wife and daughters happening to return a visit to neighbor Flamborough's,
found that family had lately got their pictures drawn by a limner, who
traveled the country, and did them for fifteen shillings a head. As this
family and ours had long a sort of rivalry in point of taste, our spirit took
the alarm at this stolen march upon us, and notwithstanding all I could say,
and I said much, it was resolved that we should have our pictures done too.
Having, therefore, engaged the limner, for what could I do? Our next
deliberation was to show the superiority of our taste in the attitudes. As for
our neighbor's family, there were seven of them, and they were drawn with
seven oranges, a thing quite out of taste, no variety in life, no composition
in the world. We desired to have something done in a brighter style and, after
many debates, at length came to an unanimous resolution to be drawn together,
in one large historical family-piece. This would be cheaper, since one frame
would serve for all, and it would be infinitely more genteel; for all families
of any taste were now drawn in the same manner. As we did not immediately
recollect an historical subject to hit us, we were contented each with being
drawn as independent historical figures. My wife desired to be represented as
Venus, with a stomacher richly set with diamonds, and her two little ones as
Cupids by her side, while I, in my gown and band, was to present her with my
books on the Bangorean controversy. Olivia would be drawn as an Amazon, sitting
upon a bank of flowers, dressed in a green joseph, laced with gold, and a whip in
her hand. Sophia was to be a shepherdess with as many sheep as the painter
could spare; and Moses was to be dressed out with an hat and white feather. Our
taste so much pleased the 'Squire, that he insisted on being put in as one of
the family, in the character of Alexander the Great at Olivia's feet. This was
considered by us all as an indication of his desire to be introduced into the
family in reality* nor could we refuse his request. The painter was therefore
set to work, and as he wrought with assiduity and expedition, in less than four
days the whole was completed. The piece was large, and it must be owned he did
not spare his colors; for which my wife gave him great encomiums. We were all
perfectly satisfied with his performance; but an unfortunate circumstance had
not occured till the picture was finished, which now struck us with dismay. It
was so very large, that we had no place in the house to fix it. How we all came
to disregard so material a point is inconceivable; but certain it is, we were
this time all greatly over seen. Instead therefore of gratifying our vanity as
we hoped, there it leaned, in a most mortifying manner, against the kitchen
wall, where the canvas was stretched and painted, much too large to be got
through any of the doors, and the jest of all our neighbors. One compared it
to Robinson Crusoe's longboat, too large to be removed; another thought it
more resembled a reel in a bottle; some wondered how it should be got out, and
still more were amazed how it ever got in.

But though it excited the ridicule of some, it effectually raised more
ill-natured suggestions in many. The 'Squire's portrait being found united with
ours, was an honor too great to escape envy. Malicious whispers began to
circulate at our expense, and our tranquillity continually to be disturbed by
persons who came as friends to tell us what was said of us by enemies. These
reports we always resented with becoming spirit; but scandal ever improves by
opposition. We again therefore entered into a consultation upon obviating the
malice of our enemies and at last came to a resolution which had too much
cunning to give me entire satisfaction. It was this: as our principal object
was to discover the honor of Mr. Thornhill's addresses, my wife undertook to
sound him, by pretending to ask his advice in the choice of an husband for her
eldest daughter. If this was not found sufficient to induce him to a
declaration, it was then fixed upon to terrify him with a rival, which it was
thought would compel him, though never so refractory. To this last step,
however, I would by no means give my consent, till Olivia gave me the most
solemn assurances, that she would marry the person provided to rival him upon
this occasion, if Mr. Thornhill did not prevent it by taking her himself. Such
was the scheme laid, which though I did not strenuously oppose, I did not
entirely approve.

The next time, therefore that Mr. Thornhill came to see us, my girls took care
to be out of the way, in order to give their mama an opportunity of putting her
scheme in execution; but they only retired to the next room, from whence they
could over-hear the whole conversation; which my wife artfully introduced, by
observing that one of the Miss Flamboroughs was likely to have a very good
match of it in Mr. Spanker. To this the 'Squire assenting, she proceeded to
remark, that they who had warm fortunes were always sure of getting good
husbands: "But heaven help," continued she, "the girls that have none. What
signifies beauty, Mr. Thornhill? or what signifies all the virtue, and all the
qualifications in the world, in this age of self-interest? It is not, what is
she? but what has she? is all the cry."

"Madam," returned he, "I highly approve the justice, as well as the novelty,
of your remarks, and if I were a king, it should be otherwise. It would then,
indeed, be fine times with the girls without fortunes: our two young ladies
should be the first for whom I would provide."

"Ah, Sir!" returned my wife, "you are pleased to be facetious: but I wish I
were a queen, and then I know where they should look for an husband. But now
that you have put it into my head, seriously Mr. Thornhill, cannot you recommend
me a proper husband for my eldest girl? She is now nineteen years old, well
grown and well educated, and in my humble opinion, does not want for parts."

Madam, replied he, "if I were to choose, I would find out a person possessed of
every accomplishment that can make an angel happy. One with prudence, fortune,
taste, and sincerity, such, madam, would be, in my opinion, the proper
husband." "Ah, Sir," said she, "but do you know of any such person?" -- No,
madam," returned he, "it is impossible to know any person that deserves to be
her husband: she is too great a treasure for one man's possession, she is a
goddess. Upon my soul, I speak what I think, she is an angel." -- " Ah, Mr.
Thornhill, you only flatter my poor girl: but we have been thinking of marrying
her to one of your tenants, whose mother is lately dead, and who wants a
manager: you know whom I mean, farmer Williams: a warm man, Mr. Thornhill, able
to give her good bread; ay, and who has several times made her proposals:
(which was actually the case) but, Sir concluded she, I should be glad to have
your approbation of our choice." -- "How, madam," replied he, "my approbation!
My approbation of such a choice! Never! What! Sacrifice so much beauty, and
sense, and goodness, to a creature insensible of the blessing! Excuse me, I can
never approve of such a piece of injustice! (...) I have my reasons?" --
"Indeed, Sir," cried D^bora^ if you have your reasons, that is another affair,
bu^ should be glad to know those reasons. -- "Excuse (...) madam," returned he,
"they lie too deep for discov^: (^wing his hand upon his bosom) they remain
bury ^ivetted here.

After he was gone, upon general consultation we could not tell what to make of
these fine sentiments. Olivia considered them as instances of most exalted
passion; but I was not quite so saguine: it seemed to be pretty plain, that
they had more of love than matrimony in them: yet, whatever they might portend,
it was resolved to prosecute the scheme of farmer Williams, who, since my
daughter's first appearance in the country had paid her his addresses.

CHAP. XVII. Scarce any virtue found to resist the power of long and pleasing
temptation.
AS I only studied my child's real happiness, the assiduity of Mr. Williams
pleased me, as he was in easy circumstances, prudent and sincere. It required
but very little encouragement to revive his former passion; so that in an
evening or two after, he and Mr. Thornhill met at our house, and surveyed each
other for some time with looks of anger: but Williams owed his landlord no
rent, and little regarded his indignation. Olivia, on her side, acted the
coquet to perfection, if that might be called acting which was her real
character, pretending to lavish all her tenderness on her new lover. Mr.
Thornhill appeared quite dejected at this preference, and with a pensive air
took leave, though I own it puzzled me to find him so much in pain as he
appeared to be, when he had it in his power so easily to remove the cause, by
declaring an honorable passion. But whatever uneasiness he seemed to endure,
it could easily be perceived that Olivia's anguish was still greater. After any
of these interviews between her lovers, of which there were several* she
usually retired to solitude, and there indulged her grief. It was in such a
situation I found her one evening, after she had been for some time supporting
a fictitious gaiety. -- You now see, my child, said I, that your confidence in
Mr. Thornhill's passion was all a dream: he permits the rivalry of another
every way his inferior, though he knows it lies in his power to secure you by a
candid declaration of himself. -- "Yes, papa," returned she, but he has his
reasons for this delay: I know he has. The sincerity of his looks and words
convince me of his real esteem. A short time, I hope, will discover the
generosity of his sentiments, and convince you that my opinion of him has been
more just than yours. -- "Olivia, my darling," returned I, every scheme that
has been hitherto pursued to compel him to a declaration, has been proposed and
planned by yourself, nor can you in the least say that I have constrained you.
But you must not suppose, my dear, that I will be ever instrumental in
suffering his honest rival to be the dupe of your ill-placed passion. Whatever
time you require to bring your fancied admirer to an explanation shall be
granted? but at the expiration of that term, if he is still regardless, I must
absolutely insist that honest Mr. Williams shall be rewarded for his fidelity.
The character which I have hitherto supported in life demand this from me, and
my tenderness, as a parent, shall never influence my integrity as a man. Name
then your day, let it be as distant as you think proper, and in the mean time
take care to let Mr. Thornhill know the exact time on which I design delivering
you up to another. If he really loves you, his own good sense will readily
suggest that there is but one method alone to prevent his losing you for ever.
-- This proposal, which she could not avoid considering as perfectly just, was
readily agreed to. She again renewed her most positive promise of marrying Mr.
Williams, in case of the other's insensibility; and at the next opportunity, in
Mr. Thornhill's presence, that day month was fixed upon for her nuptials with
his rival.

Such vigorous proceedings seemed to redouble Mr. Thornhill's anxiety; but what
Olivia really sel^ gave me some uneasiness. In this struggle between prudence
and passion, her vivacity quite forsook her, and every opportunity of solitude
was sought, and spent in tears. One week passed away; but her lover made no
efforts to restrain her nuptials. The succeeding week he was still assiduous;
but not more open. On the third he discontinued his visits entirely, and
instead of my daughter testifying any impatience, as I expected, ^^e seemed to
retain a pensive tranquillity, which I looked upon as resignation. For my own
part, I was now sincerely pleased with thinking that my child was going to be
secured in a continuance of competence and peace, and frequently applauded her
resolution. It was within about four days of her intended nuptials that my
little family at night were gathered round a charming fire, telling stories of
the past, and laying schemes for the future. Busied in forming a thousand
projects, and laughing at whatever folly came uppermost, "Well, Moses," cried
I, we shall soon, my boy, have a wedding in the family, what is your opinion of
matters and things in general? -- My opinion, father, is, that all things go on
very well; and I was just now thinking, that when sister Livy is married to
farmer Williams, we shall then have the loan of his cyder-press and brewing
tubs for nothing. -- "That we shall, Moses," cried I, and he will sing us Death
and the Lady, to raise our spirits into the bargain. -- He has taught that song
to our Dick, cried Moses; and I think he goes through it very prettily. -- Does
he so, cried I, then let us have it: where is little Dick; let him up with it
boldly. -- My brother "Dick," cried Bill my youngest, is just gone out with
sister Livy; but Mr. Williams has taught me two songs, and I Will sing them for
you, papa. Which song do you choose, the Dying Swan, or the Elegy on the death
of a mad Dog? The elegy, child by all means, said I, I never heard that yet;
and Deborah, my life, grief you know is dry, let us have a bottle of the best
gooseberry wine, to keep up our spirits. I have wept so much at all sorts of
elegies of late, that without an enlivening glass I am sure this will overcome
me; and Sophy, love, take your guitar, and thrum in with the boy a little.

An ELEGY on the Death of a Mad Dog.
GOOD people all, of every sort,
Give ear unto my song;
And if you find it wondrous short,
It cannot hold you long.
In Islington there was a man,
Of whom the world might say,
That still a godly race he ran,
Whenever he w^nt to pray.
A kind and gentle heart he had,
To comfort friends and foes;
The naked every day he clad,
When he put on his clothes.
And in that town a dog was found,
As many dogs there be,
Both mungrel* puppy, whelp, and hound,
And curs of low degree.
This dog and man at first were friends;
But when a pique began,
The dog, to gain his private ends,
Went mad and bit the man.
Around from all the neighboring streets,
The wondering neighbors ran,
And swore the dog had lost his wits,
To bite so good a man.
The wound it seemed both sore and sad,
To every christian eye;
And while they swore the dog was mad,
They swore the man would die.
But soon a wonder came to light,
That showed the rogues they ly'd,
The man recovered of the bite,
The dog it was that died.
A very good boy, Bill, upon my word, and an elegy that may truly be called
tragical. Come, my children, here is Bill's health, and may he one day be a
bishop.

"With all my heart," cried my wife; and if he but preaches as well as he
sings, I make no doubt of him. The most of his family, by the mother's side.
could sing a good song: it was a common saying in our country, that the family
of the Blenkinsops could never look straight before them, nor the Hugginses
blow out a candle; that there were none of the Grograms but could sing a song,
or of the Majorams but could tell a story, -- "However that be," cried I, the
most vulgar ballad of them all generally pleases me better than the fine modern
odes, and things that petrify us in a single stanza; productions that we at
once detest and praise. Put the glass to your brother, Moses. The great fault
of these elegists is, that they are in despair for griefs that give the
sensible part of mankind very little pain. A lady loses her lap dog, and so the
silly poet runs home to versify the disaster.

"That may be the mode," cried Moses, in subblimer compositions; but the
Ranelagh songs that come down to us are perfectly familiar, and all cast in the
same mould: Collin meets Dolly, and they hold a dialogue together, he gives her
a fairing to put in her hair, and she presents him with a nosegay, and then
they go together to church, where they give good advice to young nymphs and
swains to get married as fast as they can.

"And very good advice too," cried I, and I am told there is not a place in the
world where advice can be given with so much propriety as there; for as it
persuades us to marry, it also furnishes us with a wife, and surely that must
be an excellent market, my boy, where we are told what we want, and supplied
with it when wanting.

"Yes, Sir," returned Moses, and I know but of two such markets for wives in
Europe, Ranelagh in England, and Fontarabia in Spain. The Spanish market is
open once a year, but our English wives are saleable every night.

"You are right, my boy," cried his mother, Old England is the only place in
the world for husbands to get wives. -- And for wives to manage their husbands,
interrupted I* It is a proverb abroad, that if a bridge were built across the
sea, all the ladies of the Continent would come over to take pattern from ours;
for there are no such wives in Europe as our own.

But let us have one bottle more, Deborah, my life, and Moses give us a good
song. What thanks do we not we owe to heaven for thus bestowing tranquillity,
health and competence. I think myself happier now than the greatest monarch
upon earth. He has no such fireside, nor such pleasant faces about it. Yes,
Deborah, my dear, we are now growing old; but the evening of our life is likely
to be happy. We are descended from ancestors that knew no stain, and we shall
leave a good and virtuous race of children behind us. While we live they will
be our support and our pleasure here, and when we die they will transmit our
honor untainted to posterity. Come, my son, we wait for your song: let us have
a chorus. But where is my darling Olivia? That little cherub's voice is always
sweetest in the concert. -- Just as I spoke Dick came running in -- O papa,
papa, she is gone from us, she is gone from us, my sister Livy is gone from us,
for ever. -- Gone, child! -- Yes, she is gone off with two gentlemen in a post
chaise, and one of them kissed her, and said he would die for her; and she
cried very much, and was for coming back; but he persuaded her again and she
went into the chaise, and said, O what will my poor papa do when he knows I am
undone! -- "Now then," cried I, my children, go and be miserable; for we shall
never enjoy one hour more. And O may heaven's everlasting fury light upon him
and his! Thus to rob me of my child! And sure it will, for taking back my sweet
innocent that I was leading up to heaven Such sincerity as my child was
possessed of. But all our earthly happiness is now over. Go my children, go,
and be miserable and infamous; for my heart is broken within me! -- "Father,"
cried, my son, "is this your fortitude?" -- Fortitude, child! Yes, he shall see
I have fortitude! Bring me my pistols. I Will pursue the traitor. While he is on
earth I Will pursue him. Old as I am, he shall find I can sting him yet. The
villain! The persidious villain! -- I had by this time reached down my pistols,
when my poor wife, whose passions were not so strong as mine, caught me in her
arms. My dearest, dearest husband, cried she, the bible is the only weapon that
is fit for your old hands now. Open that my love, and read our anguish into
patience, for she has vilely deceived -- Her sorrow repressed the rest in
silence. -- "Indeed, Sir," resumed my son, after a pause, your rage is too
violent and unbecoming. You should be my mother's comforter, and you increase
her pain. It ill suited you and your reverend character thus to curse your
greatest enemy: you should not to have cursed the wretch, villain as he is. --
"I did not curse him, child, did I?" -- Indeed, Sir, you did, you cursed him
twice. -- Then may Heaven forgive me and him if I did! And now, my son, I see
it was more than human benevolence that first taught us to bless our enemies!
Blessed be his holy name for all the good he has given, and for that he has taken
away. But it is not, it is not a small distress that can wring tears from these
old eyes, that have not wept for so many years. My child! -- To undo my
darling! May confusion seize! Heaven forgive me, what am I about to say! You
may remember, my love, how good she was, and how charming; till this vile
moment all her care was to make us happy. Had she but died! But she is gone,
the honor of our family contaminated, and I must look out for happiness in
other worlds than here. But, my child, you saw them go off: perhaps he forced
her away? If he forced her, she may yet be innocent. -- "Ah no, Sir!" cried the
child, he only kissed her, and called her his angel, and she wept very much,
and leaned upon his arm, and they drove off very fast. -- "She Is an ungrateful
creature," cried my wife, who could scarce speak for weeping, to use us thus.
She never had the least constraint put upon her affections. The vile strumpet
has basely deserted her parents without any provocation, thus to bring your
gray hairs to the grave, and I must shortly follow.

In this manner that night, the first of our real misfortunes, was spent in the
bitterness of complaint, and ill supported sallies of enthusiasm. I determined,
however, to find out our betrayer, wherever he was, and reproach his baseness.
The next morning we missed our wretched child at breakfast, where she used to
give life and cheerfulness to us all. My wife, as before, attempted to ease her
heart by reproaches. "Never," cried she, shall that vilest stain of our family
again darken those harmless doors. I will never call her daughter more. No, let
the strumpet live with her vile seducer: She may bring us to shame, but she
shall never more deceive us.

"Wife," said I, do not talk thus hardly: my detestation of her guilt is as
great as yours; but ever shall this house and this heart be open to a poor
returning repentant sinner. The sooner she returns from her transgression, the
more welcome shall she be to me. For the first time the very best may err; art
may persuade, and novelty spread out its charm. The first fault is the child of
simplicity; but every other the offspring of guilt. Yes, the wretched creature
shall be welcome to this heart and this house, though stained with ten thousand
vices. I will again hearken to the music of her voice, again will I hang fondly
on her bosom, if I find but repentance there. My son, bring hither my bible and
my staff; I will pursue her, wherever she is, and though I cannot save her from
shame, I may prevent the continuance of iniquity.

CHAP. XVIII. The pursuit of a father to reclaim a lost child to virtue.
THOUGH the child could not describe the gentleman's person who handed his sister
into the post-chaise, yet my suspicions tell entirely upon our young landlord,
whose character for such intrigues was but too well known. I therefore directed
my steps toward Thornhill-castle. resolving to upbraid him, and, if possible
to bring back my daughter: but before I had reached his seat, I was met by one
of my parishioners, who said he saw a young lady resembling my daughter in a
post-chaise with a gentleman, whom, by the description, I could only guess to
be Mr. Burchell, and that they drove very fast. This information, however, did
by no means satisfy me. I therefore went to the young 'Squire's, and though it
was yet early, insisted upon seeing him immediately: he soon appeared with the
most open familiar air, and seemed perfectly amazed at my daughter's elopement,
protesting upon his honor that he was quite a stranger to it. I now therefore
condemned my former suspicions, and could turn them only on Mr. Burchell, who I
recollected had of late several private conferences with her: but the
appearance of another witness left me no room to doubt of his villainy, who
averred, that he and my daughter were actually gone toward the wells, about
thirty miles off, where there was a great deal of company. Hearing this, I
resolved to pursue them there. I walked ^g with earnestness, and enquired of
several by the way, but received no accounts, till entering the town, I was met
by a person on horseback, whom I remembered to have seen at the Squire's, and
he assured me that if I followed them to the races, which were but thirty miles
farther, I might depend upon overtaking them; for he had seen them dance there
the night before, and the whole assembly seemed charmed with my daughter's
performance. Early the next day I walked forward to the races, and about four
in the afternoon I came upon the course. The company made a very brilliant
appearance, all earnestly employed in one pursuit, that of pleasure; how
different from mine, that of reclaiming a lost child to virtue! I thought I
perceived Mr. Burchell at some distance from me: but, as if he dreaded an
interview, upon my approaching him, he mixed among a crowd, and I saw him no
more. I now reflected that it would be to no purpose to continue my pursuit
farther, and resolved to return home to an innocent family, who wanted my
assistance. But the agitations of my mind, and the fatigues I had undergone,
threw me into a fever, the symptoms of which I perceived before I came off the
course. This was another unexpected stroke, as I was more than seventy miles
distant from home: however, I retired to a little alehouse by the road-side,
and in this place, the usual retreat of indigence and frugality, I laid me down
patiently to wait the issue of my disorder. I languished here for near three
weeks; but at last my constitution prevailed, though I was unprovided with
money to defray the expenses of my entertainment. It is possible the anxiety
from this last circumstance alone might have brought on a relapse, had I not
been supplied by a traveller, who stopped to take a cursory refreshment. This
person was no other than the philanthropic bookseller in St. Paul's
churchyard, who has written so many little books for children: he called
himself their friend; but he was the friend of all mankind. He was no sooner
alighted, but he was in haste to be gone; for he was ever on business of the
utmost importance, and was at that time actually compiling materials for the
history of one Mr. Thomas Trip. I immediately recollected this good-natured
man's red pimpled face; for he had published for me against the Deuterogamists
of the age, and from him I borrowed a few pieces, to be paid at my return.
Leaving the inn, therefore, as I was yet but weak, I resolved to return home by
easy journeys of ten miles a day. My health and usual tranquillity were almost
restored, and I now condemned that pride which had made me refractory to the
hand of correction. Man little knows what calamities are beyond his patience to
bear till he tries them; as in ascending the heights of ambition, which look
bright from below, every step we rise shows us some new prospect of hidden
disappointment; so in our descent to the vale of wretchedness, which, from the
summits of pleasure appears dark and gloomy, the busy mind still attentive to
its own amusement, finds something to flatter and surprise it. Still as we
descend, the objects appear to brighten, unexpected prospects amuse, and the
mental eye becomes adapted to its gloomy situation.

I now proceeded forwards, and had walked about two hours, when I perceived
what appeared at a distance like the wagon, which I was resolved to overtake;
but when I came up with it, found it to be a strolling company's cart, that was
carrying their scenes and other theatrical furniture to the next village, where
they were to exhibit. The cart was attended only by the person who drove it,
and one of the company, as the rest of the players were to follow the ensuing
day. Good company upon the road, says the proverb, is always the shortest cut,
I therefore entered into conversation with the poor player; and as I once had
some theatrical powers myself, I descanted on such topics with my usual
freedom: but as I was pretty much unacquainted with the present state of the
stage, I demanded who where the present theatrical writers in vogue, who the
Drydens and Otways of the day. -- I fancy, Sir, cried the player, few of our
modern dramatists would think themselves much honored by being compared to the
writers you mention. Dryden and Rowe's manner, Sir, are quite out of fashion;
our taste has gone back a whole century. Fletcher, Ben Johnson, and all the
plays of Shakespeare, are the only things that go down. -- "How," cried I, is
it possible the present age can be pleased with that anti^uated dialect that
obsolete humor, those over charged characters, which abound in the works you
mentioned? -- "Sir," returned my companion, the public think nothing about
dialect, or humor, or character; for that is none of their business, they only
go to be amused, and find themselves happy when they can enjoy a pantomime,
under the sanction of Johnson's or Shakespeare's name. -- So then, I suppose,
cried I, that our modern dramatists are rather imitators of Shakespeare than of
nature. -- "To say the truth," returned my companion, I don't know that they
imitate any thing at all; nor indeed does the public require it of them: it is
not the composition of the piece, but the number of starts and attitudes that
may be introduced into it that forces applause. I have known a piece, with not
one jest in the whole, shrugged into popularity, and another saved by the
poet's throwing in a fit of the gripes. No, Sir, the works of Congreve and
Farquhar have too much wit in them for the present taste; our modern dialogue
is much more natural.

By this time the equipage of the strolling company was arrived at the village,
which, it seems, had been apprised of our approach, and was come out to gaze at
us; for my companion observed, that strollers always have more spectators
without doors than within. I did not consider the impropriety of my being in
such company till I saw a mob gathered about me. I therefore took shelter, as
fast as possible, in the first alehouse that offered, and being shown into the
common room, was accosted by a very well-drest gentleman, who demanded whether
I was the real chaplain of the company, or whether it was only to be my
masquerade character in the play. Upon informing him of the truth, and that I
did not belong to the company, he was condescending enough to desire me and the
player to partake of a bowl of punch, over which he discussed modern politics
with great earnestness and seeming interest. I set him down in my own mind for
nothing less than a parliament man at least; but was almost confirmed in my
conjectures, when upon my asking what there was in the house for supper, he
insisted that the player and I should sup with him at his house, with which
request, after some entreaties, I was prevailed on to comply.

CHAP. XIX. The description of a person discontented with the present
government, and apprehensive of the loss of our liberties.
THE house where we were to be entertained, lying at a small distance from the
village, our inviter observed, that as the coach was not ready, he would
conduct us on foot, and we soon arrived at one of the most magnificent mansions
I had seen in the country. The apartment into which we were shown was perfectly
elegant and modern; he went to give orders for supper, while the player, with a
wink, observed that we were perfectly in luck. Our entertainer soon returned,
an elegant supper was brought in, two or three ladies, in an easy dishabille,
were introduced, and the conversation began with some sprightliness. Politics,
however, was the subject on which our entertainer chiefly expatiated; for he
asserted that liberty was at once his boast and his terror. After the cloth was
removed, he asked me if I had seen the last Monitor, to which replying in the
negative, "What, nor the Auditor, I suppose?" cried he. "Neither, Sir,"
returned I. "That Is strange, very strange," replied my entertainer. Now, I read
all the politics that come out. The Daily, the Public, the Ledger, the
Chronicle, the London Evening, the Whitehall Evening, the seventeen magazines,
and the two reviews; and though they hate each other, I love them all. Liberty,
Sir, liberty is the Briton's boast, and by all my coal mines in Cornwall, I
reverence its guardians." "Then it is to be hoped," cried I, "you reverence the
king." "Yes," returned my entertainer, "when he does what we would have him;
but if he goes on as he has done of late, I Will never trouble myself more with
his matters. I say nothing. I think only. I could have directed some things
better. I don't think there has been a sufficient number of advisers; he should
advise, with every person willing to give him advice, and then we should have
things done in another manner."

"I wish," cried I, "that such intruding advisers were fixed in the pillory. It
should be the duty of honest men to assist the weaker side of our constitution,
that sacred power that has for some years been every day declining, and losing
its due share of influence in the state. But these ignorants still continue the
cry of liberty, and if they have any weight basely throw it into the subsiding
scale."

"How," cried one of the ladies, "do I live to see one so base, so sordid, as
to be an enemy to liberty, and a defender of tyrants? Liberty, that sacred gift
of heaven, that glorious privilege of Britons!"

"Can it be possible, cried our entertainer, "that there should be any found at
present advocates for slavery? Any who are for meanly giving up the privileges
of Britons? Can any, Sir, be so abject?"

"No, Sir," replied I, "I am for liberty, that attribute of Gods! Glorious
liberty! that theme of modern declamation. I would have all men kings. I would
be a king myself. We have all naturally an equal right to the throne: we are
all originally equal. This is my opinion, and was once the opinion of a set of
honest men who were called Levellers. They tried to erect themselves into a
community, where all should be equally free. But alas! it would never answer;
for there were some among them stronger, and some more cunning than others, and
these became masters of the rest; for as sure as your groom rides your horses,
because be is a cunninger animal than they, so surely will the animal that is
cunninger animal than they, so surely will the animal that is cunninger or
stronger than he, sit upon his shoulders in turn. Since then it is entailed
upon humanity to submit, and some are born to command, and others to obey, the
question is, as there must be tyrants, whether it is better to have them in the
same house with us, or in the same village, or still farther off, in the
metropolis. Now, Sir, for my own part, as I naturally hate the face of a
tyrant, the farther off he is removed from me, the better pleased am I. The
generality of mankind also are of my way of thinking, and have unanimously
created one King, whose election at once diminishes the number of tyrants, and
puts tyranny at the greatest distance from the greatest number of people. Now
those who were tyrants themselves before the election of one tyrant, are
naturally averse to a power raised over them, and whose weight must ever lean
heaviest on the subordinate orders. It is the interest of the great, therefore,
to diminish kingly power as much as possible; because whatever they take from
it is naturally restored to themselves; and all they have to do in a state, is
to undermine the single tyrant, by which they resume their primaeval authority.
Now a state may be so constitutionally circumstanced, its laws may be so
disposed, and its men of opulence so minded, as all to conspire to carry on
this business of undermining monarchy. If the circumstances of the state be
such, for instance, as to favor the accumulation of wealth, and make the
opulent still more rich, this will increase their strength and their ambition.
But an accumulation of wealth must necessarily be the consequence in a state,
when more riches flow in from external commerce, than arise from internal
industry: for external commerce can only be managed to advantage by the rich,
and they have also at the same time all the emoluments arising from internal
industry: so that the rich, in such a state, have two sources of wealth,
whereas the poor have but one. Thus wealth in all commercial states is found to
accumulate, and such have hitherto in time become aristocratical. Besides this,
the very laws of a country may contribute to the accumulation of wealth; as
when those natural ties that bind the rich and poor together are broken, and it
is ordained that the rich shall only marry among each other; or when the
learned are held unqualified to serve their country as merely from a defect of
opulence, and wealth is thus made the object of a wise man's ambition, by these
means I say, and such means as these, riches will accumulate. The possessor of
accumulated wealth, when furnished with the necessaries and pleasures of life,
can employ the superfluity of fortune only in purchasing power. That is,
differently speaking, in making dependants, in purchasing the liberty of the
needy or the venal, of men who are willing to bear the mortification of
contiguous tyranny for bread. Thus every very opulent man generally gathers
round him a circle of the poorest of the people; and the polity abounding in
accumulated wealth, may be compared to a Cartesian system, each orb with a
vortex of its own. Those, however, who are willing to move in a great man's
vortex, are only such as must be slaves, the rabble of mankind, whose souls and
whose education are adapted to servitude, and who know nothing of liberty
except the name. But there must still be a large number of the people without
the sphere of the opulent man's influence, namely, that order of men which
subsists between the very rich and the very rabble; those men who are possessed
of two large fortunes to submit to the neighboring man in power, and yet are
too poor to set up for tyranny themselves. In this middle order of mankind are
generally to be found all the arts, wisdom, and virtues of society. This order
alone is known to be the true preserver of freedom, and may be called the
People. Now it may happen that this middle order of mankind may lose all its
influence in a state, and its voice be in a manner drowned in that of the
rabble: for if the fortune sufficient for qualifying a person at present to
give his voice in state affairs, be ten times less than was judged sufficient
upon forming the constitution, it is evident that greater numbers of the rabble
will thus be introduced into the political system, and they, ever moving in the
vortex of the great, will follow where greatness shall direct. In such a state,
therefore, all that middle order has left, is to preserve the prerogative and
privileges of one principal tyrant with the most sacred circumspection. For he
divides the power of the rich, and calls off the great from falling with
tenfold weight on the middle order placed beneath them. The middle order may be
compared to a town of which the opulent are forming the siege, and which the
tyrant is hastening to relieve. While the besiegers are in dread of the
external enemy, it is but natural to offer the townsmen the most specious
terms; to flatter them with sounds, and amuse them with privileges: but if they
once defeat the tyrant, the walls of the town will be but a small defense to
its inhabitants. What they may then expect, may be seen by turning our eyes to
Holland, Genoa, or Venice, where the laws govern the poor, and the rich govern
the law. I am then for, and would die for, monarchy, sacred monarchy; for if
there be any thing sacred amongst men, it must be the anointed sovereign of his
people, and every diminution of his power in war, or in peace, is an
infringement upon the real liberties of the subject. The sounds of liberty,
patriotism, and Britons, have already done much; it is to be hoped that the
true sons of freedom will prevent their ever doing more. I have known many of
those bold champions for liberty in my time, yet do I not remember one that was
not in his heart and in his family a tyrant."

My warmth I found had lengthened this harangue beyond the rules of good
breeding: but the impatience of my entertainer, who often strove to interrupt
it could be restrained no longer. "What," cried he, "then I have been all this
while entertaining a Jesuit in parson's clothes: but by all the coal mines of
Cornwall, out he shall pack, if my name be Wilkinson. I now found I had gone
too far, and asked pardon for the warmth with which I had spoken. "Pardon,"
returned he in a fury: "I think such principles demand ten thousand pardons.
What, give up liberty, property, and, as the Gazetteer says, lie down to be
saddled with wooden shoes! Sir, I insist upon your marching out of this house
immediately to prevent worse consequences, Sir, I insist upon it." I was going
to repeat my remonstrances; but just then we heard a footman's rap at the door,
and the two ladies cried out, "As sure as death there is our master and
mistress come home." It seems my entertainer was all this while only the
butler, who, in his master's absence, had a mind to cut a figure, and be for a
while the gentleman himself; and to say the truth, he talked politics as well
as most country gentleman do. But nothing could now exceed my confusion upon
seeing the gentleman, with his lady, enter, nor was their surprise, at finding
such company and good cheer, less than ours. "Gentlemen," cried the real master
of the house, to me and my companion, "I am your most humble servant; but I
protest this is so unexpected a favor, that I almost sink under the
obligation." However unexpected our company might be to him, his, I am sure,
was still more to us, and I was struck dumb with the apprehensions of my own
absurdity, when whom should I next see enter the room but my dear miss Arabella
Wilmot, who was formerly designed to be married to my son George; but whose
match was broken off, as already related. As soon as she saw me, she flew to my
arms with the utmost joy. "My dear sir," cried she, "to what happy acci^dent is
it that we owe so unexpected a visit? I am sure my uncle and aunt will be in
raptures when they find they have the good Dr. Primrose for their guest." Upon
hearing my name, the old gentleman and lady very politely stepped up, and
welcomed me with most cordial hospitality. Nor could they forbear smiling upon
being informed of the nature of my present visit: but the unfortunate butler,
whom they at first seemed disposed to turn away, was, at my intercession,
forgiven.

Mr. Arnold and his lady, to whom the house belonged now, insisted upon having
the pleasure of my stay for some days, and as their niece, my charming pupil,
whose mind, in some measure, had been formed under my own instructions, joined
in their entreaties, I complied. That night I was shown to a magnificent
chamber, and the next morning early, Miss Wilmot desired to walk with me in the
garden, which was decorated in the modern manner. After some time spent in
pointing out the beauties of the place, she enquired with seeming unconcern,
when last I had heard from my son George. Alas! Madam, cried I, he has now been
near three years absent, without ever writing to his friends or me. Where he is
I know not; perhaps I shall never see him or happiness more. No, my dear Madam,
we shall never more see such pleasing hours as were once spent by our fireside
at Wakefield. My little family are now dispersing very fast, and poverty has
brought not only want, but infamy upon us. The good-natured girl let fall a
tear at this account; but as I saw her possessed of too much sensibility, I
forbore a more minute detail of our sufferings. It was, however, some
consolation to me to find that time had made no alteration in her affections,
and that she had rejected several matches that had been made her since our
leaving her part of the country. She led me round all the extensive
improvements of the place, pointing to the several walks and arbours, and at
the same time catching from every object a hint for some new question relative
to my son. In this manner we spent the forenoon, till the bell summoned us in
to dinner, where we found the manager of the strolling company, who was come to
dispose of tickets for the Fair Penitent, which was to be acted that evening,
the part of Horatio by a young gentleman who had never appeared on any stage
before. He seemed to be very warm in the praises of the new performer, and
averred, that he never saw any who bid so fair for excellence. Acting he
observed was not learned in a day; But this gentleman, continued he, seems born
to tread the stage. His voice, his figure, and attitudes, are all admirable. We
caught him up accidentally in our journey down. This account in some measure,
excited our curiosity, and, at the entreaty of the ladies, I was prevailed upon
to accompany them to the playhouse, which was no other than a barn. As the
company with which I went was incontestably the chief of the place, we were
received with the greatest respect, and placed in the front seat of the
theater; where we sat for some time with no small impatience to see Horatio
make his appearance. The new perfomer advanced at last, and I found it was my
unfortunate son. He was going to begin, when, turning his eyes upon the
audience, he perceived us, and stood at once speechless and immovable. The
actors behind the scenes, who ascribed this pause to his natural timidity,
attempted to encourage him; but instead of going on, he burst into a flood of
tears, and retired off the stage. I don't know what were the sensations I felt;
for they succeeded with too much rapidity for description: but I was soon
awaked from this disagreeable reverie by Miss Wilmot, who, pale and with a
trembling voice, desired me to conduct her back to her uncle's. When got home,
Mr. Arnold, who was as yet a stranger to our extraordinary behavior, being
informed that the new performer was my son, sent his coach, and an invitation,
for him; and as he persisted in his refusal to appear again upon the stage, the
players put another in his place, and ^e soon had him with us. Mr. Arnold gave
him the kindest reception, and I received him with my usual transport; for I
could never counterfeit false resentment. Miss Wilmot's reception was mixed
with seeming neglect, and yet I could perceive she acted a studied part. The
tumult in her mind seemed not yet abated; she said twenty giddy things that
looked like joy, and then laughed loud at her own want of meaning. At intervals
she would take a sly peep at the glass, as if happy in the consciousness of
unresisting beauty, and often would ask questions, without giving any manner of
attention to the answers.

END of the FIRST VOLVME.
THE VICAR OF WAKEFIELD: A TALE.

Supposed to be written by HIMSELF.

Sperate miseri, cavote foelices.

VOL. II.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR WILLIAM MENTZ, AND SOLD BY MOST OF THE BOOKSELLERS
IN AMERICA. M,DCC,LXXII.

CHAP. I. The history of a philosophic vagabond, pursuing novelty, but losing
content.
AFTER we had supped, Mrs. Arnold politely offered to send a couple of her
footmen for my son's baggage, which he at first seemed to decline; but upon her
pressing the request, he was obliged to inform her, that a stick and a wallet
were all the moveable things upon this earth that he could boast of. "Why, aye,
my son," cried I, "you left me but poor, and poor I find you are come back; and
yet I make no doubt you have seen a great deal of the world." -- "Yes, Sir,"
replied my son, "but traveling after fortune, is not the way to secure her;
and, indeed, of late, I have desisted from the pursuit," -- "I fancy Sir,"
cried Mrs Arnold," "that the account of your adventures would be amusing: the
first part of them I have often heard from my niece: but could the company
prevail for the rest, it would be an additional obligation." -- "Madam,"
replied my son, "I can promise you the pleasure you have in hearing, will not
be half so great as my vanity in the recital and yet in the whole narrative I
can scarce promise you one adventure, as my account is not of what I did, but
what I saw. The first misfortune of my life, which you all know was great; but
though it distressed, it could not sink me. No person ever had a better knack at
hoping than I. The less kind I found fortune then, the more I expected from her
another time, and being now at the bottom of her wheel, every new revolution
might lift, but could not depress me. I proceeded therefore, toward London in
a fine morning no way uneasy about to morrow, but cheerful as the birds that
caroll'd by the road. I comforted myself with various reflections, that London
was the true mart where abilities of every kind were sure of meeting
distinction and reward.

"Upon my arrival in town, Sir, my first care was to deliver your letter of
recommendation to your cousin who was himself in little better circumstances
than me. My first scheme, you know, Sir, was to be the usher at an academy, and
I asked his advice on the affair. Our cousin received the proposal with a true
Sardonic grin. Aye, cried he, this is a pretty career, indeed, that has been
chalked out for you. I have been once an usher at a boarding school myself; and
may I die by an anodyne necklace, but I had rather be an under turnkey in
Newgate. I was up early and late: I was brow-beat by the master, hated for my
ugly face by the mistress, worried by the boys within and never permitted to
stir out to meet civility abroad. But are you sure you are fit for a school?
Let me examine you a little. Have you been bred apprentice to the business? No.
Then you will not do for a school. Can you dress the boys hair? No. Then you will not
do for a school. Have you had the small pox? No. Then you will not do for a
school. Can you lie three in a bed? No. Then you will never do for a school?
H^ve you got a good stomach? Yes. Then you will by no means do for a school.
No, Sir, if you are for genteel easy profession bind yourself seven years as an
apprentice to turn a cutler's wheel; but avoid a school by any means. But come,
continued he, I see you are a lad of spirit and some learning, what do you
think of commencing author, like me? You have read in books, no doubt, of men
of genius starving at the trade: but at present I Will show you forty very dull
fellows about town that live by it in opulence. All honest jogg trotmen, who go
on smoothly and dully, and write history and politics, and are praised; and
who, had they been bred cobblers, would all their lives have only mended shoes,
but never made them."

"Finding that there was no great degree of gentility affixed to the character
of an usher, I resolved to accept his proposal; and having the highest respect
for literature, I hailed the antiqua matter of Grub-street with reverence. I
thought it my glory to pursue a track which Dryden and Otway trod* before me.
In fact, I considered the goddess of this region as the parent of excellence;
and however an intercourse with the world might give us good sense, the poverty
she granted was the nurse of genius! Big with these reflections, I sat down,
and finding that the best things remained to be said on the wrong side, I
resolved to write a book that should be wholly new. I therefore dressed up three
paradoxes with some ingenuity. They were false, indeed, but they were new. The
jewels of truth have been so often imported by others, that nothing was left
for me to import but some splendid things that at a distance looked every bit
as well. Witness you powers what fancied importance sat perched upon my quill
while I was writing. The whole learned world, I made no doubt, would rise to
oppose my systems; but then I was prepared to oppose the whole learned world.
Like the porcupine I sat self collected, with a quill pointed against every
opposer"

"Well said my boy," cried I, "and what subject did you treat upon? I hope you
did not pass over the importance of Hierarchial monogamy. But I interrupt, go
on; you published your paradoxes; well, and what did the learned world say to
your paradoxes?"

"Sir," replied my son, "the learned world said nothing to my paradoxes?
nothing at all, Sir. Every man of them was employed in praising his friends and
himself, or condemning his enemies; and unfortunately, as I had neither, I
suffered the cruellest mortification, neglect."

"As I was meditating one day in a coffee-house on the fate of my paradoxes, a
little man happening to enter the room, placed himself in the box before me,
and after some preliminary discourse, finding me to be a scholar, drew out a
bundle of proposals, begging me to subscribe to a new edition he was going to
give the world of Propertius, with notes. This demand necessarily produced a
reply that I had no money; and that concession led him on to enquire into the
nature of my expectations. Finding that my expectations were just as great is
my p^e, I see, cried he, you are unacquainted with the to^^* I Will teach you a
part of it. Look at these proposals, upon these very proposals I have subsisted
very comfortably for twelve years. The moment a nobleman returns from his
travels, a Creolian arrives from Jamaica, or a dowager from her country seat, I
strike for a subscription. I first besiege their hearts with flattery, and then
pour in my proposals at the breach. If they subscribe readily the first time, I
renew my request to beg a dedication fee. If they let me have that, I smite
them once more for engraving their coat of arms at the top. Thus, continued he,
I live by vanity and laugh at it. But between ourselves, I am now too well
known, I should be glad to borrow your face a bit: a nobleman of distinction
has just returned from Italy; my face is familiar to his porter; but if you
bring this copy of verses, my life for it you succeed, and we divide the spoil."

"Bless us, George," cried I, "and is that the employment of poets now! Do men
of their exalted talents thus stoop to beggary! Can they so far disgrace their
calling, as to make a vile traffic of praise for bread!"

"O no, Sir," returned he, "a true poet can never be so base; for wherever
there is genius there is pride. The creatures I now describe are only beggars
in rhyme. The real poet, as he braves every hardship for fame, so he is equally
a coward to contempt, and none but those who are unworthy protection condescend
to solicit it."

"Having a mind too proud to stoop to such indignities, and yet a fortune too
humble to hazard a second attempt for fame, I was now obliged to take a middle
course, and write for bread. But I was unqualified for a profession where mere
industry alone could ensure success. I could not suppress my lurking passion
for applause: but usually consumed that time in efforts after excellence which
takes up but little room, when it should have been more advantageously employed
in the diffusive productions of fruitful mediocrity. My little piece would come
forth in the midst of a periodical publication, unnoticed and unknown. The
public were more importantly employed, than to observe the easy simplicity of
my style, or the harmony of my periods. Sheet after sheet was thrown off to
oblivion. My essays were buried among the essays upon liberty, eastern ta^^ and
cures for the bite of a mad dog; while Philau^ Philalethes, Philelutheros, and
Philanthropos, all wrote better, because they wrote faster, than I."

"Now, therefore, I began to associate with none but disappointed authors, like
myself, who praised, deplored, and despised each other. The satisfaction we
found in every celebrated writer's attempts, was inversely as their merits. I
found that no genius in another could please me. My unfortunate paradoxes had
entirely dried up that source of comfort. I could neither read nor write with
satisfaction; for excellence in another was my aversion, and writing was my
trade."

"In the midst of these gloomy reflections, as I was one day sitting on a bench
in St. James's park, a young gentleman of distinction who had been my intimate
acquaintance at the university, approached me. We saluted each other with some
hesitation, he almost ashamed of being known to one who made so shabby an
appearance, and I afraid of a repulse. But my suspicions soon vanished; for Ned
Thornhill was at the bottom a very good-natured fellow."

"What did you say, George?" interrupted I. "Thornhill, was not that his name?
it can certainly be no other than my landlord." -- "Bless me," cried Mrs.
Arnold, "is Mr. Thornhill so near a neighbor of yours? He has long been a
friend in our family, and we expect a visit from him shortly."

"My friend's first care," continued my son, "was to alter my appearance by a
very fine suit of his own clothes, and then I was admitted to his table upon
the footing of half-friend, half-underling. My business was to attend him at
auctions, to put him in spirits when he sat for his picture, to take the left
hand in his chariot when not filled by another, and to assist at tattering a
kip, as the phrase was, when we had a mind for a frolic. Besides this, I had
twenty other little employments in the family. I was to do many small things
without bidding; to carry the corkscrew; to stand godfather to all the butler's
children; to sing when I was bid; to be never out of humor; always to be
humble, and, if I cou^^ to be happy."

"In this ^nourable post, however, I was not without a rival. A captain of
marines, who seemed formed for the place by nature, opposed me in my patron's
affections. His mother had been laundress to a man of quality, and thus he
early acquired a taste for pimping and pedigree. As this gentleman made it the
study of his life to be acquainted with lords, though he was dismissed from
several for his stupidity; yet he found many of them who permitted his
assiduities, being as dull as himself. As flattery was his trade, he practiced
it with the easiest address imaginable; but it came awkward and stiff from me;
and as every day my patron's desire of flattery increased, so every hour being
better acquainted with his defects, I became more unwilling to give it. Thus I
was once more fairly going to give up the field to the captain, when my friend
found occasion for my asistance. This was nothing less than to fight a duel for
him, with a gentleman whose sister it was pretended he had used ill. I readily
complied with his request, and though I see you are displeased at my conduct, yet
as it was a debt indispensably due to friendship, I could not refuse. I
undertook the affair disarmed my antagonist, and soon after had the pleasure of
finding that the lady was only a woman of the town, and the fellow her bully
and a sharper. This piece of service was repaid with the warmest professions of
gratitude; but as my friend was to leave town in a few days, he knew no other
method to serve me, but by recommending me to his uncle Sir William Thornhill,
and another nobleman of great distinction, who enjoyed a post under the
government. When he was gone, my first care was to carry his recommendatory
letter to his uncle, a man whose character for every virtue was universal yet
just. I was received by his servants (...) the most hospitable smiles; for the
looks of the domestics ever transmit their master's benevolence. Being shown
into a grand apartment, where Sir William soon came to me, I delivered my
message and letter, which he read, and after pausing some minutes, Pray, Sir,
cried he, inform me what you have done for my kinsman, to deserve this warm
recommendation? But I suppose, Sir, I guess at your merits, you h^^e fought for
him; and so you would expect a reward ^m me, for being the instrument of his
vices. I wish, sincerely wish^ that my present refusal may be some punishment
for your guilt; but still more, that it may be some inducement to your
repentance. -- The severity of this rebuke I bore patiently, because I knew it
was just. My whole expectations now, therefore, lay in my letter to the great
man. As the doors of the nobility are almost ever beset with beggars, all ready
to thrust in some sly petition, I found it no easy matter to gain admittance.
However, after bribing the servants with half my worldly fortune, I was at last
shown into a spacious apartment, my letter being previously sent up for his
lordship's inspection. During this anxious interval I had full time to look
round me. Every thing was grand, and of happy contrivance: the paintings, the
furniture, the gildings, petrified me with awe, and raised my idea of the
owner. Ah, thought I to myself, how very great must the possessor of all these
things be, who carries in his head the business of the state, and whose house
displays half the wealth of a kingdom: sure his genius must be unfathomable!
During these awful reflections I heard a step come heavily forward. Ah, this is
the great man himself; No, it was only a chambermaid. Another foot was heard
soon after. This must be He! No, it was only the great man's valet de chamber.
At last his lordship actually made his appearance. Are you, cried he, the
bearer of this here letter? I answered with a bow. I learn by this" continued
he, "as how that -- But just at that instant a servant delivered him a card,
and without taking farther notice, he went out of the room, and left me to
digest my own happiness at leisure. I saw no more of him* till told by a
footman that his lordship was going to (...) coach at the door. Down I
immediately followed, (...) joined my voice to that of three or four more, who
came, like me, to petition for favors. His lordship, however, went too fast
for us, and was gaining his chariot door with large strides, when I hallooed
out to know if I was to have any reply. He was by this time got in, and
muttered an answer, half of which only I heard, ^he other half was lost in the
rattling of his chariot wheels. I stood for some time with my neck stretched
out, in the p^^^ure of one that was listening, to catch the glorious sounds
till looking round me, I found myself alone at his lordship's gate."

"My patience," continued my son, "was now quite exhausted: stung with the
thousand indignities I had met with, I was willing to cast myself away, and
only wanted the gulf to receive me. I regarded myself as one of those vile
things that nature designed should be thrown by into her lumber room, there to
perish in unpitied obscurity. I had still however, half a guninea left, and of
that I thought fortune herself should not deprive me: but in order to be sure
of this I was resolved to go instantly and spend it while I had it, and then
trust to occurrences for the rest. As I was going along with this resolution,
it happened that Mr. Cripse's office seemed invitingly open to give me a
welcome reception. In this office Mr. Cripse kindly offers all his majesty's
subjects a generous promise of 30 l. a year, for which promise all they give in
return is their liberty for life, and permission to let him transport them to
America as slaves. I was happy at finding a place where I could lose my fears
in desperation, and therefore entered this cell; for it had the appearance of
one, being dark, damp, and dirty. Here I found a number of poor creatures, all
in circumstances like myself, expecting the arival of Mr. Cripse, presenting a
true epitome of English impatience. Each untractable soul at variance with
fortune, wre^ked her injuries on their own hearts: but Mr. Cripse at last came
down, and all our murmurs were hushed. He deigned to regard me with an air of
peculiar approbation, and indeed he was the first man who for a month past
talked to me with smiles. After a few questions, he found I was fit for every
thing in the world. He paused a while upon the properest means of providing for
me, and slapping his forehead, as if he had found it, assured me, that there
was at that time an embassy talked of from the synod of Pennsylvania to the
Chickasaw Indians, and that he would use his interest to get me made secretary.
I knew in my own heart that the fellow lied, and yet his promise gave me
pleasure, there was something so magnificent in the sound. I fairly, therefore,
divide any half guinea, one half of which went to be added to his thirty
thousand pounds, and with the other half I resolved to go to the next tavern,
to be there more happy than he.

"As I was going out with that resolution, I was met at the door by the captain
of a ship, with whom I had formerly some little acquaintance, and he agreed to
be my companion over a bowl of punch. As I never chose to make a secret of my
circumstances, he assured me that I was upon the very point of ruin, in
listening to the office-keeper's promises; for that he only designed to sell me
to the plantations." "But," continued he, "I fancy you might, by a much shorter
voyage, be very easily put into a genteel way of bread. Take my advi^e. My ship
sails tomorrow for Amsterdam; what if you go in her as a passenger? The moment
you land all you have to do is to teach the Dutchmen English, and I Will warrant
you will get pupils and money enough. I suppose you understand English," added
he, "by this time, or the duece is in it." I confidently assured him of that;
but expressed a doubt whether the Dutch would be willing to learn English. He
affirmed with an oath that they were fond of it to distraction; and upon that
affirmation I agreed with his proposal, and embarked the next day to teach the
Dutch English in Holland. The wind was fair, our voyage short, and after having
paid my passage with half my movables, I found myself, fallen as if from the
skies, a stranger in one of the principal streets of Amsterdam. In this
situation I was unwilling to let any time pass unemployed in teaching. I
addressed myself therefore to two or three of those I ^et, whose appearance
seemed most promising; but it was impossible to make ourselves mutually
understood. It was not till this very moment I recollected, that in order to
teach Dutchmen English, it was necessary that they should first teach me Dutch.
How I came to overlook so obvious an objection, is to me amazing; but certain
it is I overlooked it.

This scheme thus blown up, I had some thoughts of fairly shipping back to
England again; but happening into company with an Irish student, who was
returning from Louvain, our conversation turning upon topics of literature,
(for by the way it may be observed, that I always forgot the meanness of my
circumstances when I could converse upon such subjects) from him I learned that
there were not two men in his whole university who understood Greek. This
amazed me. I instantly resolved to travel to Louvain, and there live by
teaching Greek; and in this design I was heartened by my brother student, who
threw out some hints that a fortune might be got by it.

I set boldly forward the next morning. Every day lessened the burden of my
movables, like Aesop and his basket of bread; for I paid them for my lodgings
to the Dutch as I traveled on. When I came to Louvain, I was resolved not to
go sneaking to the lower professors, but openly tendered my talents to the
principal himself. I went, had admittance, and offered him my service as a
master of the Greek language, which I had been told was a desideratum in his
university. The principal seemed at first to doubt of my abilities; but of
these I offered to convince him, by turning a part of any Greek author he
should fix upon into Latin. Finding me perfectly earnest in my proposal, he
addressed me thus: "You see me, young man," continued he, I never learned
Greek, and I don't find that I ever missed it. I have had a doctor's cap and
gown without Greek: I have ten thousand florins a year without Greek: and I eat
heartily without Greek. In short," continued he, "I don't know Greek, and I do
not believe there is any use in it."

I was now too far from home to think of returning: so I resolved to go
forward. I had some knowledge of music, with a tolerable voice, and now turned
what was once my ^^^sement into a present means of bare subsistence. I passed
among the harmless peasants of Flanders, and among such of the French as were
poor enough to be very merry; for I ever found them sprightly in proportion to
their wants. Whenever I approached a peasant's house toward night-fall, I
played one of my most merry tunes, and that procured me not only a lodging, but
subsistence for the next day. I once or twice attempted to play for people of
fashion; but they still thought my performance odious, and never rewarded me
even with a trifle. This was to me the more extraordinary, as whenever I used
formerly to play for company, when playing was my amusement, my music never
failed to throw them into raptures, and the ladies especially; but as it was
now my only means, it was received with contempt: a proof how ready the world
is to under-rate those talents which a man lives by.

In this manner I proceeded to Paris, with no design but just to look about me,
and then to go forward. The people of Paris are much fonder of strangers that
have money, than of those that have wit. You may imagine then, as I could not
boast much of either, that I was no great favorite. After I had walked about
the town four or five days, and seen the outsides of the best houses, I was
preparing to leave this retreat of venal hospitality, when passing through one
of the principal streets, whom should I meet but our cousin, to whom you first
recommended me. This meeting was very agreeable to me, and I believe not
displeasing to him. He enquired into the nature of my journey to Paris, and
informed me of his business there, which was to collect pictures, medals,
intaglios, and antiques of all kinds, for a gentleman in London, who had just
stepped into taste and a large fortune. I was still more surprised at seeing our
cousin pitched upon for this office, as himself had often assured me he knew
nothing of the matter. Upon my asking how he had been taught the art of a
connoscento so very suddenly, he assured me that nothing was more easy. The
whole secret consisted in a strict adherence to two rules: the one always to
observe, that the picture might have been better if the painter had taken more
pains; and the other, to praise the works of Pietro* Perugino. But, says he, as
I once taught you how to be an author in London, I Will now undertake to instruct
you in the art of picture buying at Paris.

With this proposal I very readily closed, as it was a living, and now all my
ambition was to live. I went therefore to his lodgings, improved my dress by
his assistance, and after some time, accompanied him to auctions of pictures*
where the English gentry were expected to be purchasers. I was not a little
surprised at his intimacy with people of the best fashion, who referred
themselves to his judgment upon every picture or medal, as to an unerring
standard of taste. He made very good use of my assistance upon these occasions;
for when asked his opinion, he would gravely take me aside, and ask mine,
shrug, look wise, return, and assure the company, that he could give no opinion
upon an affair of so much importance. Yet there was sometimes an occasion for a
more supported assurance. I remember to have seen him, after giving his opinion
that the coloring of a picture was not mellow enough, very deliberately take a
brush with brown varnish, that was accidently lying in the place, and rub it
over the piece with great composure before all the company, and then ask if he
had not improved the tints.

When he had finished his commission in Paris, he left me strongly recommended
to several men of distinction, as a person very proper for a traveling tutor;
and I was after some time employed in that capacity by a gentleman who brought
his ward to Paris, in order to set him forward on his tour through Europe. I
was to be the young gentleman's governor, with this injunction, that he should
always be permitted to direct himself. My pupil in fact understood the art of
guiding in money concerns much better than I. He was heir to a fortune of about
two hundred thousand pounds, left him by an uncle in the West Indies; and his
guardians, to qualify him for the management of it, had bound him apprentice to
an attorney. Thus avarice was his prevailing passion: all his questions on the
road were, how money might be saved; which was the least expensive course of
travel; whether any thing could be bought that would turn to account when
disposed of again in London. Such curiosities on the way as could be seen for
nothing he was ready enough to look at; but if the sight was to be paid for, he
usually asserted that he had been told it was not worth seeing. He never paid a
bill, that he would not observe, how amazingly expensive traveling was, and
all this though he was not yet come to the age of twenty-one. When arrived at
Leghorn, as we took a walk to look at the port and shipping, he enquired the
expense of the passage by sea home to England. This he was informed was but a
trifle, compared to his returning by land, he was therefore unable to withstand
the temptation; so paying me the small part of my salary that was then due, he
took leave, and embarked with only one attendant for London.

I now therefore was left once more upon the world at large, but then it was a
thing I was used to. However my skill in music could avail me nothing in a
country where every peasant was a better musician than I; but by this time I
had acquired another talent, which answered my purpose as well, and this was a
skill in disputation. In all the foreign universities and convents, there are
upon certain days philosophical theses maintained against every adventitious
disputant; for which, if the champion opposes with any dexterity, he can claim
a gratuity in money, a dinner, and a bed for one night. In this manner
therefore I fought my way toward England, walked along from city to city,
examined mankind more nearly, and, if I may so express it, saw both sides of
the picture. My remarks however, were few: I found that monarchy was the best
government for the poor to live in, and common wealths for the rich. I found
that riches in general were in every country another name for freedom; and that
no man is so fond of freedom himself that he would not choose to subject the
will of some individuals of societ^ (...) own.

Upon my arrival in England, I resolved to pay my respects first to you, and
then to enlist as a volunteer in the first expedition that was sent out; but on
my journey down my resolutions were changed, by meeting an old acquaintance,
who I found belonged to a company of comedians, that were going to make a
summer campaign in the country. The company seemed not much to disapprove of me
for an associate. They all, however, apprized me of the importance of the task
at which I aimed; that the public was a many headed monster, and that only such
as had very good heads could please it: that acting was not to be learned in a
day; and that without some traditional shrugs, which had been on the stage, and
only on the stage, these hundred years, I could never pretend to please. The
next difficulty was in fitting me with parts, as almost every character was in
keeping. I was driven, for some time, from one character to another, till at
last Horatio was fixed upon, which the presence of the present company happily
hindered me from acting."

CHAP. II. The short continuance of friendship amongst the vicious, which is
coeval only with mutual satisfaction.
MY son's account was too long to be delivered at once, the first part of it
was begun that night, and he was concluding the rest after dinner the next day,
when the appearance of Mr. Thornhill's equipage at the door seemed to make a
pause in the general satisfaction. The butler, who was now become my friend in
the family, informed me with a whisper, that the 'Squire had already made some
overtures to Miss Wilmot, and that her aunt and uncle seemed highly to approve
the match. Upon Mr. Thornhill's entering, he seemed, at seeing my son and me,
to start back; but I readily imputed that to surprise, and not displeasure.
However, upon our advancing to salute him, he returned our greeting with the
most apparent candor; and after a short time, his presence seemed only to
increase the general good humor.

After tea he called me aside, to enquire after my daughter; but upon my
informing him that my enquiry was unsuccessful, he seemed greatly surprised;
adding, that he had been since frequently at my house, in order to comfort the
rest of my family, whom he left perfectly well. He then asked if I had
communicated her misfortune to Miss Wilmot, or my son; and upon my replying
that I had not told them as yet, he greatly approved my prudence and
precaution, desiring me by all means to keep it a secret; "For at best," cried
he, it is but divulging one's own infamy; and perhaps Miss Livy may not be so
guilty as we all imagine. We were here interrupted by a servant, who came to
ask the 'Squire in, to stand up at country dances; so that he left me quite
pleased with the interest he seemed to take in my concerns. His addresses,
however, to Miss Wilmot, were too obvious to be mistaken; and yet she seemed
not perfectly pleased, but bore them rather in compliance to the will of her
aunt, than from real inclination. I had even the satisfaction to see her lavish
some kind looks upon my unfortunate son, which the other could neither extort
by his fortune nor assiduity. Mr. Thornhill's seeming composure, however, not a
little surprised me: we had now continued here a week, at the pressing
instances of Mr. Arnold; but each day the more tenderness Miss Wilmot showed my
son, Mr. Thornhill's friendship seemed proportionably to increase for him.

He had formerly made us the most kind assurances of using his interest to
serve the family; but now his generosity was not confined to promises alone:
the morning I designed for my departure, Mr. Thornhill came to me with looks of
real pleasure to inform me of a piece of service he had done for his friend
George. This was nothing less than his having procured him an ensign's
commission in one of the regiments that was going to the West Indies, for which
he had promised but one hundred pounds, his interest having been sufficient to
get an abatement of the other two. "As for this trifling piece of service,"
continued the young gentleman, I desire no other reward but the pleasure of
having served my friend; and as for the hundred pound to be paid, if you are
unable to raise it yourselves, I will advance it, and you shall repay me at
your leisure. This was a favor we wanted words to express our sense of: I
readily therefore gave my bond for the money, and testified as much gratitude
as if I never intended to pay.

George was to depart for town the next day to secure his commission, in
pursuance of his generous patron's directions, who judged it highly expedient
to use dispatch, lest in the mean time another should step in with more
advantageous proposals. The next morning, therefore, our young soldier was
early prepared for his departure, and seemed the only person among us that was
not affected by it. Neither the fatigues and dangers he was going to encounter,
nor the friends and mistress, for Miss Wilmot actually loved him, he was
leaving behind, any way damped his spirits. After he had taken leave, of the
rest of the company, I gave him all I had, my blessing. "And now, my boy,"
cried I, thou art going to fight for thy country, remember how thy brave
grandfather fought for his sacred king, when loyalty among Britons was a
virtue. Go, my boy, and imitate him in all but his misfortunes, if it was a
misfortune to die with Lorld Falkland. Go, my boy, and if you fall, though
distant, exposed and unwept by those that love you, the most precious tears are
those with which heaven bedews the unburied head of a soldier.

The next morning I took leave of the good family, that had been kind enough to
entertain me so long, not without several expressions of gratitude to Mr.
Thornhill for his late bounty. I left them in the enjoyment of all that
happiness which affluence and good breeding procure, and returned toward home,
despairing of ever finding my daughter more, but sending a sigh to heaven to
spare and to forgive her. I was now come within about twenty miles of home,
having hired an horse to carry me, as I was yet but weak, and comforted myself
with the hopes of soon seeing all I held dearest upon earth. But the night
coming on, I put up at a little public house by the road-side, and asked for
the landlord's company over a pint of wine. We sat beside his kitchen fire,
which was the best room in the house, and chatted on politics and the news of
the country. We happened, among other topics, to talk of young 'Squire
Thornhill, whom the host assured me was hated as much as an uncle of his, who
sometimes came down to the country, was loved. He went on to observe, that he
made it his whole study to betray the daughters of such as received him to
their houses, and after a fortnight or three weeks possession, he turned them
out unregarded and abandoned to the world. As we continued our discourse in
this manner, his wife, who had been out to get change, returned, and perceiving
that her husband was enjoying a pleasure in which she was not a sharer, she
asked him, in an angry tone, what he did there, to which he only replied in an
ironical way by drinking her health. "Mr. Symmonds," cried she, you use me very
ill, and I Will bear it no longer. Here three parts of the business is left for
me to do, and the fourth left unfinished; while you do nothing but soak with
the guests all day long, whereas if a spoonful of liquor were to cure me of a
fever, I never touch a drop. I now found what she would be at, and immediately
poured her out a glass, which she received with a curtesy, and drinking toward
my good health, "Sir," resumed she, it is not so much for the value of the
liquor I am angry, but one cannot help it, when the house is going out of the
windows. If the customers or guests are to be dunned, all the burden lies upon
my back, he would as lief eat that glass as budge after them himself. There now
above stairs, we have a young woman who has come to take up her lodgings here,
and I don't believe she has got any money by her over civility. I am certain
she is very slow of payment, and I wish she were put in mind of it. -- What
signifies minding her, cried the host, "if she be slow, she is sure." -- "I
don't know that," replied the wife; but I know that I am sure she has been here
a fortnight, and we have not yet seen the cross of her money. -- "I suppose, my
dear," cried he, we shall have it all in a lump. -- "In a lump!" cried the
other, I hope we may get it any way; and that I am resolved we shall this very
night, or out she tramps, bag and baggage. -- "Consider, my dear," cried the
husband, she is a gentlewoman, and deserves more respect. -- "As for the matter
of that," returned the hostess, gentle or simple, out she shall p^ck with a
sa^^rara. Gentry may be good things where they take, but for my part I never
saw much good of them at the sign of the Harrow. -- Thus saying, she ran up a
narrow flight of stairs, that went from the kitchen to a room over head, and I
soon perceived by the loudness of her voice, and the bitterness of her
reproaches, that no money was to be had from her lodger. I could hear her
remonstrances very distinctly* "Out, I say, pack out this moment, tramp, thou
(...) famous strumpet, or I Will give thee a mark thou will not be the better for
this three months. What! you trumpery, to come and take up an honest house,
without cross or coin to bless yourself with; come along, I say." -- "O dear
madam," cried the stranger, "pity me, a poor abandoned creature for one night,
and death will soon do the rest." -- I instantly knew the voice of my poor
ruined child Olivia. I flew to her rescue, while the woman was dragging her
along by the hair, and caught the dear forlorn wretch in my arms. -- "Welcome,
any way welcome, my dearest lost one, my treasure, to your poor old father's
bosom. Though the vicious forsake thee, there is yet one in the world that will
never forsake thee; though thou had ten thousand crimes to answer for, he will
forget them all." -- "O my own dear" -- for minutes she could no more -- "my
own dearest good papa! Could angels be kinder! How do I deserve so much! The
villain, I hate him and myself, to be a reproach to such goodness. You cannot
forgive me, I know you cannot." -- "Yes, my child, from my heart I do forgive
thee! Only repent, and we both shall yet be happy. We shall see many pleasant
days yet, my Olivia!" -- "Ah! never, sir, never. The rest of my wretched life
must be infamy abroad and shame at home. But, alas! papa, you look much paler
than you used to do. Could such a thing as I am give you so much uneasiness?
Sure you have too much wisdom to taste the miseries of my guilt upon yourself."
-- "Our wisdom, young woman," replied I. -- "Ah, why so cold a name, papa*"
cried she. "This is the first time you ever called me by so cold a name" -- I
ask pardon, my darling," returned I; "but I was going to observe, that wisdom
makes but a slow defense against trouble, though at last a sure one."

The landlady now returned to know if we did not choose a more genteel
apartment, to which assenting, we were shown a room, where we could converse
more freely. After we had talked ourselves into some degree of tranquillity, I
could not avoid desiring some account of the gradations that led to her present
wretched situation. "That villain, sir," said she, "from the first day of our
meeting made me honorable, though private, proprosals."

"Villain indeed," cried I; "and yet it in some measure surprises me, how a
person of Mr. Burchell's good sense and seeming honor could be guilty of such
deliberate baseness, and thus step into a family to undo it."

"My dear papa," returned my daughter, "you labor under a strange mistake, Mr.
Burchell never attempted to deceive me. Instead of that he took every
opportunity of privately admonishing me against the artifices of Mr. Thornhill*
who now I find was even worse than he represented him." -- "Mr. Thornhill,"
interrupted I, "can it be?" -- "Yes, Sir," returned she, "it was Mr. Thornhill
who seduced me, who employed the two ladies, as he called them, but who, in
fact, were abandoned women of the town, without breeding or pity, to decoy us
up to London. Their artifices, you may remember, would have certainly
succeeded, but for Mr. Burchell's letter, who directed those reproaches at
them, which we all applied to ourselves. How he came to have so much influence
as to defeat their intentions, still remains a secret to me; but I am convinced
he was ever our warmest, sincerest friend."

"You amaze me, my dear," cried I; "but now I find my first suspicions of Mr.
Thornhill's baseness were too well grounded: but he can triumph in security;
for he is rich and we are poor. But tell me, my child, sure it was no small
temptation that could thus obliterate all the impressions of such an education,
and so virtuous a disposition as thine."

"Indeed, Sir," replied she, "he owes all his triumph to the desire I had of
making him, and not myself, happy. I knew that the ceremony of our marriage,
which was privately performed by a popish priest, was no way binding, and that
I had nothing to trust to but his honor." "What," interrupted I, "and were you
indeed married by a priest, and in orders." -- "Indeed. Sir, we were," replied
she, "though we were both sworn to conceal his name." -- "Why then, my child,
come to my arms again, and now you are a thousand times more welcome than
before: for you are now his wife to all intents and purposes: nor can all the
laws of man, though written upon tables of adamant, lessen the force of that
sacred connection."

"Alas, papa," replied she, "you are but little acquainted with his villainies:
he has been married already, by the same priest, to six or eight wives more,
whom, like me, he has deceived and abandoned."

"Has he so?" cried I, "then we must hang the priest, and you shall inform
against him to morrow." -- "But, Sir," returned she, "will that be right, when
I am sworn to secrecy?" -- "My dear," I replied, "if you have made such a
promise, I cannot, nor will not, tempt you to break it. Even though it may
benefit the public, you must not inform against him. In all human institutions
a smaller evil is allowed to procure a greater good; as in politics, a province
may be given away to secure a kingdom; in medicine, a limb may be lopt off, to
preserve the body. But in religion the law is written, and inflexible, never to
do evil. And this law, my child, is right: for otherwise, if we commit a
smaller evil, to procure a greater good, certain guilt would be thus incurred,
in expectation of contingent advantage. And though the advantage should
certainly follow, yet the interval between commission and advantage, which is
allowed to be guilty, may be that in which we are called away to answer for the
things we have done, and the volume of human actions is closed for ever. But I
interrupt you, my dear, go on."

"The very next morning," continued she, "I found what little expectations I
was to have from his sincerity. That very morning he introduced me to two
unhappy women more, whom, like me, he had deceived, but who lived in contented
prostitution. I loved him too tenderly to bear such rivals in his affections,
and strove to forget my infamy in a tumult of pleasures. With this view, I
danced, dressed, and talked; but still was unhappy. The gentlemen who visited
there, told me every moment of the power of my charms, and this only
contributed to increase my melancholy, as I had thrown all their power quite
away. Thus each day I grew more pensive, and he more insolent, till at last the
monster had the assurance to offer me to a young Baronet of his acquaintance.
Need I describe, Sir, how his ingratitude stung me? My answer to this proposal
was almost madness. I desired to part. As I was going he offered me a purse;
but I flung it at him with indignation, and burst from him in a rage, that for
a while kept me insensible of the miseries of my situation. But I soon looked
round me, and saw myself a vile, abject, guilty thing, without one friend in
the world to apply to.

"Just in that interval, a stage-coach happening to pass by, I took a place, it
being my only aim to be driven at a distance from a wretch I despised and
detested. I was set down here, where, since my arrival, my own anxiety, and
this woman's unkindness, have been my only companions. The hours of pleasure
that I have passed with my mamma and sister, now grow painful to me. Their
sorrows are much; but mine are greater than theirs; for mine are guilt and
infamy."

"Have patience, my child," cried I, "and I hope things will yet be better.
Take some repose tonight, and tomorrow I Will carry you home to your mother,
and the rest of the family, from whom you will receive a kind reception. Poor
woman, this has gone to her heart: but she loves you still, Olivia, and will
forget it."

CHAP. III. Offenses are easily pardoned where there is love at bottom.
THE next morning I took my daughter behind me, and set out on my return home.
As we traveled along, I strove by every persuasion, to calm her sorrows and
fears, and to arm her with resolution to bear the presence of her offended
mother. I took every opportunity, from the prospect of a fine country, through
which we passed to observe how much kinder Heaven was to us, than we were to
each other, and that the misfortunes of nature's making were very few. I
assured her, that she should never perceive any change in my affections, and
that during my life, which yet might be long, she might depend upon a guardian
and an instructor. I armed her against the censures of the world, showed her,
that books were sweet unreproaching companions to the miserable, and that if
they could not bring us to enjoy life, they would teach us to endure it.

The hired horse that we rode was to be put up that night at an inn by the way,
within about five miles from my house, and as I was willing to prepare my
family for my daughter's reception, I determined to leave her that night at the
inn, and to come for her, acompanied by my daughter Sophia, early the next
morning. It was night before we reached our appointed stage: however, after
seeing her provided with a decent apartment, and having ordered the hostess to
prepare proper refreshments, I kissed her, and proceeded toward home. My heart
caught new sensations of pleasure the nearer I approached that peaceful
mansion. As a bird that has been frighted from its nest, my affections out-went
my haste, and hovered round my little fireside, with all the rapture of
expectation. I called up the many fond things I had to say, and anticipated the
welcome I was to receive. I already felt my wife's tender embrace, and smiled
at the joy of my little ones. As I walked but slowly, the night waned apace.
The laborers of the day were all retired to rest; the lights were out in every
cottage; no sounds were heard but of the shrilling cock, and the deep-mouthed
watch-dog, at hollow distance. I approached my little abode of pleasure, and
before I was within a furlong of the place, our honest mastiff came running to
welcome me.

It was now near midnight that I came to knock at my door: all was still and
silent: my heart dilated with unutterable happiness, when, to my amazement, the
house was bursting out in a blaze of fire, and every ^perture was red with
conflagration! I gave a loud convulsive outcry, and fell upon the pavement
insensible. This alarmed my son, who perceiving the flames, instantly waked my
wife and daughter, and all running, out naked, and wild with apprehension,
recalled me to ^ife with their anguish. But it was only to objects of new
terror; for the flames had, by this time, caught the roof of our dwelling, part
after part continuing to fall in, while the family stood, with silent agony,
looking on, as if they enjoyed the blaze. I gazed upon them and upon it by
turns, and then looked round me for my two little ones; but they were not to be
seen. O misery! "Where," cried I, where are my little ones? -- "They are burnt
to death in the flames," says my wife calmly, "and I will die with them." --
That moment I heard the cry of the babes within, who were just awaked by the
fire, and nothing could have stopped me. "Where, where, are my children?" cried
I, rushing through the flames, and bursting the door of the chamber in which
they were confined, "Where are my little ones?" -- Here, dear-papa, here we
are, cried they together, while the flames were just catching the bed where
they lay. I caught them both in my arms and snatched them through the fire as
fast as possible, while just as I got out, the roof sunk in. "Now," cried I,
holding up my children, now let the flames burn on, and all my possessions
perish. Here they are, I have saved my treasure. Here, my dearest, here are our
treasures, and we shall yet be happy. We kissed our little darlings a thousand
times, they clasped us round the neck, and seemed to share our transports,
while their mother laughed and wept by turns.

I now stood a calm spectator of the flames, and, after some time began to
perceive that my arm to the shoulder was scorched in a terrible manner. It was
therefore out of my power to give my son any assistance, either in attempting
to save our goods, or preventing the flames spreading to our corn. By this
time, the neighbors were alarmed, and came running to our assistance; but all
they could do was to stand, like us, spectators of the calamity. My goods,
among which were the notes I had reserved for my daughters fortunes, were
entirely consumed, except a box, with some papers, that stood in the kitchen,
and two or three things more of little consequence, which my son brought away
in the beginning. The neighbors contributed, however what they could to
lighten our distress. They brought us clothes, and furnished one of our
outhouses with kitchen utensils; so that by daylight we had another, though a
wretched dwelling to retire to. My honest next neighbor, and his children were
not the least assiduous in providing us with every thing necessary, and
offering whatever consolation untuto^ed benevolence could suggest.

When the fears of my family had subsided, curiosity to know the cause of my
long stay began to take place; having therefore informed them of every
particular, I proceeded to prepare them for the reception of our lost one; and
though we had nothing but wretchedness now to impart, yet to procure her a
welcome to what we had. This task would have been more difficult but for o^
recent calamity, which had humbled my wife's pride, and blunted it by more
poignant afflictions. Being unable to go for my poor child myself, as my arm
now grew very painful, I sent my son and daughter, who soon returned,
supporting the wretched delinquent, who had not courage to look up at her
mother, whom no instructions of mine could persuade to a perfect
reconciliation; for women have a much stronger sense of female error than men.
"Ah, madam," cried her mother, this is but a poor place you are come to after
so much finery. My daughter Sophy and I can afford but little entertainment to
persons who have kept company only with people of distinction. Yes, Miss Livy,
your poor father and I have suffered very much of late; but I hope heaven will
forgive you. -- During this reception, the unhappy victim stood pale and
trembling, unable to weep or to reply; but I could not continue a silent
spectator of her distress: wherefore assuming a degree of severity in my voice
and manner, which was ever followed with instant submission, I entreat, woman,
that my words may be now marked once for all: I have here brought you back a
poor deluded wanderer; her return to duty demands the revival of our
tenderness. The real hardships of life are now coming fast upon us, let us not
therefore increase them by dissension among each other. If we live harmoniously
together, we may yet be contented, as there are enough of us here to shut out
the censuring world, and keep each other in countenance. The kindness of heaven
is promised to the penitent, and let ours be directed by the example. Heaven,
we are assured, is much more pleased to view a repentant sinner, than many
persons who have supported a course of undeviating rectitude. And this is
right; for that single effort by which we stop short in the down-hill path to
perdition, is itself a greater exertion of virtue, than an hundred acts of
justice.

CHAP. IV. None but the guilty can be long and completely miserable.
SOME assiduity was now required to make our present abode as convenient as
possible, and we were soon again qualified to enjoy our former serenity. Being
disabled myself from assisting my son in our usual occupations, I read to my
family from the few books that were saved, and particularly from such, as, by
amusing the imagination, contributed to ease the heart. Our good neighbors too
came every day with the kindest condolence, and fixed a time in which they were
all to assist at repairing my former dwelling. Honest farmer Williams was not
last among these visitors; but heartily offered his friendship. He would even
have renewed his addresses to my daughter; but she rejected them in such a
manner as totally repressed his future solicitations. Her grief seemed formed
for continuing, and she was the only person of our little society that a week
did not restore to cheerfulness. She now lost that unblushing innocence which
once taught her to respect herself, and to seek pleasure by pleasing. Anxiety
now had taken strong possession of her mind, her beauty began to be impared
with her constitution, and neglect still more contributed to diminish it. Every
tender epithet, bestowed on her sister brought a pang to her heart and a tear
to her eye; and as one vice, though cured, almost ever plants others where it has
been, so her former guilt, though driven out by repentance, left jealousy and
envy behind. I strove a thousand ways to lessen he^ care, and even forgot my
own pain in a concern for here is, collecting such amusing passages of history,
as a strong memory and some reading could suggest. Our happiness, my dear, I
would say, is in the power of one who can bring it about a thousand unforeseen
ways, that mock our foresight. If example be necessary to prove this, I Will give
you a story, my child, told us by a grave, though sometimes a romancing,
historian.

Matilda was married very young to a Neapolitan nobleman of the first quality,
and found herself a widow and a mother at the age of fifteen. As she stood one
day caressing her infant son in the open window of an apartment, which hung
over the river Volturna, the child, with a sudden spring leaped from her arms
into the flood below, and disappeared in a moment. The mother, struck with
instant surprise, and making an effort to save him, plunged in after; but, far
from being able to assist the infant, she herself with great difficulty escaped
to the opposite shore, just when some French soldiers were plundering the
country on that side, who immediately made her their prisoner.

As the war was then carried on between the French and Italians with the utmost
inhumanity, they were going at once to perpetrate those two extremes, suggested
by appetite and cruelty. This base resolution, however, was opposed by a young
officer, who, though their retreat required the utmost expedition, placed her
behind him, and brought her in safety to his native city. Her beauty at first
caught his eye, her merit soon after his heart. They were married; he rose to
the highest posts; they lived long together, and were happy. But the selicity
of a soldier can never be called permanent: after an interval of several years
the troops, which he commanded having met with a repulse, he was obliged to
take shelter in the city where he had lived with his wife. Here they suffered a
siege, and the city at length was taken. Few histories can produce more various
instances of cruelty, than those which the French and Italians at that time
exercised upon each other. It was resolved by the victors, upon this occasion,
to put all the French prisoners to death; but particularly the husband of the
unfortunate Matilda, as he was principally instrumental in protracting the
siege. Their determinations were, in general executed almost as soon as
resolved upon. The captive soldier was led forth, and the executioner, with his
sword, stood ready, while the spectators in gloomy silence awaited the fatal
blow, which was only suspended till the general, who presided as judge, should
give the signal. It was in this interval of anguish and expectation, that
Matilda came to take her last farewell of her husband and deliverer, deploring
her wretched situation and the cruelty of fate, that had saved her from
perishing by a premature death in the river Volturna, to be the spectator of
still greater calamities. The general, who was a young man, was struck with
surprise at her beauty, and pity at her distress; but with still stronger
emotions when he heard her mention her former dangers. He was her son, the
infant for whom she had encountered so much danger. He acknowledged her at once
as his mother and fell at her feet. The rest may be easily supposed: the
captive was set free, and all the happiness that love, friendship, and duty
could confer on each, were united.

In this manner I would attempt to amuse my daughter; but she listened with
divided attention; for her own misfortunes engrossed all the pity she once had
for those of another, and nothing gave her ease. In company she dreaded
contempt: and in solitude she only found anxiety. Such was the color of her
wretchedness, when we received certain information, that Mr. Thornhill was
going to be married to Miss Wilmot, for whom I always suspected he had a real
passion, though he took every opportunity before me to express his contempt both
of her person and fortune. This news only served to increase poor Olivia's
affliction; such a flagrant breach of fidelity, was more than her courage could
support. I was resolved, however, to get more certain information, and to
defeat, if possible, the completion of his designs, by sending my son to old
Mr. Wilmot's, with instructions to know the truth of the report, and to deliver
Miss Wilmot a letter, intimating Mr. Thornhill's conduct in my family. My son
went, in pursuance of my directions, and in three days returned, assuring us of
the truth of the account; but that he had found it impossible to deliver the
letter, which he was therefore obliged to leave, as Mr. Thornhill and Miss
Wilmot were visiting round the country. They were to be married, he said, in a
few days, having appeared together at church the Sunday before he was there, in
great splendor, the bride attended by six young ladies dressed in white, and
he by as many gentlemen. Their approaching nuptials filled the whole country
with rejoicing, and they usually rode out together in the grandest equipage
that had been seen in the country for many years. All the friends of both
families, he said, were there, particularly the 'Squire's uncle, Sir William
Thornhill, who bore so good a character. He added, that nothing but mirth and
feasting were going forward; that all the country praised the young bride's
beauty and the bridegroom's fine person, and that they were immensely fond of
each other; concluding, that he could not help thinking Mr. Thornhill one of
the most happy men in the world.

"Why let him if he can," returned I: but, my son, observe this bed of straw,
and unsheltering roof; those mouldering walls, and humid floor; my wretched
body thus disabled by fire, and my children weeping round me for bread; you
have come home, my child, to all this, yet here, even here you see a man that
would not for a thousand worlds exchange situations. O, my children, if you
could but learn to commune with your own hearts, and know what noble company
you can make them, you would little regard the elegance and splendours of the
worthless. Almost all men have been taught to call life a passage and
themselves the travelers. The similitude still may be improved when we observe
that the good are joyful and serene, like travelers that are going toward
home; the wicked but by intervals happy, like travelers that are going into
exile.

My compassion for my poor daughter, overpowered by this new disaster* (...)
^pted what I had farther to observe. I bade her mother support her, and after a
short time she recovered. She appeared from this time more calm, and I imagined
had gained a new degree of resolution: but appearances deceived me: for her
tranquillity was the languor of over wrought resentment. A supply of
provisions, charitably sent us by my kind parishioners, seemed to diffuse
cheerfulness amongst the rest of the family, nor was I displeased at seeing
them once more sprightly and at ease. It would have been unjust to damp their
satisfactions, merely to condole with resolute melancholy, or to burden them
with a sadness they did not feel. Once more therefore, the tale went round and
the song was demanded, and cheerfulness condescended to hover round our little
habitation.

CHAP. V, Fresh calamities.
THE next morning the sun arose with peculiar warmth for the season; so that we
agree (...) breakfast together at the honey-suckle bank: wh^re, while we sat
my youngest daughter, at my request, joined her voice to the concert on the
trees about us. It was here my poor Olivia first met her seducer, and every
object served to recall her sadness. But that melancholy, which is excited by
objects of pleasure, or inspired by sounds of harmony, sooths the heart instead
of corroding it. Her mother too, upon this occasion, felt a pleasing distress,
and wept, and loved her daughter as before. "Do, my pretty Olivia," cried she,
let us have that little melancholy air your p^p^ was so fond of, your sister
Sophy has already obliged us. Do, child, it will please your old father. She
complied in a manner so exquisitely pathetic as moved me.

WHEN lovely woman stoops to folly,
And finds too late that men betray,
What charm can sooth her melancholy,
What art can wash her guilt away?
The only art her guilt to cover,
To hide her shame from every eye,
To give repentance to her lover,
And wring his bosom -- is to die.
As she was concluding the last stanza, to which an interruption in her voice
from sorrow gave peculiar softness, the appearance of Mr. Thornhill's equipage
at a distance alarmed us all, but particularly increased the uneasiness of my
eldest daughter, who, desirous of shunning her betrayer, returned to the house
with her sister. In a few minutes he was alighted from his chariot, and making
up to the place where I was still sitting, enquired after my health with his
usual air of familiarity." Sir, "replied I, your present assurance only serves
to aggravate the baseness of your character; and there was a time when I would
have chastised your insolence, for presuming thus to appear before me. But now
you are safe; for age has cooled my passions, ^d my calling restrains them.

"I vow, my dear sir," returned he, I am amazed at all this; nor can I
understand what it means! I hope you don't think your daughter's late excursion
with me had any thing criminal in it.

"Go," cried I, thou art a wretch, a poor pitiful wretch, and every way a liar;
but your meanness secures you from my anger! Yet, sir, I am descended from a
family that would not have borne this! And so, thou vile thing, to gratify a
momentary passion, thou have made one poor creature wretched for life, and
polluted a family that had nothing but honor for their portion.

"If she or you," returned he, are resolved to be miserable, I cannot help it.
But you may still be happy; and whatever opinion you may have formed of me, you
shall ever find me ready to contribute to it. We can readily marry her to
another, and what is more, she may keep her lover beside; for I protest I shall
ever continue to have a true regard for her.

I found all my passions awakened at this new degrading proposal; for though
the mind may often be calm under great injuries, little villainy can at any
time get within the soul, and sting it into rage. -- Avoid my sight, thou
reptile, cried I, nor continue to insult me with thy presence. Were my brave
son at home, he would not suffer this; but I am old, and disabled, and every
way undone.

"I find," cried he, you are bent upon obliging me to talk in an harsher manner
than I intended. But as I have shown you what may be hoped from my friendship,
it may not be improper to represent what may be the consquences of my
resentment. My attorney, to whom your late bond has been transferred, threatens
hard, nor do I know how to prevent the course of justice, except by paying the
money myself, which, as I have been at some expenses lately, previous to my
intended marriage, it is not so easy to be done. And then my steward talks of
driving for the rent: it is certain he knows his duty; for I never trouble
myself with affairs of that nature. Yet still I could wish to serve you, and
even to have you and your daughter present at my marriage, which is shortly to
be solemnized with Miss Wilmot: it is even the request of my charming Arabella
herself, whom I hope you will not refuse.

"Mr. Thornhill," replied I, hear me once for all: as to your marriage with any
but my daughter, that I never will consent to; or though your friendship could
raise me to a throne, and your resentment sink me to the grave, yet would I
despise both. Thou have once woefully, irreparably deceived me. I reposed my
heart upon thine honor, and have found it is baseness. Never more, therefore,
expect friendship from me. Go and possess what fortune has given thee, beauty,
riches, health, and pleasure. Go, and leave me to want, infamy, disease, and
sorrow. Yet humbled as I am, shall my heart still vindicate its dignity, and
though thou have my forgiveness, thou shall ever have my contempt.

"If so," returned he, depend upon it you shall feel the effects of this
insolence, and we shall shortly see which is the fittest object of scorn, you
or I. -- Upon which he departed abruptly.

My wife and son, who were present at this interview, seemed terrified with the
apprehension. My daughters also finding that he was gone, came out to be
informed of the result of our conference, which, when known, alarmed them not
less than the rest. But as to myself I disregarded the utmost stretch of his
malevolence: he had already struck the blow, and now I stood prepared to repel
every new effort. Like one of those instruments used in the art of war, which,
however, thrown, still presents a point to receive the enemy.

We soon, however found that he had not threatened in vain; for the very next
day his steward came to demand my annual rent, which, by the train of accidents
already related, I was unable to pay. The consequence of my incapacity was his
driving my cattle that evening, and their being appraised and sold the next day
for less than half their value. My wife and children now therefore entreated me
to comply upon any terms, rather than incur certain destruction. They even
begged of me to admit his visits once more, and used all their little eloquence
to paint the calamities I was going to endure: the terrors of a prison, in so
rigorous a season as the present, with the danger that threatened my health
from the late accident that happened by the fire. But I continued inflexible.

"Why, my treasures," cried I, why will you thus attempt to persuade me to the
thing that is not right! My duty has taught me to forgive him; but my
conscience will not permit me to approve. Would you have me applaud to the
world what my heart must internally condemn? Would you have me tamely sit down
and flatter our infamous betrayer; and to avoid a prison continually suffer the
more galling bonds of mental confinement! No, never. If we are to be taken from
this abode, only let us hold to the right, and wherever we are thrown, we can
still retire to a charming apartment, and look round our own hearts with
intrepidity and with pleasure!

In this manner we spent that evening. Early the next morning, as the snow had
fallen in great ab^^dance in the night, my son was employed in clearing it
away, and opening a passage before the door. He had not been thus engaged long,
when he came running in, with looks all pale, to tell us that two strangers,
whom he knew to be officers of justice, were making toward the house.

Just as he spoke, they came in, and approaching the bed where I lay, after
previously informing me of their employment and business, made me their
prisoner, bidding me prepare to go with them to the county goal, which was
eleven miles off.

"My friends," said I, this is severe weather on which you have come to take me
to a prison; and it is particularly unfortunate at this time, as one of my arms
has lately been burnt in a terrible manner, and it has thrown me into a slight
fever, and I want clothes to cover me, and I am now too weak and old to walk
far in such deep snow: but if it must be so, I Will try to obey you.

I then turned to my wife and children, and directed them to get together what
few things were left us, and to prepare immediately for leaving this place. I
entreated them to be expeditious and desired my son to assist his elder sister,
who, from a consciousness that she was the cause of all our calamities, was
fallen, and had lost anguish in insensibility. I encouraged my wife, who, pale
and trembling, clasped our affrighted little ones in her arms, that clung to
her bosom in silence, dreading to look round at the strangers. In the mean time
my youngest daughter prepared for our departure, and as she received several
hints to use dispatch, in about an hour we were ready to depart.

CHAP. VI. No situation, however wretched it seems, but has some sort of
comfort attending it.
WE set forward from this peaceful neighborhood, and walked on slowly. My
eldest daughter being enfeebled by a slow fever, which had begun for some days
to undermine her constitution, one of the officers, who had an horse, kindly
took her behind him; for even these men cannot entirely divest themselves of
humanity. My son led one of the little ones by the hand, and my wife the other,
while I leaned upon my youngest girl, whose tears fell not for her own but my
distresses.

We were now got from my late dwelling about two miles, when we saw a crowd
running and shouting behind us, consisting of about fifty of my poorest
parishioners. These, with dreadful imprecations soon seized upon the two
officers of justice, and swearing they would never see their minister go to
gaol while they had a drop of blood to shed in his defense, were going to use
them with great severity. The consequence might have been fatal, had I not
immediately interposed, and with some difficulty rescued the officers from the
hands of the enraged multitude. My children who looked upon my delivery now as
certain, appeared transported with joy, and were incapable of containing their
raptures. But they were soon undeceived, upon hearing me address the poor
deluded people, who came, a^^ they imagined, to do me service.

"What! my friends, cried I, and is this the way you love me! Is this the
manner you obey the instructions I have given you from the pulpit! Thus to fly
in the face of justice, and bring down ruin on yourselves and me! Which is your
ringleader? Show me the man that has thus seduced you. As sure as he lives he
shall feel my resentment. Alas! my dear deluded flock, return back to the duty
you owe to God, to your country and to me. I shall yet perhaps one day see you
in greater felicity here, and contribute to make your lives more happy. But let
it at least be my comfort when I pen my fold for immortality, that not one here
shall be wanting.

They now seemed all repentance, and melting into tears, came one after the
other to bid me farewell. I shook each tenderly by the hand, and leaving them
my blessing, proceeded forward without meeting any farther interruption. Some
hours before night we reached the town, or rather village; for it consisted but
of a few mean houses, having lost all its former opulence, and retaining no
marks of its ancient superiority but the gaol.

Upon entering, we put up at an inn, where we had such refreshments as could
most readily be procured, and I supped with my family with my usual
cheerfulness. After seeing them properly accomodated for that night, I next
attended the sheriff's officers to the prison, which had formerly been built
for the purposes of war, and consisted of one large apartment, strongly grated,
and paved with stone, common to both felons and debtors at certain hours in the
four and twenty. Besides this, every prisoner had a separate cell, where he was
locked in for the night.

I expected upon my entrance to find nothing but lamentations, and various
sounds of misery; but it was very different. The prisoners seemed all employed
in one common design, that of forgetting thought in merriment or clamor. I was
apprized of the usual perquisite required upon these occasions, and immediately
complied with the demand, though the little money I had was very near being all
exhausted. This was immediately sent away for liquor, and the whole prison soon
was filled with riot, laughter, and profaneness.

"How," cried I to myself, shall men so very wicked be cheerful, and shall I be
melancholy! I feel only the same confinement with them, and I think I have more
reason to be happy.

With such reflections I labored to become cheerful; but cheerfulness was
never yet produced by effort, which is itself painful. As I was sitting
therefore in a corner of the gaol, in a pensive posture, one of my fellow
prisoners came up, and sitting by me, entered into conversation. It was my
constant rule in life never to avoid the conversation of any man who seemed to
desire it: for if good, I might profit by his instruction: if bad, he might be
assisted by mine. I found this to be a knowing man, of strong unlettered sense;
but a thorough knowledge of the world, as it is called, o^ more properly
speaking, of human nature on the wrong side. He asked me if I had taken care to
provide myself with a bed, which was a circumstance I had never once attended
to.

"That Is unfortunate," cried he, as you are allowed here nothing but straw, and
your appartment is very large and cold. However, you seem to be something of a
gentleman, and as I have been one myself in my time, part of my bed-cloaths are
heartily at your service.

I thanked him, professing my surprise at finding such humanity in a gaol in
misfortunes; adding, to let him see that I was a scholar, That the sage ancient
seemed to understand the value of company in affliction when he said, Ton
kosmon air, ei dos ton etairon^ and in fact, continued I, what is the World if
i^ affords only solitude?

"You talk of the world, Sir," returned my fe^ prisoner; " the world is in its
dotage, and yet the cosmog^ or creation of the world has puzzled the
philosophers of ev^ age. What a medley of opinions have they not broached (...)
the creation of the world. Sanconiathon, Manetho, Berosus, ^ Ocollus Lucanus
have all attempted it in vain. The latter these words, Anarchon ara kai
atelutation to pan, which ^plies -- "I ask pardon, Sir," cried I, "for
^^^terrupting so much learning; but I think I have heard all this before. Have
I not had the pleasure of once seeing you at Welbridge fair, and is not your
name Ephraim Jenkinson?" At this demand he only sighed. "I suppose you must
recollect," resumed I, "one Doctor Primrose, from whom you bought a horse."

He now at once recollected me; for the gloominess of the place and the
approaching night had prevented his distinguishing my features before. -- "Yes,
Sir," returned Mr. Jenkinson, "I remember you perfectly well, I bought an
horse, but forgot to pay for him. Your neighbor Flamborough is the only
prosecutor I am any way afraid of at the next assizes: for he intends to swear
positively against me as a coiner. I am heartily sorry, Sir, I ever deceived
you, or indeed any man: for you see," continued, he, showing his shackles,
"what my tricks have brought me to."

"Well, sir," replied I, "your kindness in offering me assistance, when you
could expect no return, shall be repaid with my endeavors to soften or totally
suppress Mr. Flamborough's evidence, and I will send my son to him for that
purpose the first opportunity; nor do I in the least doubt but he will comply
with my request, and as to my own evidence, you need be under no uneasiness
about that."

"Well, sir," cried he, "all the return I can make shall be yours. You shall
have more than half my bedcloaths to night, and I Will take care to stand your
friend in the prison, where I think I have some influence."

I thanked him, and could not avoid being surprised at the present youthful
change in his aspect, for at the time I had seen him before, he appeared at
least sixty. -- 'Sir," answered he, "you are little acquainted with the world;
I had at that time false hair, and have learnt the art of counterfeiting every
age from seventeen to seventy. Ah sir, had I but bestowed half the pains in
learning a trade, that I have in learning to be a scoundrel, I might have been
a rich man at this day. But rogue as I am, still I may be your friend, and that
perhaps when you least expect it."

We were now prevented from further conversation, by the arrival of the
gaoler's servants, who came to call over the prisoners names, and lock up for
the night. A fellow also, with a bundle of straw for my bed attended, who led
me along a dark narrow passage into a room paved like the common prison, and in
one corner of this I ^ead my bed, and the clothes given me by my fell^
prisoner; which done, my conducter who was (...) ^ugh, bade me a good night.
After my usual ^editations, and having praised my heavenly corrector, ^ laid
myself down and slept with the utmost tranquillity ^^ll morning.

CHAP. VII. A reformation in the gaol. To make laws complete they should reward
as well as punish.
THE next morning early I was awakened by my family, whom I found in tears at
my bedside. The gloomy-strength of every thing about us, it seems, had daunted
them. I gently rebuked their sorrow, assuring them I had never slept with
greater tranquillity, and next enquired after my eldest daughter, who was not
among them. They informed me that yesterday's uneasiness and fatigue had
increased her fever, and it was judged proper to leave her behind. My next care
was to send my son to procure a room or two to lodge the family in, as near the
prison as conveniently could be found. He obeyed; but could only find one
apartment, which was hired at a small expense, for his mother and sisters, the
jailer with humanity consenting to let him and his two little brothers lie in
the prison with me. A bed was therefore prepared for them in a corner of the
room, which I thought answered very conveniently. I was willing however
previously to know whether my little children chose to lie in a place which
seemed to fright them upon entrance.

"Well," cried I, "my good boys, how do you like your bed? I hope you are not
afraid to lie in this room, dark as it appears."

"No, papa" says Dick, "I am not afraid to lie any where, where you are."

"And I," says Bill, who was yet but four years old, "love every place best
that my papa is in."

After this, I allotted to each of the family what they were to do. My daughter
was particularly directed to watch her declining sister's health; my wife was
to attend me; my little boys were to read to me: "And as for you, my son,"
continued I, "it is by the labor of your hands we must all hope to be
supported. Your wages, as a day labourer, will be full sufficient, with proper
frugality, to maintain us all, and comfortably too. Thou art now sixteen years
old, and have strength, and it was given to thee, my son, for very useful
purposes; for it must save from famine your helpless parents and family.
Prepare then this evening to look out for work against tomorrow, and bring
home every night what money you earn, for our support."

Having thus instructed him, and settled the rest, I walked down to the common
prison, where I could enjoy more air and room. But I was not long there when
the execrations, lewdness, and brutality that invaded me on every side, drove
me back to my apartment again. Here I sat for some time, pondering upon the
strange infatuation of wretches, who finding all mankind in open arms against
them, were, however laboring to make themselves a future and a tremendous
enemy.

Their insensibility excited my highest compassion, and blotted my own
uneasiness a while from my mind. It even appeared as a duty incumbent upon me
to attempt to reclaim them. I resolved therefore once more to return, and in
spite of their contempt to give them my advice, and conquer them by
perseverance. Going therefore among them again, I informed Mr. Jenkinson of my
design, at which he laughed, but communicated it to the rest. The proposal was
received with the greatest good humor, as it promised to afford a new fund of
entertainment to persons who had now no other resource for mirth, but what
could be derived from ridicule or debauchery.

I therefore read them a portion of the service with a loud unaffected voice,
and found my audience perfectly merry upon the occasion. Lewd whispers* groans
of contrition burlesqued, winking and coughing, alternately excited laughter.
However, I continued with my natural solemnity to read on, sen^ible that what I
did might amend some, but could it (...) receive no contamination from any.

After reading, I entered upon my exhortation, which was rather calculated at
first to amuse them than to reprove. I previously observed, that no other
motive but their welfare could induce me to this; that I was their fellow
prisoner, and now gained nothing by preaching. I was sorry, I said, to hear
them so very profane; because they got nothing by it, but might lose a great
deal: "For be assured, my friends," cried I, for you are my friends, however
the world may disclaim your friendship, though you swore twelve thousand oaths
in a day, it would not put one penny in your purse. Then what signifies calling
every moment upon the devil, and courting his friendship, since you find how
scurvily he uses you? He has given you nothing here, you find, but a mouthful
of oaths and an empty belly; and by the best accounts I have of him, he will
give you nothing that is good hereafter.

"If used ill in our dealings with one man, we naturally go elsewhere. Were it
not worth your while then, just to try how you may like the usage of another
master, who gives you fair promises at least to come to him? Surely, my
friends, of all stupidity in the world, his must be greatest, who after robbing
an house, runs to the thief-takers for protection. And yet how are you more
wise? You are all seeking comfort from him that has already betrayed you,
applying to a more malicious being than any thief-taker of them all; for they
only decoy, and then hang you but he decoys, and hangs, and, what is worst of
all, will not let you loose after the hangman has done."

When I had concluded, I received the compliments of my audience, some of whom
came and shook me by the hand, swearing that I was a very honest fellow, and
that they desired my further acquaintance. I therefore promised to repeat my
lecture next day, and actually conceived some hopes of making a reformation
here; for it had ever been my opinion, that no man was past the hour of
amendment, every heart lying open to the shafts of reproof, if the archer could
but take a proper aim. When I had thus satisfied my mind, I went back to my
apartment, where my wife had prepared a frugal meal, while Mr. Jenkinson begged
leave to add his dinner to ours, and partake of the pleasure, as he was kind
enough to express it, of my conversation. He had not yet seen my family, for as
they came to my apartment by a door in the narrow passage, already described,
by this means they avoided the common prison. Jenkinson at the first interview
therefore seemed not a little struck with the beauty of my youngest daughter,
which her pensive air contributed to heighten, and my little ones did not pass
unnoticed.

"Alas, Doctor," cried he, "these children are too handsome and too good for
such a place as this!"

"Why, Mr. Jenkinson," replied I, "thank heaven my children are pretty
tolerable in morals, and if they be good, it matters little for the rest."

"I fancy, sir, returned my fellow prisoner, "that it must give you great
comfort to have this little family about you."

A comfort, Mr. Jenkinson," replied I, "yes it is indeed a comfort, and I would
not be without them for all the world; for they can make a dungeon seem a
palace. There is but one way in this life of wounding my happiness, and that is
by injuring them."

"I am afraid then, sir," cried he, "that I am in some measure culpable; for I
think I see here (looking at my son Moses) "one that I have injured, and by
whom I wish to be forgiven."

My son immediately recollected his voice and features, though he had before
seen him in disguise taking him by the hand, with a smile forgave him. "Yet,"
continued he, "I cannot help wondering at what you could see in my face, to
think me a proper mark for deception."

"My dear sir, returned the other, "it was not your face, but your white
stockings and the black ribband in your hair that allured me But no
disparagement to your parts, I have deceived wiser men than you in my time, and
yet, with all my tricks, the blockheads have been too many for me at last."

"I suppose," cried my son, "that the narrative of such a life as yours must be
extremely instructive and amusing."

"Not much of either," returned Mr. Jenkinson. "Those relations which describe
the tricks and vices only of mankind, by increasing our suspicion in life,
retard our success. The traveller that distrusts every person he meets, and
turns back upon the appearance of every man that looks like a robber, seldom
arrives in time to his journey's end.

"Indeed I think from my own experience I may say, that the knowing one is the
silliest fellow under the sun. I was thought cunning from my very childhood:
when but seven years old the ladies would say that I was a perfect little man;
at fourteen I knew the world, cocked my hat, and loved the ladies; at twenty,
though I was perfectly honest, yet every one thought me so cunning, that not
one would trust me. Thus I was at last obliged to turn sharper in my own
defense, and have lived ever since, my head throbbing with schemes to deceive,
and my heart palpitating with fears of detection.

"I used often to laugh at your honest simple neighbor Flamborough, and one
way or another generally cheated him once a year. Yet still the honest man went
forward without suspicion, and grew rich, while I still continued tricksy and
cunning, and was poor, without the consolation of being honest.

"However," continued he, "let me know your case* and what has brought you
here; perhaps though I have not skill to avoid a goal myself, I may extricate
my friends."

In compliance with his curiosity, I informed him of the whole train of
accidents and follies that had plunged me into my present troubles, and my
utter inability to get free.

After hearing my story, and pausing some minutes, he slapt his forehead, as if
he had hit upon something material, and took his leave, saying he would try
what could be done.

CHAP. VIII. The same Subject continued.
THE next morning I communicated to my wife and children the scheme I had
planned of reforming the prisoners, which they received with universal
disapprobation, alleging the impossibility and impropriety of it; adding, that
my endeavors would no way contribute to their amendment, but might probably
disgrace my calling.

"Excuse me," returned I, these people, however fallen, are still men, and that
is a very good title to my affections. Good council rejected, returns to enrich
the giver's bosom; and though the instruction I communicate may not mend them,
yet it will assuredly mend myself. If these wretches, my children, were
princes, there would be thousands ready to offer their ministry; but, in my
opinion, the heart that is buried in a dungeon is as precious as that seated
upon a throne. Yes, my treasures, if I can mend them I will; perhaps they will
not all despise me. Perhaps I may catch up even one from the gulf, and that
will be great gain; for is there upon earth a gem so precious as the human soul?

Thus saying, I left them, and descended to the common prison, where I found
the prisoners very merry, expecting my arrival: and each prepared with some
goal trick to play upon the doctor. Thus, as I was going to begin, one turned
my wig awry, as if by accident, and then asked my pardon. A second, who stood
at some distance, had a knack of spitting through his teeth, which fell in
showers upon my book. A third would cry amen in such an affected tone, as gave
the rest great delight. A fourth has slily picked my pocket of my spectacles.
But there was ^he whose trick gave more universal pleasure than all the rest;
for observing the manner in which I had disposed my books on the table before
me, he very dexterously displaced one of them, and put an obscene jest-book of
his own in the place. However I took no notice of all that this mischievous
groupe of little beings could do; but went on, perfectly sensible that what was
ridiculous in my attempt, would excite mirth only the first or second time,
while what was serious would be permanent. My design succeeded, and in less
than six days some were penitent, and all attentive.

It was now that I applauded my perseverance and address, at thus giving
sensibility to wretches divested of every moral feeling, and now began to think
of doing them temporal services also, by rendering their situation somewhat
more comfortable. Their time had hitherto been divided between famine and
excess, tumultuous riot and bitter repining. Their only employment was
quarrelling among each other, playing cribbage, and cutting tobacco stoppers.
From this last mode of idle industry I took the hint of setting such as chose
to work at cutting pegs for tobacconists and shoemakers, the proper wood being
bought by a general subscription, and when manufactured, sold by my
appointment; so that each earned something every day: a trifle indeed, but
sufficient to maintain him.

I did not stop here, but instituted fines for the punishment of immorality,
and rewards for peculiar industry. Thus in less than a fortnight I had formed
them into something social and humane, and had the pleasure of regarding myself
as a legislator, who had brought men from their native ferocity into friendship
and obedience.

And it were highly to be wished, that legislative power would thus direct the
law rather to reformation than severity. That it would appear convinced that
the work of eradicating crimes is not by making punishments familiar, but
formidable. Instead of our present, prisons, which find or make men guilty,
which enclose wretches for the commission of one crime, and return them, if
returned alive, fitted for the perpetration of thousands; it were to be wished
we had as in other parts of Europe, places of penitence and solitude, where the
accused might be attended by such as could give them repentance if guilty, or
new motives to virtue if innocent. And this, but not the increasing
punishments, is the way to mend a state: nor can I avoid even questioning the
validity of that right which social combinations have assumed of capitally
punishing offenses of a slight nature. In cases of murder their right is
obvious, as it is the duty of us all, from the law of self-defence, to cut off
that man who has shown a disregard for the life of another. Against such, all
nature rises in arms; but it is not so against him who steals my property.
Natural law gives me no right to take away his life, as by that the horse he
steals is as much his property as mine. If then I have any right, it must be
from a compact made between us, that he who deprives the other of his horse,
shall die. But this is a false compact; because no man has a right to barter
his life, no more than to take it away, as it is not his own. And next the
compact is inadequate, and would be set aside even in a court of modern equity,
as there is a great penalty for a very trifling convenience, since it is far
better that two men should live, than that one man should ride. -- But a
compact that is false between two men, is equally so between an hundred, or an
hundred thousand; for as ten millions of circles can never make a square, so
the united voice of myriads cannot lend the smallest foundation to falsehood.
It is thus that reason speaks, and untutored nature says the same thing.
Savages that are directed nearly by natural law alone are very tender of the
lives of each other; they seldom shed blood but to retaliate former cruelty.

Our Saxon ancestors, fierce as they were in war, had but few executions in
times of peace; and in all commencing governments that have the print of nature
still strong upon them, scarce any crime is held capital.

It is among the citizens of a refined community that penal laws, which are in
the hands of the rich, are laid upon the poor. Government, while it grows
older, seems to acquire the moroseness of age; and as if our possessions were
become dearer in proportion as they increased, as if the more enormous our
wealth, the more extensive our fears, our possessions are paled up with new
edicts every day, and hung round with gibbets to scare every invader.

Whether it is from the number of our penal laws, or the licentiousness of our
people, that this country should show more convicts in a year, than half the
dominions of Europe united? Perhaps it is owing to both; for they mutually
produce each other. When by indiscriminate penal laws a nation beholds the same
punishment affixed to dissimilar degrees of guilt, from perceiving no
distinction in the penalty, the people are led to lose all sense of distinction
in the crime, and this distinction is the bulwark of all morality: thus the
multitude of laws produce new vices, and new vices call for fresh restraints.

It were to be wished then that power, instead of contriving new laws to punish
vice, instead of drawing hard the cords of society till a convulsion come to
burst them, instead of cutting away wretches as useless, before we have tried
their utility, instead of converting correction into vengeance, it were to be
wished that we tried the restrictive arts of government, and made law the
protector, but not the tyrant of the people. We should then find that
creatures, whose souls are held as dross, only wanted the hand of a refiner; we
should then find that wretches, now stuck up for long tortures, lest luxury
should feel a momentary pang, might if properly treated, serve to sinew the
stat^ in times of danger, that, as their faces are like ours, their hearts are
so too; that few minds are so base as that perseverance cannot amend; that a
man may see his last crime without dying for it; and that very little blood
will serve to cement our security.

CHAP. IX. Happiness and misery rather the result of prudence than of virtue in
this life. Temporal evils or felicities are regarded by heaven as things merely
in themselves trifling and unworthy its care in the distribution.
I HAD now been confined more than a fornight, but had not since my arrival
been visited by my dear Olivia, and I greatly longed to see her. Having
communicated my wishes to my wife, the next morning the poor girl entered my
apartment, leaning on her sister's arm. The change which I saw in her
countenance struck me. The numberless graces that once resided there were now
fled, and the hand of death seemed to have molded every feature to alarm me.
Her temples were sunk, her forehead was tense, and a fatal paleness sat upon
her cheek.

"I am glad to see thee, my dear," cried I; "but why this dejection, Livy? I
hope my love, you have too great a regard for me, to permit disappointment thus
to undermine a life which I prize as my own. Be cheerful, child, and we may yet
see happier days."

"You have ever, sir," replied she, "been kind to me, and it adds to my pain
that I shall never have an oppor^unity of sharing that happiness you promise.
Happiness, I fear, is no longer reserved for me here; and I long to be rid of a
place where I have only found distress. Indeed, Sir, I wish you would make a
proper submission to Mr. Thornhill; it may, in some measure, induce him to pity
you, and it will give me relief in dying."

"Never, child," replied I, "I never shall be brought to acknowledge my
daughter a prostitute; for though the world may look upon your offense with
scorn, let it be mine to regard it as a mark of credulity, not of guilt. My
dear, I am no way miserable in this place, however dismal it may seem and be
assured that while you continue to bless m^ ^y living, he shall never have my
consent to make you more wretched by marrying another.

After the departure of my daughter, my fellow prisoner, who was by at this
interview, sensibly enough exp^^^ulated upon my obstinacy, in refusing a
submission, which promised to give me freedom. He observed, that the rest of my
family was not to be sacrificed to the peace of one child alone, and she the
only one who had offended me. "Beside," added he, "I don't know if it be just
thus to obstruct the union of man and wife, which you do at present, by
refusing to consent to a match which you cannot hinder, but may render unhappy."

"Sir," replied I, "you are unacquainted with the man that oppr^sses us. I am
very sensible that no submission I can make could procure me liberty even for
an hour. I am told that even in this very room a debtor of his, no later than
last year, died for want. But though my submission and approbation could
transfer me from hence, to the most beautiful apartment he is possessed of, yet
I would grant (...); as something whispers me that it would be giving a
sanction to adultery. While my daughter lives, no other marriage of of his
shall ever be legal in my eye. Were she removed, indeed, I should be the basest
of men, from any resentment of my own, to attempt putting asunder those who
wish for an union. No, villain as he is, I could then wish him married, to
prevent the consequences of his future debaucheries. But should I not now be
the most cruel of all fathers, to sign an instrument which must send my child
to the grave, merely to avoid a prison myself; and thus to escape one pang,
break my child's heart with a thousand?

He acquiesced in the justice of this answer, but could not avoid observing,
that he feared my daughter's life was already too much wasted to keep me long a
prisoner. "However, continued he, though you refuse to submit to the nephew, I
hope you have no objections to laying your case before the uncle, who has the
first character in the kingdom for every thing that is just and good. I would
advise you to send him a letter by the post intimating all his nephew's ill
usage, and my life for it that in three days you shall have an answer." I
thanked him for the hin^ and instantly set about complying; but I wanted paper,
and unluckily all our money had been laid out that morning in provisions,
however he supplied me.

For the three ensuing days I was in a state of anxiety, to know what reception
my letter might meet with; but in the mean time was frequently solicited by my
wife to submit to any conditions rather than remain here, and every hour
received repeated accounts of the decline of my daughter's health. The third
day and the fourth arrived, but I received no answer to my letter: the
complaints of a stranger against a favorite nephew, were no way likely to
succeed; so that these hopes soon vanished like all my former. My mind,
however, still supported itself though confinement and bad air began to make a
visible alteration in my health, and my arm that had suffered in the fire, grew
worse. But my children still sat by me, and while I was stretched on my straw,
read to me by turns, or listened and wept at my insructions. But my daughter's
health declined faster than mine; every message from her contributed to
increase my apprehensions and pain. The fifth morning after I had written the
letter which was sent to Sir William Thornhill, I was alarmed with an account
that she was speechless. Now it was that confinement was truly painful to me:
my soul was bursting from its prison to be near the pillow of my child, to
comfort, to strengthen her, to receive her last wishes, and teach her soul the
way to heaven! Another account came. She was expiring, and yet I was debarred
the small comfort of weeping by her. My fellow prisoner, some time after, came
with the last account. He bade me be patient. She was dead! -- The next morning
he returned, and found me with my two little ones, now my only companions, who
were using all their innocent efforts to comfort me. They entreated to read to
me, and bid me not to cry, for I was now too old to weep. "And is not my sister
an angel, now, papa," cried the eldest, "and why then are you sorry for her? I
wish I were an angel out of this frightful place, if my papa were with me."
Yes," added my youngest darling, "Heaven where my sister is, is a finer place
than this, and there are none but good people there, and the people here are
very bad."

Mr. Jenkinson interrupted their harmless prattle, by observing that now my
daughter was no more I should seriously think of the rest of my family, and
attempt to save my own life, which was every day declining for want of
necessaries and wholesome air. He added, that it was now incumbent on me to
sacrifice any pride or resentment of my own, to the welfare of those who
depended on me for support; and that I was now, both by reason and justice,
obliged to try to reconcile my landlord.

"Heaven be praised," replied I, "there is no pride left me now, I should
detest my own heart if I saw either pride, or resentment lurking there. On the
contrary, as my oppressor has been once my parishioner, I hope one day to
present him up an unpolluted soul at the eternal tribunal. No, sir, I have no
resentment now, and though he has taken from me what I held dearer than all his
treasures, though he has wrung my heart, for I am sick almost to fainting, very
sick, my fellow prisoner, yet that shall never inspire me with vengeance. I am
now willing to approve his marriage, and if this submission can do him any
pleasure, let him know, that if I have done him any injury, I am sorry for it."
Mr. Jenkinson took pen and ink, and wrote down my submission nearly as I have
expressed it, to which I signed my name. My son was employed to carry the letter
to Mr. Thornhill, who was then at his seat in the country. He went, and in
about six hours returned with a verbal answer. He had some difficulty, he said,
to get a sight of his landlord, as the servants were insolent and suspicious;
but he accidently saw him as he was going out upon business, preparing for his
marriage, which was to be in three days. He continued to inform us, that he
stepped up in the humblest manner, and delivered the letter, which, when Mr.
Thornhill had read, he said that all submission was now too late and
unnecessary; that he had heard of our application to his uncle, which met with
the contempt it deserved; and as for the rest, that all future applications
should be directed to his attorney, not to him. He observed, however, that as
he had a very good opinion of the discretion of the two young ladies, they
might have been the most agreeable intercessors.

"Well, sir," said I to my fellow prisoner, "you now discover the temper of the
man that oppresses me. He can at once be facetious and cruel; but let him use
me as he will, I shall soon be free, in spite of all his bolts to restrain me.
I am now drawing toward an abode that looks brighter as I approach it: this
expectation cheers my afflictions; and though I shall leave an helpless family
of orphans behind me, yet they will not be utterly forsaken; some friend,
perhaps, will be found to assist them for the sake of their poor father, and
some may charitably relieve them for the sake of their heavenly father."

Just as I spoke, my wife, whom I had not seen that day before, appeared with
looks of terror, and making efforts, but unable to speak. "Why, my love," cried
I, "why will you thus increase my affliction by your own; what though no
submissions can turn our severe master, though he has doomed me to die in this
place of wretchedness, and though we have lost a darling child, yet still you
will find comfort in your other children when I shall be no more." "We have
indeed lost," returned she, "a darling child. My Sophia, my dearest, is gone,
snatched from us, carried off by ruffians."

"How, madam," cried my fellow prisoner, " Miss Sophia carried off by villains,
sure it cannot be?"

She could only answer with a fixed look and a flood of tears. But one of the
prisoners wives, who was present, and came in with her, gave us a more distinct
account: she informed us that as my wife, my daughter, and herself, were taking
a walk together on the great road a little way out of the village, a
post-chaise and four drove up to them and instantly stopped. Upon which, a
well-drest man, but not Mr. Thornhill, stepping out, clasped my daughter round
the waist, and forcing her in, bid the postillion drive on, so that they were
out of sight in a moment.

"Now," cried I, "the sum of my miseries is made up, nor is it in the power of
any thing on earth to give me another pang. What! not one left! not to leave me
one! the monster! the child that was next my heart! she had the beauty of an
angel, and almost the wisdom of an angel. But support that woman, nor let her
fall. Not to leave me one!" -- "Alas! my hushand," said my wife, "you seem to
want comfort even more than I. Our distresses are great; but I could bear this
and more, if I saw you but easy. They may take away my children and all the
world, if they leave me but you."

My son, who was present, endeavored to moderate our grief; he bade us take
comfort, for he hoped that we might still have reason to be thankful -- "My
child," cried I, "look round the world, and see if there be any happiness left
me now. Is not every ray of comfort shut out; while all our bright prospects
only lie beyond the grave!" -- "My dear father," returned he, "I hope there is
still something that will give you an interval of satisfaction; for I have a
letter from my brother George," -- "What of him, child," interrupted I, does he
know of our misery. I hope my boy is exempt from any part of what his wretched
family suffers?" -- Yes, sir," returned he, "he is perfectly gay, cheerful, and
happy. His letter brings nothing but good news; he is the favorite of his
colonel, who promises to procure him the very next lieutenancy that becomes
vacant!"

"And are you sure of all this," cried my wife, "are you sure that nothing ill
has befallen my boy?" -- Nothing indeed, madam," returned my son, "you shall
see the letter, which will give you the highest pleasure; and if any thing can
procure you comfort I am sure that will." "But are you sure," still repeated
she, "that the letter is from himself, and that he is really so happy?" --
"Yes, madam," replied he, it is certainly his, and he will one day be the
credit and the support of our family!" -- "Then I thank providence," cried she,
"that my last letter to him has miscarried. Yes, my dear," continued she,
turning to me, "I will now confess that though the hand of heaven is sore upon
us in other instances, it has been favorable here. By the last letter I wrote
my son, which was in the bitterness of anger, I desired him, upon his mother's
blessing, and if he had the heart of a man, to see justice done his father and
sister, and avenge our cause. But thanks be to him that directs all things, it
has miscarried and I am at rest." -- "Woman," cried I, "thou have done very
ill, and at another time my reproaches might have been more severe. Oh! what a
tremendous gulf have thou escaped, that would have buried both thee and him in
endless ruin. Providence, indeed, has here been kinder to us than we to
ourselves. It has reserved that son to be the father and protector of my
children when I shall be away. How unjustly did I complain of being stripped of
every comfort, when I still hear that he is happy and insensible of our
afflictions; still kept in reserve to support his widowed mother, to protect
his brothers and sisters. But what sisters has he left, he has no sisters now,
they are all gone, robbed from me, and I am undone." -- "Father," interrupted
my son, "I beg you will give me leave to read his letter, I know it will please
you." Upon which, with my permission, he read as follows:

Honored Sir,
I Have called off my imagination a few moments from the pleasures that
surround me, to fix it upon objects that are still more pleasing, the dear
little fireside at home. My fancy draws that harmless groupe as listening to
every line of this with great composure. I view those faces with delight which
never felt the deforming hand of ambition or distress! But whatever your
happiness may be at home, I am sure it will be some addition to it* to hear
that I am perfectly pleased with my situation, and every way happy here.

Our regiment is countermanded and is not to leave the kingdom; the colonel,
who professes himself my friend, takes me with him to all companies where he is
acquainted, and after my first visit, I generally find myself received with
increased respect upon repeating it. I danced last night with Lady G --, and
could I forget you know whom, I might be perhaps successful. But it is my fate
still to remember others, while I am myself forgotten by most of my absent
friends, and in this number, I fear, Sir, that I must consider you; for I have
long expected the pleasure of a letter from home to no purpose. Olivia and
Sophia too, promised to write, but seem to have forgotten me. Tell them then
they are two arrant little baggages, and that I am this moment in a most
violent passion with them: yet still, I know not how, though I want to bluster a
little, my heart is respondent only to softer emotions. Then tell them, sir,
that after all, I love them affectionately, and be assured of my ever remaining

Your dutiful son.


"In all our miseries," cried I, "what thanks have we not to return, that one
at least of our family is exempted from what we suffer. Heaven be his guard,
and keep my boy thus happy to be the supporter of his widowed mother, and the
father of these two babes, which are all the patrimony I can now bequeath him.
May he keep their innocence from the temptations of want, and be their
conductor in the paths of honor." I had scarce said these words, when a noise,
like that of a tumult, seemed to proceed from the prison below; it died away
soon after, and a clanking of setters was heard along the passage that led to
my apartment. The keeper of the prison entered, holding a man all bloody,
wounded and fettered with the heaviest irons. I looked with compassion on the
wretch as he approached me, but with horror when I found it was my own son. --
"My George! My George! and do I behold thee thus? Wounded! Fettered! Is this
thy happiness! Is this the manner you return to me! O that this sight could
break my heart at once and let me die!"

"Where, Sir, is your fortitude," returned my son with an intrepid voice. "I
must suffer, my life is ^o^feited, and let them take it; it is my last
happiness that I have committed no murder, though I have lost all hopes of
pardon."

I tried to restrain my passions for a few minutes in silence, but I thought I
should have died with the effort. -- "O my boy, my heart weeps to behold thee
thus, and I cannot, cannot help it. In the moment that I thought thee blessed,
and prayed for thy safety, to behold thee thus again! Chained, wounded. And yet
the death of the youthful is happy. But I am old, a very old man, and have
lived to see this day. To see my children all untimely falling about me, while
I continue a wretched survivor in the midst of ruin! May all the curses that
ever sunk a soul fall heavy upon the murderer of my children. May he live, like
me, to see -- "

"Hold, Sir," replied my son, "or I shall blush for thee. How, Sir, forgetful
of your age, your holy calling, thus to arrogate the justice of heaven, and
fling those curses upward that must soon descend to crush thy own gray head
with destruction! No, Sir, let it be your care now to fit me for that vile
death I must shortly suffer, to arm me with hope and resolution, to give me
courage to drink of that bitterness which must shortly be my portion"

"My child, you must not die: I am sure no offense of thine can deserve so vile
a punishment. My George could never be guilty of any crime to make his
ancestors ashamed of him."

"Mine, Sir," returned my son, "is, I fear, and unpardonable one. I have sent a
challenge, and that is death by a late-act of parliament. When I received my
mother's letter from home, I immediately came down, determined to punish the
betrayer of our honor and sent him an order to meet me, which he answered, not
in person, but by his dispatching four of his domestics to seize me. I wounded
one, but the rest made me their prisoner. The coward is determined to put the
law in execution against me, the proofs are undeniable; and as I am the first
transgressor upon the statute, I see no hopes of pardon. But you have often
charmed me with the lessons of fortitude, let me now, Sir, find them in your
example,"

"And, my son, you shall find them. I am now raised above this world, and all
the pleasures it can produce. From this moment I break from my heart all the
ties that held it down to earth, and will prepare to fit us both for eternity.
Yes, my son, I will point out the way, and my soul shall guide yours in the
ascent, for we will take our flight together. I now see and am convinced you
can expect no pardon here, and I can only exhort you to seek it at that
greatest tribunal where we both shall shortly answer. But let us not be
niggardly in our exhortation, but let all our fellow prisoners have a share:
good jailer, let them be permitted to stand here, while I attempt to improve
them." Thus saying, I made an effort to rise from my straw, but wanted
strength, and was able only to recline against the wall. The prisoners
assembled according to my directions, for they loved to hear my council, my son
and his mother supported me on either side, I looked and saw that none were
wanting, and then addressed them with the following exhortation.

CHAP. X. The equal dealings of providence demonstrated with regard to the
happy and the miserable here below. That from the nature of pleasure and pain,
the wretched must be repaid the balance of their sufferings in the life
hereafter.
MY friends, my children, and fellow sufferers, when I reflect on the
distribution of good and evil here below, I find that much has been given man
to enjoy, yet still more to suffer. Though we should examine the whole world,
we shall not find one man so happy as to have nothing left to wish for; but we
daily see thousands who by suicide show us they have nothing left to hope. In
this life then it appears that we cannot be entirely blessed, but yet we may be
completely miserable!

Why man should thus feel pain, why our wretchedness should be requisite in the
formation of universal felicity, why, when all other systems are made perfect
only by the perfection of their subordinate parts, the great system should
require for its perfection, parts that are not only subordinate to others, but
imperfect in themselves? These are questions that never can be explained, and
might be useless if known. On this subject providence has thought fit to elude
our curiosity, satisfied with granting us motives to consolation

In this situation, man has called in the friendly assistance of philosophy,
and heaven seeing the incapacity of that to console him, has given him the aid
of religion. The consolations of philosophy are very amusing, but often
fallacious. It tells us that life is filled with comforts, if we will but enjoy
them; and on the other hand, that though we unavoidably have miseries here,
life is short, and they will soon be over. Thus do these consolations destroy
each other; for if life is a place of comfort, its shortness must be misery,
and if it be long, our griefs are protracted. Thus philosophy is weak; but
religion comforts in an higher strain. Man is here, it tells us, sitting up his
mind, and preparing it for another abode. When the good man leaves the body and
is all a glorious mind, he will find he has been making himself a heaven of
happiness here, while the wretch that has been maimed and contaminated by his
vices shrinks from his body with terror, and finds that he has anticipated the
vengeance of heaven. To religion then we must hold in every circumstance of
life for our truest comfort; for if already we are happy, it is a pleasure to
think that we can make that happiness unending, and if we are miserable, it is
very consoling to think that there is a place of rest. Thus to the fortunate
religion holds out a continuance of bliss, to the wretched a change from pain.

But though religion is very kind to all men, it has promised peculiar reward
to the unhappy; the sick, the naked, the houseless, the heavy-laden, and the
prisoner^ have ever most frequent promises in our sacred law. The author of our
religion every where professes himself the wretch's friend, and unlike the
false ones of this world bestows all his caresses upon the forlorn. The
unthinking have censured this as partiality, as a preference with out merit to
deserve it. But they never reflect that it is not in the power even of heaven
itself to make the offer of unceasing felicity as great a gift to the happy as
to the miserable. To the first eternity is but a single blessing^ since at most
it but increases what they already possess. To the latter it is a double
advantage; for it diminishes their pain here, and rewards them with heavenly
bliss hereafter.

But providence is in another respect kinder to the poor than the rich; for as
it thus makes the life after death more desirable, so it smooths the passage
there. The wretched have long familiarity with every face of terror. The man of
sorrows lays himself quietly down, he has no possessions to regret, and but few
ties to stop his departure: he feels only nature's pang in the final
separation, and this is no way greater than he has often fainted under before;
for after a certain degree of pain, every new breach that death opens in the
constitution, nature kindly covers with insensibility.

Thus providence has given the wretched two advantages over the happy in this
life, greater felicity in dying, and in heaven all that superiority of pleasure
which arises from contrasted enjoyment. And this superiority, my friends, is no
small advantage, and seems to be one of the pleasures of the poor man in the
parable; for though he was already in heaven; and felt all the raptures it
could give, yet it was mentioned as an addition to his happiness, that he had
once been wretched and now was comforted, that he had known what it was to be
miserable, and now felt what it was to be happy.

Thus, my friends, you see religion does what philosophy could never do: it
shows the equal dealings of heaven to the happy and to the unhappy, and levels
all human enjoyments to nearly the same standard. It gives to both rich and
poor the same happiness hereafter, and equal hopes to aspire after it; but if
the rich have the advantage of enjoying pleasure here, the poor have the
endless satisfaction of knowing what it was once to be miserable, when crowned
with endless felicity hereafter; and even though this should be called a small
advantage, yet being an eternal one, it must make up by duration what the
temporal happiness of the great may have exceeded by intenseness.

These are therefore the consolations which the wretched have peculiar to
themselves, and in which they are above the rest of mankind; in other respects
they are below them. They who would know the miseries of the poor must see life
and endure it. To declaim on the temporal advantages they enjoy, is only
repeating what none either believe or practice. The men who have the
necessaries of living are not poor, and they who want them must be miserable.
Yes, my friends we must be miserable. No vain efforts of a refined imagination
can sooth the wants of nature, can give elastic sweetness to the dank vapor of
a dungeon, or ease to the throbbings of a woe-worn heart. Let the philosopher
from his couch of softness tell us that we can resist all these. Alas! the
effort by which we resist them is still the greatest pain! Death is slight, and
any man sustains it; but torments are dreadful, and these no man can endure.

To us then, my friends, the promises of happiness in heaven should be
peculiarly dear; for if our reward be in this life alone, we are then indeed of
all men the most miserable. When I look round these gloomy walls, made to
terrify, as well as to confine us: this light that only serves to show the
horrors of the place, those shackles that tyranny has imposed, or crime made
necessary: when I survey these emaciated looks, and hear those groans, O my
friends, what a glorious exchange would heaven be for these. To fly through
regions unconfined as air, to bask in the sunshine of eternal bliss, to carol
over endless hymns of praise, to have no master to threaten or insult us, but
the form of goodness himself for ever in our eyes, when I think of these
things, death becomes the messenger of very glad tidings; when I think of these
things, his sharpest arrow becomes the staff of my support; when I think of
these things, what is there in life worth having? When I think of these things,
what is there that should not be spurned away? Kings in their palaces should
groan for such advantages; but we, humbled as we are, should yearn for them.

And shall these things be ours? Ours they will certainly be, if we but try for
them; and what is a comfort, we are shut out from many temptations that would
retard our pursuit. Only let us try for them: and they will certainly be ours,
and what is still a comfort, shortly too; for if we look back on past life, it
appears but a very short span, and whatever we may think of the rest of life,
it will yet be found of less duration; as we grow older the days seem to grow
shorter, and our intimacy with time ever lessens the perception of his stay.
Then let us take comfort now, for we shall soon be at our journey's end; we
shall soon lay down the heavy burden laid by heaven upon us, and though death,
the only friend of the wretched, for a little while mocks the weary traveller
with the view, and like his horizon, still flies before him; yet the time will
certainly and shortly come, when we shall cease from our toil; when the
luxurious great ones of the world shall no more tread us to the earth; when we
shall think with pleasure on our sufferings below; when we shall be surrounded
with all our friends, or such as deserved our friendship; when our bliss shall
be unutterable, and still, to crown all, unending.

CHAP. XI. Happier prospects begin to appear. Let us be inflexible, and fortune
will at last change in our favor.
WHEN I had thus finished and my audience was retired, the jailer, who was one
of the most humane of his profession, hoped I would not be displeased, as what
he did was but his duty, observing that he must be obliged to remove my son
into a stronger cell, but that he should be permitted to revisit me every
morning. I thanked him for his clemency, and grasping my boy's hand, bade him
farewell, and be mindful of the great duty that was before him.

I again therefore laid me down, and one of my little ones sat by my bedside
reading, when Mr. Jenkinson entering, informed me that there was news of my
daughter; for that she was seen by a person about two hours before in a strange
gentleman's company, and that they had stopped at a neighboring village for
refreshment, and seemed as if returning to town. He had scarce delivered this
news, when the jailer came with looks of haste and pleasure, to inform me, that
my daughter was found. Moses came running in a moment after, crying out that
his sister Sophy was below, and coming up with our old friend Mr. Burchell.

Just as he delivered this news my dearest girl entered, and with looks almost
wild with pleasure, ran to kiss me in a transport of affection. Her mother's
tears and silence also showed her pleasure -- "Here, papa," cried the charming
girl, "here is the brave man to whom I owe "my delivery; to this gentleman's
intrepidity I am indebted for my happiness and safety. -- " A kiss from Mr.
Burchell, whose pleasure seemed even greater than hers, interrupted what she
was going to add.

"Ah, Mr. Burchell," cried I, "this is but a wretched habitation you now find
us in; and we are now very different from what you last saw us. You were ever
our friend: we have long discovered our errors with regard to you, and repented
of our ingratitude. After the vile usage you then received at my hands, I am
almost ashamed to behold your face; yet I hope you will forgive me, as I was
deceived by a base ungenerous wretch, who, under the mask of friendship has
undone me."

"It is impossible," replied Mr. Burchell, "that I should forgive you, as you
never deserved my resentment. I partly saw your delusion then, and as it was
out of my power to restrain, I could only pity it!"

"It was ever my conjecture," cried I, "that your mind was noble; but now I
find it so. But tell me, my dear child, how have thou been relieved, or who the
ruffians were who carried thee away?"

"Indeed, Sir," replied she, "as to the villain who brought me off, I am yet
ignorant. For as my mamma and I were walking out, he came behind us, and almost
before I could call for help, forced me into the post-chaise, and in an instant
the horses drove away. I met several on the road, to whom I cried out for
assistance; but they disregarded my entreaties. In the mean time the ruffian
himself used every art to hinder me from crying out: he flattered and
threatened by turns, and swore that if I continued but silent, he intended no
harm. In the mean time I had broken the canvas that he had drawn up, and whom
should I perceive at some distance but your old friend Mr. Burchell, walking
along with his usual swiftness, with the great stick for which we used so much
to ridicule him. As soon as we came within hearing, I called out to him by
name, and entreated his help. I repeated my exclamations several times, upon
which, with a very loud voice, he bid the postilion stop; but the boy took no
notice, but drove on with still greater speed. I now thought he could never
overtake us, when in less than a minute I saw Mr. Burchell come running up by
the side of the horses, and with one blow knock the postilion to the ground.
The horses when he was fallen soon stopped of themselves, and the ruffian
stepping out, with oaths and menaces drew his sword, and ordered him at his
peril to retire; but Mr. Burchell running up, shivered his sword to pieces, and
then pursued him for near a quarter of a mile; but he made his escape. I was at
this time come out myself, willing to assist my deliverer; but he soon returned
to me in triumph. The postilion, who was recovered, was going to make his
escape too; but Mr. Burchell ordered him at his peril to mount again, and drive
back to town. Finding it impossible to resist, he reluctantly complied, though
the wound he had received seemed, to me at least, to be dangerous. He continued
to complain of the pain as we drove along, so that he at last excited Mr.
Burchell's compassion, who, at my request, exchanged him for another at an inn
where we called on our return."

"Welcome then," cried I, "my child, and thou her gallant deliverer, a thousand
welcomes. Though our cheer is but wretched, yet our hearts are ready to receive
you. And now, Mr. Burchell, as you have delivered my girl, if you think her a
recompense she is yours, if you can stoop to an alliance with a family so poor
as mine, take her, obtain her consent, as I know you have her heart, and you
have mine. And let me tell you, Sir, that I give you no small treasure, sho^
been celebrated for beauty it is true, but that is not (...) meaning, I give
you up a treasure in her mind."

"But I suppose, Sir" cried Mr. Burchell, "that you are apprized of my
circumstances, and of my incapacity to support her as she deserves?"

"If your present objection," replied I, be meant as an evasion of my offer, I
desist: but I know no man so worthy to deserve her as you; and if I could give
her thousands, and thousands sought her from me, yet my honest brave Burchell
should be my dearest choice."

To all this his silence alone seemed to give a mortifying refusal, and without
the least reply to my offer, he, demanded if we could not be furnished with
refreshment from the next inn? To which being answered in the affirmative, he
ordered them to send in the best dinner that could be provided upon such short
notice. He bespoke also a dozen of their best wine; and some cordials for me.
Adding, with a smile, that he would stretch a little for once, and though in a
prison, asserted he was never better disposed to be merry. The waiter soon made
his appearance with preparations for dinner, a table was lent us by the jailer,
who seemed remarkably assiduous, the wine was disposed in order, and two very
well-drest dishes were brought in.

My daughter had not yet heard of her poor brother's melancholy situation, and
we all seemed unwilling to damp her cheerfulness by the relation. But it was in
vain that I attempted to appear cheerful, the circumstances of my unfortunate
son broke through all efforts to dissemble: so that I was at last obliged to
damp our mirth by relating his misfortunes, and wishing that he might be
permitted to share with us in this little interval of satisfaction. After my
guests were recovered from the consternation my account had produced, I
requested also that Mr. Jenkinson a fellow prisoner might be admitted, and the
jailer granted my request with an air of unusual submission. The clanking of my
son's irons was no sooner heard along the passage, than his sister ran
imp^^^ently to meet him; while Mr. Burchell in the mean (...) asked me if my
son's name was George, to which ^ing in the affirmative, he still continued
silent. As soon as my boy entered the room, I could perceive he regarded Mr.
Burchell with a look of astonishment and reverence. "Come on," cried I, "my
son, though we are fallen very low, yet providence has been pleased to grant us
some small relaxation from pain. Thy sister is restored to us, and there is her
deliverer; to that brave man it is that I am indebeted for yet having a
daughter, give him* my boy, the hand of friendship, he deserves our warmest
gratitude"

My son seemed all this while regardless of what I said, and still continued
fixed at respectful distance -- "My dear brother," cried his sister, "why don't
you thank my good deliverer; the brave should ever love each other."

He still continued his silence and astonishment, till our guest at last
perceived himself to be known, and assuming all his native dignity, desired my
son to come forward. Never before had I seen any thing so truly majestic as the
air he assumed upon this occasion. The greatest object in the universe, says a
certain philosopher, is a good man struggling with adversity; yet there is
still a greater, which is the good man that comes to relieve it. After he had
regarded my son for some time with a superior air, "I again find," said he,
"unthinking boy, that the same crime" -- But here he was interrupted by one of
the gaoler's servants, who came to inform us that a person of distinction, who
had driven into town with a chariot and several attendants, sent his respects
to the gentleman that was with us, and begged to know when he should think
proper to be waited upon. -- "Bid the fellow wait, cried our guest, till I
shall have leisure to receive him;" and then turning to my son, "I again find,
Sir," proceeded he, "that you are guilty of the same offense for which you once
had my reproof, and for which the law is now preparing its justest punishment.
You imagine, perhaps, that a contempt for your own life, gives you a right to
take that of another: but where, Sir, is the difference between a duelist who
hazards a life of no value, and the murderer who acts with greater security? Is
it any diminution of the gamester's fraud when he alleges ^t he has staked a
counter?"

"Alas, Sir," cried I, "whoever you are, pity (...) poor misguided creature;
for what he has done was in obedience to a deluded mother, who in the
bitterness of her resentment required him upon her blessing to avenge her
quarrel. Here, Sir is the letter, which will serve to convince you of her
imprudence and diminish his guilt"

He took the letter and hastily read it over. "This," says he, though not a
perfect excuse, is such a palliation of his fault, as induces me to forgive
him: And now, Sir" continued he, kindly taking my son by the hand, "I see you
are surprised at finding me here; but I have often visited prisons upon
occasions less interesting. I am now come to see justice done a worthy man, for
whom I have the most sincere esteem. I have long been a disguised spectator of
thy father's benevolence. I have at his little dwelling enjoyed respect
uncontaminated by flattery, and have received that happiness that courts could
not give, from the amusing simplicity round his fireside. My nephew has been
apprized of my intentions of coming here, and I find is arrived; it would be
wronging him and you to condemn him without examination: if there be injury,
there shall be redress; and this' I may say without boasting, that none have
ever taxed the injustice of Sir William Thornhill.

We now found the personage whom we had so long entertained as an harmless
amusing companion, was no other than the celebrated Sir William Thornhill, to
whose virtues and singularities scarce any were strangers. The poor Mr.
Burchell was in reality a man of large fortune and great interest, to whom
senates listened with applause, and whom party heard with conviction; who was
the friend of his country, but loyal to his king. My poor wife recollecting her
former familiarity, seemed to shrink with apprehension; but Sophia, who a few
moments before thought him her own, now perceiving the immense distance to
which he was removed by fortune, was unable to conceal her tears.

"Ah, Sir" cried my wife, with a piteous aspect, how (...) possible that I can
ever have your forgiveness; the ^^ts you received from me the last time I had
the honor of seeing you at our house, and the jokes* which I audaciously threw
out, these jokes, Sir, I fear can never be forgiven."

"My dear good lady," returned he with a smile, "If you had your joke, I had my
answer: I Will leave it to all the company if mine were not as good as yours. --
To say the truth, I know no body whom I am disposed to be angry with at present
but the fellow who so frighted my little girl here. I had not even time to
examine the rascal's person so as to describe him in an advertisement. Can you
tell me, Sophia, my dear, whether you should know him again?"

"Indeed, Sir," replied she, "I cannot be positive; yet now I recollect he had a
large mark over one of his eyebrows." "I ask pardon, madam," interrupted
Jenkinson, who was by, "but be so good as to inform me if the fellow wore his
own red hair?" -- "Yes, I think so," cried Sophia. -- "And did your honor,"
continued he, turning to Sir William, "observe the length of his legs?" -- "I
cannot be sure of their length," cried the Baronet, "but I am convinced of their
swiftness; for he out-ran me, which is what I thought few men in the kingdom
could have done." -- "Please your honor," cried Jenkinson, "I know the man: it
is certainly the same; the best runner in England; he has beaten Pinwire of
Newcastle, Timothy Ba^ter is his name, I know him perfectly, and the very place
of his retreat this moment. If your honor will bid Mr. Jailer let two of his
men go with me, I Will engage to produce him to you in an hour at farthest. Upon
this the jailer was called, who instantly appearing, Sir William demanded if he
knew him. "Yes, please your honor," replied the jailer, "I know Sir William
Thornhill well, and every body that knows any thing of him, will desire to know
more of him." -- "Well then," said the baronet, "my request is, that you will
permit this man and two of your servants to go upon a message by my authority
and as I am in the commission of the peace, I undertake to secure you." --
"Your promise is sufficient," replied the other, and you may at a minute's
warning send them over England whenever your honor thinks fit."

In pursuance of the gaoler's compliance, Jenkinson was dispatched in search of
Timothy Baxter, while we were amused with the affiduity of our youngest boy
Bill, who had just come in and climbed up to Sir William's neck in order to
kiss him. His mother was immediately going to chastise his familiarity, but the
worthy man prevented her; and taking the child, all ragged as he was, upon his
knee, "What, Bill, you chubby rogue," cried he, "do you remember your old
friend Burchell; and Dick too, my honest veteran, are you here, you shall find
I have not forgot you." So saying, he gave each a large piece of gingerbread,
which the poor fellows eat very heartily, as they had got that morning but a
very scanty breakfast.

We now sat down to dinner, which was almost cold; but previously, my arm still
continuing painful, Sir, William wrote a prescription, for he had made the
study of physic his amusement, and was more than moderately skilled in the
profession; this being sent to an apothecary who lived in the place, my arm was
dressed, and I found almost instantaneous relief. We were waited upon at dinner
by the jailer himself, who was willing to do our guest all the honor in his
power. But before we had well dined, another message was brought from his
nephew, desiring permission to appear, in order to vindicate his innocence and
honor, with which request the baronet complied, and desired Mr. Thornhill to
be introduced.

CHAP XII. Former benevolence now repaid with unexpected interest.
MR. Thornhill made his entrance with a smile, which he seldom wanted, and was
going to embrace his uncle, which the other repulsed with an air of disdain.
"No fawning, Sir, at present," cried the baronet, with a look of severity, "the
only way to my heart is by the road of honor; but here I only set complicated
instances of falsehood, cowardice, and oppression. How is it, Sir, that this
poor man, for whom I know you professed a friendship, is used thus hardly? His
daughter vilely seduced, as a recompense for his hospitality, and he himself
thrown into a prison perhaps but for resenting the insult? His son too, whom
you feared to face as a man -- "

"Is it possible, Sir," interrupted his nephew, "that my uncle could object
that as a crime which his repeated instructions alone have persuaded me to
avoid." "Your rebuke," cried Sir, William, "is just: you have acted in this
instance prudently and well, though not quite as your father would have done:
my brother indeed was the soul of honor; but thou -- yes you have acted in
this instance perfectly right, and it has my warmest approbation."

"And I hope," said his nephew, "that the rest of my conduct will not be found
to deserve censure. I appeared, Sir, with this gentleman's daughter at some
places of public amusement: thus what was levity, scandal called by a harsher
name, and it was reported that I had debauched her. I waited on her father in
person, willing to clear the thing to his satisfaction, and he received me only
with insult and abuse. As for the rest, with regard to his being here, my
attorney and steward can best inform you, as I commit the management of
business entirely to them. If he has contracted debts and is unwilling or even
unable to pay them, it is their business to proceed in this manner, and I see
no hardship or injustice in pursuing the most legal means of redress."

"If this, cried Sir William, "be as you have stated it, there is nothing
unpardonable in your offense; and though your conduct might have been more
generous in not suffering this gentleman to be oppressed by subordinate
tyranny, yet it has been at least equitable."

"He cannot contradict a single particular," replied the 'squire, "I defy him
to do so, and several of my servants are ready to attest what I say. Thus,
Sir," continued he, finding that I was silent, for in fact I could not
contradict him, "thus, Sir, my own innocence is vindicated; but though at your
entreaty I am ready to forgive this gentleman every other offense, yet his
attempts to lessen me in your esteem, excite a resentment that I cannot govern.
-- And this too at a time when his son was actually preparing to take away my
life; this, I say, was such guilt, that I am determined to let the law take its
course. I have here the challenge that was sent me and two witnesses to prove
it; and even though my uncle himself should dissuade me, which I know he will
not, yet I will see public justice done, and he shall suffer for it."

"Thou monster," cried my wife, "have thou not had vengeance enough already,
but must my poor boy feel thy cruelty. I hope that good Sir William will
protect us, for my son is as innocent as a child; I am sure he is, and never
did harm to man."

"Madam," replied the good man, "your wishes for his safety are not greater
than mine; but I am sorry to find his guilt too plain; and if my nephew
persists -- " But the appearance of Jenkinson and the gaoler's two servants now
called off our attention, who entered, haling in a tall man, very genteelly
dressed, and answering the description already given of the ruffian who had
carried off my daughter -- "Here," cried Jenkinson, pulling him in, "here we
have him, and if ever there was a candidate for Tyburn, this is one."

The moment Mr. Thornhill perceived the prisoner, and Jenkinson who had him in
custody, he seemed to shrink back with terror. His face became pale with
conscious guilt, and he would have withdrawn; but Jenkinson, who perceived his
design, stopped him -- "What, 'squire, cried he, "are you ashamed of your two old
acquaintances, Jenkinson and Baxter: but this is the way that all great men
forget their friends, though I am resolved we will not forget you. -- Our
prisoner, please your honor," continued he, turning to Sir William, "has
already confessed all. -- He declares that it was Mr. Thornhill who first put
him upon this affair, that he gave him the clothes he now wears to appear like
a gentleman, and furnished him with the post-chaise. The plan was laid between
them that he should carry off the young lady to a place of safety, and that
there he should threaten and terrify her; but Mr. Thornhill was to come in, in
the mean time, as if by accident, to her rescue, and that they should fight a
while, and then he was to ru^ off, by which Mr. Thornhill would have the better
opportunity of gaining her affections himself under the character of her
defender."

Sir William remembered the coat to have been frequently worn by his nephew,
and all the rest the prisoner himself confirmed by a more circumstantial
account; concluding, that Mr. Thornhill had often declared to him that he was
in love with both sisters at the same time.

"Heavens," cried Sir William, "what a viper have I been fostering in my bosom!
And so fond of public justice too as he seemed to be. But he shall have it;
secure him, Mr. Jailer -- yet hold, I fear there is not legal evidence to
detain him."

Upon this, Mr. Thornhill, with the utmost humility, entreated that two such
abandoned wretches might not be admitted as evidences against him, but that his
servants should be examined. -- "Your servants" replied Sir William, "wretch,
call them yours no longer: but come let us hear what those fellows have to say,
let his butler be called."

When the butler was introduced, he soon perceived by his former master's looks
that all his power was now over. "Tell me," cried Sir William sternly, "have
you ever seen your master and that fellow dressed up in his clothes in company
together?" "Yes, please your honor," cried the butler, "a thousand times: he
was the man that always brought him his ladies." -- "How," interrupted young
Mr. Thornhill, "this to my face!" -- "Yes," replied the butler, "or to any
man's face. To tell you a truth, master Thornhill, I never either loved you or
liked you, and I don't care if I tell you now a piece of my mind." -- "Now
then," cried Jenkinson, "tell his honor whether you know any thing of me." --
"I cannot say," replied the butler, "that I know much good of you. The night
that gentleman's daughter was deluded to our house, you were one of them, --
"So then," cried Sir William, "I find you have brought a very fine witness to
prove your innocence: thou stain to humanity! to associate with such wretches!"
(But continuing his examination) "You tell me, Mr. Butler, that this was the
person who brought him this old gentleman's daughter," -- "No, please your
honor," replied the butler, "he did not bring her, for the 'squire himself
undertock that business; but he brought the priest that pretended to marry
them." -- "It is but too true," cried Jenkinson, "I cannot deny it, that was
the employment assigned me, and I confess it to my confusion."

"Good heavens!" exclaimed the baronet, "how every new discovery of his
villainy alarms me. All his guilt is now too plain, and I find his present
prosecution was dictated by tyranny, cowardice and revenge; at my request, Mr.
Jailer, set this young officer, now your prisoner, free, and trust to me for
the consequences. -- I Will make it my business to set the affair in a proper
light to my friend the magistrate who has committed him. But where is the
unfortunate young lady herself: let her appear to confront this wretch, I long
to know by what arts he has seduced her honor. Entreat her to come in. Where
is she?"

"Ah, Sir," said I, "that question stings me to the heart: I was once indeed
happy in a daughter, but her miseries." -- Another interruption here prevented
me; for who should make her appearance but Miss Arabella Wilmot, who was next
day to have been married to Mr. Thornhill. Nothing could equal her surprise at
seeing Sir William and his nephew here before her; for her arrival was quite
accidental. It happened that she and the old gentleman her father were passing
through the town, on their way to her aunt's, who had insisted that her
nuptials with Mr. Thornhill should be consummated at her house; but stopping
for refreshment, they put up at an inn at the other end of the town. It was
there from the window that the young lady happened to observe one of my little
boys playing in the street, and instantly sending a footman to bring the child
to her, she learnt from him some account of our misfortunes; but was still kept
ignorant of young Mr. Thornhill's being the cause. Though her father made
several remonstrances on the impropriety of going to a prison to visit us, yet
they were ineffectual; she desired the child to conduct her, which he did, and
it was thus she surprised us at a juncture so unexpected.

Nor can I go on, without a reflection on those accidental meetings, which,
though they happen every day, seldom excite our surprise but upon some
extraordinary occasion. To what a fortuitous concurrence do we not owe every
pleasure and convenience of our lives. How many seemiag accidents must unite
before we can be clothed or fed. The peasant must be disposed to labor, the
shower must fall, the wind fill the merchant's fail, or numbers must want the
usual supply.

We all continued silent for some moments, while my charming pupil, which was
the name I generally gave this young lady, united in her looks compassion and
astonishment, which gave new finishings to her beauty. "Indeed, my dear Mr.
Thornhill," cried she to the 'squire, who she supposed was come here to succor
and not to oppress us; "I take it a little unkindly that you should come here
without me, or never inform me of the situation of a family so dear to us both;
you know I should take as much pleasure in contributing to the relief of my
reverend old master here, whom I shall ever esteem, as you can. But I find
that, like your uncle, you take a pleasure in doing good in secret."

"He find pleasure in doing good!" cried Sir William, interrupting her. "No, my
dear, his pleasures are as base as he is. -- You see in him, madam, as complete
a villain as ever disgraced humanity. A wretch, who after having deluded this
poor man's daughter, after plotting against the innocence of her sister, has
thrown the father into prison, and the eldest son into fetters, because he had
courage to face his betrayer. -- And give me leave, madam, now to congratulate
you upon an escape from the embraces of such a monster."

"O goodness," cried the lovely girl, "how have I been deceived! Mr. Thornhill
informed me for certain that this gentleman's eldest son, Captain Primrose, was
gone off to America with his new-married lady."

"My sweetest miss," cried my wife, "he has told you nothing but falsehoods. My
son George never left the kingdom, nor ever was married. Though you have forsaken
him, he has always loved you too well to think of any body else; and I have
heard him say "he would die a bachelor for your sake." She then proceeded to
expatiate upon the sncerity of her son's passion, she set his duel with Mr.
Thornhill in a proper light, from thence she made a rapid digression to the
'squire's debaucheries, his pretended marriages, and ended with a most
insulting picture of his cowardice.

"Good heavens!" cried Miss Wilmot, how very "near have I been to the brink of
ruin! But how great is my pleasure to have escaped it! Ten thousand falsehoods
has this gentleman told me! He had at last art enough to persuade me that my
promise to the only man I esteemed was no longer binding, since he had been
unfaithful. By his falsehoods I was taught to detest one equally brave and
generous!"

But by this time my son was freed from the encumbrances of justice. Mr.
Jenkinson also, who had acted as his valet de chamber, had dressed up his hair,
and furnished him with whatever was necessary to make a genteel appearance. He
now therefore entered, handsomely dressed in his regimentals, and without vanity,
(for I am above it) he appeared as handsome a fellow as ever wore a military
dress. As he entered, he made Miss Wilmot a modest and distant bow, for he was
not as yet acquainted with the change which the eloquence of his mother had
wrought in his favor. But no decorums could restrain the impatience of his
blushing mistress to be forgiven. Her tears, her looks, all contributed to
discover the real sensations of her heart for having forgotten her former
promise, and having suffered herself to be deluded by an impostor. My son
appeared amazed at her condescension, and could scarce believe it real. --
"Sure, madam," cried he, "this is but delusion! I can never have merited this!
To be blessed thus is to be too happy." -- No, Sir, replied she, "I have been
deceived, basely deceived, else nothing could have ever made me unjust to my
promise. You know my friendship, you have long known it; but forget what I have
done, and as you once had my warmest vows of constancy, you shall now have them
repeated; and be assured that if your Arabella cannot be yours, she shall never
be another's." -- "And no other's you shall be," cried Sir William, "if I have
any influence with your father."

This hint was sufficient for my son Moses, who immediately flew to the inn
where the old gentleman was, to inform him of every circumstance that had
happened. But in the mean time the 'squire perceiving that he was on every side
undone, now finding that no hopes were left from flattery and dissimulation,
concluded that his wisest way would be to turn and face his pursuers. Thus
laying aside all shame, he appeared the open hardy villain. "I find then,"
cried he, "that I am to expect no justice here; but I am resolved it shall be
done me. -- "You shall know, Sir," turning to Sir William, "I am no longer a
power depending upon your favors. I scorn them. Nothing can keep Miss Wilmot's
fortune from me, which, I thank her father's assiduity, is pretty large. The
articles, and a bond for her fortune, are signed, and safe in my possession. It
was her fortune, not her person, that induced me to wish for this match, and
possessed of the one, let who will take the other."

This was an alarming blow, Sir William was sensible of the justice of his
claims, for he had been instrumental in drawing up the marriage articles
himself. Miss Wilmot therefore perceiving that her fortune was irretrievably
lost, turning to my son, she asked if the loss of fortune could lessen her
value to him. "Though fortune." said she, "is out of my power, at least I have
my hand to give."

"And that, madam," cried her real lover, was indeed "all that you ever had to
give; at least all that I ever thought worth the acceptance. And I now protest,
my Arabella by all that is happy, your want of fortune this moment increases my
pleasure, as it serves to convince my sweet girl of my sincerity."

Mr. Wilmot now entering, he seemed not a little pleased at the danger his
daughter had just escaped, and readily consented to a dissolution of the match.
But finding that her fortune, which was secured to Mr. Thornhill by bond, would
not be given up, nothing could exceed his disappointment. He now saw that his
money must all go to enrich one who had no fortune of his own. He could bear
his being a rascal; but to want an equivalent to his daughter's fortune was
wormwood. He sat therefore for some minutes employed in the most mortifying
speculations till Sir William attempted to lessen his anxiety. -- "I must
confess, Sir," cried he, "that your present disappointment does not entirely
displease me. Your immoderate passion for wealth is now justly punished. But
though the young lady cannot be rich, she has still a competence sufficient to
give content. Here you see an honest young soldier, who is willing to take her
without fortune; they have long loved each other, and for the friendship I bear
his father, my interest shall not be wanting for his promotion. Leave then that
ambition which disappoints you, and for once admit happiness which courts your
acceptance"

"Sir William," replied the old gentleman, "be assured I never yet forced her
inclinations, nor will I now. If she still continues to love this young
gentleman, let her have him with all my heart. There is still, thank heaven,
some fortune left, and your promise will make it something more. Only let my
old friend here (meaning me) give me a promise of settling six thousand pounds
upon my girl, if ever he should come to his fortune, and I am ready this night
to be the first to join them together."

As it now remained with me to make the young couple happy, I readily gave a
promise of making the settlement he required, which to one who had such little
expectations as I, was no great favor -- We had now therefore the satisfaction
of seeing them fly into each other's arms in a transport. "After all my
misfortunes." cried my son George, "to be thus rewarded! Sure this is more than
I could ever have presumed to hope for. -- To be possessed of all that is good,
and after such an interval of pain! My warmest wishes could never rise ^o
high!" -- "Yes, my George," returned his lovely bride, now let the wretch take
my fortune; since you are happy without it, so am I. O what an exchange have I
made from the basest of men to the dearest, best. -- Let him enjoy our fortune,
I now can be happy even in indigence." -- "And I promise you," cried the
'squire, with a malicious grin, "that I shall be very happy with what you
despise." -- Hold, hold, Sir," cried Jenkinson, "there are two words to that
bargain. -- As for that lady's fortune, Sir, you shall never touch a single
stiver of it. Pray your honor," continued he to Sir William, "can the 'squire
have this lady's fortune if he be married to another?" -- "How can you make
such a simple demand," replied the baronet, "undoubtedly he cannot." -- "I am
sorry for that," cried Jenkinson; for as this gentleman and I have been old
fellow sporters, I have a friendship for him. But I must declare, well as I
love him, that his contract is not worth a tobacco stopper, for he is married
already." " -- You lie like a rascal," returned the 'squire, who seemed rouzed
by this insult, "I never was legally married to any woman." -- "Indeed, begging
your honor's pardon," replied the other, "you were; and I hope you will show a
proper return of friendship to your own honest Jenkinson, who brings you a
wife, and if the company restrain their curiosity a few minutes, they shall see
her." -- So saying he went off with his usual celerity, and left us all unable
to form any probable conjecture as to his design. -- "Ay let him go," cried the
'squire, "whatever else I may have done I defy him there. I am too old now to
be frightened with 'squibs."

"I am surprised," said the baronet, "what the fellow can intend by this. Some
low piece of humor I suppose! -- "Perhaps, Sir," replied I, "he may have a
more serious meaning. -- For when we reflect on the various schemes this
gentleman laid to seduce innocence, perhaps some one, more artful than the
rest, has been found able to deceive him. When we consider what numbers he has
ruined, how many parents now feel with anguish the infamy and the contamination
which he has brought into their families, it would not surprise me if some one
of them. -- Amazement! Do I see my lost daughter! Do I hold her! It is, it is
my life, my happiness. I thought thee lost, my Olivia, yet still I hold thee --
and still shall thou live to bless me." -- The warmest transports of the
fondest lover were not greater than mine when I saw him introduce my child, and
held my daughter in my arms, whose silence only spoke her raptures. "And art
thou returned to me, my darling," cried I, "to be my comfort in age!" -- "That
she is," cried Jenkinson, "and make much of her, for she is your own honorable
child, and as honest a woman as any in the whole room, let the other be who she
will. And as for you, 'squire, as sure as you stand there, this young lady is
your lawful wedded wife. And to convince you that I speak nothing but truth,
here is the license by which you were married together." -- So saying, he put
the license into the baronet's hands, who read it, and found it perfect in
every respect. "And now, gentlemen," continued he, "I find you are surprised at
all this; but a few words will explain the difficulty. That there 'squire of
renown, for whom I have a great friendship, but that is between ourselves, has
often employed me in doing odd little things for him. Among the rest he
commissioned me to procure him a false license and a false priest, in order to
deceive this young lady. But as I was very much his friend, what did I do but I
went and got a true license and a true priest, and married them both as fast as
the cloth could make them. Perhaps you would think it was generosity that made me
do all this. But no. To my shame I confess it, my only design was to keep the
license, and let the 'squire know that I could prove it upon him whenever I
thought proper, and so make him come down whenever I wanted money." A burst of
pleasure now seemed to fill the whole apartment; our joy reached even to the
common room, where the prisoners themselves sympathized, And shock their chains
In transport and rude harmony.


Happine^s expanded upon every face, and even Olivia's cheek seemed flushed
with pleasure. To be thus restored to reputation, to friends and fortune at
once was a rapture sufficient to stop the progress of decay and restore former
health and vivacity. But perhaps among all there was not one who felt sincerer
pleasure than I. Still holding the dear-loved child in my arms, I asked my
heart if these transports were not delusion. "How could you," cried I turning
to Mr. Jenkinson, "how could you add to my miseries by the story of her death!
But it matters not, my pleasure at finding her again, is more than a recompense
for the pain."

"As to your question*" replied Jenkinson, "that is easily answered. I thought
the only probable means of freeing you from prison, was by submitting to the
'squire, and consenting to his marriage with the other young lady. But there
you had vowed never to grant while your daughter was living: there was
therefore no other method to bring things to bear but by persuading you that
she was dead. I prevailed on your wife to join in the deceit, and we have not
had a fit opportunity of undeceiving you till now."

In the whole assembly now there only appeared two faces that did not glow with
transport. Mr. Thornhill's assurance had entirely forsaken him: he now saw the
g^lph of infamy and want before him, and trembled to take the plunge. He
therefore fell on his knees before his uncle, and in a voice of piercing misery
implored compassion. Sir William was going to spurn him away, but at my request
be raised him, and after pausing a few moments. "Thy vices, crimes, and
ingratitude," cried he, "deserves no tenderness; yet thou shall not be entirely
forsaken, a bare competence shall be supplied, to support the wants of life,
but not its follies. This young lady, thy wife, shall be put in posession of a
third part of that fortune which once was thine, and from her te^derness alone
thou art to expect any extraordinary supplies for the future." He was going to
express his gratitude for such kindness in a set speech; but the Baronet
prevented him by bidding him not to aggravate his mea^^ess, which was already
but too aparent. He ordered him at the ^^me time to be gone* and from all his
former domestics to choose out (...) such as he should think p^^per, which was
all that should be granted to amend him.

As soon as he left us, Sir William very politely stepped up to his new niece
with a smile, and wished her joy.

His example was followed by Miss Wilmot and her father; my wife too kissed her
daughter with much affection, as, to use her own expression, she was now made
an honest woman of. Sophia and Moses followed in turn, and even our benefactor
Jenkinson desired to be admitted to that honor. Our satisfaction seemed scarce
capable of increase. Sir William, whose greatest pleasure was in doing good,
now looked round with a countenance open as the sun, and saw nothing but joy in
the looks of all except that of my daughter Sophia, who, for some reasons we
could not comprehend, did not seem perfectly satisfied. "I think now," cried
he, with a smile, "that all the company, except one or two, seem perfectly
happy. There only remains an act of justice for me to do. You are sensible,
Sir," continued he, turning to me, "of the obligations we both owe Mr.
Jenkinson for his late assiduity in detecting a scoundrel. It is but just we
should both reward him for it. -- Your youngest daughter Miss Sophia, will, I
am sure, make him very happy, and he shall have from me five hundred pounds as
her fortune, and upon this I am sure they can live very comfortably together.
Come, Miss Sophia, what say you to this match of my making? Will you have him?"
-- My poor girl seemed almost sinking into her mother's arms at the hideous
proposal. -- "Have him, Sir!" cried she faintly. "No, Sir, never." "What."
cried he again, "not have Mr. Jenkinson, your benefactor, an handsome young
fellow, with five hundred pounds and good expectations!" -- "I beg, Sir,"
returned she, scarce able to speak, "that you will desist, and not make me so
very wretched." -- "Was ever such obstinacy known." cried he again, "to refuse
a man whom the family has such infinite obligations to, who preserved your
sister. What, not have him!" -- "No, Sir, never," replied she angrily, "I Would
soon^ die first." -- "If that be the case t^^n, cried he, "if you will not have
him -- I think I must have you myself." And so saying he caught her to his
breast with ^dour. "My loveliest, my most sensible of girls." cried he, "how
could you ever think your own Burchell could deceive you, or that Sir William
Thornhill could ever cease to admire a mistress that loved him for himself
alone? I have for some years sought for a woman, who, a stranger to my fortune,
could think that I had merit as a man. After having tried in vain, even amongst
the pert and ugly, how great at last must be my rapture to have made a conquest
over such sense and such heavenly beauty!" Then turning to Jenkinson, "As I
cannot, Sir, part with this young lady myself, for she has taken a fancy to the
cut of my face, all the recompense I can make is to give you her fortune; and
you may call upon my steward tomorrow for five hundred pounds." Thus we had
all our compliments to repeat, and Lady Thornhill underwent the same round of
ceremony that her sister had done before. In the mean time Sir William's
gentleman appeared to tell us that the equipages were ready to carry us to the
inn, where every thing was prepared for our reception. My wife and I led the
van, and left those gloomy mansions of sorrow. The generous Baronet ordered
forty pounds to be distributed among the prisoners, and Mr. Wilmot, induced by
his example, gave half that sum. We were received below by the shouts of the
villagers, and I saw and shook by the hand two or three of my honest
parishioners, who were among the number. They attended us to our inn, where a
sumptuous entertainment was provided* and coarser provisions distributed in
great quantities among the populace.

After supper, as my spirits were exhausted by the alteration of pleasure and
pain which they had sustained during the day, I asked permission to withdraw,
and leaving the company in the midst of their mirth, as soon as I found myself
alone, I poured out my heart in gratitude to the giver of joy as well as of
sorrow, and then slept undisturbed till morning.

CHAP. XIII. The Conclusion.
THE next morning as soon as I awakened, I found my eldest son sitting by my
bedside, who came to increase my joy with another turn of fortune in my
favor. First having released me from the settlement that I had made the day
before in his favor, he let me know that my merchant who had failed in town
was arrested at Antwerp, and there had given up effects to a much greater
amount than what was due to his creditors. My boy's generosity pleased me
almost as much as this unlooked for good fortune. But I had some doubts whether
I ought in justice to accept his offer. While I was pondering upon this, sir
William entered the room, to whom I communicated my doubts. His opinion was,
that as my son was already possessed of a very affluent fortune by his
marriage, I might accept his offer without any hesitation. His business,
however, was to inform me, that as he had the night before sent for the
licenses, and expected them every hour, he hoped that I would not refuse my
assistance in making all the company happy that morning. A footman entered
while we were speaking, to tell us that the messenger was returned, and as I
was by this time ready, I went down, where I found the whole company as merry
as affluence and innocence could make them. However, as they were now preparing
for a very solemn ceremony, their laughter entirely displeased me. I told them
of the grave, becoming and sublime deportment they should assume upon this
mystical occasion, and read them two homilies and a thesis of my own
composition, in order to prepare them. Yet they still seemed perfectly
refractory and ungovernable. Even as we were going along to church, to which I
led the way, all gravity had quite forsaken them, and I was often tempted to
turn back in indignation. In church a new dilemma arose, which promised no easy
solution. This was, which couple should be married first; my son's bride warmly
insisted, That lady Thornhill (that was to be) should take the lead; but this
the other refused with equal ardour, protesting she would not be guilty of such
rudeness for the world. The argument was supported for some time between both
with equal obstinacy and good breeding. But as I stood all this time with my
book ready, I was at last quite tired of the contest, and shutting it, "I
perceive," cried I, "that none of you have a mind to be married, and I think we
had as good go back again; for I suppose there will be no business done here
today." -- This at once reduced them to reason. The Baronet and his Lady were
first married, and then my son and his lovely partner.

I had previously that morning given orders that a coach should be sent for my
honest neighbor Flamborough and his family, by which means, upon our return to
the inn, we had the pleasure of finding the two Miss Flamboroughs alighted
before us. Mr. Jenkinson gave his hand to the eldest, and my son Moses led up
the other: (and I have since found that he has taken a real liking to the girl,
and my consent and bounty he shall have whenever he thinks proper to demand
them.) We were no sooner returned to the inn, but numbers of my parishioners,
hearing of my success, came to congratulate me, but among the rest were those
who rose to rescue me, and whom I formerly rebuked with such sharpness. I told
the story to Sir William, my son-in-law, who went out and reproved them with
great severity; but finding them quite disheartened by his harsh reproof, he
gave them half a guinea a-piece to drink his health, and raise their dejected
spirits.

Soon after this we were called to a very genteel entertaiment, which was dressed
by Mr. Thornhill's cook. And it may not be improper to observe with respect to
that gentleman, that he now resides in quality of companion at a relation's
house, being very well liked and seldom sitting at the side-table, except when
there is no room at the other; for they make no stranger of him. His time is
pretty much taken up in keeping his relation, who is a little melancholy, in
spirits, and in learning to blow the French-horn. My eldest daughter, however,
still remembers him with regret; and she has even told me, though I make a
great secret of it, that when he reforms she may be brought to relent. But to
return, for I am not apt to digress thus; when we were to sit down to dinner
our ceremonies were going to be renewed. The question was whether my eldest
daughter, as being a matron, should not sit above the two young brides, but the
debate was cut short by my son George, who proposed, that the company should
sit indiscriminately, every gentleman by his lady. This was received with great
approbation by all, excepting my wife, who I could perceive was not perfectly
satisfied, as she expected to have had the pleasure of sitting at the head of
the table and carving all the meat for all the company. But notwithstanding
this, it is impossible to describe our good humor. I cannot say whether we had
more wit amongst us now than usual; but I am certain we had more laughing,
which answered the end as well. One jest I particularly remember, old Mr.
Wilmot drinking to Moses, whose head was turned another way, my son replied,
"Madam, I thank you." Upon which the old gentleman, winking upon the rest of
the company, observed that he was thinking of his mistress. At which jest I
thought the two Miss Flamboroughs would have died with laughing. As soon as
dinner was over, according to my old custom, I requested that the table might
be taken away, to have the pleasure of seeing all my family assembled once more
by a cheerful fireside. My two little ones sat upon each knee, the rest of the
company by their partners. I had nothing now on this side of the grave to wish
for, all my cares were over, my pleasure was unspeakable. It now only remained
that my gratitude in good fortune should exceed my former submission in
adversity.

FINIS.

