AN ESSAY ON EDUCATION; DELIVERED AT THE PUBLIC COMMENCEMENT, At YALE-COLLEGE,
in NEW HAVEN, September 9th, 1772.

NEW HAVEN: PRINTED BY THOMAS AND SAMUEL GREEN, MDCCLXXII.

An ESSAY, etc.
IT is an observation no less true than common, that the HUMAN MIND bears a
strong resemblance to the wild and unmanured garden of nature, which (though
amidst an infinite profusion of weeds and briers) by diligence and culture
becomes fertile, fair and flourishing. Our minds being furnished with latent
powers, it is the business of EDUCATION to unfold and bring them to light.
EDUCATION is a kind of second creation; it gives form and comeliness to those
rude and unwrought materials, which, like the natural World, in its chaotic
state, are "without order and void." NATURE gives us talents; it is EDUCATION
which applies them right or wrong; the first bestows propensities and
affections which may be directed to good, either public or private; the latter
improves or perverts them. The infant mind is pliant and ductile, like wax, you
may mould it to any form; you may stamp a fair or deformed impression upon it;
error or knowledge, indolence or industry, virtue or vice.

"'It Is EDUCATION forms the youthful mind,
Just as the twig is bent, the tree's inclined."
In youth the faculties are vigorous and alert, the conception quick, and the
memory retentive. We are endued with a general appetite for glory; EDUCATION
determines it to this, or that particular object. Different virtues and vices
are exposed to view, to captivate the attentive spectator, without always
displaying their different concomitants or effects. As youth is unbiassed by
prejudice; so it is susceptible of any impression, and withal credulous;
curious, yet easily imposed on. Possessed of an innate and almost insuperable
propensity to imitation, we imbibe opinions, as easily as we do manners. To
nothing short of this can it be imputed, that many more are influenced by the
idle reveries of the humorous, and fantastic notions of the capricious, than
by the most excellent sentiments of the wise and counsels of the worthy. We
must divest things of their false garnish, lest emerging from the shade of
obsurity, we be dazzled with artificial splendour and rendered incapable of
seeing objects in their real forms.

Allured by the delusive charms of a tempting World, the YOUTH as he advances
in years, makes excursions, extends his acquaintance, and fixes upon some
object as the darling or his pursuit. He proportions the worth of every thing
around him, accordingly as it first strikes his imagination. All the gaieties
of the world assault him at once -- Pleasure allures him, riches solicit, and
honors court him -- If he withstands the first attack, it is ten to one, but
the second proves too powerful; he soon forms different ideas of virtue and
merit, yields himself a captive and becomes a slave. Has he been taught to
despise Pleasure, the grand Mistress of the world? the delirious, thrilling
sensation, strengthened by natural fire, will soon enervate his resolution and
unsinew the most confirmed purposes of reason and philosophy; unless CULTURE
has disclosed the deceitful charms. Has he heard avarice contemned; the narrow
views of self-interest ridiculed? Has he been told that the fawning courtier of
popular applause justly sinks into contempt? Till EDUCATION has taught him the
d'shonour and infamy to which they lead, he will be liable to fall into the
same beaten track, and in the end fail of that praise, which is the fair
attendant of virtue.

Life is a masquerade, where a fictitious character is frequently assumed.
Being fond of indolence, we content ourselves with a superficial survey of men
and things, without (...) them behind the scenes, as well as in the open
theater. The world is variegated with objects, which make a (...) appearance
without discovering their intrinsic worth; and these have a powerful influence
to captivate the youthful spectator, whose education has been ill and partial;
who has never been taught to look beyond the confines of his own narrow
experience. EDUCATION draws the curtain which conceals their true character,
gives us right ideas of honor and merit, and serves as a clue to direct us to
right objects of choice.

While the passions are opening, curiosity is awake, and the young mind is
ready to take its ply from the seducements of fashion and creditable examples.
What makes the little MISS, so imperious and haughty; who swells with rage at
every imaginary affront, and never thinks that She is treated with proper
respect; what, but the early incense offered to her vanity? Why is almost every
assembly crowded with flaunting COQUETS, but because they have been accustomed
from their cradles, to admire their own sweet figure? No sooner does she
perceive respect paid to dress, beauty and external mien; but she uses every
little artifice to catch the attention of beholders. This done, she grows
important, in her own eyes, and imagines innumerable graces included in her
beauty; while every little formality of the insinuating GALLANT, contributes to
the unguarded charmer's delusion. Why does the Youth when freed from the
restraints to which younger years are subject, prove a spend-thrift, an
abandoned rake, but from the over-fondness of doting parents, and the bad
company with which he is conversant? Why does the World swarm with
shallow-pated BEAUS, but because intrigue has been the height of their
ambition, and to make good their point, they have referred to dress and
conquest all their views and intentions? If we hold the airy Nothing up to
view, we shall find all its qualifications, the most general concomitants of a
narrow, contracted education. View the empty bubble: a fickle, capricious mind
with little or no genius; proud and ostentatious, yet for the most part of mean
extraction; profuse, yet not generous; having much raillery with little wit;
falsely delicate; unacquainted with virtue and truth; well versed in all the
little arts of disguise and dissimulation; averse to industry; fond of noise
and confusion; strongly tinctured with pedantry; in low intrigues no novice:
and I wish it were a rara avis, to whom this character might justly be applied.
What forms the quack, the supple courtier and the sham patriot; but that train
of grovelling arts and low dealing, which has led them the way to fraud and
chicane? Whence such a spawn of wild enthusiasts, of blind bigots, but from
their narrow education? Why, in a word, are mankind so ignorant, and withal so
conceited; so ill founded, yet so obstinate, in their opinions; so prone to
pleasure and ease, and so impatient of industry and frugality; but because they
have been hoodwinked before they had time to open their eyes, and nourished
from their infancy in popular prepossession, in vanity and indolence? Nor is
this the only mis-conduct we meet with, in an age where the views of education
are directed more to manners than to morals; where prudence is but artifice;
where graces cast a specious gloss upon vice, and the passions are allowed to
give coloring to the objects of pursuit.

The grand affair of launching into the world, takes place in a period of life
the most eventful that we ever experience. The wisdom of the serpent is as
necessary as the innocence of the dove; and unless our minds are rightly
attempered with both, we shall split upon the dangerous shoals before we spy
them. It is a foible to which human nature is extremely incident, to be content
with present seize, and guard the safe side, while the weak one is left
to defend itself. An Education (which deserves the name) inculcates maxims of
honor and probity, inspires the noblest sentiments of moral duty, and
impresses an equal detestation of all the vices of depraved humanity. A Youth
elated with such sublime ideas, which his parents, his tutors, his books, or
even his own ingenuous heart has rendered familiar to him, (little mistrusting
that vice can put on more than one garb) opens forth into the World; not that
which he has so long dreamed of; but a World new, strange and inconsistent with
all his former expectations. The most fashionable vices he beholds patronised,
prosperous and triumphant, virtue discountenanced, unsuccessful and degraded.
-- He finds the edge of ridicule turned on some of those qualities, he has
hither to been most fond of. -- If he quits the clamorous crowd, where impiety
is made a point of honor, and profaneness esteemed a good recommendation; he
will soon unite himself to the more specious and atractive party. At first, his
simplicity in what they term Good breeding, makes him the dupe of this
plausible society: but soon, their occasional hints, their negligent sarcasms,
their sallies of wit and polite raillery, on what he has been accustomed to
hold sacred, debauch his mind, and create a fondness for those scenes, which
were once his greatest aversion. The truth is, the Youth should be fortified
with a gradual intelligence of the World, that he may be prepared to see it
without surprise, and live in it without danger. His first steps should be
short and secure; his associates few, and of the best. The veil must be taken
off from some parts, and left still upon others; while he has, painted out
before him, what he does not see, and even more hinted at, than can be painted.

If his mind is at first contracted within a narrow circle, this gradual
acquaintance with the things around him, will enlarge his views, and teach him
to regard himself as a CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, assert his native liberty, and
despise a SLAVE of any sect or party. This will learn him to act with
cautiousness in points where it is not impossible that he may be deceived; and
on the other hand, it will as effectually guard him against every wrong bias,
hung upon the mind by a favorite passion, or particular education.

An opinionative zeal for our own tenets, is the grand inlet, the unguarded
avenue of the mind, by which a thousand errors find admission, unnoticed. We
must search the inmost recesses of our thoughts, sift our own sentiments, and
subject them to frequent reviews, that we may enable the mind to detect its own
sophisms, and guard against the fallacies, upon which it practices. It is
admirable to observe, how many artifices must be used, to procure admission for
the most evident truths, into minds, frightened by novelty, or rendered
insensible by accidental prejudice. Nay, some are so very fond and tenacious of
their own unerring principles, that when one of their darling positions is
attacked, they use no other weapon but stupidity, to elude the force of
argument. To have the mind warmed with a love for truth, and willing to divest
itself of all prepossession and prejudice, it must be tempered with candor.
This will prove no less an incentive to virtue, than a barrier against vice.
REASON, the supreme law of our nature, will then be the standard by which we
may correct our false notions of honor and pleasure. -- Vice will appear as it
is; a violation of our nature, and a fall from its true dignity: virtue its
highest ornament and perfection.

Animated with such principles, the youth will dare to take a higher aim in
life, than the pursuits of the idle rabble; will reverence his nature, and be
ashamed of those stains which degrade it. He will keep his head and heart
equally poised for action; enter the busy scenes of life; suffer his passions
to grow warm, without disturbing the coolness of reason; while every grateful
emotion which he feels, resulting from a manly, generous conduct, fires him
with a love for virtue and every noble principle.


