A FEW REASONS IN FAVOR OF VENDUES.
IT has always been considered as a general rule, That trade will regulate
itself; and this being granted, Vendues or Auctions will be found rather
advantageous than destructive: For, should it be said, that great quantities of
goods are by this means sold to a loss, let it be considered, that this must be
owing to the too great quantities imported, which must either be kept on hand a
long time, or be disposed of in this manner.

BY there being Vendues, or places of public sale of goods in and about this
city, many strangers, (Captains of vessels and others) are encouraged to import
quantities of goods, who, from their situation, are prevented from selling them
upon equal terms with our settled merchants, not knowing the people, or who to
trust, and perhaps obliged to return in a short time, they are of course led to
this mode of sale, by which they (...) immediately in cash for their goods, and
enabled to purchase our produce.

PARTICULARLY the traders to and from Ireland, who, it is well known, import
large quantities of linens and other goods into this place annually, and depend
in a great measure on the Vendues to turn them into cash, which they usually
lay out in the purchase of flax-seed, flour or lumber.

BUT it has been objected, that encouraging strangers to sell their goods among
us, who are here but a short time, and bear no part of the burdens occasioned
by taxes, etc. is injurious to our merchants.

THIS must appear to have little weight, when we consider that the present
flourishing state of this province and city, is in a great measure owing to the
encouragement given to strangers, (if the merchants and traders from Great
Britain and Ireland may be called so) who, by being permitted to bring their
goods and wares to our market, have kept the country well supplied; and in
return, have taken off large quantities of our produce.

ADD to this, that where ever the greatest quantities of goods are, there of
course will the people resort, both with their cash and produce, not only from
being sure of obtaining what they may want, but from a prospect of obtaining
their goods on better terms.

IF it be granted, that the importation of British manufactures are necessary,
and of advantage to the country, then those persons that introduce and dispose
of them on the lowest terms, must be confessed the best friends to the
community, and deserve their countenance and encouragement.

BUT strangers, from their situation and circumstances, generally dispose of
their goods at a much lower rate than the stated merchant; therefore, it is the
interest of the community to encourage their trade with us. By this means, we
get those goods that we want for our own consumption (and for which we are
beholden to other countries) at the lowest rates; and those people in return,
generally give the highest price for our produce.

WE might here quote the New England trade, by which large quantities of fish,
oil, etc. are imported into our province, and in return, they purchase our
flour, pork, iron, etc. which certainly keeps up the price of those
commodities, and must be of advantage to our country: They also supply us with
a great sum in bills of exchange, which prevents the merchants from sending off
the specie in remittance. Put all those considerations together, and they do
certainly prove, that it is the interest of the community to give the greatest
encouragement to strangers trading among us; and therefore, the suppressing the
Vendues, or laying any tax or duty upon the goods sold by them, which for the
greatest part belong to strangers, must be a discouragement to their trade with
us, and in its consequences injurious to the country in general.

THOSE persons who are desirous to have the Vendues suppressed, or laid under a
heavy duty or fine, have mentioned the conduct of the New York Assembly, as a
pattern for ours to follow (which, by the bye, is the first instance of the
kind in America). In answer, it may be observed, that the New-Yorkers once, by
an order of their corporation, fixed the price of meat, butter, eggs, etc. that
the country brought in for their daily provision; but this has not yet been
copied by our corporation, as, no doubt, they must have seen the absurdity of
it; for the event proved, they had like to have been starved, the country
justly resenting such a regulation, and withholding their produce until the
ordinance was repealed. In like manner, we find they have already been obliged
to amend the first law made against Vendues, and have now reduced their duty
from five to two per cent. and it is not to be doubted, but in a little time
they will be obliged to take it entirely off.

THE suppression or taxing of Vendues will probably introduce Pawn-Brokers, as
in London, when those who are in great want of cash, and under the necessity of
raising it in a short time, will be oblige to pledge their goods at, perhaps,
quarter their value, and allow the Broker a large premium beside for the use of
the money; and if those goods are not redeemed at the limited time, they become
the property of the Broker, at the price they were pawned or pledged at. This
evil must be confessed to be much greater than the most extravagant description
given of Vendues.

BUT, if it should be said by any person, that the design of the petition
carried to the Honorable House of Assembly, is not to suppress, but to
regulate Vendues, then the question might be asked, In what manner the
regulation is proposed? Whether, by subjecting the goods sold at them to a
certain fee or duty, or by only regulating the mode in which their public sales
shall be conducted?

IF the first should be attempted, it certainly will be injurious, and operate
as a great discouragement to strangers, and a tax upon the inhabitants, as it
is confessed, that goods, as they are at present sold at Vendue, will not bear
an additional charge.

SHOULD the latter be all that is intended, it is presumed, that the
Vendue-Masters themselves would have no objection, as several of them have
frequently expressed a desire that such a measure should take place.

AND in this, perhaps, we could not follow better examples, than some of the
great trading cities in Europe. In Amsterdam, the numbers of Brokers are
limited to 395, who are obliged to take out licenses, give security, and be
upon oath. In London, the number of Brokers are unlimited, but they are also
obliged to take out licenses, give security, and be upon oath.

THIS is mentioned, as it appears from the face of the petition, that the
subscribers only request a regulation; and, it is beyond all doubt, that a very
great majority of them look on Vendues both useful and necessary, and would not
have signed the petition, had they imagined any thing more than regulation was
intended.

IT has been hinted, to suppress all Vendues in the Northern Liberties and
Southwark, by which all business in that way will fall into the hands of one
only. The partiality and injustice of such a measure, is too great to suppose
it would meet with the least encouragement by so respectable and impartial a
body as our Representatives.

THERE are at present a number of gentlemen employed in that business, of
unexceptionable characters, who have done the business of their employers with
the greatest honor and punctuality, notwithstanding the many illiberal
reflections thrown out by some persons: And must these persons at once be
deprived of their livelihood? shall a business that can give bread to so many
be monopolised by one? will the public be better served by this means? or, will
it put a stop to the pretended evil? Certainly, No.

UPON the whole, therefore, as this matter is now laid before the Honorable
House of Assembly, it is not to be doubted, that, should they be of opinion,
that a regulation of Vendues are become necessary, they will endeavor to do it
in such a manner as will tend to promote the best interest of the community in
general. At the same time, that they will be tender of the interest of those
individuals who are employed therein; by not giving an undue preference to one
to the great injury of the rest.


