Mr. LEAMING's SERMON. The Evidence for the Truth of Christianity.

The Evidence for the Truth (...)made plain -- from Matters of (...) IN A
SERMON. Preached at NORWALK, January 28th, 1770, and at TRINITY-CHURCH, in the
CITY of NEW YORK, July 5th, 1772, and at ST. GEORGE'S-CHAPEL the same Day.

By JEREMIAH LEAMING, A. M. Missionary at NORWALK, in Connecticut, from the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel.

NEW YORK: Printed by JOHN HOLT, in Burnet-Street, near the Coffee-House. 1772.

To the PUBLIC.
THE following Sermon owes its Publicat(...) (...)tirely to some of the
Auditors, who were (...) when it was delivered from the Pulpit, and had such an
Opinion of its Merit, as to solicit the Author for a Copy to be published at
their own Expense and Risk. He has kindly granted the Request: And as the
Publishers think the Discourse strikingly plain, sensible and manly, composed
by the Author with deep Attention to the Subject, a clear and strong Persuasion
of the Truth and Importance of the Sentiments he expressed, sincerely and
piously intended, and judiciously calculated to evince some of the great
fundamental Truths of Christianity in Opposition to the Cavils of ignorant or
designing Men, -- It is hoped the Publication -- though it cannot convey the
Sentiments with that unaffected Warmth and Propriety of Emphasis, with which
they flowed from the Preacher's Heart to those of his Audience, -- yet it is
the sincere Desire of the Publishers, that it may afford as much Pleasure and
Advantage to the Reader, as it gave to every attentive, well disposed Hearer
who received it from the Mouth of the Author.

Though much has been said and written upon this Subject before, yet some of the
Arguments in the following Discourse have not only their Weight but their
Novelty to recommend them -- and it may be said with Propriety that they are
Old Truths set in a new Light: At least the Evidence of the Facts, is put in a
Light that to the Publishers was entirely new and convincing, and they trust
will be so to every Reader who desires to know the Truth, and act conformably
to it.

HEBREWS, Chap. 1. V. 1.2. God who at sundry Times, and in diverse Manners,
spoke in Time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, Has in these last Days
spoken unto us by his Son.


THE Words I have now read to you, show the Apostle, the Author of them, to be
a complete Divine, as well as a perfect Master of Address.

You all know, this Epistle out of which the Text is taken, was written to the
Hebrews, who acknowledged, that God had revealed himself to that Nation, by
Moses and the Prophets. But then many of them denied that God had spoken to
them by his Son Jesus Christ: In order to rectify this Error, the Apostle in
the Beginning of the Epistle, asserts a Fact which was necessary to be believed
by all the Jewish Nation; as he was now ordered by God, to abolish all the
Jewish Rites, which as yet had not been done by any Revelation from Heaven: and
the Jews were bound to obey the Law given from Heaven, 'til such Time, as that
Law was set aside by the same Authority which gave it at first. In the Year 52
-- We find in Acts 15 -- that the Gentile Christians, were orderd to abstain
from Meats offered to Idols, from Blood, from Things strangled, and from
Fornication. But it does not appear that the Jews were exempted from observing
the Law of Moses, till the Year 64 -- they were to observe the Law of Moses,
together with the Laws of Christ, till they received an Order from Heaven to
set aside the old Law. This was the Difference between the Jewish and Gentile
Christians, till this Epistle to the Hebrews was written.


In the Epistle to the Hebrews the Apostle allows what the Jews contended for,
that God had revealed himself, not only to the Jews, but to many, even before
Moses. At Sundry Times God acquainted the World, that the Soul was immortal; by
Enoch, by Noah, before the Flood: and Abraham taught his Children the
Commandments of the Lord, after the Flood. And Jacob, by prophesying to his
Sons of Things to come, showed that he had a Revelation from Heaven. Then,
Moses taught the Children of Israel during their Pilgrimage through the
wilderness. And after they came into the Holy Land, they were taught by
Deborah, Samuel, and the other Prophets, in the Time of the Judges. By Nathan,
in the Time of David and Solomon. And by Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel; in the
Time of the Kings. By Daniel, Haggai, Zechariah and Malachi, in, and after the
Captivity.

And these Revelations were made to them in diverse Manners; that is, sometimes
in a Cloud, sometimes in a Fire sometimes in a still small Voice; at other
Times, by Visions, Dreams, and a Voice from between the Cherubims: and by the
holy Spirit speaking in the Prophets.

As sure as God had taught the people in these various Ways, and Methods, so
sure it was, that the same God now taught them by his Son Jesus Christ, who was
the very Person, to whom all the former Dispensations directly pointed.

Before the Time of Moses, Mankind were taught by Tradition of what had been
revealed, and by immediate Revelations. After Moses, they were taught partly by
written Revelation, and partly by the Dispensation they were under; and partly
by Prophets and holy Persons, who were inspired to teach them in those Points
in which, their written Revelation was deficient, or imperfect.

Accordingly the Will of Heaven, was exhibited in these Periods of the Church
of God, in various Ways, and different Methods. But after Christ came, the
whole Scheme of our Redemption by a crucified Savior was revealed, and all
committed to writing, by which, all Christians are to regulate their Faith and
Practice. Now, all the Evidence for their Faith, and all the Rules for their
Conduct, are to be found in the sacred Volume. There fore we read, That Christ
brought Life, and Immortality to Light through the Gospel. (2 Epistle to
Timothy 1.10) This Expression, is not to be understood as if the Doctrine of
the immortality of the Soul, was not believed before Christ came; but only to
intimate, that all the Evidences for it, were not contained in the written
Rules given to the Jews. The Prophets were to teach the Jews in many Things not
contained in the written Law, saying, know the Lord in this, and other
particulars; but under the Dispensation of the Mesiah, All shall know him from
the greatest to the least. That is, all the Evidences for Christianity, for the
Immortality of the Soul, and for our Conduct as Christians, are contained in
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. There we may be fully acquainted, how we were
redeemed, that the Divine Assistance is afforded to all who seek for it, to
help them to find out the Truth; and after they have found it, to enable them
to practice all Gospel Obedience, which will qualify the Soul to enjoy the
Happiness of Heaven: and that Christ will intercede in Right of his own Merits,
that all who have believed in him, and acknowledged him as their Lord and
Master, and obeyed his Laws, shall be put in possession of that Degree of
Happiness, of which, their Gospel Obedience has rendered them fit to be
Partakers.

The Apostle, in the Text, takes it for granted, that God was the Author of
several former Dispensations; and I shall do the same now, -- and only exhibit
the Proof that the Christian Religion came from God, with all the Evidence,
that the Importance of the Case required.

Neither the Time allowed me, nor your Patience will admit that I should
mention all the Evidences contained in the Scriptures, as a Proof, that the
Christian Religion came from God. Therefore, I shall, at this Time, insist upon
only one single Evidence, out of many, -- that is, the Resurrection of Christ,
as a full Proof in the Case. If the Resurrection is proved by incontestable
Evidence, then the Christian Religion must have come from God: If that cannot
be proved, all the Evidences must be deemed insignificant. If Christ be not
risen, then is our preaching vain, and your Faith is also vain, (1 Corinthians
15.14.

The Resurrection of Christ is a Matter of Fact, Every rational Being is as
good a Judge of a Matter of Fact, as the greatest Man upon Earth.
said to be done upwards of seventeen Hundred Years ago: therefore the Evidence
for this Fact must be taken from the Historians of that Age, in which, it is
said Christ arose from the Dead.

Let only the same Credit be given to the Authors of the New Testament, that is
allowed to other Historians of that Age in which they lived, and the Matter is
put out of all Dispute.

Friends and Enemies all agree that Christ was dead before he was taken down
from the Cross. Pilate did not consent that Christ should be taken from the
Cross till he was sure that he was dead: The Soldiers did not take him down
from the Cross, till they had with a Spear pierced his Side, and forthwith came
thereout Blood and water. There is no Water in that Part of the Body, but what
is contained in the Pericardium; if that is broken it is instant Death.
(John 19.34.)

Thus it appears that Christ was dead; let us see if there is any Evidence that
he was alive after this. For the Evidence of this, we must have recourse to the
Historians of that Age.

The eleven Apostles declare, that they saw and conversed with Christ after he
rose from the Dead, at several Times, within forty Days after he rose. Not only
so, but he appointed the Time when, and the Place where he would appear to them.

And it is also affirmed, that five Hundred Persons saw him at one Time, after
he rose from the Dead.

The Apostles upon all Opportunities declare that they were Witnesses of his
resurrection; and they affirmed this, at the Peril of their Lives.

If this was not true; the Conduct of the Apostles cannot be accounted for,
upon any rational Footing. For there was no Advantage could arise to them in
this World, but much Distress, and Danger, for asserting what they did. And as
to the other World, for they believed the Immortality of the Soul, they must
expect nothing but Punishment, if they persisted in declaring that to be true,
which they knew to be absolutely false.

Let the Conduct of the Apostles be ever so unaccountable, in asserting that
Christ was risen from the Dead; yet if there are other Historians, of equal
Character with them, who lived at the Time when it was said, that Christ rose
from the Dead, and declare that he did not rise; and that they could produce
Numbers besides themselves, who saw his Body liveless and unanimated, lying in
the Market at Jerusalem, at various Times for forty Days; and not only so, but
five Hundred People saw it there, in this lifeless State, at one Time; and that
the greatest Part of these People were alive when these Historians asserted
these Facts, and that they died for asserting of them: Were this the Case, it
would greatly weaken the Apostles' Evidence in the Matter of the Resurrection.
That is, if we consider the Apostles' Evidence as only human, as I do for the
present, this contrary Evidence would go near to destroy what had been affirmed
by the Apostles. It is allowed that the onus probandi, lies on the affirmative
Side of the Question: Yet it is but just to call for Evidence hereof from the
other Side; as it was in the Power of those who denied the Resurrection, to
(...) a positive Proof, by producing the Body of Christ if he was not risen.
But is this the Case? Is there so much as one Historian, who asserts that he
saw the Body of Christ dead, after the Apostles declare it to be alive? Were
not the Jews and Romans as much concerned to prove the Falsehood of the
Apostles in this point, as they were to support their own Characters? Were they
not warned beforehand, that Christ had said he should rise the third Day? Did
they not upon this Information take the Charge of the Body of Christ, after it
was laid in the Tomb, As the Tomb was cut out of a solid Rock, there was but
one Way for the Body to come out; so it was easy to guard it and prevent any
Cheat in the Case.
in order, to prevent any public Deception? If the Body was gone, were not
they who took the Charge of it, answerable for it to the Public?

All Power, civil and military, was in the Hands of the Jews and Romans, at
that Time. They could easily have confuted the Apostles, if what they asserted
was not true. The Magistrates could have searched and ransacked every Corner in
the whole City.

But there was no Need of so great a Search as this; for if his Body was left
in the Hands of any, except Christians, they would readily deliver it up, in
order to expose the Cheat. Accordingly if the Body was in Jerusalem in a
lifeless State, it might easily have been found, and no doubt would have been
found, and laid in open View to all the Inhabitants of the whole City.

If this had been done, it might have put an End, to all the Apostles had to
offer in the Case. Men would have seen with their own Eyes, that the Fact which
the Apostles asserted, was all at the very best, but a mere Delusion.

Was this done? Or was it even attempted to be done? No! And what Reason can be
given why they did not attempt it? Only this -- that they were conscious Christ
was risen, and they could not produce his Body to the People. Otherwise they
would certainly have taken this Method, and stifled the Error, if it was an
Error, even in its very Birth

If they had searched for the Body and found it, this would have had the
Effect, to have entirely established the Prudence and Sagacity of the Enemies
of the Christian Religion, and confounded all those who pretended to believe it.

But this they could not do: his Body was not to be found by them. It could not
be detained even by Death, nor all the Powers of Darkness, for it was not
possible it could be holden by them.

Perhaps it may be asked by some, why Christ did not appear to the Unbelievers;
and convince them, that he was risen from the Dead;

I answer, that he did appear to some; for it is not reasonable to suppose,
that all the five Hundred Persons to whom he appeared were Believers, before he
appeared to them. And we are absolutely certain that St. Paul was an Unbeliever
till after Christ appeared unto him.

Indeed none of the Apostles believed the Article of the Resurrection, as one
of the Characters of the Messiah, till after he appeared to them. When the
Women told them that Christ was risen, it seemed to them as idle Tales, and
they believed them not. When the two Disciples told them that he was risen, and
they had seen him, the Apostles believed it not. Thomas absolutely refused to
believe the Apostles, in this Point, till he should be convinced by his own
Senses.

Indeed it appears, that not one of his Disciples believed that he was to rise
from the Dead, till after he appeared to them. But then, they immediately
became Witnesses to the World, that he was risen from the Dead. Those that were
best acquainted with his Person before he suffered, were the fittest Persons
for Witnesses of his Resurrection: and no others were qualified to be Witnesses
in the Case. For if they did not know him before he died, how could they know
him after he was risen? Accordingly, his Disciples were the best qualified to
be Judges in the Case.

And besides all this: God is the proper Judge of his own Dispensations, and
best knows what Evidence, is most likely to prove effectual to produce a Belief
in Mankind: and therefore has given that Evidence in Scripture, which is most
powerful to bring us to a Belief of the Truth.

It may be asked, why there is not some Miracle wrought in every Age, and
Country to convince People of the Truth of Christianity?

I answer, the very Thing desired, God has been pleased to do. Perhaps, there
is not a Government upon Earth, where there is not a Jew to testify the Truth
of the Christian Religion. Every Jew we behold is a Miracle; for nothing less
than the Divine Interposition in a miraculous Way, could have preserved that
Nation distinct, when they lived amidst all other Nations; detested and
persecuted by them for seventeen Hundred Years.

Where are the ancient Romans now? Can any Man point out the Descendants of
that once numerous and potent People? And yet that Nation was in the Meridian
of its Glory, at the Time, when the Jews were dispersed among all Nations. But
to return,

The Evidence of the Resurrection of Christ, which proves that God has spoken
to us by his Son, or given a new Dispensation under the Government of the
Messiah, is so clear and evident, that we must renounce the very Faculty of
Credibility, and all Faith in History, before we can set aside the Evidence
which God has given for the Truth of the Christian Religion.

All the Evidence is on the Side of Christianity, there is none on the other.
Though the Enemies to Christianity have ransacked all the Records of Time, they
cannot produce so much as one Man, that has said he saw the Body of Christ
confined under the Power of Death, after the Apostles declare he was risen from
the Dead. Is it possible then, that Men who make Evidence the Standard of their
Belief, should hesitate a Moment about the Truth of Christianity? There is
sufficient Evidence offered in the Scripture, for the Truth of the Christian
Religion, to satisfy a rational Enquiry, whatever it may be to silence a
useless Curiosity.

The true State of the Case lies thus: The eleven Apostles declare at the
Hazard of their Lives, and died for asserting of it, that Christ rose from the
Dead. They declare that they saw him, handled him, and eat with him, after he
died, and rose from the Dead.

On the other Side, there is not the least distant Hint given by any Historian,
even of the lowest Character, that any Person saw the Body of Christ dead,
after the Time, that the Apostles declare that he was risen.

Now which Man acts the most consistent with the Character of a rational Being,
-- he who believes eleven Men, who assert a Matter of Fact, that they were Ear
and Eye Witnesses of; or he who refuses his Belief? And yet there is not one
Person who asserts the Contrary to be true, that is, not one Person who though
he had it in his Will and Power to detect the Error, were it an Error, that
ever has said the least Thing that could invalidate the Evidence, the Apostles
have laid before the World.

If Men will be determined by plain Evidence in the Case, they must embrace
Christianity; for it is true, that Christ rose from the Dead; it is also true,
that he has given us a Religion which we ought and are bound to believe and
practice.

I have laid the Evidence before you, to prove that Christ rose from the Dead;
and till such Time, as that a Number of Historians, of equal Character with the
Apostles, can be produced, that saw his Body dead, after the Time the Apostles
declare it to be alive; the Evidence in favor of Christianity is so clear,
that no Man who makes Evidence the Basis of his Conduct, can possibly withhold
his Assent to the Truth of our most holy Religion.

I suppose there is not one present, that is willing to be governed by any
Thing that is unreasonable; that is to say, if sufficient Evidence is laid
before you, you will give your Assent accordingly.

In the Case of Christianity, you see, that the Evidence is clear, and easy to
be found. And consequently, that our Belief is rational and and manly; founded
upon such Motives as we are able to justify, before God and Man.

The next Thing, after we believe the Record which God has given of his Son, is
sincerely to take the Profession of Christianity upon us, according as Christ
has commanded; then to regulate our Lives by that Law, which our Savior who
rose from the Dead, has given for a Rule for his Church in every changing
Scene in this inconstant World.

In order, that we may make a right Use of the Advantages we enjoy by a Gospel
Revelation; let us set an high Value on the holy Scriptures, and make them the
sole Rule of our Faith and Practice. They contain the whole Evidence of our
Religion, and all that Christ has done, is doing, and will do for his Church,
together with the whole that Christ requires us to do for ourselves, with that
Assistance he has purchased for us, and bestows upon all those who sincerely
seek for it, in the Ways of his Appointment.

If we would form a just Notion of Christianity, free from all the Corruptions
which were brought into it by designing Men, we must make the Study of the
Scriptures a Part of our Religion. It would have been very happy for the
Christian Church, if they had made the Scriptures all along the Rule of their
Conduct. Then they would not have fallen into those gross Corruptions in
Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, which have caused such unchristian Divisions
in the Church, which have created much Coldness in Religion. However, these
Errors cannot be charged to our Religion, as contained in the Bible; if we
forsake the Scriptures for a mere Whim of Men's distempered Brains, we must
expect to embrace Absurdity. But if we take the Evidence for Christianity from
the Scripture, we are always safe; for our Faith then will not be changed
according to the Fashions of the Times, but be placed and built upon the
Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
Corner Stone. (Ephesians 2, 20.)

Christians who adhere to a written Revelation, have this Advantage, that by
impartially consulting it, the Deviations from it may be detected, and their
Religion be brought back to its original Standard.

Are we in doubt concerning the Truth of Christianity? The Scriptures contain
that Evidence in Favor of it, which is convincing to every Man* who is
determined by the Force of Evidence.

Are we in doubt about any Doctrine? The Scriptures are clear, as to all Points
of Doctrine that were designed for this Period of the Church.

Are we at a Loss what was the ancient Discipline of the Church? The Scriptures
will inform us exactly, how the Apostles governed the Church in their Time;
together with the Laws how the Church is to be governed to the Consummation of
all Things.

Are we under deep Concern to find out what is our Duty? Open your Bible; there
you may find it, in legible Characters.

Are we sensible we are Sinners, and have thereby lost all Intercourse with the
pure and holy Father of the Universe? The Scriptures acquaint us, That we have
an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous; and he is the
Propitiation for our Sins. (1 John 2.1, 2.) That though we are Sinners, yet we
may obtain Pardon and Mercy upon the Gospel Offer; that our Religion is a
Religion of Mercy, not of Merit in us: and accordingly we may be accepted
through the Merits of Christ, if we repent.

Are we under Trouble and Affliction of any Kind? The Scriptures are a
sovereign Remedy to allay our Grief; for they acquaint us, that God puts under,
his everlasting Arms, to support the Feeble, and holds out his Mercy to
encourage the desponding Soul, and alleviate the Grief of the Mourner.

Are we groaning under a Load of Infamy, because our Characters are unjustly
taken from us? The Scriptures inform us, that it will not be long to the Time,
(...) shall appear before the Tribunal of Heaven and Ear^^ and then our
Characters will appear in their true, genuine Colors.

Are we laboring under any bodily Pain or Sickness? The Scriptures assure us,
that after a little Time, we shall be possessed of a Resurrection Body, in
which, there will be no Pain or Sickness. For as Christ rose from the Dead,
being the first Fruits from the Dead, so will he also raise us from the Dead. I
shall conclude this Discourse by laying open the human Heart in all its
Windings, Disguises, and Corruptions.

To accomplish this Design effectually, I must make a solemn Appeal to the
Conscience of each individual Soul here present, to sit as Judge in this
Affair. The Rule, by which, you are to judge, is the Word of the ever-living
God. The Things you are to pass Judgment upon, are your own inward Characters,
Principles, Springs of Action, and Conduct in Life. No human Creature besides
yourself, can pass a just Sentence in the Case. And yet it is of infinite
Concern to you that such a Judgment be formed. The habitual Tenor of your Life
must be carefully examined: your Conduct must be arraigned, interrogated, and
tried by the sacred Rule of God's Word. In Consequence of this, you will stand
condemned, or acquitted, not by him that now speaks to you, but by one who is
infinitely better qualified to judge in this Matter; even by a Sentence which
you have passed upon yourself, having the Word of God in one Hand, and a true
Knowledge of your own Heart, in the other.

Who is there, that believes future Rewards and Punishments, can stand by, as
an unconcerned Spectator, when Things of such infinite Moment await him? Are
you fit for Heaven, or are you not? Or have you never made any inquiry about
it? If you have not, how is it possible you can be easy one Moment? Do you not
believe there is a Day coming, how soon you know not, (...) before the Bar of
God's Judgment seat? In this Process all the Angels of Heaven, and all the Men
that ever were upon the Earth, will be present. I shall see you all there; and
may I see you at the Right Hand of the blessed Jesus, shouting forth Praises
for the Mercies of Redeeming Love. In that Day, we shall all hear the Sentence
pronounced upon us, which will put us in Possession of everlasting Bliss, or
consign us over to eternal Woe.

At this Tribunal the Conduct of every Soul will be tried by the Word of God.
They who have made the Scriptures the Rule of their Life, and thereby are
qualified to enjoy the State of the Blessed, will by the Merits of Christ, hear
this enravishing Sentence pronounced upon them, Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you.

And on the other Hand; they who would not have Christ to rule over them, but
set up Rules of their own in Opposition to the Divine Law, shall nevertheless
be judged by the sacred Scripture, and hear this awful, and tremendous Sentence
pronounced upon them in terrible Accents, Depart from me ye cursed, into
everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. How dreadful, how
amazing will it be, to hear such a Sentence passed by that loving Savior, that
most kind merciful Redeemer; who had such a mighty Love for Mankind, as to come
into an ungrateful World, and suffer, sweat, bleed, and die, to put Mankind
(...) a Capacity of obtaining everlasting Felicity! How must it shock the
guilty Soul, to hear Christ, who now says Come unto me, then say, Depart from
me ye cursed! Here let Conscience do its sacred Office.

If we can be persuaded to realize this last Tribunal, it would be the very
best Expedient to silence all Objections to Religion; and excite Mankind to the
faithful Discharge of every Duty. And if we persevere in Gospel Obedience to
the End of Life, we may reasonably expect to be eternally happy; through the
Merits of Christ, to whom, with the Father, (...) bed all Honor, Glory, Might,
(...) both now, and for ever. Amen.


