A VINDICATION Of the Power, Obligation and Encouragement of the Unregenerate
to attend the Means of Grace.

Against the Exceptions of the Rev. Mr. SAMUEL HOPKINS, In the Second Part of
his Reply to the Rev. Mr. MILLS; Entitled, "The true State and Character of the
Unregenerate, stripped of all Misrepresentation and Disguise."

BY MOSES HEMMENWAY, A. M. Pastor of the First CHURCH in WELLS.

"Quisquis haec legit, ubi pariter certus est, pergat mecum; ubi pariter
hae^itat, quaerat mecum; ubi errorem suum cognoscit, redeat ad me; ubi meum,
revo et me."

August. de Trin. Lib. 1. Cap. 3. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by J. KNEELAND, next
to the Treasurer's Office in Milk-Street. MDCCLXXII.

CORRECTIONS.
Page 1. l. 11. from bottom for because read that. p. 17. l. 3. f. in r. a.
from p. 25 to 29. the running title should have been "The inability of the
unregenerate stated and explained." p. 35. l. 2 f..r., p. 37. l. 19. f. equally
r. legally. p. 48. l. 9. bot. r. affection of heart to being in general. p. 51.
l. 4. bot. f. 73 r. 72. p. 61. l. 9. bot. r. our own good. p. 117. l. 1. r. as
absolutely unlawful. l. 11. after "love to God" add and as expressions of the
same. l. 27. r. any external duty. page 129. l. last erase these words "He
means the whole of our duty in it is full extent." p. 144. l. 16. r. it is the
duty.

CONTENTS.
SECT. I. The state of the question. Page 1, -- 5 SECT. II. An enquiry into the
character of the unregenerate, their powers and principles of action, with the
nature and quality of those exercises of which they are capable. THE Nature of
Unregeneracy considered, p. 6 -- 9 The Inability of the Unregenerate
considered, 10 -- 11 The Distinction of natural and moral Inability examined,
12 -- 21 The Inability of the Unregenerate, stated and explained, 22 -- 29 This
Inability respects holy Acts, 30 The Nature of true Holiness, 31 -- 48 What
Powers and Assistances the Unregenerate may be the Subjects of, 49 -- 51 Reason
a Principle of Action, 52 Conscience a Principle of Action, 53 -- 56 Self-love
a natural Principle, 57 The Nature of Self-love considered and distinguished,
58 -- 71 Other Affections and Inclinations natural to Mankind, 72 -- 73 An
Examination of Mr. H's Account of the Inability of the Unregenerate, 74 -- 81
Natural Principles and their Corruption considered and distinguished, 82 -- 85
The best Actions of the Unregenerate in some Respects good, 86 -- 89 Whether
the Lads of the Unregenerate may be in any Respects lawful and good, 90 -- 92
The best Actions of the Unregenerate not Exercises of Enmity against God, 93 --
99
SECT. III. Arguments proving that something is required of men in a way of
duty previous and preparatory to regeneration. Natural and supernatural Laws
compared and distinguished, 100 -- 103 The Unregenerate able and obliged to do
Actions materially good, 104 -- 107 Mr. H's Objections to the first Argument
considered and refuted, 108 -- 118 The second Argument proposed taken from Mar.
xii. 28 -- 34. 119 -- 123 Mr. H's Argument from Mat. xxii. 37 -- 40. examined
and answered, 124 -- 132 The third Argument from Romans ii. 14. 133 The English
Translation of Romans ii. 14. considered and defended, 134 -- 137 The fourth
Argument from Mark vi. 20. 138 The fifth Argument from P^il. iv. 8. 139 -- 145
The sixth Argument from several Texts in the Old Testament, 146 -- 147 An
Answer to Mr. H's Objections, 148 -- 156 The seventh Argument from God's
encouraging the Use of Means, 157 -- 162 Mr. H's Exceptions removed, 163 -- 164
The eighth Argument from the Ends of God's Commands, 165 -- 170 An Objection
answered, 171, 172 Such Means are prescribed as are suited to their End, 173 --
175 The Argument confirmed from John v. 39. 176 -- 178 The Argument confirmed
from Luke xiii. 24. 179* 180 The Argument confirmed from John vi. 27. 181, 182
The Argument confirmed from Joh. vi. 24. 182 -- 183 Mr H's Exceptions examined
and refured, 184 -- 188 A notable Mistake of Mr. H's corrected, 189 -- 194 More
Objections considered, 195 -- 198 The last Argument proposed and defended, 199
-- 202
SECT. IV. A Reply to Mr. H's Arguments. An Answer to Mr H's Arguments, 203 --
225 Conclusion, 226 -- 227

The power, obligation and encouragement of the unregenerate to attend the
means of grace, considered and vindicated against the exceptions, etc.
SECT. I. The State of the question.
THEY who have been conversant with controversial writings need not be informed
what vexatious wrangles are often carried on about the true state and meaning
of the question in dispute; each party confidently charging the other with
maintaining propositions which they utterly disown. One great cause of which we
have reason to think is because men aim rather to display their own talent at
reasoning, than to instruct those in meekness who are in opposition to them.
They who have this in ^iew, to run down and triumph over an antagonist at all
events, if they find themselves unable to confute what he has really asserted,
must pretend that he ho^ds to something which they imagine themselves able to
confute. But though the due exercise of charity and a candid fair spirit
toward those with whom they may have to do in a way of disputation, would no
doubt much shorten their work, and disincumber their discourses of abundance of
vain jangling; yet so imperfect are our conceptions, and such is the ambiguity
of language, the best medium we have of communicating our ideas, that even
intelligent persons, and those mutually well affected, will many times
strangely mistake the designed purport of each others expressions.

Had it not been for our distant situation from each other, I would, before I
entered the lists of public debate with the Rev. Mr. Hopkins, have tried whether
by private conference, or letters, the difference of opinion that appears to be
between us might not have been somewhat narrowed and reduced. -- But at present
I have no other way of entering into his views than by what he has published;
which while I examine with freedom, I hope I shall not transgress the law of
charity toward a fellow labourer in the Gospel, or the rules of modesty
toward one, who, on other accounts besides superiority of age, is entitled to
respectful treatment from the author of the ensuing essay.

The subject now to be discussed having never (that I know of) been
controverted among professed Christians till very lately, it will be the more
necessary for us to take care that we conceive aright of the question proposed
to consideration -- And that the state of the question may be truly and plainly
represented, it will be necessary for us in the first place to distinguish it
from some other questions with which it may inadvertently be confounded. -- Let
it then be carefully observed.

The question is not whether it be the duty of the unregenerate to obey all and
each of the commands of God. The obligation of all mankind to obey the divine
law, is on both sides equally acknowledged.

Nor is it disputed whether there be ordinarily a work of the holy Spirit upon
the soul preparatory to regeneration. This we both plead for.

It is also mutually allowed that this preparatory work is ordinarily carried
on by means of the outward dispensation of the word, and other divine
ordinances.

And that the Endeavors of the unregenerate in attending on God's word and
ordinances are, by his appointment and blessing, subservient to this
preparatory work.

And further, that God has some way given encouragement to the endeavors of
the unregenerate in a way of attendance on the means of grace. -- This, though
perhaps denied by some, with whom at present we concern not ourselves, is
expressly granted by Mr. H. I shall now propose that state of the question which
Mr. H. has given in the second part of his reply to the Rev. Mr. Mills, p. 116.

'The question' says he is, whether there are any commands given to the
unregenerate which do not require any thing holy, but only require such
exercises and doings which they may and do comply with while they are perfect
enemies to true holiness?

If Mr. H. had only maintained the negative of the question as above proposed,
the difference which seems to be between him and those who maintain that
something is enjoined upon and required of sinners in a way of duty previous
and preparatory to regeneration, might I conceive be accommodated without much
trouble. -- For we conceive that there is no inconsistency in supposing that a
divine command which requires holiness, and nothing but what is some way
included in holiness, does yet require and oblige to the performance of some
actions, which taken nakedly in themselves, separate from such circumstances,
qualifications and adjuncts as ought to accompany them, have not the complete
essence of holiness. -- We conceive that the holiness of an action consists in
its entire conformity to the divine law, in itself, its principles, end and
manner. -- That the law which requires the whole of what is necessary to
constitute an action holy, does also require each of those things in particular
which are involved and conjoined in every act of holy obedience, although the
complete essence of holiness is not found in any of those particulars detached
from the rest. There is a great breadth in the divine law, to which every act
of true holiness must be some way answerable. Whatever particular is
comprehended in the duty required by any divine precept, is therefore matter of
duty because contained in the command; and yet it will not follow, either that
whatever is contained in the duty required has (taken by itself) the whole of
what is essential to true holiness, or that there is any command which does not
require any thing holy, but only requires unholy acts. In a word, we conceive
that it may very consistently be maintained, that though no actions of the
unregenerate are so fully conformable to the divine command as that they can be
denominated holy in the least degree, being essentially defective in diverse
respects; yet some actions are conformable to the divine command in some
respects, and are therefore comprehended in the requirement of it.

Whether such conceptions of the commands of God and of the actions of the
unregenerate are agreeable to scripture and reason will afterward be examined.
Our present design is not to argue points, but to open the subject of the
ensuing enquiry. But it is very manifest that Mr. H -- 's aim and design is not
so much to prove that there is no command which requires only such actions as
may be done in a state of unregeneracy, but that no actions of the unregenerate
are required at all. If he would admit that they were required at all in any
divine precept, and that consequently we had any divine warrant to inculcate
upon sinners an attendance on the means of grace, as preparatory to
regeneration, I would never contend with him, though he should at the same time
hold that this is not the whole duty contained in and injoined upon them by
such precept. The question then is not, as he has represented, whether there
are any commands given to the unregenerate which do not require any thing truly
holy, but only require such exercises as have not the nature of true holiness.
But the question is, whether any actions which men do or can perform while
unregenerate, are required of them in and by any divine command? This we affirm
and Mr. H. denies.

This appears from the whole drift of his reasoning, which is to oppose and
confute the notion of unregenerate duties as he calls them; that is, of duties
required of men to be performed by them previous to regeneration. And his
express words (p. 116.) put this matter out of doubt. For after saving that his
opponent has attempted to prove that God does require duties of the
unregenerate which they are to do, and do and may perform while in an
unregenerate state, and also that he suspected and even concluded that he (Mr.
H.) held to no such duties, he adds that he readily owns the charge; and
proceeds accordingly to produce his arguments.

But to prepare the way for the clearer discussion of the important question
above stated, there are some preliminary enquiries which I have proposed to
consider by themselves, and which will furnish matter abundantly sufficient for
the next Section.

SECT. II. An enquiry into the character of the unregenerate, their powers and
principles of action, with the nature and quality of those exercises of which
they are capable.
THE points proposed to examination in this Section being important, and nearly
connected with our main subject, and having been the subjects of great
controversies, by means of which, as it often happens in the like case, they
have fallen into much confusion and intanglement through the subtilties of vain
philosophy, there will be need of careful attention to give a clear and just
representation of truth, avoiding erroneous extremes on either hand. I will
endeavor to be as plain as the nature of the subjects will allow; though I
fear it will be sometimes necessary to enter farther into some abstruse
metaphysical disqusitions than is desirable in a theological dissertation. If
the reader has not a relish for such speculations, he may relieve himself
without much inconvenience by now and then passing over a paragraph or two
which may appear dry and barren.

As we are to consider the character of the unregenerate, the first enquiry is,
who are intended by the unregenerate? To which the answer is obvious: all those
are intended who have never been the subjects of that important change termed
by christians, regeneration or being born again: That change whereby men become
true christians or saints, as the scriptural phrase is. I shall not here stay
to show the different significations in which this word has been understood by
divines. In Scripture it signifies the same as conversion, or a man's being
turned, or turning from sin to holiness, as has been well proved by a learned
writer of our own. Edwards on Original Sin, part 3. chap. 2.
And if Christian divines had kept to the scriptural sense of the word, without
either enlarging or narrowing it, they would, I suppose, have done as they
ought to do. However, there is a more limited sense which has obtained with
many. Regeneration in this strict sense imports the immediate work of the holy
Spirit, creating, infusing or communicating a principle of spiritual life, with
a power for holy exercises and acts. It is commonly, if not universally in this
latter sense, that the word is to be understood when used by Mr. H. If then the
grace of regeneration imports a vital principle with a power for holy acts,
then the defect or privation of this, in any man, is that in which the essence
of unregeneracy consists. And every one who is a subject thereof is
unregenerate.

Unregeneracy, I say, consists strictly in a privation, and not as some seem to
conceive) in principles or habits physically and positively opposite to
goodness. For first, there are no positive principles of sinsolness in nature.
If there were, they must have a positive cause. They must either be created in
and with our nature by God, who must therefore be the proper efficient cause of
what is simply and essentially evil, or else they must be the production of
some evil being, who is therefore in part the author of our nature; which is no
other than the manichean Heresy. Secondly, though there be positive principles
of sinful acts, yet unregeneracy does not consist in them. If we take the word
Sin in the concrete sense, then it is true there is something positive in the
nature of it, which therefore must flow from some positive cause and principle.
But sinfulness metaphysically and abstractly considered is only a defect, and
flows only from a defect in the causes or principles of that act which is
sinful. There are not in the nature of man positive principles of foolishness,
though there are positive principles of action, which operating without the
direction and government of wisdom, are the source of foolish action, or folly
in the concrete sense. And the same positive principles of action operating
without the influence and government of holy dispositions in creatures subject
to the divine law, are the positive causes of sinful actions, which in the
concrete sense are sin. It might easily be shown that sin consists formally and
essentially in defect or privation contrary to the divine law: that it flows
from privative and deficient and not from positive and efficient causes: And
that this is agreeable to the judgment of the most learned divines, who have
most zealously maintained the doctrine of man's natural depravity in
consequence of the original lapse. Vid. Ames. De Cons. p. 143. Twiss Vind.
Great. lib. 2 p. 27. Norton's Orthod. Evang p 63. Mastricht. p. 443. Alting.
loc. commun. p. 58. Turret. Instit. vol 1 p. 651. Goodwin's works. vol. 3. p.
322. Edwards on Original Sin. p. 317. etc.
Regeneration, which is the removal of unregeneracy, does not destroy any
positive principles in our nature, but it is the infusion or superaddition of
what was wanting to its moral integrity and perfection. Unregeneracy then does
not lie in any positive principles of action, nor in any actings of the soul,
or in the privation of any exercise, but it consists in the privation of
spiritual life and power for holy action. It is blindness in the mind, want of
taste for spiritual beauty, impotency and indisposition in the will to choose
and perform acts of obedience in a holy spiritual manner.

But it is necessary to be observed, that since unregeneracy consists in the
privation of that rectitude and moral perfection of nature in which man was at
first created, and which by the divine law he was bound to maintain, it is
therefore to be accounted not merely an unhappy but a faulty defect, which does
not excuse a sinner from guilt in transgressing the laws of God,
notwithstanding his impotency and indisposition to exercises and acts of true
holiness. -- Which observation is of importance to be remembered, that sinners
may not exculpate themselves while living in disobedience to God, by perverting
the doctrine of man's natural inability with respect to acts of holy obedience,
and that the calumny which some have had the forehead to cast upon all who dare
call in question their novel opinions concerning the powers and actions of the
unregenerate, who have without any just foundation been charged with justifying
sinners in their impenitency and disobedience to God, may be obviated.

But in order to our having right apprehensions of the state of the
unregenerate, with the nature and quality of their actions, we must enquire
more distinctly into these things: Which is the more necessary to be done,
because Mr. H. in his section on the character of the unregenerate, has
discoursed in too loose and declamatory a manner, and not with distinctness of
method, precision of expression, and clearness of evidence, which are necessary
to give a proper view of the subject. In the multitude of synonymous
expressions, which he has so profusely heaped together to set forth the
depravity of the unregenerate, though there are sundry just observations, yet
many expressions are by no means exact. Things which ought to be carefully and
clearly distinguished, are often so confounded and lumped together, as tends
exceedingly to darken and perplex the subject, instead of opening and
illustrating it. Yea several propositions are advanced, inconsistent with truth
and sound doctrine; which so far as they fall in our way, and tend to obstruct
our progress, will in the proper place be animadverted upon.

The principal point here to be enquired into, is that impotency to the
performance of duty which is implied in unregeneracy. For the opening of which,
three things will be distinctly considered.

I. The nature and degree of this impotency.

II. The powers and assistances for action, which the unregenerate may be the
subjects of.

III. The nature and quality of those actions which with these powers and
assistances they may perform.

The first enquiry we will divide into three branches, viz. What kind of
impotency is that which is implied in unregeneracy. -- And as impotency or
power implies a relation to acts, we will declare what kind of acts they are,
for which the unregenerate want power -- Then the degree of this impotency will
be considered.

1. Concerning that kind of impotency the unregenerate are supposed to be
under, there has been much enquiry. Many who have had occasion to make frequent
mention of it seem to have been much at a loss how to state the matter clearly,
or how to conceive of it. This difficulty has been greatly increased by means
of the remarkable ambiguity attending almost every notable word and phrase,
commonly occurring in discourses on this subject; which ambiguity often lies so
deep as not to be readily observed.

To remedy this inconvenience, the distinction of natural and moral impotency
has been introduced, and is at this day much in vogue with many among us, ever
since an eminent writer of our own, Rev. Mr. Jonathan Edwards, late President
of New Jersey College.
in his elaborate treatise on the human will, some few years ago published, has
made great use of this distinction. As it may serve to throw some light upon
the subject of our present enquiry, I will endeavor to state this famous
distinction, as I find it laid down by those who have made use of it, and then
make some observations upon it.

It seems to be a plain dictate of common sense, as well as of divine
revelation, that there is some kind of inability with respect to certain
actions, which is a good excuse for not doing them. And on the other hand it is
evident from scripture, and seems to be a point generally acknowledged among
Christians, that men may be in some sense unable to do certain actions, which
notwithstanding they are bound in duty to do, and are inexcusable for not
doing. Here are we see two kinds of inability, the distinction between which
ought to be marked as strongly and plainly as possible. The former kind is
meant by natural, the latter by moral inability.

But unless we understand the real difference between those things which are
distinguished by different names, our knowing that one is called by this name,
and the other by that, shows us only their nominal difference. Our conceptions
of things are not at all enlarged and improved, any more than by our knowing
the latin or greek names of them. We must then consider what is the real
difference between the ideas, distinguished by the terms natural and moral
inability. If this difference is clearly opened, and expressed in words of
plain and determinate signification, we have then what we wanted; but if the
explication is given in terms as unfixed in their meaning, or as hard to be
understood as what was to be explained is in itself, we are then as far from
understanding the matter as before.

Let us then attend to the definition of natural and moral impotency. The first
is defined to be an inability to do a thing, because what is most commonly
called nature does not allow of it, or because of some impeding defect or
obstacle that is extrinsic to the will, either in the faculty of understanding,
constitution of body, or external objects.

"Moral inability" we are told consists not in any of these things, but in the
opposition or want of inclination. Edwards on the Will, p. 24.


If this were a clear and exact representation of the difference between that
kind of impotency which is an excuse for not doing an action, and that kind
which is no excuse, our present enquiry might easily be answered. For we allow
that the unregenerate are not held excusable in their disobedience to the
divine law, though unable in some sense to yield that obedience which is
required of them. But if I may (premising due respect to the superior character
of the author above mentioned) declare my mind freely, I must say that this
representation of the matter is to me neither plain nor sufficient, and
introduces a language and manner of speaking so dissonant from, and
contradictory to the language of the sacred scriptures, and the almost
universal style of sound divines, that I cannot be pleased with it.

The real difference between that inability which excuses from acting, and that
which does not, is not clearly expressed, either by the terms natural and
moral, which are as vague in their signification as almost any words in
language, or by the definitions which are given of natural and moral inability.
It will not be easy to find two sentences of equal length, containing more dark
and ambiguous terms than the above definitions. When we are told that natural
impotency is an inability to do a thing, because what is most commonly called
nature, does not allow it; this surely does not make the matter a jot the
plainer. I am utterly at a loss what is commonly called nature; a word which is
observed to bear about a dozen different significations. See Boyle's Enquiry
into the Notion of Nature, p. 27, etc.
It is added, or because of some impeding defect or obstacle that is extrinsic
to the will. Before we can understand what is here intended, there are two
doubts of no small difficulty to be resolved. First, what is meant by the will?
Sometimes it means the power of willing, sometimes the act of willingness,
sometimes the object or thing willed. Now which of the two former senses of the
word is here meant, or whether both, is not I confess clear to me. -- If by the
will, is here meant actual willingness, then the impotency of the unregenerate,
with respect to holy acts, must be concluded to be natural and excusable
according to this definition, for it is certain that it is extrinsic and
antecedent to all exercises and acts of the will; which conclusion is doubtless
very unsound. If by the will is here meant the power of willing, then in case a
man intoxicates himself with strong drink, to that degree as to disorder his
understanding, and introduce an impeding defect or obstacle to the regular
exercise of that faculty, his impotency to sober and rational acts, is
according to this definition natural and excusable, since his incapacity is
because of a defect or disorder he has brought upon his understanding. But this
surely is not so evidently true. And further, it is not necessary that the
defects or obstacles to action should be extrinsic to the power of willing, in
order to a creature's being excusable for not acting. There is a defect of
power to will an action, which is a good reason for not doing it. And there is
also a defect of power to will, which is no good excuse. But secondly, We can
never understand by this definition wherein consists natural inability, or
whether those impeding defects or obstacles which render an action impossible
be a good excuse for not doing it, unless we are able to determine whether
these obstacles or defects belong to the understanding or will or bodily
constitution. And I guess these are not such easy and plain points, that it is
fit people should wait till they are clearly determined by the philosophers,
before they should be able to determine whether their impotency excuses them or
not. Some who have been no mean philosophers, have thought that no real and
natural distinction could be made between the faculties, habits, acts and
objects of the understanding and will; which though it may be thought a wild
notion by those who have always been used to think in a different track, yet
for my own part I am scarce able to show that it is any ways absurd, or
unphilosophical. The faculties of the mind have been commonly distinguished by
modern divines and philosophers into the understanding, the will, and the
affections. Others comprehend the affections in the will; among whom is the
Rev. Author above mentioned. -- The object of the understanding is truth, the
object of the will and affections is good. The mind by the understanding
perceives, judges, reasons, knows, assents; by the affections loves, rejoices,
hates, grieves, etc. -- by the will chooses, refuses, exerts, forbears, and the
like. These objects and acts of the mind at first may seem to be of a different
nature; but this may perhaps be owing to our viewing the same object, as it
were in a different attitude and light. -- Thus Good, which is the object of
the affections, is knowable, so is an object of the understanding. It may be
both known and loved. Yea to know and to love good, seems to be the same thing.
What is love, but the perception of goodness, or loveliness? Perception is
referred to the understanding, and affection to the will. But is there any more
real difference between perceiving beauty and loving it, than there is between
attraction and gravitation? It will be said, there is a twofold perception of
objects, viz. Sub ratione ver^, and sub ratione boni: The former is referred to
the intellect, the latter to the heart or will. But it may well be enquired,
whether there be any object of perception in nature, or any perception or idea
in the mind, which does not involve both those respects? And whether
perception, and taste, do not universally, essentially and necessarily imply
each other, their difference being rather nominal than real? Whether there be
any taste without perception, or any perception without taste? And
consequently, whether the understanding and heart, do not really contain each
other, and their acts coincide? I have sometimes thought that the promiscuous
use of the words, mind, understanding, heart, knowledge, love, observable in
the inspired books, was very agreeable to this supposition, and gave some
countenance to it. And yet the common distinction of the faculties of the mind
may conveniently enough be retained, for method's sake, provided we take care
not to be led into mistake by it. If what has been above suggested should be
found agreeable to truth, will not such curious questions about which some have
made so much ado, viz. Whether the heart be renewed by the illumination of the
understanding, or the understanding enlightened by the renovation of the heart,
and the like, dissolve into smoke and vanity, and all disputes about the
priority and causality of the one to the other may perhaps be found to proceed
on a mistaken hypothesis. -- However this may be, it seems scarce worth while
for Christians to spend their time, and much less fall into uncharitable
contentions, in weaving, and in sweeping away the fine spun cobwebs of each
other. Surely the fates of Greece depend not upon these things.
And however this may be, it is not surely fit that a distinction of so much
importance as this, between that inability which excuses and that which does
not, should turn upon so nice and abstruse a point, as whether the defect or
obstacle lies in the understanding or the will.

The definition of moral inability is equally dark and indeterminate. "Moral
inability" we are told, consists not in any of those things before mentioned,
but either in the want of inclination, or the strength of a contrary
inclination; or the want of sufficient motives in view to induce and excite the
act of the will, or the strength of apparent motives to the contrary; or both
these may be resolved into one, and it may be said in one word, that moral
inability consists in the opposition or want of inclination. Here we may
observe that the word inclination may either signify an act of the soul, or it
may signify a power promptitude and habitual fitness of the soul to incline,
upon the proposal of proper objects, motives and persuasives. The words in
which this definition is expressed, as well as those which immediately follow,
would persuade one to think that by inclination is here meant the act of
inclining, or preferring. For this is spoken of as supposing and depending upon
motives in the view of the mind. For it is said, When a person is unable to
will or choose such a thing through a defect of motives, or prevalence of
contrary motives, it is the same thing as his being unable through the want of
an inclination, or the prevalence of a contrary inclination, in such
circumstances, and under such views. And yet I can hardly think that the want
of actual inclination, or the want of motives in the view of the mind, is all
that this learned author intends by moral inability. For then we must conclude
that the inability of the unregenerate, with respect to exercises of holy
obedience, consists merely in the want of acts, or in contrary actings, (for
this is allowed to be merely a moral inability by this author) and consequently
the removal of this inability, which is effected in regeneration, is nothing
else but producing an actual inclination to holiness, by means of motives
brought to the view of the mind, and not it creating or infusing any new habit,
power, or principle in the mind and heart, and thereby giving an immediate
subjective capacity of being so influenced and wrought upon by motives, as to
take a new actual inclination. But this is a conclusion which I cannot think
this author would admit. Besides the words power and inability, have relation
to acts. And in order of nature, power is necessarily prior to all acts flowing
from it; even as the cause is necessarily prior to the effect. To talk of power
or inability, whether natural or moral, in any other sense, is unintelligible
jargon. Now this author often speaks of a moral inability to love God and
holiness, which he endeavors to prove is no excuse. If then moral inability
consists, as we are here told in the want of an inclination, then we must
conclude that there is an inclination prior to the love of God and holiness,
and which bears the relation to it of a power to its act. The want of this
inclination is the want of this power. The question is, what is this
inclination wherein consists our moral power to love God and holiness, and the
want of which is moral inability. Is it an inclination to God and holiness? No
certainly. For this is the very act itself of love. And it is as evidently
absurd to suppose an act educed from itself as its power, of the want of power
to consist in the want of the act, as it would be to suppose an effect to be
its own cause. And to say that moral inability is no excuse for not loving God
is only saying that a man's not loving God is no excuse for not loving him.
Which is too ridiculously trifling to deserve to be solemnly debated or even
seriously asserted. Is this inclination, the want of which is moral inability,
to love God, an inclination (not to God and holiness but) to the love of God
and holiness? No. For then it will unavoidably follow that we must first have
an inclination (that is a love) to the love of holiness, and from thence as
from its cause or power the act of love to holiness must flow, which is absurd,
and preposterous: Since it is manifest that our loving God, is in order of
nature, prior to our inclining to or loving the love of God; and consequently
the latter cannot be considered as a power, or the want of it as an inability
of any kind whether natural or moral with relation to the former.

If by inclination we understand an habitual radical principle or next power
and promptitude in the soul, to incline and yield to the influence of motives
and moral persuasives whereby a compliance with duty may be inculcated; then I
grant that the want of this is that in which I do suppose the inability of the
unregenerate, with respect to acts of true holiness, really to consist. But
then I observe, first, that I do not find that this is ever called mere moral
impotency by any divine or philosopher, before this author. -- Secondly, his
description of moral inability as consisting in the want of motives, or in
contrary motives, is not consistent with the notion of inability here given.
For that power which is here supposed to be wanting does not consist in, or
depend upon any acts, affections, views, or motives in the mind whatsoever; but
is a prior subjective ground of all holy exercises, and of the prevalence and
efficacy of motives thereunto. Indeed I am apt to think that the author above
mentioned did mean to include this impotency here described, in what he calls
moral inability; but to say the truth, he often reasons about moral impotency
in so dark (not to say loose) a manner, that one is at a loss to know whether
he means by it the want of a power to will, or the want of actual willingness.
And he often appears to argue as if there were evidently no difference between
that inability to duty which consists in the want of actual willingness, and
that which consists in the want of a power to will; and concludes that it must
clearly follow, that because unwillingness is no excuse for not doing our duty,
therefore the want of a principle or next power to be willing, is no excuse:
which conclusion, though it be true in the case of the unregenerate, yet will
scarce follow from these premises; since in the judgment of common sense the
cases are not parallel. Nor is the difference in the nature of things taken
away or lessened at all, because both may be comprehended under the common
equivocal name of moral inability.

And therefore I add in the second place, that as this distinction of natural
and moral inability is not plain and intelligible enough, so it is lame and
insufficient for the purpose of giving one a distinct and exact view of the
subject to which it is applied. For under the common name of moral inability
are signified such different states, as according to the common sense of
mankind ought to be carefully distinguished. For instance, who does not see
that one who is under the dominion of sin, destitute of any principle of
virtue, given up of God to vile affections and hardness of heart, is under a
far other kind of impotency to turn from the love and practice of sin to
holiness, than a man is said to be under to do any ordinary action of life
while he is only unresolved to do it, but at the same time has it in the power
of his will to resolve upon and do it, upon the proposal of a good reason or
motive, without having any new principles or habits infused to enable him unto
it. The difference is great and striking. The inability in the latter case is
what is (I think) frequently called moral impotency by divines and
philosophers; and needs nothing to remove it but what is called moral suasion.
But in order to remove the impotency in the former case to actions spiritually
good, the sinner must have a new heart created, a new principle or taste
communicated to him. And therefore this is much more commonly and properly
called a natural impotency, though in a somewhat qualified sense. The
confounding these things together has been the occasion of some gross mistakes,
as before we have done we shall have occasion to observe.

I add thirdly, that the distinction of natural and moral inability, as
understood and improved, of late, introduces a new style and language into
religious discourses, so dissonant and contradictory to the language of
scripture, and that which has hitherto been received and used in the church,
that I think it ought not to be commended or imitated. The inspired writers
assert not only a want of will, but of power to do that which is holy and
acceptable to God, in such as are in a state, and under the dominion of sin:
that the carnal mind is not and cannot be subject to the law of God: that the
natural man cannot receive and know the things of the Spirit of God: that an
evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit: that no man can come to the Son except
the Father draw him; that separate from Christ, we can do nothing, spiritually
good, etc. These phrases, according to their proper signification, express a
real inability or want of power, and not merely a want of will. Nor do I
remember that the inability of man as in a state of sin to comply with his duty
in a holy manner, is ever in scripture expressed or signified by a word
importing merely a want of will: or on the contrary, that a mere want of
willingness is ever signified by the words and phrases above quoted, or any
others of the same force. When our Savior tells the Jews, ye will not come to
me that ye might have life, his design herein was not to express their
inability in any sense to come to him, but their wilful refusal, and actual
rejection of him. In scripture language, cannot and will not, signify different
things; the former a want of power, the latter a want of acts. And they who
confound these things together in their discourses, depart at least from the
style of the sacred writings. I readily allow that the inability of the
unregenerate is essentially different from that of mere animals with respect to
moral actions: yet if we follow the scriptures, or general style of christian
writers, it is more proper to call it a natural impotency, than a moral
impotency consisting in a want of will. Such a departure from the language of
the church is inconvenient, and ought not for light reasons to be attempted. It
is well known that christian writers, especially since the Pelagian
controversy, have constantly asserted that man in a state of sin is unable, as
well as unwilling to perform acts of holy obedience; and that it is necessary
they be furnished with a power herefor by the grace of God. And how universally
the Calvinian divines in particular, (for whom those who hold this modern
distinction so sacred would be thought to have some regard) have maintained a
natural as well as moral impotency in fallen man, with respect to the
performance of spiritual duties, is well known by those who have been
conversant with their writings.

I mean not to make difficulty about words and phrases, provided the things
signified by them are clearly and distinctly represented: and I will allow that
the impotency here intended may properly be called moral in several respects --
as it relates to acts of a moral nature -- as it is a moral, or culpable defect
-- and as human nature was not originally subject to it, but it was contracted
by sin. But to call it simply moral inability, as opposed to natural, and then
to explain it as consisting merely in the want of inclination and motives, is a
way of speaking (as I humbly conceive) improper in itself, abhorrent from the
custom and style of the sacred and of christian writers, tending to deceive and
mislead the inattentive in their reasonings and conclusions, and has done so in
fact in some notorious instances, as will afterward appear.

I shall therefore endeavor to represent in a somewhat different manner, the
nature of that inability here proposed to examination. Only I would forewarn
the reader not to expect to have all the darkness dispelled, which such
abstruse subjects are more or less involved in, especially in the view of such
as have not much attended to them; which yet should not discourage us from
aiming at as clear and distinct apprehensions as may be obtained.

The human soul though immaterial and uncompounded in its substance, is the
subject of various powers. By powers is meant both an ability to act, and a
capacity of being acted upon. Of these powers some are necessary to constitute
man a proper subject of moral government. These are ordinarily distinguished by
the name of Faculties. There are other powers which though not essential to the
being of a moral agent, are yet necessary to his well-being, and to the right
exercise of his faculties, in obeying the law of his creation. These are
commonly called principles, habits, dispositions, etc.

In respect of its faculties the soul is indifferently capable of sin or
holiness, of right or wrong action. But when endowed with habits morally good
it is not indifferently disposed to sin or holiness, but has a fitness and
promptitude for right action. --

The faculties of the soul are sometimes called the primary powers of moral
action, By moral actions I mean such as are commanded or forbidden by the
divine law.
every action as such flows from the faculty as its proper physical cause. And
as what is called the matter or substance of actions receives its being or is
produced by the faculties, they are therefore called the material principles of
action.

The moral habit or principle is for distinction sometimes called the secondary
power of moral action; -- whereby the soul is capacitated, qualified, and (as
it were) biassed not only to act, but also to act in such a manner; that is,
wisely and virtuously. It is also called the formal principle of right action;
whence it is that actions are morally good. For that the faculties which are in
their own nature indifferently capable of right or wrong exercises, should
exert themselves in the manner they ought, amidst the infinitely various ways
equally possible, is owing to some cause or reason. Nor is this to be ascribed
merely to the objective proposal of opportunities and motives, but to the
subjective meetness and disposition of the agent to be wrought upon and
influenced by them. Which disposition or meetness does not lie in the natural
faculties in themselves considered, since it may be increased, diminished, and
even totally lost, while the natural faculties remain the same; but is a
perfection superadded to and as it were investing them, and cooperating in all
their exercises and operations.

To make this matter, if I can, a little plainer, I will here endeavor to
explain more particularly what I mean by habits, as distinguished from the
faculties.

The word habit is sometimes used in a narrow sense for a disposition or
promptitude to any particular manner of action, which is acquired by a series
of actions. This is sometimes called custom, which sometimes hangs so heavy a
bias upon the mind in its operations, as to induce what is called a moral
necessity or inability to certain actions. By which is not commonly meant any
inclinations which a man has no power to resist or control, but such as cannot
without great difficulty be overcome. These contracted habits much resemble
natural propensities in their influence and effects. Hence custom is called a
secondary nature. It not only strengthens the natural appetites, but will
really create new ones which nature never gave us; as appears in a multitude of
obvious instances.

But the word habit has obtained a more general and extensive signification
among divines. It is used to express any principle, disposition, or propensity,
which is a foundation of men's loving or hating particular objects, or acting in
a particular manner. They are accordingly reduced to three classes: natural,
called instincts -- supernatural or infused, called graces, -- and acquired,
which have been above described.

It may further be observed, that as there are propensities and powers in the
mind, previous to and independent upon all its views and exercises, which are
internal and habitual principles of operation; so there are other powers, which
flow as acts from some prior principle or habit in the mind: which may
therefore at the same time be considered as both habits and acts, though in
different respects; even as the same thing, considered in different relations,
may be both a cause and an effect; which is the case of all causes except the
first. Thus love is an act flowing from habit in the soul; and at the same time
is itself a habit or principle of beneficent action.

The difference between the primary and secondary power of action, or between
the faculties and habits of the mind, may be yet better conceived of when
illustrated by a familiar instance and example.

As man has a power of uttering articulate sounds to signify his ideas, he may
be said to have the faculty or first power of speaking any particular language.
But in order to his being able to speak any language with propriety, he must
have skill in it; and this skill or understanding of language, is a habit or
second power superadded to and (in some sort) cooperating with the general
faculty of speech. And words considered simply as articulate sounds standing
for ideas, are produced by the faculty of speech as their proper physical
cause. But it is owing to a man's skill in language that he utters articulate
sounds in such a manner as is fit to express ideas according to the propriety
of the language. As therefore the faculty of pronouncing words as signs of
ideas may be called the material principle, from which the matter of words (if
I may so speak) proceeds, so skill in language may be called the formal
principle of speech, whence flows the propriety of words, according to the true
idiom of a particular language. Thus man as a rational agent is endowed with
faculties, primary powers, and material principles for moral action: which yet
will never operate in the manner they ought, or in a way of virtuous action,
without the concurring influence of a virtuous habit or disposition, as a
secondary power and formal principle.

The faculties are essential and inseparable powers of the human soul:
particular habits are not essential and inseparable powers. For though it seems
to be as impossible to conceive of the human faculties as divested of all
habits or dispositions, as it is to conceive of matter diverted of all form;
yet as the particular forms of matter are accidental and changeable, so the
same may be said of the particular habits of the mind.

A man who has all natural faculties necessary for moral action, without those
habits or principles whereby he is qualified and disposed to exercise them in a
holy manner, may be said to have a remote power for holy action; but when he is
furnished and qualified with these principles, he has an immediate or next
power, and is capable of being excited thereto by the proposal of occasions,
and motives suited to touch these springs of action, and educe from them such
exercises and operations.

This may suffice to show what is intended by the primary and secondary power
of moral action.

To apply this to the point in hand, let it be observed, that the inability of
the unregenerate with respect to acts of holy obedience, does not consist in
the want of any natural faculty necessary for the performance of it, as is on
all hands acknowledged. Regeneration, which removes this inability, is not a
creation of new natural faculties. How they are defined and distributed by
philosophers, whether the common distinction of them into the understanding and
the will be founded in nature, how their several operations depend upon each
other, I stay not to enquire. This is certain, that mankind are furnished with
natural faculties sufficient for the performance of whatever duty is required
of them. Their impotency consists in the want of a secondary power, a habit or
principle disposing them to holy affections and actions; the origin of which
defect I will endeavor briefly to declare.

Man was originally created upright. His soul was furnished not only with
faculties sufficient for whatever duty God required of him, but also with
principles and habits enabling and prompting him to obedience. He had a power
both to will and to do. There was a foundation in the moral state and frame of
his soul for those affections, and that behavior to which he was bound by the
law of his creation. And though he was dependent upon God in all his
operations, yet it was as really in the power of his own will, as furnished
with principles of righteousness, to act righteously, as it was in the power of
his will as a natural faculty to act at all. And as he might truly be said to
have a power to act, though not independent in its exercise upon God's
providential concurrence, so he had a power to act righteously, though not
independent on the divine cooperation, as the original source of moral
perfection. He needed but to act according to his nature, and exercise those
faculties and principles he was endowed with in his creation, in order to
maintain his innocence and happiness. Capable he was indeed by reason of the
mutability of his finite nature of being deceived and falling into sin, as from
fact is sadly evident; but he was not necessitated to it through any defect of
natural strength or rectitude. But by voluntarily neglecting to follow nature
in its superior principles, and obey the dictates of the divine law written on
his heart, he (as it were) cast away that divine perfection and glory of his
nature, and blotted out the sacred impression of God's moral image from his
heart. The natural faculties with the inferior habits, which in all their
exercises and operations ought to be subordinate to that sovereign superior
perfective principle of human nature, being thus left to operate alone, human
nature became immediately depraved. An amazing revolution took place in the
soul of man, consisting in no less than a change of its ultimate and highest
end of action; a revolution resembling the change in a political body,
revolting from its lawful King, placing an usurping subject in his throne, and
transferring to him that love, honor, obedience and tribute, which is due from
a subject to his prince.

By this unhappy act the habit or principle of righteousness was lost. No
sooner did he quit his hold of this sacred band of union to God (if I may so
express it) than he sunk, he ^ell far out of the reach of it. Or if I may
borrow a similitude from philosophy, as soon as he wandered beyond the sphere of
divine attraction, his inferior appetites and inclinations, like a repellent
force, carried him off instantly, rendering it impossible for him without an
immediate interposition of divine power to recover his former station. By the
free act of his own will he gave himself up to be governed by his inferior
principles; which, though good and useful in their proper place of
subordination, are unfit to have the government of the heart. And though God
was able if he had pleased to have instantly dethroned the usurper, and
recovered again the dominion of the heart; yet as no such favor was due to the
rebellious creature, and would have been contrary to the threatening of that law
under which man was created, God was pleased, as it were, to pronounce this
awful sentence upon him; Since man has chosen to be unrighteous and corrupt,
let him be corrupt and unrighteous. Since he has divested his nature of its
perfective ornament, dignity, and glory, it is a meet punishment of his sin
that his nature remain divested of it. It is just that he be left in that state
of corruption and inability he has chosen, and inherit the consequences.

Thus it appears that this impotency of man in his natural state, is both the
natural and penal consequence of his first transgression. Natural, as it was in
effect the object of his own choice, in turning away from God, to self and the
creature as his last end. Penal, as God in righteous judgment did not restore
that primitive rectitude and power, which by being thus slighted and thrown
away, was justly forfeited.

It must be added, that the impotency of the unregenerate, with respect to acts
of holy obedience, is sinful as well as penal; since it consists in the want of
those principles and powers, which by the divine law man was required to
maintain and exercise. This impotency is therefore a state of inconformity to
the divine law; which being at first exactly proportioned to man's moral
powers, and forbidding him to incapacitate himself for the performance of his
duty; that want of power to do his duty, which by his voluntary fault he has
contracted, is such a state as the divine law allows not. It is because man has
disabled himself from doing his duty, that we argue the inexcusableness, and
sinfulness of his moral inability. If any way could have been supposed, how
Adam could have been here^ of that holiness he was created in, without a
precedaneous act of sinning as the cause, then indeed we might have said that
privation of holiness should not have been reckoned sin either to himself or
his posterity in that case. This corruption of nature or want of original
righteousness, in such case, would not have been nor could have been accounted
a sin, but it comes only to be a sin as it refers to, and is connected with
the guilt of an act of sin that caused that corruption of nature. For that
which makes it a sin is not the want of it simply, but as relating to a
forfeiture and losing of it by some act those are guilty of who lose it. Dr.
Goodwin on an unregenerate 'man's guiltiness. p. 16. Fol.


That Adam should be subject to an habitual inability with respect to his duty,
and yet be held bound to the performance of it, is not so hard to conceive. But
that this inability and corruption should be propagated to his posterity, and
have the same effects and consequences in them, is a point attended with vast
difficulty; and is perhaps the Gordian knot in revealed religion. And yet the
experience of the world in all ages has extorted a general acknowledgment of
the depravity of human nature; and the scriptures plainly assert and constantly
suppose it. They represent man in his natural state as destitute of both a will
and power for such acts as are spiritually good; that he is unable to will and
do duties in a holy manner, until by supernatural and special grace he is
enabled and persuaded thereto; and yet charge him with sin and guilt for every
deviation from that perfection which the divine law requires. Upon the
testimony of God in his word, my faith rests satisfied, without pretending to
see through those difficulties, which the sacred writers have not, that I
remember, once attempted to solve.

What kind of impotency that is which the unregenerate are under, and wherein
it consists, has now been declared in general. But for the further opening of
this point, it was proposed, in the next place, to consider what kind of
exercises and acts they are for which they want a secondary power. Now though
the general answer be obvious from what has been above declared, viz. that this
impotency respects only such actions as are holy or spiritually good; yet it
will be necessary to our conceiving clearly the true import of this assertion,
that we understand what is intended by a holy action, or in other words, what
is the nature of true holiness. This then is the point to which we shall now
attend: and as it is of great and general importance for christians to have
clear and right apprehensions of this matter, I will take the liberty (craving
the reader's indulgence) to be a little particular in answering this enquiry;
and the rather because it will appear, before we have done, that
misapprehensions here have been one root and occasion of unhappy mistakes in
other points.

The shortest, plainest and fullest definition of holiness in a creature, that
at present occurs to me, is this: Holiness consists in conformity to the
preceptive will of God. This may seem a simple account of what has been a
subject of so much painful disquisition; but if it be just, its simplicity it
is hoped is no disadvantage.

Sin and holiness are direct opposites. Now sin is most accurately defined,
anomia, 1 John 3, 4.
the transgression of the law. Perhaps the word would be rendered more exactly,
inconformity to the law. Holiness then being directly contrary must consist in
conformity to it. I shall not be mistaken by the intelligent reader, as though
I meant to assert, that the original and primary obligation of a moral agent to
be holy, was founded in the sovereign will and command of God. Holiness is not
therefore right and fit merely because God has commanded us to be holy, but he
has therefore commanded this because it is right. Indeed the eternal and
unchangeable laws of nature, are properly and originally the laws of God. But
they are not primarily and originally founded in his sovereign will. The
primary and original obligation is founded in and results necessarily from the
nature of God, and the relation subsisting between him and the creature.
Positive precepts are acts of God's sovereign will. And there is a secondary
obligation to those duties which are required in the law of nature, which
(obligation) is founded in, and flows from God's sovereign authority, as shall
afterward be shown. It has been said that the authority of a law lies wholly
in the threatening, or appears and is expressed only in that. This authority is
exercised and expressed in the threatening to the disobedient, and cannot
possibly be expressed in any thing else, or in any other way. Hopkin's Sermon
on Romans 7.7. p. 6. Authority is nothing else but a right to command, connoting
an obligation of obedience in the subject commanded. Authority is therefore
properly the adjunct of a law giver, and cannot except by a m^^^ any be
attributed to a law. The authority of a law is that in or belonging to it which
obliges the subject to obey it; or it is the right of the law, (if I may so
speak) or rather of the lawgiver, to command obedience. To say then that the
authority of a law her wholly in the threatening, is the same thing as to say
that the threatening of the law is all that obliges the subject to obedience;
and consequently if the threatening or threatened punishment could be avoided, it
would no longer be our duty to obey the law. And for any one to be freed from
the penalty of the law, is the same thing as to be freed from the authority or
obligation of the law. But surely this is a very unsound principle. It is
indeed gross hobbism. The very dregs of antinomianism. According to this
principle believers are not subject to the authority of the law, for they are
not subject to the penalty or threatening. The authority of a law is presupposed
in the threatening, for if the subject were not bound in duty to obey the law,
separate from, and antecedent to the consideration of the threatened penalty, it
would be unjust to threaten ^m, and more unjust to punish him for not obeying.
Nor it is true that the authority of the law appears only in the threatening.
For then the most unrighteous laws may appear to have as much authority or
right to command obedience as any; since they may be enforced with penalties;
But they have no authority at all; nor do they appear to have any to those who
judge of them by right rules. The authority or binding power of a law, consists
primarily and principally in these two things, the righteousness of the law
itself, and the right of the legislator to enact it: And whatever obligation
the penalty lays upon the subject, is but a subordinate and secondary one. It
is rather an obligation of interest than of duty. The authority of a law giver
consists in his right to require obedience under penalty; and whatever it be
that gives any one this right, one thing is evident, that it is not merely a
power of threatening and punishing -- Whatever makes it manifest that any one
has the right of legislation, in that alone does his authority appear; but the
bare exercise of power, which is all that appears merely in commanding
threatening and punishing, does not make it appear that any one has right,
unless we are so absurd as to found right merely in irresistible power.


But however this may be, the will of God is the rule of our duty, and in
conformity hereto, holiness, which comprehends the whole duty of man, formally
consists. And therefore to understand the nature of holiness, we must know what
the divine law requires of us. But as the commandment of God is exceeding
broad, comprehending whatever pertains to the moral rectitude of man, we can
here only give a general sketch of the duty therein required.

Whatever appears either by the light of nature, or supernatural revelation to
be the will of God, is contained in the precept of the divine law. More
particularly, our duty may be summed up in three words, right habits,
affections and actions.

(1.) The divine law extends to the habits and principles of the soul,
requiring a secondary power, promptitude and readiness for such exercises and
acts as are holy and good. Holiness comprehends a rectitude of nature, as well
as action. This is what we understand by that state of integrity in which the
scriptures teach us that man was at first created; which is called uprightness,
and righteousness, whereby is signified an agreement or conformity to the rule
of God's law -- And the privation or defect of this rectitude of nature is
therefore sin, being an irregularity forbidden by the law. If habits are wholly
to be resolved into a divine constitution, and are nothing but a law of nature
(which has been intimated to be probably the truth of the matter by Mr. H. when
examined with true philosophic metaphysic strictness. Sermon. on John 1.13. p.
38.) It seems utterly inconceivable how there can be moral rectitude or
obliquity in habits of any kind. A law of nature is nothing but a stated method
of divine operation. How then can this be moral goodness in us. Does the law
require us to constitute the law of nature or ^ix the method of divine
operation? Or does the law impute the divine constitution, (which is entirely
distinct from and extrinsic to our minds and all their exercises,) as virtue or
vice to us? Is an act or constitution of the divine being, as such, really and
formally our fault or virtue? Such metaphysical flights are I believe beyond
the reach of most. As to the pretended difficulty of forming distinct ideas of
habits, perhaps there is equal difficulty in forming distinct ideas of the soul
or its faculties. Habits may properly be said to be active as well as the
faculties, if by activity we mean caus^^ influence into acts. Is not the wisdom
of the artificer a cause in its kind of the goodness of his work? But enough of
this!
This I will suppose is allowed by the author with whom I am principally
concerned in this debate, (notwithstanding sundry expressions scattered through
his book inconsistent with the doctrine of original righteousness or sin)
until I find him expressly denying it. But whatever rectitude of nature man was
at first en^owed with, the production of it by the creating power of God, is in
order of nature prior to the morality of it, or it is relation to the law. The
creating efficiency of God, gave being to the concreated principles of human
nature; which was no sooner made than subject to a law exactly suited and
proportioned to all its powers and principles; and this law gave morality and
holiness to these principles. Now since the divine law requires a moral agent
to maintain that rectitude and perfection of nature in which he was created,
and allows him not to corrupt and disable himself for the duty enjoined ^n him;
we conclude that integrity of nature is a state morally good, and depravity of
nature is a state morally evil.

(2.) The divine law regulates the internal or immanent acts of the soul, which
according as they are conformable or repugnant to the will of God are holy or
sinful. It has been disputed among learned divines whether moral rectitude or
obliquity, belongs to the acts both of the understanding and will, or merely to
the acts of the will. Whether the acts of the understanding are governed by the
will, or the acts of the will by the understanding, which acts first, etc.
These things I leave to those who have a mind to dispute about g^at's wool.
After proposing one query to their consideration, viz. Whether any act or idea
of the human mind can possibly be conceived of, which does not include some
taste or perception of the object as good or evil? Or in other words, whether
there is the least evidence that there is or ever was any such faculty as what
is called understanding di^^ti^ct from the heart? Every act of the soul is (I
suppose) under the government of the divine law. Those who have a natural
capacity, with outward advantages for knowing God and understanding his will,
their ignorance is a sinful defect. Right affections are also by the consent of
all comprehended in the duty prescribed in the divine law. The love of God and
our neighbor is spoken of in scripture as a kind of summary of the duty of
man. On the two commandments requiring love, hang all the law and the prophets.

(3.) The law of God extends to actions, or effective acts of the soul, which
are sometimes called impera^e acts of the will, producing a real effect
extrinsic to the active faculty. The affections or immanent acts of the soul do
not effect any thing, or have any causal influence without the mind. But the
effective acts of the soul are productive of some work, or external action. Now
the law of God prescribes rules of behavior to men, requiring them to do as
well as love what is good. It commands us not only to know and love God, but to
show forth his praise, to glorify him, and walk in his ordinances, to cause our
light to shine before men, that others may see our good works. Not only to love
our neighbor, but to carry it justi^^ and kindly to him in speech and
behavior. In a word, that good works are a part of the duty God has required
of us, has not yet, that I find, been openly denied by any bearing the name of
Christians; though some through a fond attachment to peculiar notions in
philosophy and religion have overlooked the unavoidable consequences of this
truth, as will in due time be manifested.

This may suffice for a general view of the duty required of man in the divine
law -- Rectitude of nature, affection, and practice, comprehends whatever
belongs to the nature of holiness. All these things are commanded, and nothing
else.

But to have just and determinate conceptions of this matter, there are some
important remarks and distinctions necessary to be attended to.

(1.) Holiness is in scripture and in the common language of christians
considered as an adjunct, or property both of persons and actions: and there is
some difference in the complex idea signified by the word holiness, according
as it is applied to persons, or their actions, which should be carefully noted.
A holy person is a saint, one whose heart and life are conformable to the rule
of his duty, whose moral character, that is, his principles, affections, and
behavior, are answerable to God's preceptive will. An affection or action is
holy when it is in all respects such as the divine law requires. If there be
any defect in a man's moral character, it is not absolutely holy, though in
some particulars it may be good. And if there be any moral defect in an action
it is not absolutely holy, though in some respects it may be good, or may have
some goodness in or belonging to it. As there are good actions which have sin
adhering to them, so there are sins that have good in them. For, Bonum or^tur
ex in^^gr^s, m^lum ex qu^^unque defectu. GIVEN on the Holy Spirit, p. 248.
The holiness of any person's character does not consist in any particular
virtue, act or work, but in the conjunction of every virtue, act and work
required in the divine commandment. The holiness of any particular action does
not consist either in the work wrought, or in the manner, or any particular
circumstances of the performance, seperately or in itself considered, but in
the conjunction or concurrence, of the goodness of the action in itself with
the goodness of its circumstances and manner of performance.

(2.) The distinction between legal and evangelical holiness must also be
noted. Legal holiness is that which perfectly answers the requirement of the
law in every respect. Evangelical holiness, though defective in the eye of the
law, is yet so far answerable to the rule of duty as that according to the
gracious constitution of the new covenant it is through the mediation of
Christ, acceptable and rewardable by God; and is proportioned and adapted to
those ends for the sake of which it is required in the gospel. A person or
action is (...) unholy i^ it be in any degree inconformable to the law of God.
It is evangelically unholy if deficient in any thing necessary to acceptance
with God according to the new covenant. No human person or action is to be
found in this world that is legally holy. Evangelical holiness is found in
different degrees in the character of all true christians, and in some of their
affections and performances: but it is not found in the unregenerate or any of
their actions.

Here then is the great point to be resolved, viz. What is the nature of
evangelical holiness? Which agreeable to the distinction abovementioned may be
divided into two enquiries. What is essentially implied in the character of a
holy or good man in the gospel acceptance? And what is necessarily required in
any act to constitute it evangelically holy, or spiritually good?

The general and most essential difference between the character of a saint and
sinner in the gospel sense consists chiefly in these things. The true saint is
one who is regenerate, or endowed with a supernatural vital principle, with
habitual power for holy acts. Being by faith united to Christ he receives from
him supplies of grace, vital communications, in order to his furtherance in
holiness and comfort. As to the exercises of a principle of holiness in faith,
hope, love and good works, these are an essential part of the character of a
good man. It is not indeed essential to a state of evangelical holiness that
grace be at all times in actual exercise. A habit of holiness will not however
in adult persons remain dormant long at a time. It will in various degrees
prevail, and have a governing influence into the practice, yet not so as to
exclude danger of great degrees of apostasy in time of temptation. This is that
seed of God which shall never utterly die or perish in any soul where ^ce
planted. Though a saint may for a time fail in the acts, he shall not finally
fall from the state of holiness. Here then lies the essential universal
difference. Whatever good gifts or virtuous endowments the minds of the
unregenerate may be furnished with, and however useful and amiable their lives
may be, yet they are unable to will or do any thing spiritually good. And
however the true christian may fail in acts of holy obedience, that divine
nature of which he is made a partaker remains in him.

To resolve the other enquiry, viz. What is required in any act to constitute
it an act of gospel holiness there will be need of more consideration. That I
may open this point as plainly and fully as I can in a few words, I would
premise a few things concerning the habitual principle of holiness, which is
the subjective ground of all acts of evangelical obedience, showing wherein
this is different from natural principles. As this is a secret hidden work, it
seems scarce capable of being otherwise discribed than by its subject, its
efficient cause, its end, and effects. The receptive subject is the whole
spirit, soul and body, all the powers or faculties of human nature. The
efficient cause is the holy Spirit, creating and infusing a vital principle,
with a power and promptitude for holy exercises. The end whereof is to prepare
a living temple, wherein to take up his everlasting residence: to fit the
subject for such exercises and acts as are required in the gospel, and are
suitable and necessary for that new state to which he is called, that he may
bring forth the fruit of new obedience, to the glory of God's grace, the honor
of Jesus Christ, and his gospel, the good of mankind, the present comfort, and
eternal salvation of his own soul. The effects are a spiritual change in his
apprehensions, affections, enjoyments, aims, and endeavors: dying to sin,
living to God, in the daily exercise of repentance, faith, love and good works.

This leads us to consider the nature of those acts which flow from that
supernatural habit or principle above described; in other words what is
requisite to constitute an action spiritually good, and according to the
evangelical covenant acceptable to God? and in the first place, all acts of
acceptable obedience imply or presuppose the person to be in a state of
reconciliation with God. This indeed is not properly a qualification of the
action, but the agent: and that not an inherent, but relative qualification,
yet it is absolutely necessary. The promises and blessings of the covenant
belong only to those who are in the covenant. Till a sinner is justified, his
being in a state of guilt is an effectual bar to the acceptance of his
performances as rewardable with covenant blessings. God accepts us, and has a
gracious respect to us, in and through the mediator of the new covenant, before
he accepts or respects any of our works as acts of gospel holiness.

Secondly, All acts of gospel holiness must in themselves be conformable to the
divine command. The work done, the opus operatum must be a commanded action,
and not a mere human invention. This is what is meant by the substance and
matter of duty, about which Mr. H. appears to be so bewildered, and talks in
such an extraordinary strain, as if something must needs be intended extrinsic
to, and distinct from the act of the soul or agent. This was rather too gross a
mistake. One would scarce have expected that Mr. Hopkins, would need to be
informed that by the substance or matter of an action is meant the action as
abstracted from its circumstances, and not any consequent effects distinct from
it. Whatever absurdity there is in calling the locomotion of body abstract from
the agency of the soul the substance or matter of duty, himself (I suppose) is
author of it. If some speaking in popular style have called the external
effects immediately connected with the act of the mind as their cause, and
flowing from it according to the laws of nature, by the name of external
actions, duties, or sins, it was because on account of this connection they are
considered as virtually comprehended in, and the same with the act of the mind:
not that they ever dreamed that the mere motion of matter separate from the
agency of the mind has any morality in it. It is the act itself commanded to be
done that is the matter of duty. It is the act of the will ad extra, productive
of an external work required in the divine law, that is the substance and
matter of external duty. I say then, no action however qualified or
circumstanced is holy, if the act itself, as to the substance and matter of it,
be not commanded, or conformable to the rule of duty.

Thirdly, All acts of holiness must flow from right principles. An action taken
nakedly in itself may bear some conformity to the divine command, and yet be so
deficient in its causes and principles as to be unholy. The same effective acts
of the soul may be educible from very different principles. Two servants may be
equally attentive, and in the same way, to please their master; while the one
acts from love, the other from slavish fear. An unregenerate sinner and a true
saint may do the same kind of actions, considered in themselves; the one from
holy, the other from mere natural principles. The principles of holy obedience
are (1.) A divine nature, a new heart, a supernatural habit communicated in
regeneration. (2.) A true faith in God, in Christ, in the divine word,
precepts, promises, and threatenings, wherein are contained the rule and motives
of evangelical obedience. (3.) The special influence of the holy Spirit
dwelling within us, exciting, assisting, and cooperating with us, working in
us both to will and to do what is acceptable to God. To which may be added with
respect to effective acts, (4.) Love, the greatest of christian graces, without
which we with all our endowments and works are nothing.

Fourthly, Acts of gospel holiness must be directed to a right end. A defect
here will corrupt the best performances. Many good actions done by believers,
instead of being accepted and rewarded in the world to come, will be burnt up
as hay and stubble, because not done for an holy end. The ends of holy
obedience are, First, the glorifying and pleasing God: Secondly, the salvation
of our own souls: Thirdly, the best good of mankind. To these all inferior ends
must be subordinated, without which, however good and lawful in themselves,
they become irregular and inordinate; but by being sought in their proper place
are sanctified to us. Fifthly. There are other circumstances, such as the
manner, time, place, etc. of the action which must be rightly ordered according
to the divine command. A gross defect or irregularity in these respects, may so
deform an otherwise good action, that it is rather to be accounted a sin than a
good work. A good man may do an action materially good, and for a good end, and
yet it may be so unseasonable, so misplaced, so out of order, and in it is
circumstances some how so indecent and improper, that it may really degenerate
into sin.

This then is the sum of the matter. Holiness comprehends conformity to the
command of God in respect of the matter, manner, principle, and end of action.
An action's being conformable to the rule in any one of these several respects,
while inconformable in the others, is not sufficient to denominate it holy. So
far as it is conformable to the rule of duty it is good; but not every instance
of conformity to the rule is holiness. When goodness of principle, end, manner,
and circumstances concur and concenter in an act materially good, the
conjunction or coincidence of all these constitute that entire conformity to
the will of God which is true holiness. But neither will a good end and
principle sanctify a forbidden action, nor is the doing a commanded action an
instance of holy obedience, if essentially defective in principle and end.

The divine law is a perfect rule of duty; nor is any action good or acceptable
any further than it is conformable to it. And yet as was before hinted, the
sincere obedience of true believers though far short of legal perfection is
acceptable to God through the mediation of Christ. For by the grace of the
gospel christians are delivered from the rigor of the law, as Calvin phrases
it. Instit. lib. 3. chap, 19. sect. 5.
That is, though the rule of our duty be not at all abated, yet the rule of
acceptance with God in acts of obedience is not according to the rigor of law,
but the grace of the new covenant. According to the rigor of law, one sin is
sufficient to hinder the acceptance of a person, or any of his actions, however
perfect they may have been: And besides the least sinful defect in the strength
or degree of affection or endeavor renders the act utterly unacceptable to
God. But by the grace of the new covenant the weakest desires and endeavors of
obedience, if sincere and right in the several respects above mentioned, are
through Christ's mediation accepted; notwithstanding any sinful mixtures, and
defects in degree, with which they are attended. These defects being forgiven,
and as it were covered by the merits of Christ, hinder not the acceptance of
the sincere obedience of believers, as to those ends and purposes for which it
is in the gospel required of them. Our author in his sermons on Romans 7.7. p. 8.
says, "Jesus Christ did not come into the world and assume the character of
mediator in order to get this (moral) law repealed or abated, as many have very
absurdly and wickedly believed and taught." Absurd and wicked doctrine indeed!
If there are any among us who avow so gross an error (though I know of none)
christians are bound in duty to God, and charity to the souls of men, to
testify earnestly against it. At the same time charity allows us not to
insinuate so high a charge against any who do not evidently appear to be justly
obnoxious to it.


It will naturally be here enquired; Whether those works of christians, which
though materially good, and flowing in the main from right principles, and
aiming at a right end, are yet in no small degree irregular in respect of the
manner, and some circumstances of the performance; are on that account unholy
and unacceptable according to the tenor of the new covenant. The resolution of
this case will, I hope, give some further light to the subject of our present
enquiry, the nature of evangelical holiness.

Let it then be carefully observed, that there are some acts of the mind which
have whatever is essential to a holy action inseperably connected with, or
rather involved in the substance and matter of the act. Thus love and
resignation to God are acts not only materially good, that is, conformable to
the divine will considered barely in themselves, but they are such acts as
necessarily imply holy principles, and cannot possibly flow from any other:
Such acts as are immediately directed to and connected with a holy end, even
the highest that a creature can respect: Such acts as can never be
unseasonable, or improper at any time, in any place or circumstances: And in a
word, are so essentially and intrinsically right, holy, and spiritual in the
very substance of the act, that though they may be imperfect in degree, yet
they cannot be evangelically unholy, nor will they ever fail of a gracious
acceptance with God through Jesus Christ.

But there are other actions, such as all commanding or effective acts of the
will required in the divine command, which may be willed and done for the
substance of the act, without the circumstances and qualifications above
mentioned as necessary to constitute an action spiritually good. The action
does not necessarily imply holy principles and ends, and may be very irregular
in respect of manner and other circumstances. Besides some qualifications
required in a commanded action to constitute it spiritually good may be applied
to an action materially repugnant to the divine law. An unlawful action through
error of judgment may be done for a good end, and a holy principle exercised in
doing it: And on the contrary an action good in itself (...) be done without
any respect to a holy end, or an^ exercise of a holy principle. Now though it
be ^ain that whatever is required in the divine command is good, and of
consequence both the substance and the requisite qualifications are both good
(...) themselves; yet neither the goodness of the action in itself detached
from other necessary qualifications, nor the goodness of these qualifications
if and to a forbidden action, are sufficient to constitute ^he complex work an
act of evangelical obedience. There is indeed a partial imperfect kind of mo^
goodness, or conformity to the command in such ^ns; It has of late become very
customary with many to use the terms, virtue, moral virtue, true virtue, moral
goodness, etc. to express what is in scripture called holiness. But why should
we borrow our language from the Greek and Roman schools rather than the sacred
oracles? It may give our discourses more of the appearance of philosophical
diss^ons, but is attended with several inconveniences, besides increasing the
ambiguity of language. The apostle Paul was not ignorant of the language of
philosophers in his time, yet he seems to ^^ve carefully avoided it in all his
writings. Nor does it appear that he ever used the words signifying moral
goodness or virtue, in the sense in which they were used by the philosophers,
and are used at this day. The reason seems to be that he was unwilling to have
gospel holiness mistaken for the moral virtue recommended by the gentile
philosophers. There is a moral goodness which is not holiness. The morality of
an action is it is relation to a law. It Is moral goodness is it is conformity to
the law. It Is holiness is it is entire conformity as above explained. Every
instance of conformity to the law in any respect may properly be called moral
goodness, but not every instance of moral goodness is holiness. The old divines
thought this distinction to be useful and necessary. I cannot but think they
were herein more judicious than those who reject it.
but they want that integrity and completenese of conformity which is essential
to true holiness.

To apply this to the case under present consideration; when christians in the
e^^rcise of holy principles, and with a sincere aim to obey and glorify God, do
good actions in a somewh^^ improper and irregular manner; though what is
conformable to the divine command be not acceptable, ^et whatever goodness
there is in the performance, ^ill in this case find a gracious acceptance; and
w^ver is amiss in the manner, a gracious pardon. Y^^ suppose a work not good in
itself should through error of judgment be done from a sincere respect to God
(...) his glory; though the work itself, or effective act of the soul be sinful
and unacceptable; yet the exercises of love to God and sincere desires to obey
him, (...) acts in themselves universally and essentially holy (...) good.
Though therefore the work will be (...), yet the exercises of holy affections
accompanying the work having in them the entire nature of evangelical holiness,
will be accepted. In a word, such is the grace of the new covenant, that not
one holy affection, desire or motion of the heart, however feeble, and however
connected, mingled, and as it were incorporated with sin, shall be forgotten or
unaccepted. Though the christian may suffer great^^ss of dross, hay and
stubble, by the fire that shall try his work, yet not the least dust of gold
shall perish among the rubbish. Every shattered fragment (if I may so speak) of
true holiness, collected into one sum, shall follow him into the future world,
and receive an eternal reward.

Corollary. If the nature of true holiness has here been justly represented, it
seems not to be an exact and just definition to say " its essence consists in
general benevolence." Vid. EDWARDS on the nature of true virtue. p. 117 -- 119.
For though it be true that general benevolence is a holy affections, yet
holiness does not consist wholly in right affections. Not only love but good
works are required in the divine command. Effective acts of the soul are as
really of the nature of holiness as immanent exercises, when they are in
themselves, and in their circumstances and qualifications, conformable to the
will of God. That conformity to the will of God which gives them the nature of
holiness, respects the performances, as well as the concomitant affections. And
besides, there is a rectitude of nature conformable to the law, distinct from
all exercises of the soul whatever. This definition then appears to be
defective, narrow, and inadequate. Whatever is required in the divine law,
belongs to the nature of virtue, if we mean by it the same with true holiness;
but that something besides benevolence is required in the divine law has been
in some measure manifested, and shall by God's help, be further demonstrated in
the next section. It may perhaps be agreeable to some readers to have this point
stated a little more metaphysically. We may then observe, that virtue (that is
holiness) is a word which may be taken either in an abstract or concrete sense;
and may in either of those senses be defined. Virtue in the abstract, or
virtuousness is a quality of some habit or act of a moral agent. Virtue in the
concrete is a qualified habit or act. In the abstract, it is conformity to the
law. In the concrete it is a habit or act conformable to the law. Virtue in the
abstract, has for it is subject some habit or act required in the law. And it is
formal reason which is all that can be meant by it is essence is it is agreement
with the law. Virtue in the concrete, has for it is subject a moral agent, its
substance or matter is some habit or act conformable to the law, it is form
consists in the conformity thereof to the law. It appears then that to say the
essence of virtue consists in benevolence, is not an exact definition, whether
we take the word virtue abstractly or concretely. Virtue in the abstract is not
benevolence -- for benevolence is an act or habit, but virtuousness is neither
act nor habit, but the conformity thereof to the law. Benevolence is one
instance of virtue in the concrete sense, and an important one, but not the
only one. Virtue in this sense consists essentially not only in benevolence,
but in every other act or habit duly conformable to the law of God.

And as virtue may be defined from it is relation to the divine law as it is
perfect and adequate rule, so it may also be defined from it is respect to the
highest good, or the good of the universe, which is (as we may say) the
original reason and foundation of the divine law. The highest good of the
universe may be considered as a measure or standard by which to try whether any
thing be truly and simply good. And accordingly true virtue may be defined
either in the abstract -- is the agreement and consent of the habits and acts
of the mind with the good of the universe, or in the concrete, as the habits
and acts of the mind agreeing and consenting with the good of the universe. It
is in this way that Mr. Edwards aims to define the nature of true virtue in his
dissertation on that subject. But as I humbly conceive, has not done it with
accuracy and exactness. All his definitions are in the concrete, but they are
neither adequate to the subject, nor scarce consistent with each other.
Sometimes he says that true virtue consists in benevolence to being in general
-- sometimes it is a consent, propensity and union of heart, to being in
general, that is immediately exercised in a general good will. Which is to me a
very dark sentence, nor can I determine whether this consent, propensity, etc.
means an act or habit. A little after he says that his meaning is that the
nature of true virtue consists in a disposition to benevolence toward being in
general, and again that no affections toward particular persons or beings are
of the nature of true virtue but such as arise from a generally benevolent
temper, or from that habit and frame of mind wherein consists a disposition to
love being in general. And once more all virtue consists in that affection of
heart to being which is exercised in benevolence or an inclination to it is
good. Does there not appear to be great perplexity and embarrasment in these
definitions? Sometimes we are told that the essence of virtue consists in an
affection, sometimes in a habit disposing to that affection, sometimes in
something we can hardly tell whether habit or affection, sometimes it seems in
both habits and affections -- sometimes all virtue consists in an affection
exercised in an affection: And as for actions or effective acts they seem to be
quite overlooked and forgotten, as if they had nothing of the nature of virtue.
But if we define virtue in the concrete, it is as improper to say that its
essence consists in this or that particular instance whether habit, affection
or action, as it would be to say that the essence of justice consists in any
particular exercise or act of justice. The essence of concrete virtue consists
in every habit, affection and action conformable to the divine law, and
agreeing with or favoring the general good of the universe, as has been above
explained.




The nature of true holiness has been thus far considered. The impotency of the
unregenerate consists in a want of power for exercises and acts of this kind,
It only remains to finish the account we proposed to give of this matter, that
we say a word or two concerning the degree of that impotency unto acts of true
holiness, to which the unregenerate are subject. It is manifest from scripture,
and will be I suppose acknowledged, that no mere man is able in this life to
attain to legal holiness, or perfect conformity to the law in any action. As to
evangelical holiness the unregenerate, though endowed with a remote power for
such acts in the faculties of their mind, have not a next or habitual power for
them. For (1.) they are not in a state of reconciliation, without which their
works cannot be acceptable: Nor (2.) are they furnished with the principles of
gospel holiness; viz. a new heart, a living faith, and the special influence of
the holy Spirit, implying a vital union to Christ, without whom we can do
nothing: Nor (3.) can they direct any of their actions ultimately to the glory
of God: And therefore though they may perform some actions materially good, (as
shall presently be shown) yet they cannot perform them in a holy manner: Nor
are they in their present state capable of such exercises as imply true
holiness in the substance of the act. It must then be concluded that for the
performance of duties in a holy spiritual manner, all who are in a state of
irregeneracy are without strength.

Proceed we now to the second enquiry, viz. What powers and assistances for
action the unregenerate may be the subjects of?

The question is not concerning the primary power of action consisting in the
natural faculties of the soul, in which respect there is no essential
difference between one man and another: But what secondary powers or principles
of action the unregenerate are endowed with, and what further helps beyond the
mere powers of nature may be and are sometimes afforded to them. And let it be
remembered, that we do not mean to place the power of the unregenerate in any
natural principles separate from supernatural assistances by the outward
dispensation of the word, and inward influence of the Spirit of God; but we say
that from the concurrence of all these there arises an immediate or next power
for the performance of such actions, as we shall afterward show are required
in the word of God.

To instance in some particulars: The unregenerate are able from natural
principles, assisted by instruction, and the influence of the holy Spirit, to
reform their lives, to purpose, speak and do many things materially good,
wherein the substance of effective acts of obedience is contained. They have a
power to attend to the reading and preaching of God's word, and pray to him for
his saving mercy: And to do this in such a manner as is in some respects
agreeable to the divine command; that is, seriously and conscienciously: With a
deep concern to escape the misery of a state of sin and guilt: With a
conviction of conscience (and a just one too) that God has commanded, and
encouraged them to do so, and consequently that it is their duty: And with some
moral sense or taste of the fitness and reasonableness of their doing these
things, and of the moral turpitude of a contrary behavior.

It is not my present business to prove that such actions, and such
circumstances of action as have here been mentioned, are in themselves good,
and commanded by God. That will be attended to in it is proper place. What I
have now to do is to show that the unregenerate have a power by the common aids
of divine grace to do such actions, and in such a manner as has here been
declared.

This appears first from fact. They have sometimes done all these things. Now
as every act presupposes a power sufficient for it, it is certain that men have
a principle or power for the doing of such actions as are done by them.

Secondly, The same may be proved a priori by taking a view of human nature,
with it is powers, principles, habits, and springs of action. These when
directed and excited by that light and influence which may be conveyed to the
mind of an unregenerate person from the word and Spirit of God, are sufficient,
without the infusion of a holy principle, to enable him to will and do all
these things. There is nothing in such exercises and acts which may not be
educed from natural principles, under the advantages above mentioned.

To manifest this we may take a brief survey of the principles of action
natural to mankind, together with those advantages and assistances which in
different degrees ordinarily attend the outward dispensation of the gospel.
This enquiry will be necessary to obviate exceptions, as will appear in the
progress of this disputation. But if the reader has a mind to avoid
metaphysical disquisitions, contenting himself with the simple doctrine of
divine revelation, and the simple dictates of common sense, he may if he
pleases pass over what follows to the 73d page, which for the sake of some
readers has been inserted.

It will be proper in the first place, to show what is here intended by a
principle of action. The word principle is of a very general signification. It
comprehends whatever has a causal influence into an action. It may be applied
to the agent, who is the efficient principle, to the faculty or primary power,
which metaphysical writers call the substantial principle. But these are
foreign to our present enquiry. What we here mean by a principle of action, is
that in or belonging to a voluntary agent, whereby he is fitted, guided, and
disposed unto the performance of such kind of actions as have been mentioned.
Or in one word the formal principle. These principles might be reduced to two
heads, viz. the directing, and the moving or prompting principles. But without
being sollicitous to reduce them to these classes they may conveniently enough
be comprised in these four particulars. Reason, Conscience, Self-love, and
other particular inclinations.

1. Reason is a principle of action natural to mankind. By which I do not mean
simply the natural faculty of reasoning and judging, but as furnished with an
habitual power, fitness, and promptitude to reason, judge and dictate aright,
especially in matters relating to practice. Hereby we discern the connection
between causes and their effects, the suitableness of means to their ends, and
in what way we are to pursue that happiness we desire. When therefore we are
convinced that we are hastening into the eternal world, where those who are
reconciled to God will be happy in his favor, and those who are obnoxious to
his wrath will be punished with everlasting destruction, and that now is the
season of mercy, in which God is using means with us, and calling us to attend
on them, in order to obtain that knowledge of the way of salvation, and that
divine influence which may persuade and enable us to an acquiescence in, and
consent to it; reason will dictate that it is fit and right for us to regard
our eternal interest according to it is importance; and diligently use those
outward means whereby God is wont to communicate to sinners the blessings of
his special grace. The dictate of reason will have a tendency to determine our
wills to such a conduct as it prescribes. For there is a propensity in the mind
to follow the practical dictates of it is own reason; which though often
controuled by some particular appetite or inclination acting in opposition
thereto, will yet even when overpowered make a strong resistance. The dictate
of reason (says Mr. EDWARDS,) declaring what is most for a person's happiness
taking in the whole of his duration, when it takes place, is one thing that is
put into the scales, and is to be considered as a thing which has concern in
the compound influence which moves or induces the will, etc. Enquiry concerning
the will, p. 12.
Though the soul be prompted to the choice of it is ultimate end not by reason
but by taste, yet in the choice of the means conducive to this end the dictate
of reason has great weight to determine the will. Whether therefore it be
proper to call reason a prompting, or only a directing principle of action,
certain it is that it is dictates have a tendency to influence the conduct of
mankind. Reason assisted by the word and Spirit of God, will tend to engage the
unregenerate to a serious attendance to the means of grace.

2. Conscience is another principle of action natural to mankind. In this
principle is implied a moral sense approving virtue and disapproving vice;
whence arises a sense of desert, as an eminent writer of our own has justly
observed. EDWARDS on the nature of true virtue, chap. 5.
That there is a moral sense or taste of the natural beauty of virtue and
deformity of vice, distinct from a supernatural principle of holiness, may I
suppose be taken for granted. Now conscience I say, when enlightened by the word
and awakened by the Spirit of God, is both a directing and prompting principle
of action. It directs men what they ought to do, it represents the obligation
they are under to do it, the reasonableness of complying with their duty, the
unfitness of a contrary behavior; and from a sense of the difference between
right and wrong warns them what to expect as the just consequence of their
actions. The approbation of conscience implies some perception or taste of the
natural beauty of virtue, and this denotes some kind of propensity in the heart
to such acts as are thus approved, though not a holy spiritual propensity to
spiritual excellency as such. A sense of beauty of any kind implies taste or
inclination of soul to it. The moral sense shows that there is something in
it is object attractive of the heart. That painful remorse which is caused by a
consciousness of sin shows that it is repugnant to some taste or inclination:
For as pleasure consists in the gratification of some taste or appetite, so
pain arises from the disagreement and contrariety of it is object to some taste
or appetite. When therefore an unregenerate sinner is convinced that it is his
duty by virtue of the divine command to reform his life, and attend the means
of grace; conscience as a director, moral inducer to, and approver of duty,
will have an influence to determine the will to a compliance with it is
dictates. Other natural inclinations may be too strong for conscience to
control, yet when it is overpowered by lust, there will be many times a hard
and uneasy renitency.

But Mr. H. objects, p. 10. Natural conscience, so far as it is distinguished
from the heart, is no principle of action at all. The heart is the source and
seat of all moral exercise and action. Natural conscience therefore, as
distinguished from this, is neither virtuous nor vicious.

I can scarce satisfy myself what is intended in this objection; but if I can
guess at the meaning and design of it, it is exceeding impertinent. Natural
conscience belongs to the heart, and is a principle of it, if we understand by
the heart the same that is meant by it in scripture. "By the heart," says Dr.
Owen, the scripture understands all the faculties of our souls, as they are
an entire rational principle of all moral and spiritual operations. OWEN on
apostasy, chap. 13.
And again more particularly: The heart generally denotes the whole soul of
man, and all the faculties of it, not absolutely, but as they are all one
principle of moral operations, as they all concur to our doing good or evil.
The mind as it enquireth, discerns, and judges what is to be done, and what
refused; the will as it chooses or refuses and avoids; the affections as they
like or dislike, cleave to, or have an aversion from that which is proposed to
them; the conscience as it warns and determines, are all together called the
heart. Id. On indwelling sin. chap. 3.
We will then readily grant that conscience as distinct from all the powers and
principles of the soul is no principle of operation, but we do not mean any
such thing by natural conscience. We suppose (and if we are wrong we would
gladly be set right) that natural conscience is a principle of the heart or
soul, considered as the source of moral action. It is one principle among
others that has influence in determining the acts of the will; which is very
consistent with the supposition of the heart's being the principle of all moral
operation. -- There are several particular principles of rational and moral
action in the human mind, which have their several influence into it is acts,
and being joined together they form one compound principle of action, which we
call the heart. And if we should take the word Heart to signify the will, which
is perhaps what our author means by it, natural conscience would still be a
principle of it. For it includes the moral sense, as has been just observed.
And the moral sense implies taste, which doubtless belongs to the appetitive
faculty. The apostle calls the impression and sense of duty which the Gentiles
had in their conscience, the work of the law written in their hearts Romans 2.15.
Yea, if the conscience belong wholly to the understanding, it may yet properly
be called a principle of moral action, if any regard be paid to the dictate of
conscience declaring what is duty, if this be one thing to be put into the
scale, which if there be any such principle in human nature as the moral sense
cannot be denied. The understanding is allowed to be a principle of action as
well as the will by those who make use of this distinction of the faculties.
Yea what is more usual among divines than to call the acts of the soul, such as
knowledge, faith, love, etc. principles of such actions as flow from them? And
would not that man be thought impertinent who should seriously insist, that
these as distinguished from the heart are no principles of moral action,
because the heart is the source and seat of all moral exercise? Or would any
intelligent and candid person imagine there is any impropriety in saying, that
in some sense the whole soul is the only principle of moral action, and at the
same time that the several distinct faculties, habits and various acts of the
soul, are distinct and several principles of operation? That natural
conscience, in itself considered, is either virtuous or sinful, we do not
assert, nor have any occasion to do it in order to maintain that it is a
principle of such actions as are here supposed.

3. Self-love is another natural principle whereby men may be prompted to
reform their lives, and attend on the means of grace. This need not be proved,
Mr. H. asserting that "the unregenerate act only from self-love." What is the
proper notion of self-love, is a point that much needs to be duly stated and
cleared, having had so large a share of grave perplexity through the subtilties
of vain philosophy. The reader will I hope pardon me if I divert a little from
the main business in hand, to set this matter in a true light.

It will be proper to premise some general observations concerning love, which
may help us in resolving our present enquiry concerning the nature of self-love.

Love being a simple perception or affection of the heart, cannot properly be
defined; yet it is felt and known by all men. It is commonly distinguished into
two kinds, benevolence and complacence. Benevolence is love to persons or
beings capable of happiness. Complacence is love to those things which are
objects of happiness.

Benevolence is, I think, justly termed by Mr. Edwards, On the Nature of true
Virtue, page 119.
that affection or propensity of heart to any being which causes it to incline
to it is well being, or disposes it to desire and take pleasure in it is
happiness. Here we may observe, that our love to or delight in the happiness of
any being is not benevolence, if this be a just account of it, but is an
immediate effect, a distinct act of the mind flowing from it. Both the object
and act are different. The object of benevolence is some perceptive being,
which is distinct from the happiness of the same being. The acts are also
different. For we love and delight in the happiness of a person, because we
love the person himself. Benevolence is such a union of soul in affection to
the person beloved as is a foundation or cause of a participation in the good
or evil that befalls him. Hence arises a love to, or complacency in his
happiness.

Complacence is that affection we have for those things which are agreeable to
some taste or appetite sensitive or mental. Happiness is nothing else but our
enjoying those things which are objects of our complacence. Our love to the
happiness of those for whom we have a benevolent affection, is our complacence
in their happiness. Our love of knowledge, virtue, arts, riches, honor, food,
is our complacency in them. And when we have a love of complacence for persons,
it is the character or endowments of the person that is it is precise object.

These two distinct kinds of love being thus noted and described in general, I
proceed to say, that benevolence may in respect of it is object be divided into
two branches, viz. Self love, and love of other perceptive beings. It may be
somewhat unusual to call self-love a branch of benevolence: But as the import
of the word will well bear this use of it, so there are good authorities to
support it. What I aim at is to distinguish a love of good will, whether to
ourselves or others, from love of complacence, which seems to have been very
often in some degree confounded with it. As self-love is only benevolence to
ourselves, the description of benevolence which has just been given may be
applied to self-love, viz. It is that affection or propensity of heart to
ourselves, which causes us to incline to our own well being, or disposes us to
desire, and take pleasure in our own happiness. -- Here then I would observe,

1. Self-love is not properly called a love of our own happiness in any sense.
The love of happiness is complacency. It has not a perceptive being for it is
immediate object.

The love of our own happiness is an ambiguous expression. Sometimes it is put
for the love of that whatever it be, that is delightful, or an object of
happiness to us. This indeed seems to be an improper way of speaking, amounting
at bottom to no more than this, our loving what we love. The love of our own
happiness most properly means a complacency in our own happy state, because it
is our own, arising from benevolence to ourselves; even as we take complacency
in the happiness of those we love because it is theirs, they are the subjects
of it. But neither love to those things which are objects of delight to us, nor
the love of our own delight as our own is self-love, though both the one and
the other have often been confounded with it. As this ought to be carefully
attended to in order to conceive aright of this matter, and yet, so far as I
have observed, is generally overlooked, I crave leave to consider it more
distinctly.

(1.) Love to those things which are delightful to us is entirely distinct from
self-love. It will be allowed by those with whom we are presently concerned,
that that love to, or complacency in the happiness of others which arises from
benevolence to them, is distinct from self-love. I add, that love to any thing
as an object of happiness, however private or personal the pleasure resulting
from it may be, is toto coelo distinct from self-love. This may seem a strange
assertion to those who have received it from eminent divines, that it is mere
self-love that appears in the disposition of men to be pleased with the objects
of their private and personal delight. But if we keep in mind the true notion
of self-love, viz. good will to ourselves, we shall see that there is nothing
of self-love in these inclinations and affections. Both the object and act or
affection are wholly different, neither does the one affection flow from the
other. The object of self-love is ourselves; the object of these appetites and
inclinations is something diverse from and extrinsic to ourselves that is
delightful to us. The affection of self-love is benevolence to ourselves: The
affection we have to that which delights us, is complacency in it as a pleasant
good.

Moreover our love to, or complacency in particular objects of delight, does
not proceed from self-love. Self-love is not the cause why I find an immediate
personal delight in beauty, proportion, particular studies, employments,
recreations, food which I may be fond of. The foundation of this delight, is a
particular taste or relish for these things, and not the good will I have for
myself. Self-love prompts us to seek those things which are objects or means of
happiness to us, but it no more creates i^ us a taste for these things, or
causes us to love them, and delight in them, than i^ creates the things
themselves loved and delighted in. Nor does self-love flow from our complacency
in particular objects. Complacency in the character of persons may be a
foundation of benevolence to them; but complacence in something distinct from
ourselves, is not the cause of good will to ourselves. Nor does self love flow
from complacency in our own character, nor has any necessary connection with
it, as is too manifest to need any proof.

This by the way shows the falsehood of that principle which Mr. H. often lays
down, and builds much upon it, without once offering any thing, that I
remember, in the shape of an argument to prove it, viz. that the unregenerate
act wholly from self love. As this is no where asserted in scripture, nor I
suppose, ever was, will, or can be proved, it may without presumption be called
in question. To say that men naturally act only from self love, implies that
all the natural inclinations or affections of men prompting them to action are
resolved into self-love: The impropriety and absurdity of which has just been
noted. Men often in their actions follow the impulse of particular instincts or
appetites in opposition to their own interest on the whole, yea in opposition
to "what reason declares to be best or most for their happiness taking in the
whole of their duration." See EDWARDS on the Will, p. 12.
Love to our own happiness in general, is the only love of happiness that flows
from self-love; and therefore self-love so far as it governs the acts of our
will, will always prompt us to choose and do what we think will be most for our
good upon the whole, taking in the whole of our existence. But a regard to what
we judge will be most for our good and happiness upon the whole is far from
having always the whole government and determination of our wills and actions.
Particular inclinations, passions and appetites, are sometimes so strong, that
instead of submitting to the rules and measures which a regard to good upon the
whole would prescribe, they carry the will captive as it were, and turn the
scale against all the re^itency of self-love. Whenever a present pleasure is
preferred to a future advantage which a person judges will be greater when it
comes, Idem page 8.
it is not a regard for our own interest upon the whole (which is the only
regard for it that flows from self-love) that determines the will in choosing
the present pleasure. For a regard to our own happiness upon the whole, if that
were the sole governing principle, would incline the will to the choice of that
which is judged to be upon the whole most for our advantage: But it is the
strength of a particular inclination to the present pleasure, entirely distinct
from self-love, or a love to our general happiness, which causes that pleasure
to appear more agreeable than a greater advantage at a distance.

There are also many actions which flow partly from a general regard to our own
happiness, and partly from particular tastes or inclinations. Such as eating
and drinking, acts of kindness to those we love, of compassion to the
miserable, attendance on divine ordinances, and in a word all actions which may
in themselves give present pleasure, and be also of advantage hereafter. A
regard to our own happiness on the whole will also incline us to the indulgence
of every appetite, when the pleasure of indulgence is not followed with
disadvantages sufficient to counterbalance it. On this account it may be
difficult or impossible to determine concerning particular actions, how far we
were prompted to them by appetite or particular inclination, and how far by a
general regard to our own happiness flowing from self-love. But the difference
between these two principles of action is palpable; and that both have their
influence into our conduct is undeniable. Sometimes one is the governing
principle, and sometimes the other.

It is methinks to be regretted that the confused unphilosophical notions of
the old Epicureans, Hobbs, and the most corrupt of the infidel writers, and
that strange affectation of resolving all particular affections natural to
mankind into self-love, in opposition to common sense, should be revived among
us by christian writers, and those of no mean note. But to proceed,

2. Love to our own happiness is not self-love. This has been explained to mean
complacence in our own welfare, as our own. Though this flows immediately and
necessarily from self-love, and is often blended with it, yet the very terms
show that both the object and affection are of a different kind. The object of
self-love is my self, a perceptive being. Happiness a desirable good is the
object of my affection, when I love my own happiness. The affections I have for
these different objects are also of a different kind, though both called by the
name of love. The one is benevolence to myself, the other complacence in my own
happiness. Benevolence does not imply complacence in the person beloved, nor
does complacence imply benevolence to the good beloved.

3. Both self-love, and the love of our own happiness are different from
selfishness. Selfishness is a regard to ourselves and our own good, exclusive
of all regards to others or their good. Two things are expressed in this
definition. First a love to ourselves and our own happiness. Secondly an
exclusion of love to others and their happiness. Observe here, that the
exclusion or privation of love to others added to self-love changes the idea.
It is adding wickedness to it. For the viciousness of selfishness consists not
at all in the love of ourselves or of our happiness, but wholly in the
exclusion of love to others and their happiness. Self-love is a very useful and
necessary principle in the world of mankind. It not only conduces to their
preservation and comfort here, but in innumerable respects restrains from acts
of true wickedness, and puts men upon seeking true virtue. EDWARDS on the
Nature of Virtue, page 182, 18^.
But the want of love to others is neither good nor useful; it is utterly
sinful, and in it is tendency most pernicious. This defect is the true cause of
the sinfulness of men's actions. Self love is not opposite to the love of God
and our neighbor, any more than loving one person is opposite to loving
another. It neither implies nor excludes it. Nor does it appear that self-love
is in general too strong, but only that love to others is too weak. The
disorders and miseries which abound in the world through the wickedness of men,
are perhaps chiefly owing to the inordinate strength of particular appetites
and inclinations, ungoverned by a regard to their own general good.

Mr. H. has gi^en two definitions of self-love. -- The first is a love of
happiness, the second is selfishness. Page 121.
It appears that he has entirely mistaken the thing in both. It is neither the
one nor the other -- but in short no more not less than good will to ourselves.

But it will be said, self-love in the unregenerate is without benevolence to
other beings, so is indeed selfishness. They have no respect or regard either
to God or man only for selfish ends, and as the fruit and exercise of this
selfishness. And this being directly opposite to all that is truly good, so far
as men act from this principle, they sin.

Whether self-love be sin, and whether all actions flowing from it are sin,
will afterward be considered. At present I will only attend briefly to these
two enquities: Whether the unregenerate have no good will to others or delight
in their happiness, except what flows from and is resolvable into mere
self-love? And whether self-love in them is selfishness?

I have shown that men have naturally particular appetites and inclinations to
objects distinct from themselves or their own happiness; which inclinations are
sometimes so strong as to control and govern self-love itself. It is now
enquired whether there be in men unregenerate any love to persons distinct from
self-love, and which is not educed from, and to be resolved into it as it is
source and only principle? Some have earnestly endeavored to prove that there
is not. Mr. H. though he has not offered one sentence that I remember tending
to evince the certainty or probability of what he asserts, is behind hand of
none in confidently affirming, that the unregenerate have no regard to any only
for selfish ends, and as a fruit and exercise of selfishness. How he confounds
the ideas of self-love and selfishness has been noted, and shall presently be
further manifested. We will put the most candid construction to his words, and
suppose that by selfishness he means self-love. But how earnestly soever he may
beg, or how peremptorily soever he may challenge a concession, that men
unregenerate have no love or regard to any others ex^^pt what flows from
self-love, I can by no means consent at present that this be taken for granted.

For 1. All that has been offered to prove this, so far as I have hitherto
observed, tends only to show that possibly self love may be the only principle
whence all those appearances of good will and kindness toward others which are
observable in mankind in general may be educed. The argument in it is full
strength is no more than this. It may be so, therefore it is so. It is
possible, therefore it is certain. But by what rule of logic can such a way of
arguing be justied? A posse ad esse non valet consequentia.
If it were true that all kind affections toward others may be effects of mere
self-love, how will this prove that they certainly are? They may as well arise
from friendly inclinations, instincts, and dispositions implanted in human
nature. The contrary never was nor can be proved. We may then full as justly
conclude, that since the love which men have for their friends and relatives
and others may arise from a particular instinct or disposition of human nature
distinct from self-love, therefore it does arise from such a principle, and not
from mere self-love. Such an argument I know would not be conclusive; yet it
would have this advantage above the other, that it would conclude agreeable to
the common sentiments of mankind. But to conclude that all unregenerate men are
as selfish in their kindest actions toward those they most love, as the most
hard hearted oppressors are in their most unconscionable measures to promote
their private interests, is, I dare say, contrary to the common sense of fools
and philosophers.

2. If the unregenerate act merely from self-love, then we are under no
obligations of gratitude to them for any acts of kindness they may do us.
Children have no more reason to be thankful to their parents, however
affectionate and careful for their welfare, than if they only nursed them as
lambs to kill and eat them. If there be no love exercised toward us, or
kindness designed to us, except what is wholly reduceable to love and kindness
to themselves, we owe no gratitude, or thanks, or recompense for it. Our
obligation to gratitude is founded upon some favor done or designed to us for
our sakes, and not wholly for the sake of the benefactor. If after receiving
kindnesses from any one we find that he had no ultimate intention to do us
good, but only to serve himself, we feel ourselves at once discharged from the
obligations of gratitude. If a man should express the warmest affections to a
woman, both by words and gifts, merely to bribe her to submit to his will, that
he might enjoy the pleasure of the sixth sense (as Scaliger calls it) by
abusing her, here is no obligation to gratitude. If self-love be the only
principle of action, and self-interest the only end ultimately aimed at, it
matters not whether a man aims at advancing his wealth or honor, or pleasure of
any kind. If he has no ultimate intention of benefiting any but himself, (which
it is certain he has not if he acts merely from self-love) no thanks or
recompense is due for benefits conferred, how many and great soever they may
be. But this surely is a consequence not to be endured, which at one stroke
cancels all obligations of gratitude to parents, friends, and benefactors, for
all favors and kindnesses, if they are unregenerate. I add,

3. That love which the unregenerate have sometimes to others, cannot possibly
be educed from self-love. I grant there is a love to others, both a love of
benevolence and complacence, which may be resolved into mere self-love as it is
principle and source. Thus, self-love produces complacence in our own
happiness. Hence arises complacence in a character favorable to our own
happiness. Complacence in the character produces benevolence to the person. But
self-love does not produce either benevolence or complacence toward another
for his own sake, but merely in order to my own benefit. A regard to our own
welfare will cause us to love what we think is conducive to it as a useful
good, but not as a delightful good -- that is, to love it as a means, but not
as an end. We may from this principle love a character that is favorable to
our interest, and love the happiness of the person, and be much delighted in
it, for our own sakes, as a means of our own happiness, but not for it is own
sake, as an object of happiness. It is the very same kind of love which we have
for a fruitful field, or a favorable season. It is true persons do us good
designedly, whereas inanimate things are useful without design or
consciousness. But this makes no difference in the view of mere self-love. That
will never cause us to love either the character or the happy state of any one
in the least degree in itself, or for it is own sake, but only as profitable to
us. Separate the means from the end, and our regard for them will cease
immediately and entirely, if we valued them only for the sake of the end. It
alters not the case at all in this respect, whether the means of our happiness
are conscious or not. Mere self-love will never cause us to love any person, or
to desire his happiness, or be pleased with it at all, as agreeable in itself,
but purely in order to our own interest, that he may serve us the better; and
when we expect no further advantage by his means, we shall be perfectly
indifferent how it fa^^s with him.

But it is evident that the unregenerate have sometimes such a love to others,
as causes them to have a real pleasure in and concern for their welfare,
separate from all hopes or prospects of being benefited by them. For it will
discover itself strongly in such circumstances where there are no such
prospects. Is it not often seen that such when they are in their own
apprehension just leaving the world, and have no expectation of being any
longer served by their friends, will appear as much or more concerned for them
as when they had hopes of living long to enjoy them. But as to those things
which are valued only for their use, however they might value them before, the
prospect of having no further advantage at once cools their affection, and
makes them unconcerned and indifferent about them. It is not mere self-love
that prompts a man to expose his life to save the life of one, who he never
expects will be able to make him any adequate requital; or to grieve at his
misfortunes, which no otherwise affect him than by exciting sympathetic sorrow.
In such instances as these there appears a love to the happiness of others as a
good desirable and delightful in itself, and not merely profitable and
subservient to self-interest, and consequently such a love as cannot be educed
from and resolved into self-love. Which was to be proved.

Scholium. Many things are loved partly as delightful in themselves, and partly
as useful. The welfare of our friends may be desired on both these accounts. So
may reputation, honors, authority, and even riches; for some appear to have a
fondness for them distinct from what arises from their apprehended usefulness.
But that love which terminates in it is object as in itself delightful can never
be resolved into self-love or a love of our own happiness; and however it may
be joined or compounded with a value for the same object as useful, it is in
it is nature as entirely and essentially different from it, as the love I have
for any food as pleasant, is different from the love I have for it as
wholesome. When a person who has been pleased with the singing of a bird, or
frighted with a rattle snake, is delighted or disgusted at the sight of their
pictures, this does not arise from self love. (See Edwards on the nature of
true Virtue, page 155.) It is not self-love but a particular taste that is the
immediate subjective ground of that pleasure we have by seeing and hearing a
beautiful singing bird. Nor is it strange if the same taste should be somewhat
gratified by a lively idea of the same object. The abhorrence we conceive upon
having the lively idea of noxious animals, with which we have been greatly
terrified, so far as it i^ not sounded in natural antipathy, seems to be a good
deal analogous to the nausea excited at the smell and taste of food which has
caused a crapula. This seems to arise from some habitual alteration in the
state of the stomach, and organs of taste and smell. That may arise from an
abiding change in the brain or nerves occasioned by the fright. There is, I
doubt not, a physical cause of both. What it is I leave to the naturalists.


More arguments might be offered to the same purpose, and whatever has been
urged in opposition hereto (so far as it has fallen under my notice) might
easily be answered, if it were proper to divert to a more thorough discussion
of this famous question. But though this seems unnecessary, it may not be amiss
to add, that it will not follow from any thing that has here been pleaded for,
that mankind have naturally a principle of true holiness, nor does it enervate
the proofs of man's natural depravity from scripture and experience. But truth
scorns to be beholden to error for it is support, and human nature corrupt as it
is may be misrepresented and belied.

Our next enquiry, namely, whether self-love in the unregenerate is
selfishness, and whether all actions flowing from self-love are selfish, and
flow from a selfish principle, is now to be briefly attended to. Now though it
be true that all who have self-love without any good will to others are selfish
persons, yet it is not self-love simply that is selfishness, or that
constitutes any one a selfish person. The exclusion of good will to others is
essentially contained in the idea of selfishness, as has just been noted. This
is a very important part of the idea, which is not included in self-love. When
this vicious defect, is conjoined with self-love in our conception, the idea is
changed from what it was before, and the name expressing it must be changed
also. It is not self-love that is selfishness, nor is it the want of love to
others, but both together. Divide a whole into parts, and neither one part nor
the other taken by itself is the whole.

If it should be supposed that men naturally act from mere self-love, it would
not follow that they acted from a selfish principle. An action does not flow
from selfishness unless want of love to others as well as love to ourselves be
a formal principle; so as that what is done should be an expression or evidence
of the former, as well as the latter. When a man does that to promote his own
interest which is in his apprehension inconsistent with the interest of others,
his action flows from selfishness; it takes it is form from the want of love to
others, as well as from love to himself. If he had regarded the welfare of
others he would have done otherwise. But when a man aims at his own welfare in
such a way as is consistent with the welfare of others, self-love is the
principle he acts from; it is from this his action takes it is form, and not at
all from the want of love to others. It is an expression of good will to
himself, it is no expression of want of love to others. Whether he had regarded
the welfare of others or not, he would have done the very same that he has
done. Suppose he has no regard to the interest of others, he is then a selfish
man. Suppose what he does interferes with the interest of others in his
apprehension, and so is an expression and evidence of want of love to them as
well as of love to himself, it then flows from selfishness, that is, it flows
from want of love to others, as well as from self-love. But suppose what he
does be profitable to himself, and consistent with the interest of others, then
mere self-love is the formal principle. The want of love to others has no
influence in the case.

It may seem strange to those who are unacquainted with metaphysics, that a
defect or privation should be spoken of as a formal principle, which has an
influence in it is kind into an action. To open this matter fully would carry us
too great a length into some abstruse disquisitions. Though privative causes
(as they are called) have no positive or physical influence in determining the
acts of the will, yet the formality of actions has a dependence upon them; and
actions are very often denominated from them. The foolishness of an agent,
though a mere defect, is though not a physical, yet a logical cause, and formal
principle of a foolish action; which action is denominated foolish, not merely
because it is the act of a foolish man, but because it is an expression of
folly, taking it is form as foolish from this defect in the agent. The same
observations may be applied to selfish actions.

An action flowing merely from self-love is not therefore a selfish action,
according to the common and proper signification of the word, unless it
interferes with the interest of others, and so is an expression and evidence of
a vicious defect of good will to them. It is properly an interested action.
There is according to the general acceptance of words, the same difference
between an interested and a selfish action, as there is between self-love and
selfishness. Self-love is the principle of the former, selfishness of the
latter.

These observations may appear to some more subtle than useful. Perhaps we
shall find before we have done, that it is of more importance than presently
appears, to have our words and ideas as determinate as possible in reasoning on
such points as are before us.

To return from this long digression. If an unregenerate sinner may have any
just reason to think, that his reforming his life, and attending the means of
grace tends to his benefit in any respect, self-love will be a prompting
principle to such a conduct; and that in some proportion to the clearness of
his conviction hereof, and the strength of his love to himself, and his own
happiness.

4. There are other affections and inclinations natural to mankind, which may
influence them to a reformation and an attendance on the common means of grace.
The natural disposition in men to be pleased in being loved and honored, and
uneasy in being the objects of contempt and abhorrence, tends to excite them to
the practice of those virtues which are of good report, and restrain from a
dissolute life consured by mankind. This pleasure and trouble though private
does not flow from self-love, as some have imagined; but from a particular
inclination of human nature. For a consciousness of being beloved by others, is
in itself delightful to us, and the contrary grievous. But (as has been shown)
love to ourselves and our own happiness will never cause us to delight in any
particular object for it is own sake, but only as a means, and for the sake of a
further end. Other particular affections and instincts might be mentioned
tending to restrain men from a profligate life, and dispose them to a contrary
behavior, which I omit. Yet I cannot forbear mentioning that inquisitive turn
of mind, that thirst after knowledge, for which some are remarkable, and all I
suppose have something of it, by which many are prompted to seek after divine
knowledge, and search for it in the use of means as for hid treasure. Many who
have no principle of true holiness take a real pleasure in searching the
scriptures, informing their minds with a doctrinal knowledge of the principles
of christian religion, and the evidences of it is divine authority, in attending
on divine ordinances, etc. There is a mental taste inclining hereto, which is
distinct from self-love, though this may have a joint influence with it.

From the whole it appears that the unregenerate are furnished with such
principles of action, as with the advantages of instruction from the word of
God, by the common influence of his Spirit, are sufficient to enable them to
reform their lives, and attend the common means of grace. They have a principle
or next power from which by mere moral suasion such acts of will may be educed.

Mr. H's sentiments on the general subject hitherto treated of are expressed in
the following words. The unregenerate sinner is under no kind of inability or
difficulty that is in the way of his turning to God immediately, which the open
profligate is not under as a bar in the way of his reforming his conduct
immediately. In the latter case all the difficulty lies in the corruption of
his heart, and the opposition of his will to it, and this is all the difficulty
in the former. And if it is more difficult for a sinner to turn to God through
Jesus Christ with his whole heart than it is for him to forsake all ways of
known sin in his external conduct, and he is under a greater inability to do
the former than the latter, it is wholly because his will opposes the former
more than it does the latter, or rather because the latter may be complied with
consistent with the indulgence of the reigning wickedness of the heart, and
enmity against God, whereas the former cannot. The reason why the open
profligate does not reform his conduct immediately i^, because he is not
willing, or his heart opposes this. And the only reason why the awakened sinner
does not embrace the gospel immediately, but remains obstinately impenitent, is
because his will even his whole heart opposes it. All the difference is, that
in the latter case the opposition of the heart to Jesus Christ is more fixed
and strong than it is in the former case to an external reformation, as an
external reformation may be complied with consistent with the gratification of
the reigning lusts of the heart: But compliance with the gospel cannot. Page 13.


As this way of representing the inability of fallen man has lately crept into
vogue with some other ingenious writers, besides our author, who seem to look
upon it as an important and happy discovery, it may not be amiss to propose
some brief observations in answer to these two enquiries.

Wherein consists the inability or difficulty which obstructs the reformation
of the profligate, and the conversion of the unregenerate?

Is the inability or difficulty in both cases of the same kind?

To the first I say, that by the acknowledgment of all there is no such
inability in either case as consists in the want of strength in the natural
faculties either to reform, or turn to God. There is no want of primary power
necessary to these purposes, either in the profligate or unregenerate. The
profligate is also furnished with such natural principles or habitual springs
of action, as are capable of being wrought upon by persuasives, so as that he
may without the infusion of supernatural habits be prevailed with to forsake
the ways of known sin in his external conduct. The obstructions in the way of
his reformation are his relish for the pleasures of sin, the external
difficulties and opposition which must be overcome if he changes his course: To
which we must add ignorance, or error of judgment, in respect of the advantage
of reforming his life, and the destructive tendency of a profligate course, and
in consequence of this an unwillingness to reform. But by means of instruction
and motives, his mistaken apprehensions may be rectified, and such a
willingness and resolution to reform his life may without the infusion of any
supernatural principle be excited, as shall overpower all these obstructions.
It may then be truly said that it is in his power to reform. All that is
wanting is that this power be drawn forth into act by exhortations and moral
inducements. He has natural faculties and habits whence such acts of will may
be educed as are implied in a reformation of his external conduct.

The inability of the unregenerate to turn to God immediately consists in his
unregeneracy. That is, the want of a principle of true holiness, a secondary
power, or next capacity of being persuaded by motives and arguments to turn
from sin to God, as has been declared at large.

To the other enquiry, viz. Whether the inability of the profligate to reform
his life be of the same kind with the inability of the unregenerate to turn to
God? I answer, it seems very plain that it is not. For,

(1.) The profligate has a real and proper ability to reform his life, being
endowed with natural faculties, and habitual principles sufficient for this
purpose, but the unregenerate are really and truly unable, (as destitute of a
principle of holiness) to perform acts of holy obedience.

The profligate is as really able to reform his life as Adam was to maintain ^s
integrity, or as a regenerate person is to comply with any of the precepts of
the gospel. Adam had a power to obey the law of his creation. He had natural
faculties, and conc^ea^ed principles of righteousness The regenerate have also
a power for acts of spiritual obedience communicated to them by the holy
Spirit. And mankind in general have it in their power to abstain from acts of
open wickedness and practice external duties. There may be a power sufficient
for an action, and yet the action may never be done. There may be a natural
faculty and habitual principle, and yet they may never be excited, or put forth
to action. The proper use of moral suasion is to work upon ch^se powers and
springs of action which are within us, to put them in motion, or wake them up
to their proper exercises.

But the unregenerate have not a next power or principle of holy exercises.
Mere moral suasion is insufficient to prevail with them to turn to God with all
their hearts, until a new heart is created in them. They have not the same kind
of power herefor that Adam had to obey the law of his creation. They have not
the same kind of power that the regenerate have to turn to God. They have not
the same kind of power that men have to do common actions. Adam had such a
power as implied an habitual principle of righteousness, so have the
regenerate. But this is wanting in the unregenerate.

When men have natural faculties and habitual principles, implying an immediate
capacity of being wrought upon merely by the proposal of motives, unwillingness
to act is very improperly called inability; or however it is an inability of a
very different kind from that which consists in the want of habitual
principles. The prosligate is unwilling to reform, but by instructions and
exhortations he may be persuaded to it without having any new principle infused
into him. The unregenerate are not only unwilling to perform acts of holy
obedience, but are destitute of a secondary power herefor, which no
instructions or exhortations can furnish them with, without the special and
immediate influence of the divine Spirit. To what has been before remai^ed
concerning the distinction of natural and moral inability, I will here add a
brief note for the further elucidation of this m^tter.

Divines have taken occasion to spea of three kinds of inability in man with
respect to supposed a^tions. First, When the action supposed exceeds the
strength ^f the active faculty in it is present state, this is called simply
^atural inability. Thus man is naturally unable to fly above ^e clouds, to
create a world, to comprehend the nature or works of God. Secondly, When an
action which does not exceed the strength of (...) natural faculties has a
necessary dependence upon, and flows from ^ome preceding act of the will, as an
effect from it is cause, this preceding and causal act of will has been
considered as a power with relation to the subsequent act flowing from it; and
the want of this has been called an inability with respect thereto.
Unwillingness has in this case been termed moral inability. When this
unwillingness takes place in a soul furnished with a principle whence the
causal act before mentioned may by instructions and motives be educed, it is
then simply moral inability, and is removed by moral suasion alone, without
communicating any new principles. But Thirdly, When the principle or habit
whence the supposed act must flow is wanting, and it is not in the power of the
will to acquire it, but it must be communicated and infused by the divine
Spirit (as is the case with the unregenerate with respect to acts of true
holiness) this constitutes a third kind of inability which has not unfitly been
called Ethico-physical. A m^n is under a natural inability to read the
scriptures, if he be b^i^d. He is under a moral inability to do so, if he be
unwilling when he is immediately capable of doing it. But he is under an
Ethico-physical inability to discern spiritual things in a spiritual manner,
and turn to God with all his heart, while he is unregenerate. Many others of
late, besides Mr. H. have confounded these two latter kinds of inability
together under the name of moral inability, contrary to the received language
of the scriptures and sound divines; though the distinction between them be as
important and necessary, as the distinction between the want of power and the
want of will; which has introduced vast confusion, perplexity, inconsistency,
and impertinence into their discourses. Hence we have seen some (who appear to
discourse very sensibly upon other points) that when they come to speak of the
inability of (...) man, think that all difficulties are clearly adn
sufficiently solved, by saying that it is a moral inability, or want of will to
do their duty. And common sense declares that unwillingness is no excuse. But
indeed this does not touch the core of the matter. If mankind are born with a
principle or habit fitting and disposing them, upon the proposal of motives and
occasions, for acts of holy obedidence no pelagian will plead unwillingness as
any excuse of disobedience. But if this habit be wantnig, and cannot be created
by any act of our will, then the inability of man consists in a want of power
to will, prior to any volitions whatever.




2. That inability which consists essentially in unregeneracy, or is
inseperably connected with it, is different in kind from that which does not
consist in unregeneracy, and has only an accidental connection with it. The
impotency of the unregenerate to turn to God with all their hearts, consists in
unregeneracy, or the want of a principle of holiness or next power for holy
exercises. But our author owns that an external reformation is consistent with
a state of unregeneracy; and consequently a power to reform is consistent with
such a state. What obstructs the reformation of the profligate may be removed
without regeneration. It is not unregeneracy, but something entirely diverse
and seperable from it. The inability then is not in both cases of the same kind.

3. If the profligate sinner were under the same kind of inability to reform,
that the unregenerate sinner is under to repent and turn to God with all his
heart, then the same kind of operation of divine grace which is necessary to
the conversion of the unregenerate would also be necessary to the reformation
of the profligate: And the same kind of means which are sufficient to reform
the profligate, would be sufficient to convert the unregenerate. There can be
no need of a different kind of divine influence to remove an obstruction or
inability of the same kind. Now it is acknowledged that the unwillingness of
the profligate to reform his life may be removed by moral suasion alone,
without communicating to him a new supernatural principle. But will Mr. H. say
that moral suasion alone, without communicating a new principle, is sufficient
to enable and persuade an unregenerate sinner to turn to God? Yet this is the
unavoidable consequence of that leading and favorite principle of his* That
the reason why the profligate remains unreformed is the same in kind with the
reason wh^ the unregenerate remain impenitent, viz. opposition of will; ALL THE
DIFFERENCE lying in this, that in the latter case the opposition is more fixed
and strong than in the former. But if this be all the difference, then it lies
only in the degree, and the stronger degree of reni^ency in the will may as
well be overcome by presenting stronger motives, or setting them in a stronger
light in the view of the mind, as a weaker may by a weaker energy of moral
suasion. And if moral suasion alone can overcome the strength of this
opposition for one moment, then the fixedness of it may be fully remedied by
fixing and holding the motives in the view of the understanding.

That which seems to have deceived our author and others in their reasonings,
is the ambiguity of the word will; which signifies both the power and the act
of willing; and confounding simple moral inability, consisting in
unwillingness, with that inability which is termed by divines ethico physical,
consisting in the want of a principle or next power to will.

The inability of the profligate to reform, so far as it consists in
unwillingness, is simple moral inability; and is not properly and upon the
whole any impotency at all, so long as the mind is furnished with a principle
or next power to will and do whatever is implied in his reformation, and only
needs to have this power excited and drawn forth into acts by instruction and
motives.

But the inability of the unregenerate to repent and turn to God, lies in the
want of a secondary power to will, which he is truly and properly unable to
produce or create in his own soul, nor can it be produced by motives alone,
because it does not consist in, or flow from any act of his will, but must be
communicated and infused by the immediate agency of the holy Spirit creating in
him a new heart. If a sinner's inability for holy acts consisted in his
unwillingness for them, or the opposition of his will to them, then it would
not consist in his unregeneracy. For unregeneracy does not lie in any actings
of the will, or in the privation of any acts, but in the privation of a
principle of holiness. To say that the only reason why a sinner does not
embrace the gospel is because his heart opposes it, is the same as to say that
his rejecting the gospel is the only reason why he rejects it, which is false
and absurd. It is false, for it implies that there is no want of a holy
principle. If a power to will were wanting, this defect would be a bar in the
way of a sinner's conversion, of much greater moment than mere unwillingness,
which if that were all might be removed by moral suasion. If unwillingness, or
opposite actings of will are the only reason why a sinner does not embrace the
gospel, unregeneracy or the want of a principle of holiness is no reason; and
consequently regeneration (as distinguished from conversion) removes no cause
of impenitency. Again, the impleaded principle is palpably absurd. Opposition
of heart or will to the gospel is refusing to embrace it, or rejecting it. But
who can help feeling the absurdity of saying that, the only reason why men
refuse to embrace the gospel, is because they refuse to embrace it? That is,
this act of will either has no cause or reason of it is existence, or else it is
the cause or reason of itself. And this shows the futility and impropriety of
such kind of assertions which some have been so fond of, "The unregenerate can
repent and turn to God if they will -- There is nothing hinders but their own
obstinate unwillingness, or want of will." Willing to repent in the sense here
intended, is a holy change of will: In one word, it is true repentance. The
matter then comes to this, He that does repent, can repent! The important use
of this sage maxim to reconcile the gospel with common sense seems to be a
modern discovery, He that is wiser for this may rejoice in it.

I agree with our author that the inability of the unregenerate is a sinful
defect, nor have I the remotest view or desire to weaken the foundation of this
important truth, but rather to confirm it. But I must say, that Mr. H. with
sundry others, how well soever they may have deserved of the christian church
on other accounts, have on this point (as I am verily persuaded) darkened
counsel by words without knowledge. To point out the impropriety of these
newfangled phrases and notions, with which some are so enamoured, with the
fallacious reasonings and conclusions issuing from them, is an important
service to the cause of truth to which christians seem to be particularly
called at this day. If any man speak let him speak as the oracles of God.

The next point proposed to consideration, is now to be attended to, and may be
stated in the following manner.

Allowing that men have a power or principle, whereby they are capable of
reforming their lives, and attending the means of grace, as has been declared
and pleaded for; yet human nature is totally depraved. Are not natural
principles then utterly sinful? And must not all exercises of such principles
be utterly sinful?

For the resolution of this point let it be observed, that we allow the
depravity of human nature, yea the total depravity, as taught in scripture, and
in the reformed churches, in opposition to the pelagian and semipelagian
doctrine. We allow that all the principles of human nature in it is unrenewed
state are corrupted by sin, that it is destitute of a principle of true
holiness, and in a state of spriritual death. But we must carefully distinguish
between natural principles considered simply in themselves, and the corruption
of them. The corruption of human nature consists essentially and radically in a
defect or privation of a principle of true holiness, not in the infusion of any
principles positively and in their own nature evil. Natural principles when
subsisting and operating alone, unsubordinate to a principle of holiness, are
corrupt, because destitute of a due perfection which they ought to have. Hence
they are sometimes called positive principles of sin; and indeed properly
enough, if we understand sin in the concrete sense: For every act of the soul
must flow from some positive principle, though sinfulness in the abstract flows
only from a privative cause, as is commonly noted by divines. Thus selfishness
is a corrupt principle, and a positive principle of selfish actions; yet there
is nothing properly positive in selfishness but the natural useful and innocent
principle of lelf-love. Human nature with it is principles may be considered
simply in itself, so it is the work of God; and therefore not evil but good. It
may also be considered as divested by the sin of man of it is primitive moral
perfection, and thereby incapacitated to answer the great end of it is creation:
So it is depraved and evil. But though depraved nature implies something
positive, yet the depravity of nature consists properly not in any thing
positive, but in a mere privation of it is due moral perfection.

That natural principles so far as they denote any thing properly positive are
not evil, may be demonstrated various ways. God is the proper efficient cause
of our nature, and of every thing positive belonging to it: But he is not the
efficient cause of evil, as all christians not only allow but contend.
Moreover, there is a real positive concurring influence of almighty God with
our natural principles in all their operations; but surely it is inconsistent
with the divine purity to excite and actuate any principle that is in itself
essentially evil, supposing it were possible (as it is not) that such a
principle did really exist. The holy Spirit works upon the natural principles
of the unregenerate altogether in awakening and humbling them, and exciting
them to attend upon the means of grace; which would be directly instigating
them to sin, as sin, if these principles and their operations were in
themselves simply evil. And finally if natural principles were positively evil,
the operations of divine grace would tend to destroy them; but it is only the
disorder introduced by sin that is removed in sanctification.

Though moral depravity has spread over every part of human nature that is
capable of it, yet not every thing in human nature is moral depravity. The
distinction between natural principles and the corruption of them is of great
importance; and it would be much better to endeavor to set this in the
plainest light possible, than to heap up cloudy loose expressions of total
depravity, enmity, selfishness, and the like, as the manner of some has been,
and then to draw such strange conclusions as that all acts flowing from mere
natural principles must of necessity be acts of enmity against God, i. e. sins
of commission, positively repugnant to the divine command. But i^ we will
conceive aright of this matter we may maintain, that though natural principles,
separate from and unsubordinate to a principle of holiness are depraved, yet in
themselves they are good lawful and useful. And though the want of a principle
of holiness deprives every act flowing from mere natural principles of that
perfection which is necessary to constitute it a holy action, which defect is
contrary to the divine law, yet the want of a holy principle does not always
and necessarily cause an act flowing from mere natural principles to be in
itself contrary to the divine command: And consequently the sin adhering to it,
does not consist in what is done, but rather in the defect of some circumstance
which ought to have attended it: That is, it lies in omission rather than
commission. Though the sinful omission or defect whereby the act is corrupted
flows from the depravity of human nature, yet the act itself does not in any
sense, nor is any exercise or expression thereof.

But this matter must be further opened and discussed, which I shall endeavor
to do as plainly as I can, by examining that famous question, which has been so
long and so much debated in the church, concerning the virtuous actions (as
they are called) of the unregenerate. Whether, and in what sense they are sin?
Whether and in what respect they are good? Here observe, that the point to be
enquired into is not, whether any actions of the unregenerate are holy, either
in a legal or evangelical acceptance? It is plain they are not. Nor whether
they are not, taken in all their circumstances sinful, and in this view may be
termed sins? This is granted. Nor whether they are meritorious of grace either
in a way of condignity or congruity? This we do not pretend. And finally, we do
not suppose that there are any promises of salvation, or regenerating grace to
the doings of the unregenerate; but God acts with sovereign liberty in the
exercises of his mercy. The question then is, Are the best actions of the
unregenerate properly denominated good in any respect, and is there any moral
goodness in them? By moral goodness is here meant any kind or degree of
conformity to the law in any respect; though there should not be that
intireness of conformity in all necessary respects which is implied in true
holiness.

The full examination of this question would carry us into the bowels of our
main controversy, which is reserved for the subject of the two following
sections. But without anticipating I would observe --

In the first place, The best actions of the unregenerate are useful, both to
themselves and to mankind in general. They are often subservient, by the
blessing of God, to their temporal and eternal good -- and the neglect of them,
with a contrary behavior, is sinful, of pernicious tendency, and oftentimes of
fatal consequence.

And as the good works of believers which are seen of men are to the glory of
God, ^o are the externally good works of the unregenerate, when done in
professed obedience to him. The inward principle of holiness is visible only to
the searcher of hearts. The want of it therefore cannot hide the light shining
from a good conversation, in the sight of mankind, by beholding of which they
may be induced to glorify God. Therefore,

Secondly, There is a goodness in outward acts of religious obedience, separate
from the goodness of the inward principle of action, or the immanent exercises
of love to God and man. Actions externally good are by the acknowledgment of
all, the proper exercises, and fit expressions of a good heart. Now whatever
act is a proper expression of a good heart, is in itself good abstract from the
goodness of temper therein exercised and expressed; otherwise there would be no
correspondence or answerableness of the expression with the thing expressed.
Beneficent action is a proper way of expressing love; because beneficence is in
itself good and amiable, and therefore love prompts and disposes men to such a
behavior. A good man inclines to and takes complacency in a good behavior.
His goodness causes him to do so. But if there were no goodness in the outward
act of beneficence, except what consisted in the inward exercise of love; then
it would be perfectly indifferent whether love operated in this way, or in a
conduct directly the reverse. If good actions are not in themselves better than
bad ones, apart from the consideration of their principle; why should a good
principle dispose a man to the one rather than the other? But if there be such
a difference in the nature of human actions, that some are properly denominated
good, and others evil in respect of their substance; which goodness or evil
does not lie in their causes and principles; then there is a goodness in the
best actions of the unregenerate, however destitute they are of a principle of
holiness.

Thirdly, If the object of choice be good, as viewed and chosen by the mind;
then the act of the will in choosing it is in itself good. The act of our will
is indeed distinct from those effects which flow from it by the laws of nature;
such as the motion of our own or other bodies, in consequence of the exertion
of our souls. And it is possible for a man by accident to do that which may
prove of advantage to himself and others, when he acts with the most
mischievous intention. In this case we say the action as chosen and done by the
agent is bad, though good has come of it contrary to his will. But when a good
effect naturally flowing from the act of a man's will is foreseen and chosen as
such; then the act of choosing is in itself good, as well as the object chosen,
or the effect flowing from it. Nor is the matter at all effected in a rational,
and moral consideration, whether the person were the immediate efficient cause
of the good effect, or only an occasional one. Actions materially good are no
doubt (if we speak properly) the actions of our souls, and not any external
effects as detached from the agency of the will. The substance or matter of an
act of choice is to be denominated good or evil, according to the nature of
it is object, as viewed and chosen by the mind. However defective the prime
principles or ultimate ends of action may be, the choice of an action
materially good is an act of choice materially good. And if there be any
goodness in some external actions more than in others, which ought to incline a
good man to take delight in them; then there is a goodness in the choice of
such kind of actions: There is a goodness in the effective act of the will,
separate from the goodness of the immanent act, or of the habit or principle
from which the immanent act flows. If there be no goodness in effective acts of
the will, except what consists in the goodness of the principles they flow
from; then a principle of holiness would no more fit dispose and prompt the
soul to such kind of acts than to the very reverse. A sanctified heart which
has a right judgment and taste approves of and inclines to such kind of acts:
They are the proper exercises of a good principle; which is a clear evidence of
their goodness in themselves. Our choice of objects is not that which makes
them good, but their goodness is the ground and reason of our choosing them, as
it is this which makes them fit objects of choice. As the effects flowing from
an act of will are what they are in themselves whether good or evil, whatever
the design of the agent might be, so the effective acts themselves are what
they are in respect of their substance, from whatever principles they might
flow. In this sense it is a true principle, that the goodness or evil of
actions lies in their nature and not in their causes. Edwards's Enquiry
concerning the Will, part 4. sect. 1.


Now when the unregenerate perform actions materially good, the external
effect, and the internal act of the mind choosing the action, and exerting
effective power for the performance of it, are the same in their own nature, as
if they acted from a ^rinciple of true holiness. And since such kind of actions
are good in themselves, abstract from the goodness of the^ principle, the want
of a holy principle does not deprive them of this kind of goodness whatever it
may be.

But here it will naturally be enquired, what kind of goodness this is which
belongs to external actions or effective acts as considered in themselves,
abstract from their principles? I answer first, the usefulness or good tendency
of such actions: Their connection with and conducivene^^ to such ends as are
ultimately good. Philosophers have distributed good into three kinds, bonum
honestum, jucundum, and utile. Moral good, happiness, and that which is
profitable, on account of it is instrumental subserviency to the attainment of
virtue or happiness. The goodness of the end derives a goodness to the means
conducing to it. In this sense at least the best actions of the unregenerate
cannot be denied to be good, by any that allow them to be any ways conducive to
their benefit. I add secondly, If such actions are required in and by any
divine command, if effective as well as immanent acts of the will are jointly
and severally subject to the law, then it must be allowed that there is a moral
goodness, in the sense before explained, in such actions; that is, there is an
agreement with the rule of duty, in the substance of the action, though such an
imperfect kind of conformity as cannot be denominated true holiness. And yet it
is such a kind of moral goodness, that the want of it is in itself really and
essentially sin. This supposition is denied and exploded by Mr. H. and that (as
his manner is) with high contempt of all that hold to it, as persons who do not
exercise their reason, but confuse and bewilder themselves with a set of words
without ideas. We will in due time try the weight of his arguments; and so
leave it to the reader, when he shall see the issue of the controversy in hand,
to resolve this point for himself; which he will then, I hope, be able to do
without any trouble.

All that I shall add at present is a brief enquiry concerning the ends of
unregenerate sinners in their be^ actions. Here, as some suppose, is the
hardest k^^ of all. For if it should be granted that natural principles of
action are in themselves good, or however not unlawful; and that such actions
may flow from them as are materially good, that is useful, and answerable to
the divine precept as to their substance, as has been declared; yet surely it
must not be said that men are allowed, and much less required by God to do any
action, however good in itself, for a bad end. Now it is supposed that the
unregenerate always act for a wrong end; which since it is forbidden, their
acting at all, while unregenerate seems to be forbidden by necessary
consequence. Though the To actum should be allowed to be good in some respects,
yet the To agere seems in this case to be evil and unlawful.

But it will require no very strong finger to unty this knot, if what has been
already laid down be remembered, and necessary distinctions attended to.

The end of an action is that for the sake of which the action is done. And
this may be said to be irregular and wrong in two different respects. First,
when what is sought for is absolutely forbidden. In this case we are not
allowed to act at all in order to such an end, even though the means in
themselves considered may be lawful. Thus it was abominable in Jezebel to
proclaim a fast, that under the cloak of zeal for reformation she might murder
Naboth. It was vile treachery in Judas to kiss his Lord in order to betray him.
Secondly, The end of an action is irregular and wrong when it is defective,
though in itself not absolutely forbidden. Here we must carefully distinguish
between the end in itself, and the corruption or irregularity of it. ^hen what
a man seeks for is good, his end is good in itself. But if he pursues this end
^n opposition to a greater good, to which it ought to be subordinate, his end
is wrong; not because an object in itself forbidden is sought, but because a
greater good is neglected. To do a forbidden action, or aim at a forbidden end
is always unlawful. So it is to neglect a commanded action, or not to direct
our actions to the glory of God, which ought to be our governing end: But it is
not unlawful in itself to do an action materially good for an inferior end, if
the pursuit of such an end be not forbidden end.

When men act in order to obtain a forbidden end, we grant that their acting at
all in this case is directly repugnant to the command of God. The choice of
such an end is in itself positively opposite to the divine will: It is a sin of
commission: It is an act materially evil; and is in no case commanded allowed
or encouraged by God. Thus if a man should utter the words of a prayer, with a
malicious intent to mock God, and profane his ordinances; such an action would
be in itself horribly wicked. To act at all with such a design would be an
exercise of contempt and enmity against God.

But the unregenerate do not always act for such ends as are in themselves
forbidden, and unlawful, though the ends of their actions are always
essentially defective. For a man to strive to escape misery is to act for a
reasonable and lawful end; unless it be a duty to desire misery, or at least to
be unconcerned about it. It a man has no other aim or desire than to secure his
own happiness, his end is defective and irregular. But the fault does not lie
in his seeking a forbidden object, but in neglecting and refusing to aim at the
glory o^ God therein. To desire and seek our own happiness is not directly and
positively repugnant to the divine command: It is no sin of commission: It is
not materially evil. When we seek our own happiness unsubordinate to the glory
of God, our end is indeed irregular and incon^orma^le to the divine command.
This irregularity lies in the privation of a supreme regard to God.
Unsubordinateness is a relative denomination, importing only the defect of a
superior governing principle and end. The want of a pious regard to God is a
si^ of omission. The actual and positive rejection of God and his honor, when
proposed as the ultimate end of our action is a sin of commission, and may be
termed an exercise of enmity against him. But a disregard to God, and forsaking
him are in their own nature entirely distinct from a regard to our own
happiness, and an endeavor to secure and promote it.

There is evidently, in the judgment of common sense, a broad difference,
between acting for an unlawful end, and acting for an end lawful in itself,
though unsubordinate to a higher one. If a man gives money to his poor
neighbor to hire him to murder his enemy, he is himself a murderer. If he does
it in hopes of a temporal reward, it does not appear that the action or end is
in itself unlawful, though both are sinfully defective if he aims at nothing
higher. In the former case the action is an exercise of enmity; in the latter
it is an exercise of mee^ self-love. By refraining to act for an unlawful end,
we refrain from sin; but no sin is avoided by forbearing to act for a
subordinate lawful end. If it were possible for a man to dives^ himself
entirely of self-love, or suspend all it is exercises; the want of love to God,
or aversion of heart from him would be as vicious, as if the man was seeking
his own happiness unsubordinate to the divine glory.

It is as I conceive through inattention to the distinctions above proposed,
between natural principles and the corruption of them, between forbidden and
defective ends, that Mr. H. has been deceived in his reasonings and
conclusions. He supposes that all exercises of the unregenerate are acts of
enmity against God, because they are carnally minded, and the carnal mind is
enmity against God. And before acts of enmity are forever unlawful. The
unavoidable consequence of which is that it is utterly unlawful for men to act
at all from natural principles. But this is mere fallacy. Actions may flow from
principles that are corrupt, and yet not flow from their corruption, so not be
any exercise or expression of moral corruption. A man acting merely from
self-love may do actions which are not selfish but interested. An action is not
selfish, or an exercise of selfishness, unless a disregard of the good of
others, as well as self love, has an influence into it as a formal principle,
and is therein expressed; which is never the case unless self-interest is
supposed to interfere with the interest of others. An action is not an exercise
of moral depravity, unless moral depravity be the cause of a man's doing it; so
that his conduct would have been the reverse if he had not been morally
depraved. An action is not an exercise of enmity against God, unless enmity to
God be the cause and formal principle of it; so that it would not have been
done unless the agent had hated God. Now it is plain there are many actions
flowing from natural principles, and directed to interior ends, which being
unsubordinate to a holy principle and end, are therefore privatively corrupt;
which actions, though destitute of that conformity to the divine law in respect
of principle and end which is implied in true holiness, do not take their form
from the corruption of their principle or end, but from that in or belonging
thereto, which is lawful and good: And consequently, whatever sinfulness
adheres to such action, lies in the omission of some requisite qualification,
and not in any actual and positive repugnancy of the act itself to the divine
law. This omission indeed may be said, in some sense, to flow from the
corruption of human nature; but the act itself does not, nor is any exercise or
expression of it. What I mean may be better understood perhaps when illustrated
by a familiar similitude. A young child who has not wisdom to judge what is
good for himself, may to gratify his appetite eat what is unwholesome; and he
may to gratify his appetite eat what is wholesome as well as pleasant. In both
cases he acts without wisdom, following his appetite. But when he eats what is
unwholesome, his want of wisdom is, though not a physical, yet a proper logical
cause of his action; because notwithstanding his appetite if he had been wise
he would not have done it. And therefore his foolishness in conjunction with
his natural appetite is the fo^al principle of his action; which action takes
it is form from, and is an effect or expression of folly as well as natural
appetite. His natural appetite is the proper positive principle of the action;
his want of wisdom is the proper privative cause of the foolishness of it. But
when a child to gratify his appetite eats what is both pleasant and wholesome,
though he acts without wisdom, yet want of wisdom is not the formal principle
of his action; it is not a cause or reason in any sense of his doing what he
does. His action is no exercise or expression of folly, but merely of natural
appetite. Though he acts from mere appetite, his action is agreeable to the
rules of wisdom. If he knew what was good for himself he would do the very
same. In this case neither wisdom nor folly, but natural appetite is the
logical, physical, formal principle of his action.

Thus when a man in order to promote his supposed interest acts in opposition
to the rules of piety and humanity, the want of a due regard to God and his
neighbor is in conjunction with self-love, the logical cause and formal
principle of his conduct; which therefore is an exercise and expression of
moral depravity, as well as natural self-love. But when a sinner does any
action materially good from mere self-love, in hopes that it will be to his
advantage; in this case the action does not flow, or take it is form, from the
corruption of human nature. It does not flow from enmity against God and his
neighbor, nor from want of love, nor from want of an habitual principle
disposing to exercises of love; but from that natural lawful and useful
principle, implanted within us by God, whereby we incline to our own happiness.
The end here aimed at is not supposed to be inconsistent with the good of the
universe: His design is not to hurt others, but to advantage himself. Such an
action can with no propriety be called an exercise of enmity to God or man;
because however averse the heart of the sinner may be from God and man at the
time of acting; yet it is not enmity, but mere self-love that disposes and
determines him to such a conduct. A change of heart would no otherwise change
the actings of his will in this case, than by joining the influence of a new
governing principle with those natural principles which operated before. The
act itself is not enmity or hot^ed of God; for it is an act materially good, by
the supposition; for instance, attending to the means of instruction. The
formal principle is not enmity but self love. How much enmity soever there may
be in the heart, it has no more positive and prompt^ng influence into this
action, than it has in the action of a sucking infant that reaches earnestly
for the breast. And the action of such an infant might as truly and properly be
called an exercise of enmity to being in general, as the action of a sinner in
the case supposed.

Man in his depraved state is an enemy to God. He is fallen under the dominion
of sin. The principles and exercises of his heart are not subject to the law of
God, nor indeed can be, so long as he is in and after the flesh, as the apostle
speaks; that is, so long as he is unregenerate. His heart is alienated from God
and his holy law: All his actions are inconformable to the rule of duty. This
alienation of heart from God, with that actual disobedience which flows from
it, being in itself and in it is natural tendency dishonorary to God, is termed
constructive enmity to God, which is implied in all sin; which yet is to be
distinguished from that actual and direct rising of the heart against the
divine majesty which is usually termed hatred of God. This is a sin of
commission, implying not only some knowledge of God, but an actual exercise of
the mind in thinking on his character with aversion. That is implied in every
omission of duty; it is chargeable on sinners who know not God and have him not
in their thoughts: It does not necessarily imply any actual exercise of the
soul at all. Enmity most properly signifies an affection or act of the soul
contrary to love. To be carnally minded, says the apostle, is enmity against
God, Romans 8.7. That which is here termed enmity, is not the carnal heart, or
depraved nature, the principle of corrupt exercises; (as many have supposed,
being deceived perhaps by the ambiguous word mind) but it is Phroneema Sarkos,
which expresses the actual exercise of the mind and heart as depraved, as is
commonly remarked by critics. See Poli Synops. Piscator, Pareus, etc in loc.
Leigh's critica sacra. Owen on spiritual Mindedness, chap. 1.
It signifies the same with the lusting of the flesh, which the apostle
elsewhere speaks of. But though the exercises and actings of natural principles
as corrupted by sin, are inconformable to the law of God, and so are
constructively at least enmity against God, since they are at best destitute of
that rectitude and holiness of principle and end which the law requires; yet in
actions materially good the sinfulness adhering does not consist in the
exercise but in the privation of right principles and ends in a^ting: It is the
omission of duty, not the perpetration of a forbidden act. Take this exercise
of the natural principle entirely away, and the sinfulness of the person
remains undiminished. The law of sin, as the apostle terms it, does not in this
case operate by a formal influence into the substance of the action, but by
depriving it of those qualifications which are necessary to constitute it
spiritually good.

Some have seemed to think that natural affections (self-love for instance)
when unsubordinate to general benevolence, are in themselves acts of
opposition, or enmity to being in general. For such an affection (it is said)
exalts it is private object above the other great and infinite object; it puts
down being in general which is infinitely superior into an inferior place.
Edwards on the Nature of true Virtue, page 131,
But this is argued rather like a rhetorician than a philosopher. It is not
self-love that puts down being in general, but it is the privation of general
benevolence. It is not any private affection in itself, but it is
unsubordinateness to the love of God and our fellow creatures that is vicious.
This unsubordinateness does not consist in the nature or strength of the
affection, but is only the privation of a superior principle; that is, it is
only the want of a supreme regard to God. It does not appear that self-love is
stronger in selfish persons than in others; at least there is no need of
supposing that it is in order to account for their conduct. The want of good
will to others will set up self interest; or leave it to be the highest object
of the affections. And indeed this is all in a selfish temper or affection that
is in itself vicious. No action is the worse for being interested, or the
better for being disinterested. Disinterested mischievousness imports the
utmost wickedness. And it was no ways derogatory to the perfection of our
Savior's submission to the will of God in his sufferings, that he endured the
cross for the joy that was set before him.

Upon the whole, though the best actions of the unregenerate are not
spiritually good, because essentially defective; yet they may be materially
good; they may flow from principles, and be directed to ends good in
themselves, though of an inferior kind. Nor is this anything more than has been
asserted by the most eminent lights of the christian church ancient and modern,
as might easily be shown. And therefore I cannot but wonder how Mr. H. should
assert confidently in the face of the public, that the world has yet found out
but two sorts of good, viz. holiness and happiness; unless he thought that his
own conceptions were the ne plus of human discovery. Two or three testimonies I
will produce for the better information of such as think this kind of goodness
above mentioned to be a new discovery. Says Dr. Ames, speaking of actions of
the unregenerate, The substance of such works is good, because even natural men
therein do the things contained in the law, Romans 2.14. But every work so far as
it agrees with the law is good. De Cons. lib. 3. caap. 17.
Mastricht is yet more full. "They are," says he, in themselves truly good, but
evil from their circumstances: They are good, but not spiritually good.
Theologia Theor. pract. lib. 4. caap. 4.
And again, The works of the heathens sometimes are good in themselves, and
thus (...) they also are pleasing to God, but not unto salvation. I^. page 1217.
Unto some men especially, says Mr. Shepard, nay unto all men almost, though
vile, yet more or less the Lord gives a power to act and live and move, and do
many spiritual duties, or good duties from themselves, etc. Para^ part 1. p. 28.
But particular citations are needless in a matter so notorious. That there is
some kind of goodness in the best actions of the unregenerate, has been never
denied by any christian that I can find, before Mr. H. If he shall be able to
prove the contrary, it is he, and not his opponents, that (so far as I can
judge) will be entitled to the honor of making a new discovery.

I have been the larger in discussing the points treated of in this Section,
because it appears to me, that our author with some others has fallen into much
mistake, by confounding together things essentially different in their natures
and causes; and has greatly darkened the truth, and thrown stumbling blocks in
the way of men's attending the means of conversion. If some particulars are not
sufficiently cleared, the reader may perhaps find them further illustrated and
confirmed in the following parts of this disputation, to which we shall now
proceed.

SECT. III. Arguments proving that something is required of Men in a way of
Duty previous and preparatory to Regeneration.
TO open our way more plainly to the ensuing arguments, I would premise one
distinction, which the reader will find necessary to be attended to and carried
in mind, that he may the better apprehend the force and pertinency of what is
to be offered, and remove such objections as may occur: And that is the
distinction between the moral law simply considered, and the divine precepts as
contained in scripture, and enjoined on men by supernatural revelation.

The natural and supernatural law (if we may thus distinguish them) do agree in
the general notion, or formal essence of law; that is a rule and bond of duty
with annexed sanctions. They agree also in their author, viz. God the supreme
lawgiver. They also coincide in their requirements, so as mutually to
strengthen each other. For the law of nature binds us to obey all supernatural
discoveries of the divine will, as soon as they are made known to us; it being
an eternal principle of the law of nature that all supernatural revelations of
the will of God (if any such there be) ought to be obeyed. And the supernatural
law of revelation establishes the law of nature, not only as it always supposes
it is unchangeable obligation, but requires the same moral duties to which we
are by the law of nature necessarily bound, and lays us under some additional
obligations of obedience. The difference then here to be noted consists
especially in these particulars.

1. The moral law strictly and simply considered flows necessarily from the
nature of God and man, and the relation subsisting between them; but the
commands of God enjoined by supernatural revelation, flow freely from his
sovereign will. Though the creation of moral agents be a free sovereign act of
the divine will, yet when once they are created their obligation to love and
obey God results necessarily from the perfections and bounty of the creator,
and the dependence of the creature on him for being and happiness. The moral
law is therefore of necessary and unchangeable obligation. But such commands as
are given by supernatural revelation are, as such, formally acts of divine
sovereignty. The giving any such commands to mankind, was a free sovereign act
of God's will. And it was the same sovereign will of God, that, according to
the counsels of infinite wisdom, determined what precepts were to be contained
in this supernatural law. Even th^se moral duties which are of eternal
obligation, as well as those duties which are called positive, and are in their
own nature changeable, have a place in this supernatural law, only because the
sovereign will and authority of the great legislator was pleased so to ordain;
and not from any necessity in the nature of things. Though a duty of necessary
obligation cannot be cancelled by any act of the divine will, and therefore we
are necessarily bound by the moral law; yet this infers no necessity that a
supernatural revelation of God's will should take in every duty of the moral
law. That additional inforcement of obedience, which results from a
supernatural injunction, or positive act of sovereign authority, may be
superadded to all, or to some only of the duties of the moral law, as infinite
wisdom shall see fit, and the ends for which such a revelation is given may
require.

2. The moral law binds all moral agents; but the precepts of supernatural
revelation bind those only to whom the revelation is given. The precepts of
revelation, as such, belong only to fallen man. Yea such of mankind as are
invincibly ignorant of divine revelation, are not bound to obey any of it is
precepts as such, though they may be bound to the same duties for substance, as
contained in the moral law of nature. The scripture revelation being designed
for and given to fallen man alone, he only is subject to it is injunctions.
Therefore,

3. The supernatural law is founded on the dispensation of grace through the
mediator; but the law of nature has no necessary dependence on that
dispensation. The duties required of men in the gospel, are required for such
ends as could not have taken place, unless an act of grace had passed in favor
of fallen man. This I have elsewhere proved, nor is it that I know of denied by
any. And I may add, that the duties are many of them such in their nature, that
there could have been no possible place f^r them, unless in consequence of the
dispensation of grace.

4. The moral law simply considered requires obedience, merely because it is
right and justly due. It exacts duties solely as a debt in which we are bound
to God, and not as means of future advantage, or conditions of future rewards.
The law gives no reward beyond the condign merit of a creature, which is
perfectly nothing. Whatever benefit or reward may accrue to a creature in the
way of obedience is owing to divine bounty, or a free promise, entirely
distinct from mere law; nor does the obligation of the law depend at all upon
it. But the precepts of revelation require duties not only as debts of
obedience, but also as means in order to some further ends. Even those duties
which are required by the moral law, and so are of necessary obligation, have
by the gracious appointment of God an instrumental subserviency to the benefit
of mankind, in this and the coming world, and as such are enjoined in the
scriptures. By being taken into this supernatural law, and appointed as means
of our present and future happiness, moral precepts have a new and distinct
obligation and enforcement superadded to them by the sovereign will of God; and
we have a new additional reason for obeying them. And as to positive precepts,
our obligation to the observance of them is wholly to be resolved into God's
sovereign will, and their subserviency as means to some good end, distinct from
the performance therein required.

Corollary, If duties be required in the scripture as means in order to some
further end, by the sovereign appointment of God, and it hence be concluded
that such a performance of them as is fitted to subserve the end proposed is
contained in the requirement, and of consequence is a commanded duty, how far
short soever it may fall of that perfection of obedience, which the law
requires, this conclusion will not imply any relaxation of the obligation men
are under to yield perfect obedience to the moral law, or extenuate the guilt
of any failure in the least degree. But of this afterward.

The attentive reader, I trust, cannot but perceive from these observations,
what will more plainly appear in our progress, that is, the fitness and
necessity of distinguishing between the moral law considered simply and
strictly in itself, as a rule and bond of right action to moral agents in
general; and the divine precepts given by supernatural revelation, to fallen
man alone, upon the foundation of divine grace through the mediator,
prescribing duties as means of carrying into execution God's merciful purposes
toward the children of men. This being premised, I shall now address myself to
the proof of my position, as above stated and explained.

I. The principles laid down in the preceding section unavoidably lead us to
conclude, that something is required of men in a way of duty, which they are
able to do previous to regeneration.

It has been proved that the unregenerate who enjoy gospel privileges are able,
by the common assistance of divine providence and grace, to reform their lives;
to break off from courses and acts of open sin in opposition to the dictates of
their own conscience; to do actions materially good, and that seriously and
conscientiously according to their present light. They have both faculties and
principles of action sufficient for these things. If these things are enjoined
upon them by, and contained in those commands which God in his word has laid
upon them, then it is their duty thus to reform their lives, and attend the
means of grace, that is, something is their duty which they have a power to do
before regeneration. The consequence cannot be denied, unless we will deny that
it is the duty of men to do whatever God has enjoined on them.

But those things abovementioned, which men have a power to do while
unregenerate, are contained in and enjoined by those commands which God in his
word has laid upon them. For it has been shown, and is abundantly evident from
scripture, that the divine command requires not only right principles and ends
of action, but also that the action itself be materially good. It regulates the
performances as well as the affections; the external and imperate, as well as
the immanent or elicit acts of the will. It enjoins the work itself, as well as
those circumstances which are requisite to constitute it a holy action. Mr. H.
owns, that if there be any commands enjoining a reformation of life and a good
behavior on the regenerate, then the same is enjoined on the unregenerate. For
he says (p. 116.) No duty is required of the regenerate which the unregenerate
are not also commanded to do. This is not true. It is doubtless the duty of the
regenerate to thank God for his distinguishing mercy in their election,
regeneration, conversion, justification, etc; which cannot be the present duty
of any unregenerate sinner.
The unregenerate then are commanded to reform their lives; to hear, read, and
meditate on the word of God; to examine their hearts and ways, and pray to God
for pardoning mercy through Jesus Christ. That is, they are commanded to do
those actions, which they have both faculties and principles sufficient to
enable them to do, as to the substance of the performance.

If then the command requires such actions, as well as such circumstances,
principles, and manner of acting, as are implied in true holiness; then the
substance of the actions, though destitute of these circumstances. are matter
of duty, as being a part, though not the whole of the requirement. The command
obliges to the whole of our duty, and to each distinct part of it. Such
effective acts of the will as are required, are materially good; they have a
goodness distinct from, and not dependent on all those circumstances and
qualifications, which are necessary to constitute them holy actions. And there
is an obligation to the performance of them, besides the obligation to perform
them in a right manner in every respect; and consequently, there is an
obligation to the doing of that which men are able to do before regeneration.

Actions may be taken in a twofold sense, that is, as learned writers express
it, in sensu composito and in sensu diviso. The meaning is, they may be taken
as comprehending, and invested with, all their moral circumstances,
qualifications, and adjuncts; or they may be taken simply and abstractly in
themselves. In the latter sense, no imperate act of the will can be denominated
holy, though for substance conformable to the divine command; because holiness
implies a conformity to the will of God in the circumstances and
qualifications, as well as the substance of the action; as has been before
declared. Yet the actions of men are subject to the divine command in the
latter as well as the former sense; that is, the divine command enjoins the
whole of what is contained in a holy action conjunctly, and it enjoins each
ingredient of the action in this compound sense, severally. We are commanded to
do actions materially good; we are also commanded to do them in such a manner,
and with such a degree of strength, as is perfectly conformable to the rule of
our duty. But these things are so commanded, that however we may fail in some
particulars, we are nevertheless bound to the observance of all and each of the
other. Which may be thus proved. The guilt of any sinful action is more or less
multiplied or aggravated, as it is inconformable to the divine law in more or
fewer respects. If an action be answerable to the law in matter and manner, but
somewhat deficient in the degree or strength of the performance, it is
sinfulness is not so great, as if it were deficient in a greater degree: It
would be yet more sinful if not done for a holy end; and still more if done for
an unlawful or forbidden end; and finally it is guilt would be yet greater if
the action itself, as well as it is end and circumstances were unlawful. To omit
the duty (external observances of religion) wholly, is worse than to perform
good in a wrong manner, and to be doing evil instead of both is yet much worse.
Goodwin's Works, Vol. 3 page 430.
It is not so bad for a man to exercise a covetous principle, by striving to
acquire riches in a lawful way that he may lay up treasures on earth, (though
this is utterly forbidden) as it would be to seek riches for the same purpose
by stealing, robbery, and all manner of unrighteousness. If there were not an
obligation to the performance of the action in itself considered, as well as
taken in conjunction with all it is moral circumstances; then the omission of it
would not in itself be sin, nor could it add any thing to the guilt arising
from the irregularity of such circumstances. For sin is the transgression of
the law. We may be sure that that is in itself a duty, the omission of which is
in itself sin. Now though external duties in sensu diviso be not holiness, yet
the omission of them is in itself sin: And consequently external duties are
required in and by the divine law. We are so bound by the law of God that an
uninterrupted course of obedience is our duty; and each particular act taken by
itself is also our duty; and in each act of obedience, perfection in degree,
according to the strength of our faculties is our duty; and so is every
inferior degree that can be supposed: And finally whatever is contained in the
essence of true holiness collectively considered is our duty; and at the sa^e
time each particular ingredient, circumstance or qualification, is also our
duty, taken separately and by itself. And our guilt is multiplied and enhanced
according as we have violated more of these obligations, and broken the divine
command in more respects.

To sum up the argument. Since actions materially good, considered in
themselves, are required of men as matter of duty; and, since unregenerate
sinners have a power to do actions materially good; we conclude, that
unregenerate sinners have a power to do something which is required as matter
of duty: Which is the point we undertook to maintain.

Mr. H. has moved an objection which contains the substance of the argument
above proposed, viz. That men by doing actions materially good, do some part of
their duty, and so far obey the command. Page 117. How he has succeeded in his
attempt to answer it we will now consider.

He says, Nothing is either duty or sin, if considered without any respect to
the heart, and as not implying any exercises of that. Page 117.

Answ. We may here note that this assertion, that nothing is either sin or
duty, if considered as not implying any exercises of the heart, is a plain
denial of the doctrines of original sin and righteousness, or of sinfulness or
righteousness of nature distinct from, and previous to all acts of the mind.
But this I suppose was owing to inadvertence, and therefore I shall take no
further notice of it. There are also some sins of omission which do not imply
any exercises of heart. If the proposition be limited to actions, we grant it;
but it will easily appear that it makes nothing against us For,

All actions whether taken in the compound, or divided sense are acts of the
will The substance of an action, is the action itself abstracted from it is
circumstances. External actions are acts of the will ad extra. Involuntary
motion and effects are not the substance and matter of action. ^or are the
natural effects and consequences of our voluntary exertions, though apprehended
and chosen by us, the substance of our action of properly speaking. This is no
other than the very act of our will, choosing that those effects should take
place, and putting forth our executive power for the production of them. Mr. H.
strangely supposes that by the substance and matter of a duty or action is
meant something distinct from all exercises of the heart, or acts of the will;
something of which a mere machine is capable; and then concludes, (as well he
might) that there is no sin or duty in all this, in itself considered; adding
some contemptuous expressions of those who are otherwise minded, as persons,
who bewilder themselves wi^h a set of words without meaning. We leave them to
his correction if there be any so absurd as to hold that to be the matter of an
action which is no act of the will. But what is this to the purpose of
answering our argument, which supposes the duties in question to be voluntary
actions? Methinks somebody else is got bewildered, besides those men of straw
which our author attacks with so much spirit.

It is further pleaded, supposing the actions in question be voluntary, yet it
is rather more absurd to speak of a man's doing any part of his duty in his
external conduct, when his conduct is considered as the fruit of wrong and
sinful exercises of heart. Page 118.

Answ. 1. We do not suppose that the fruit of any exercises of the heart, or
acts of the will, whether right or wrong, is the matter of duty, unless that
fruit be also an act of the will, Now there is no absurdity in supposing, that
an act of the will may in itself be good, and the matter of a commanded duty,
though it be the fruit of a preceding act which was not so. Mr. Edwards besure,
did not think there was a gross absurdity in supposing that the goodness or
evil of actions lay in their nature and not in their cause. Enquiry concerning
the Will, part iv. sect. 1.
Giving alms is a good action in itself, and the matter of duty; though, in the
Pharisees it was the fruit of pride, which besure was no good principle. If the
object chosen be good, the act of choosing is materially good, however it may be
wrong in it is adjuncts and circumstances. It is good in sensu diviso. It is
wrong in sensu composito. An act of choice in itself is either good or evil
according to the nature of it is object. Since then we are divinely commanded to
do actions materially good, we conclude that it is our duty to do them.

It will be enquired, is it then our duty to do these things from wrong
principles, and for unlawful ends?

Answ. 1. It is not our duty to be actuated by evil principles, or aim at
unlawful ends, in any of our actions. This is utterly sinful. But the doing a
commanded action is in itself a duty, how much soever we may fail in the
principle, end and manner of the performance. And our guilt will be double, if
the action as well as it is principle and end be utterly wrong.

2. The principles and ends of men's actions may be said to be wrong in two
senses. 1. When they are in themselves absolutely forbidden, as when a man acts
from malice. To act at all with a mischievous intent is unlawful. In this case
the formal principle, and final cause of the action is in itself sin. The
action not only flows from a heart that is corrupt, but from the corruption
itself. 2. The principles and ends of men's actions are said to be wrong, when
they are defective; though in themselves good in their kind. Such are the
principles of self-love, natural conscience, etc. in the unregenerate. Now when
men do actions materially good from these principles, they do not act from
sinful principles as sinful. That is, though they are defectively corrupt, the
action does not flow and take it is form from their corruption, as was noted in
the last section. This is well expressed by Dr. Preston, "Take man's nature,"
says he, as secluded from [sanctifying] grace, it is able to do two things; to
bring forth sin and lust, which comes from the corruption of it, and likewise
many excellent virtues, which proceed from common nature which is in a man
unregenerate, as well as sinful nature. Sermon. 6. on Romans 1.18.
A man may do a thing by nature, says Mr. Charnock, from a good principle, a
principle of common honesty good in it is kind, (brass is good in it is kind but
not so good as silver) but not evangelically good without a renewed affection
to God. Vol. 2. page 16. Fol.
Now though the want of this renewed affection to God, in performing the
substance of commanded duties, be utterly sinful, yet to act from a natural
principle good in itself is lawful: And to do actions materially good, from
such a principle is a duty, as we shall see more fully in the sequel.

It is further argued by Mr. H. that what are called external duties are not
required for their own sakes, or in themselves considered, but only as proper
ways of exercising and expressing love to God. Love to God is therefore the
thing required: The whole of the duty lies in this: And where this is wanting
the externals are as to duty an empty nothing, not the thing required; and in
doing them no duty is done. Page 118, 119.

Here are two propositions, of which the latter (according to Mr. H.) follows
from the former, being connected with it by the illative particle [therefore.]
We will first consider their connection, and then examine the truth of each of
them apart.

As to their connection: Our author here argues, that if external duties are
not required for their own sakes, but only as proper ways of exercising and
expressing love to God; then love to God is the [only] thing required: The
whole du^y lies in this. But how can this consequence flow from the antecedent
to which it is subjoined? Or indeed how can it consist with it? Common sense I
should imagine, would conclude that if external duties are required at all,
whether for their own sakes, or on any other account; then love to God is not
the only thing required, nor does the duty lie wholly in this. Certain it is,
that external actions are as diverse from love, as the effect is from it is
cause, as the sign is from the thing signified; as an immanent affection is
from an exertion of operative power for the performance of an outward work. On
the contrary, if love be the only thing required, no imperate act of the will
is required at all. If the whole duty lies in love, no part of it lies in
expressing love, or in exerting any effective acts from any principle whatever.
All the fruits and effects of love i^ a way of endeavor to glorify God, and do
good to men, being in nature entirely diverse from the affection of love, must
be cancelled from the list of duties, as well as the endeavors of the
unregenerate. To draw a consequence from a principle inconsistent with and
contrary to it, is methinks a little extraordinary. But,

Let us now examine the truth of each proposition apart. To begin with the
latter, viz. That in external duties of religion love to God is the only thing
required, the whole duty lies in this. This must be denied, since not only
scripture and reason, but Mr. H. himself will support us in saying, that
endeavors of external obedience are required, as well as the affection of
love, at least when they accompany and flow from love to God, and are genuine
fruits exercises and expressions of it. I add, that since the omission of such
endeavors is sin in itself, as well as the want of a principle of divine love
in them, and so doubles the sinners guilt; it must be concluded, that the
former is a part of duty as well as the latter; and that there is an obligation
to both conjunctly, and to each severally.

Perhaps we have not yet fully hit the joint. If not I hope we shall at length
find it, in examining the other proposition, viz. External duties of religion
are not required for their own sakes, or in themselves considered; but only as
proper ways of exercising and expressing love to God.

It will be necessary to premise a few things for the better understanding of
what is here asserted, which as it lies may not appear so plain. External
duties are of two kinds, moral and positive. To speak and behave reverently in
respect to God, justly truly and kindly toward men, seem to be duties of
perpetual obligation, on supposition that we have power and occasion of
speaking, and acting at all. Now there is a fitness and goodness in such a
manner of behavior, a suitableness to our state and relations; and a contrary
behavior would be naturally unseemly and pernicious. There is a goodness in
right actions considered in themselves, and therefore they are fit expressions
of good affections. External actions are not like words in themselves equally
fit to express any idea. There is truth righteousness and goodness in speech
and behavior, as well as in the sentiments and affections of the heart.
Whatever principle a man acts from, lying, acts of injustice and cruelty, are
unfit and evil in themselves; and on the contrary acts of righteousness and
mercy are in themselves right.

There are other external duties which are called positive. The substance of
such actions is not in itself of necessary obligation, but is sanctified and
enjoined merely by the sovereign will of God. Of this kind are institutions of
religious worship.

Concerning external duties it is enquired, 1. Whether they are required for
their own sakes? If the meaning be, whether they are required because right and
fit in themselves, and not in their own nature absolutely indifferent, I answer
positive duties are not required for their own sakes. The performance of them
is good because required, not required because good in itself. But to speak the
truth, to do justly, to behave reverently toward God, are duties in themselves
fit. There is a goodness in such a manner of conduct; and it may truly be said
that these things are required for their own sakes, or because right in
themselves; though perhaps this may not be the sole reason of their
requirement. Positive duties are required not for their own sakes, but for some
further end. Actions morally good may be and are required partly for their own
sakes, and partly as instrumental to other purposes distinct from the
performance. If then unregenerate sinners may perform external duties, good in
themselves, as has been proved, it must be concluded that this is required of
them. And if they can attend instrumental duties, so as that their attendance
shall be conducive to the end for which they are required, as shall in due time
be proved; their not being required for their own sakes will not at all weaken
our argument, that such an attendance is in itself their duty.

2. Are external duties of religion required in themselves considered? If this
means the same with the former enquiry, it has now been answered. But it seems
Mr. H. in denying this, intends something further; viz. That what are called
external duties of religion, materially considered, or in sensu diviso, are not
required but upon the supposition that they are conjoined with and flow from
love to God. That is, these things are duties if they are true expressions and
fruits of love to God, otherwise they are not required at men's hands. To open
this a little it may be noted, that some duties are binding upon us as moral
agents, without implying or presupposing any other qualifications than natural
capacities and advantages for obedience. Such are the duties of loving God and
our neighbor. Other duties are required of men only consequentially, or on
supposition that they are subjects thus qualified, and the action be thus
performed. It may be their present duty to be thus qualified, and so to do the
duty consequentially required without any delay; yet the doing of it while
unqualified is not a duty; it is not required, and ought not to be done. And
some circumstances though not essential to an action, as an action, may yet be
essential to it, as a duty required. Thus though it be the present duty of
those who have had sufficient means of instruction, to believe in Christ and
profess their faith; yet it is not the duty of any one to profess faith until
he does believe. Profession, baptism and the Lord's supper are duties on
supposition, that the subjects are qualified according to the rules of the
gospel. Though it may be the sin of an unbeliever that he does not now join
himself to the christian church, yet it would be a greater sin for him to
profess faith, and be baptized, while conscious that he is an infidel. It may
be the present duty of a professed christian to partake of the Lord's supper;
yet it is not his duty to eat and drink at the Lord's table unless he do it
religiously, in remembrance of Christ. And if any one should do the outward
action, merely to satisfy his hunger, qualify himself for a commission, or
gratify an intemperate appetite for wine, without any religious views; we might
truly say that what he does is no duty at all, but a great sin; because a
religious manner of eating and drinking is essential to partaking of the Lord's
supper, as a duty; and we ought not to do the outward action at all unless we
do it religiously. In this case though we cannot say that the qualification of
the person, and the religious manner of the performance, is the only thing
required, and that the whole of the duty lies in this, (for external actions
are also required) yet we grant that these circumstances are essential to the
outward actions, considered as duties; and where these are wanting, the
externals are as to duty an empty nothing, or rather much worse than nothing,
and in doing them no duty is done; and that for this plain reason, because
these externals are required only on supposition of these other requisites; and
consequently these adjuncts belong to the substance and matter of the duty,
though they belong not to the substance of the outward action: Which action is
a commanded duty only in the compounded and not in the divided sense.

This appears to be Mr. H's meaning, when he says, that the unregenerate in
attending the externals of religion, do nothing that is their duty. He
considers these things as enjoined on men only on supposition that they are
regenerate, and have a holy love to God. For he says, they are required only as
expressions of love to God. Expressions of love, as such, are duties only on
supposition of love. Now as it is the main design of this section to confute
this notion, it will not be necessary that we detain the reader long, by
framing a full reply to this exception, before we proceed to our ensuing
arguments. Yet a few things may be hinted briefly.

1. If this be true, then it is as unlawful for an unregenerate sinner to speak
the truth, do an act of justice or kindness to a neighbor, rescue his parent
when in danger of death, to read or hear the word of God, or pray to him for
any mercy temporal or spiritual, or do any external action whatever; as it
would be for an unbeliever contrary to his inward persuasion to profess faith,
be baptized, and come to the Lord's table purely to get drunk. For the
requirement of duties only on supposition of regeneration and love to God,
implies the prohibition of them, in all other cases. It is as unlawful for one
who has not a holy love to God, to do any thing required only as an expression
of such love, as it is for one who has no religious regard to Christ, to do an
action required only as an expression of religious regard to him.

2. Then it is a greater sin for an unregenerate sinner to read and hear God's
word, and pray to him, than to refrain from it; even as it is a greater sin for
an infidel to profess faith, etc. than not to do it. For a duty required only
on supposition of love to God, is, by one who has not this qualification, and
while he has it not, omitted with less guilt than done.

3. Then it is as unwarrantable and presumptuous for any one, whether
regenerate or not, to endeavor an attendance on an external duty of religion,
until he has some prevailing evidence that his endeavors are sincere
expressions of holy love, as it is for a man to offer himself to baptism, or to
join in partaking at the Lord's table, without a prevailing persuasion that he
is in a good measure qualified for it, and shall attend the ordinance in a
religious manner. It is indeed men's fault when they do not love God: So it is
if they (enjoying gospel privileges) are not qualified for the outward seals of
the covenant. Yet while they are unqualified they ought to refrain from them,
and while they have no evidence of their qualifications, they are, in the
judgment of their consciences, unqualified, and so obliged to refrain. And thus
every one who has no prevailing persuasion of his being a lover of God, must in
conscience refrain from such actions as are required only on supposition of
holy love, and as expressions of the same; as for instance, from declaring that
he has such love, and according to Mr. H's scheme from every other external
duty.

4. Then there is the same reason to caution and warn men against presuming to
read and hear the word of God, to pray to him, or attend on any external duty
of religion, until they first find some evidence that they either are, or shall
be regenerated in and with the attempt; as there is to warn men not to come to
the Lord's table until they find some evidence of their being duly qualified
for it.

I could easily go on further, but I forbear. Methinks these consequences are
so intolerable, that no principle ought to be admitted from which they can
fairly be deduced. If they can fairly be avoided on Mr. H's plan, let it be
shown.

It is true the external duties of religion are in themselves fit ways wherein
love to God may be exercised and expressed, and it is the duty of all men to
exercise love to God in attending on them. But it is most false to say, that
they are required only as exercises and expressions of holy love. They are
required in the gospel primarily and principally as means, through the spirit's
influence, of enlightening, convincing, converting and sanctifying those who
are chosen in Christ to salvation: As also of restraining the out-breakings of
sin in many others, and so preventing the bad consequences in this world. And
such an attendance on the external duties of religion, as does not imply any
exercises of true love to God, may be well adapted to subserve several of those
ends for which they are required; as for instance, to promote the present
welfare of mankind, to awaken and humble sinners, prepare them for
regeneration, and lead them on to a saving conversion. Why then should any
think that such an attendance is not the duty of men, previous to regeneration?

Whether the argument hitherto insisted on and defended be not valid,
notwithstanding what has yet been urged to enervate it, let the unbiassed
judge. Mr. H. indeed takes the freedom at the close of his first plea against
"unregenerate duties" (as well as at other times) to seat himself a while upon
the bench. He has given his judgment that the short plain argument he has
considered is quite sufficient to end the dispute. But it may be doubted,
whether it be proper for every pleader to follow the precedent. Some liberties
appear well enough in great men, which would scarce be thought modest in
persons of mean rank. Perhaps our author was however a little too sanguine in
concluding so peremptorily, that it is as demonstrably evident that there is no
obedience but what consists in love, as any truth contained in divine
revelation, and must approve itself to the reason of every one who will
exercise his reason, and not confuse and bewilder himself with a set of words
without meaning. Page 117. On what evidence this conclusion stands we shall see
presently.

II. Our point may be further proved from sundry texts of scripture. The first
I shall produce is the conference between our Savior and the scribe, recorded
in Mark xii. 28, -- 34. And one of the scribes came, and having heard them
reasoning together, and perceiving that he had answered them well, asked him,
Which is the first commandment of all? And Jesus answered him, The first of all
the commandments is, Hear, O Israel; the Lord our God is one Lord: And thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind, and with all thy strength. This is the first commandment. And the
second is like, namely this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself. There is
none other commandment greater than these. And the scribe said unto him, Well,
master, thou have said the truth: For there is one God, and there is none other
but he. And to love him with all the heart, and with all the understanding, and
with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love his neighbor as
himself, is more than all whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices. And, when Jesus
saw that he answered discreetly, he said unto him, Thou art not far from the
kingdom of God. And no man after that durst ask him any question.

It may seem a little remarkable, that arguments concluding in direct
contradiction to each other, should be founded on this conference. Mr. H's
principal argument to disprove "unregenerate duties," is taken from this
discourse of our Lord as related by Matthew, chap. xxii. 37, -- 39. In stating
and vindicating our argument from this passage, we shall be unavoidably led to
examine Mr. H's reasoning on the matter, which would otherwise have been
referred to another place.

The question which this scribe put to our Savior, was not, "what is the sum of
all the commands and of man's duty as contained in them? He did not conceive
that the whole duty of man was expressed in one or two commands. It would be
evidently improper on this supposition to enquire which is the first, that is
the greatest commandment of all. It seems to have been a point disputed among
the Jewish doctors, which of all the commands of the law was to be accounted
the greatest. And this scribe observing that Jesus had answered the sadducees
well was desirous to hear his judgment of this great question.

Our Savior in his reply directly resolves the point proposed, declaring
expressly that the first and great commandment is to love God with all the
heart. To which he adds the second requiring the love of our neighbor. Though
the scribe's question was only concerning the greatest command of all, yet as
the second was like the first, it is with good reason conjoined with it; and
the rather because it seems to have been a prevailing error among the Jewish
teachers, that the social virtues were not very important, provided men were
but zealous and exact in attending ordinances of divine worship. Besides, these
two commandments have the closest connection. He that truly loves God loves his
neighbor also. Our Lord therefore joining these two great moral precepts
together, which may be considered as a kind of summary of the moral law, adds,
"there is no other commandment greater than these," that is, these are the
greatest: There is no other of equal importance. Now here are two things to be
carefully noted.

1. It was not our Savior's design to comprehend all the commands of God in
these two great precepts. This is evident, because he refers to other commands,
and draws a comparison between these other, and those two great ones of which
he had been speaking. To say that the law of love is greater than the other
commands, implies that there are other commands. The comparative terms greater
and less are relative, and necessarily suppose their correlatives. Nor can it
be said, that these other commands, with which the law of love stands compared,
are contained in it. For they are plainly distinguished from it; they are
called other commands. A part of any thing cannot be called another thing than
that in which it is contained. Besides, if we should suppose that the
comparison is between the whole of the divine law and some particular commands
contained in it, our Savior's saying "there is no other commandment greater
than these," would amount to no more than this, that a part is not greater than
the whole: Which would be trifling and uninstructive.

2. Those other commands, with which the great precepts of the law are
compared, do not contain in them those which require the love of God and our
neighbor. For if they did, they would not be other commands, but the very
same, with only the addition of some new requirements. And besides, the
precepts requiring the love of God and our neighbor, are said to be greater
than the other; which would be palpably absurd, if the law of love were
involved in these other. It would be saying that the law of love is greater
than the same law, with these other precepts taken together. That is, that a
part is greater than the whole; that the love of God and our neighbor is a
greater duty, than a duty which contains in it the love of God and our
neighbor.

How can these consequences be avoided? Will any pretend that to say "there is
no other commandment greater than these," does not necessarily imply that there
is any other? This would be charging our Lord with gross impropriety of
language. Had he thought that those two commandments contained all, he would
have said there is no other commandment besides these. Or if there were any
doubt about the matter, the answer of the scribe, which was approved as
discreet, must satisfy it. Says he, to love God and our neighbor is more than
all whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices. Here those commanded duties are
mentioned, with which the love of God and our neighbor are compared; and which
we have shown are distinct from it, neither containing it nor contained in it,
in the sense here intended. Religious ordinances laid an obligation of
obedience on those to whom they were given: Yet they were not so important as
the love of God and our neighbor. This is the sense and scope of our Lord's
discourse; which is parallel with what he afterward said, when reproving the
partiality and hypocrisy of the scribes and pharisees in their religious
obedience. Says he, ye tithe mint anise and cummin, and have omitted the
weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith (with the love of God.
Luke 11.42) these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.
Mat. 23.23.
This text is also much to our purpose, and the same conclusions will flow from
it. Paying tithes is here declared to be a duty, or what ought to be done; and
another duty distinct from the weightier matters of the law. But this text is
so sim^lar in meaning and expression, to what has just been considered, that
it is needless to make more particular observations on it.

From the whole we conclude that an attendance on religious ordinances is
enjoined on men by other commands than those which enjoin holy love. And
consequently something is required as matter of duty different from love, and
which does not in itself necessarily imply any exercises of such love. There is
therefore an obligation on those to whom the word of salvation is sent, to
attend the instituted means of grace, besides the obligation they are under to
do it in the exercise of true love to God. Our Savior's determination upon the
case proposed to him, furnishes us with a sure principle for our
determinations, with respect to the positive precepts of the gospel. Such an
attendance on the means of grace is required as does not in itself necessarily
imply or presuppose regeneration, or the actings of faith and love; that is,
such an attendance as men have a power for while unregenerate. And this
obligation respects all religious ordinances, except such as may evidently
appear to be limited and appropriated to qualified subjects, that is, to
believers, as those ordinances which are called sacraments I suppose are. And
we may by parity of reason conclude that such external acts of obedience to
moral precepts as the unregenerate by God's common assistance are able to
perform, are also commanded duties.

Let us now take a view of Mr. H's reasoning from this conference, where we
have the argument on which he seems chiefly to depend, and which, if we will
take his judgment, is quite sufficient to end the dispute. I must now
anticipate a little the business of the next section, and for a while take the
place of respondent.

Says he, According to our Savior's account of the divine law or commandment
(Mat. 22.37, -- 39) it requires nothing but love to God and our neighbor. P.
116. Answer, Our Savior's words as related by Matthew, prove no such thing as
is here asserted; and as related by Mark they imply the very reverse. Mr. H.
adds, He expressly says on these two commandments hang all the law and the
prophets, (ver. 40.) That is, all that is required in the law and in the
prophets, every injunction and command to be found in divine revelation really
requires nothing but love to God and our neighbor. P. 117. Answ. But this
interpretation of our Savior's words is contrary to reason and scripture, and
for what yet appears has nothing to support it but Mr. H's authority; which
(without disparagement) may he confronted by an authority no way inferior, that
is by the authority of the same Mr. H. who in a passage lately produced
acknowledges that the externals of religion are in some cases required. But
perhaps our author does not mean that the inward affection of love is all that
is required, but Love acted out and expressed is all proper ways. Ibid. Answ.
By love acted out and expressed, I conceive nothing can be intended but the
external fruits and expressions of love, which however they may be confounded
with love under figurative expressions, are in nature as diverse from it as any
other effect is from it is cause. We do indeed allow that nothing is required as
duty, but what is either implied in the affection of love, or is a fit way of
exercising and expressing it; nothing which may not be considered as
comprehended in love, if not formally, yet virtually and radically, as being
apt to flow from it, as an effect from it is cause, or an act from it is habit.
But that no external duties of religion are required, but such as actually flow
from love, and to imply the exercises of it, (which I think is the most candid
sense in which Mr. H's words can be taken) is not at all proved by our Savior's
words, and is untrue, as has been shown from this very passage of scripture,
and shall be further demonstrated. But Mr. H. proceeds -- No other natural and
easy sense can be put upon these words of Christ; (How can we know that?) But
would they bear another sense, what St. Paul says on the same subject, fixes
the meaning of them. He says, he that loves another has fulfilled the law.
And again, Love is the fulfilling of the law. Love could not be the fulfilling
of the law, if the law required any thing more than love acted out to a perfect
degree, and in a proper manner. Love is therefore the whole duty of man.
Nothing more nor less is required. God has not given one precept to man in the
law or the prophets, in the old testament or new, but what requires love to
God, or man, or both; and is to be obeyed in the exercise of love, and no other
way, or by nothing else. There is therefore no obedience but what consists in
love; and where there is nothing of this there is no duty done; nothing that is
required, and is due, is given. P. 117.

I have now given the reader the entire argument with which Mr. H. would prove
that nothing more or less than love is required: On which we may note --

1. Here is nothing tending to enervate the proofs we have given, that there
are other commands besides the great ones our Savior speaks of.

2. If love be taken in it is proper sense for an affection or immanent act of
the will, it will be flatly contrary to the current of scripture, and to diverse
of Mr. H's expressions, to say that nothing besides love is required. It is
certain that good works as well as love are commanded duties.

3. We have no reason to think that love in the texts of scripture above
referred to is to be understood as including all those acts of external
obedience which flow from it. It does not appear that it is ever used in so
extensive a sense in the scriptures. Mr. H. besure has offered nothing to prove
that it is, unless the words of the apostle, Love is the fulfilling of the law,
may be thought to imply it; which will be considered immediately.

4. There is nothing in the shape of an argument to prove that nothing more or
less than love is required, except two texts of scripture, viz. Mat. 22.40.
Romans 13.8, 9. If then these texts should be capable of a construction different
from what he has given, his argument will come to nothing. Now it does not
appear that there is any necessity of taking these texts in the sense he has
given, and indeed if they are closely examined they will not bear that sense.

When our Savior says, On these two commandments hang all the law and the
prophets, he is speaking of commandments which he had just been comparing with
and declaring greater than others, and which were consequently diverse from
those others to which they are preferred. And there is nothing in the
expression here used that so much as intimates that every command in divine
revelation really requires nothing but love. On the contrary when one thing is
said to hang on another, we naturally conceive of a difference between them.
All the law and the prophets may properly be said to hang on these two
commandments, if these are greater than any other; if these are the foundation,
the ultimate end of other precepts, and indeed of the whole of divine
revelation, which is designed to recover men to the love of God and their
neighbor; if other duties required in the word of God naturally and regularly
flow from love as their principle or efficient cause. It seems to me that the
phrase here used cannot, without straining, be made to comprehend much more, at
least it cannot bear Mr. H's construction: Nor has he hinted one reason for his
sense of the words, except his referring to the words of St. Paul, which he
supposes to be parallel and to fix the meaning of this text, may pass for a
reason.

Our whole business then is to attend to this passage of the apostle here
referred to, which taken in it is connection is as follows. Romans xiii. 7 -- 10.
Render therefore to all their dues, etc. O ^e no man any thing but to love one
another, for he that loves another has fulfilled the law. For this, Thou
shall not commit adultery. Thou shall not kill. Thou shall not steal. Thou
shall not bear false witness. Thou shall not covet. And if there be any other
commandment it is briefly comprehended (anakephalaioutai) in this saying
namely, thou shall love thy neigbhour as thy self. Love works no ill to his
neighbor, therefore love is the fulfilling of the law. On these words we may
observe.

1. That the apostle seems evidently to speak of the law in a limited sense,
meaning only what is called the second table; containing our duty to our
neighbor. At most it comprehends only the moral law. Now if it should be
supposed that the moral law requires nothing but love, this will not prove that
there are no ordinances pertaining to the external worship of God which require
any thing besides love. For that law of which the apostle is speaking does not
contain every divine command. It does not contain positive precepts, which (as
we learn from our Savior's words) are distinct from that law which obliges us
to love our neighbor as ourselves. God by his sovereign authority may have
enjoined external duties of religion of a quite different kind, for any thing
that can be argued to the contrary from this text.

2. It is certain that the moral law, and even the second table requires
something besides love, in the strict sense. It requires acts of kindness. And
it also requires a due degree of love, and endeavor to do good. If then love
be taken in so large and qualified a sense as to include the whole of our duty,
or a perfect conformity to the law in all respects; then it is true, that this
is strictly the fulfilling of the law; and every one in whom this is found has
fulfilled the law. But then I say that something less than perfect obedience is
also required of us by God. Something is our duty, which in itself is not a
complete fulfillment of the whole law. The exercises and actings of love in
true christians are commanded duties, though by reason of their imperfection
they are not the fulfilling of the law. These and much more are their duty.
True it is, that nothing more can be required of any one than to fulfill the
law. But this will never prove that nothing less, is in any case required. The
whole of our duty in a perfect degree, and each part, in all it is degrees is
jointly and severally required. That holiness which is perfectly answerable to
the law is our duty; and such acts of holiness as are imperfect, and
consequently are not the fulfilling of the law are our duty: And external
duties of religi^n, though in themselves they have not the complete essence of
true holiness, yet are a part of that duty whereby the divine command is
fulfilled. The substance of the duty is enjoined as well as it is circumstances.
That ought to be done, and these not omitted, though the substance of external
duties without love be not gospel holiness; and though gospel holiness being
imperfect in degree be not the fulfilling of the law, or the whole duty therein
required.

If it be said, that any act of obedience is a fulfilling the law: I answer, it
may be so termed in some sense: It is a doing something required in the law.
But this is not the sense in which the apostle uses the phrase. He means the
whole of our duty in it is full extent. But if the apostle intended by the
fulfilling of the law, only a particular act of obedience, then his saying that
love is an instance of obedience to the law, does not imply but that there may
be many other instances. Love and the fruits of love, and actions materially
good though destitute of holy love, may all consistently enough be instances of
duty, by doing of which we in this sense fulfill or obey the law in some
respect. If it be said that, every instance of obedience or duty implies some
degree of holy love, this is only begging the question. But,

3. If we attend carefully to the apostles words, it will I think plainly
appear, that there are other duties we owe to our neighbor besides love, in
the sense here intended. Owe no man any thing but to love one another, for he
that loves, etc. The apostle here evidently mentions other debts or duties
owing to others besides love. Such as rendering to every one his due. And he
observes a notable difference between this debt of love, and those others; viz.
that these must be discharged by actual payment; which when we have done, we
shall owe them no longer. But that other debt of love we shall always owe our
neighbor, though we should owe him nothing else. The apostle here
distinguishes between rendering to all their due, and loving one another: He
compares and opposes these different duties to each other: Which shows that the
former are not included in love in the sense here intended. I see not how any
tolerable sense can be made of the text, if love be understood to contain those
other duties which are compared with it. For then the meaning must stand thus:
Owe no man any thing except love, that is, except tribute, custom, fear, honor
and every thing else which is ever due from one man to another* The bare
recital of which is a sufficient confutation. And thus the words of Paul
pointed to by Mr. H. confirm the sense we have given of our Savior's words.
They both appear to use the word love in it is proper sense: And neither of them
comprizes in it all acts of external obedience: And consequently Mr. H's
assertion, That nothing more or less than love is required, not only wants
proof, but is fully confuted, and convicted of falsehood from those very texts
by which he endeavors to maintain it.

But it may be enquired, Why is love called the fulfilling of the law; and he
that loves another said to have fulfilled the law; and all the commandments of
the second table comprehended briefly in this saying, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self? -- This may easily and satisfactorily be answered, I
conceive, if we will not cut the ap^stles words to the quick, which some
expositors perhaps have too much done. The learned Toletus seems to have given
the true meaning of this passage as follows. The law is said to be fulfilled
two manner of ways. 1. When each of the precepts are fulfilled in particular,
etc. 2. When that is done on which the whole law depends, or unto which the
whole law is ordained or framed, or by which the whole law is performed. And
thus he that loves has fulfilled the whole law; as well because love is the
principle, cause and root of all other things which are commanded; as because
love is the end or scope of all the commandments of the law according to 1 Timothy
1.5. as also because it exhibits the manner wherein the other commandments are
perfectly done, namely from love. Vid. Pol^ Synops. in loc.
And when all the other commandments are said to be briefly comprehended under
this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; this cannot intend that they
are strictly and formally, but only that they are as it were radically
contained therein; as love is an operative principle, disposing and prompting
to all other duties to our neighbor. Or perhaps the original word may only
import that the other commands are connected with this as their head, or
capital principle: And then the meaning will very much coincide with that of
our Savior's words before explained, "On their two commandments hang all the
law and the prophets."

But whether this be the full and exact meaning of these expressions or not,
certain it is that this passage neither requires nor indeed will bear Mr. H's
construction. And so we have considered the whole evidence on which depends the
truth of his major proposition, that the divine law enjoins nothing more or
less than love. The assumption, viz. "The unregenerate have no true (i e. holy)
love to God and their neighbor," we dispute not; though we cannot admit the
reason immediately subjoined, viz. That "unregeneracy consists in want of love,
and in consequent exercises of enmity." For it has been shown to consist in the
privation of a holy principle, and not in any act or the privation of any act.

We have now sustained the attack of our author's grand battery; and have I
hope maintained our ground against it. Whether we have not also been able to
silence it, and even take it out of his hands, and turn it to good effect
against himself, that is, to impugn his own tenet, let such as exercise their
reason judge. I doubt Mr. H. trusted a little too much to his pressed forces.
Soldiers are very apt to desert a cause, in which they are constrained to serve
against their will.

III. We will now again resume the laboring oar, and proceed in our present
task: That is, to prove that something is required of men in a way of duty
which they are able to do while unregenerate. And the next argument is taken
from the apostle's words, Romans 2.14. When the Gentiles who have not the law do
by nature the things contained in the law, these having not the law are a law
to themselves. The design of the apostle in the beginning of this epistle is to
prove that both Jews and Gentiles are under sin. But since there is no
transgression where there is no law, it might be objected, that the Gentiles
not having the law seem not to be guilty of transgressing it. To this the
apostle answers, that though the Gentiles have not the written law, yet they
have the work or impression of the law of nature on their hearts, in those
notions of right and wrong which they are naturally furnished with. This
appears, 1. from their conscienciously doing some things contained in and
enjoined by the divine law. Though they have not the law, says the apostle,
they show f^rth the work of it, they do many things which it requires, and
forbear or abstain from many things which it forbids, and so show forth it is
work and efficacy. Owen on Indwelling Sin, chap. 14.
2. From the witness of conscience accusing or excusing them, according as
their conduct is right or wrong.

That the persons here spoken of are unregenerate cannot be doubted, besure not
by Mr. H. who ventures to say, that it would not be a wise act in God to
regenerate an ignorant heathen, or a very erroneous professor of christianity,
without preparing him for this change by a previous use of means. Sermon. on
Regen. page 56.
How competent judges we are of what is wise for God to do in this case, I
enquire not. That these heathen here mentioned were unr^generate is mutually
agreed.

Of these persons it is said that they do the things contained in the law. This
is the medium or argument by which the apostle proves that they are a law to
themselves. The form of expression may seem hypothetical, " When the Gentiles
do," etc. but the meaning is plainly categorical. q. d. Since the Gentiles do
the things contained in the law, it appears that they are a law to themselves.
The consequence must stand or fall with it is antecedent.

Now whatever actions are contained in or required by the law, are commanded
duties: But by the testimony of Paul, the moral virtues of the unregenerate
heathen are things contained in the law, or as Calvin renders it, works of the
law; Instit. lib. 2. chap. 2. sect 22.
that is, works required by the law. Therefore some actions of the unregenerate
are commanded duties. And this, by the way, directly proves that a virtuous
life, as well as an attendance on ordinances of religious worship, is the duty
of men previous to regeneration.

These things the Gentiles do by nature. I do not suppose that these words were
meant to exclude all divine influence prompting and assisting the powers of
nature to action; yet they doubtless exclude the influence of supernatural
sanctifying grace; and so leave no room to doubt that the persons spoken of are
unregenerate.

But there is an exception to this testimony, that deserves some consideration.
The phrase in the original (ta tou nomou) which is here translated the things
contained in the law, is more literally rendered the things of the law. And a
learned writer Glas's Works, Vol. 3. page 25.
thinks that the meaning of the text is not that the Gentiles do any duties
contained in, or enjoined by the law; but that they do the offices of the law
to themselves or the things which pertain to the law to do. And this he says is
supported by the words immediately following, these having not the law are a
law to themselves, which show the work of the law written in their hearts.
Whether Mr. H. would follow this interpretation of the text I know not; he
having taken no notice of it. However we will attend to it. And,

1. Whereas it is supposed that the following words, "These having not the law
are a law to themselves," are an evidence that the Gentiles doing the things of
the law means their doing the things which the law does, (that is, enjoining
duty, forbidding sin, threatening, and condemning the guilty, acquitting the
innocent) it appears to me that they are a great objection, and even a full
confutation of the sense here given of the text. The design of the apostle is
to prove that the Gentiles who have not the law are a law to themselves. And
the medium, or argument by which he proves it is their doing by nature the
things of the law. Now it is a maxim in logic that the medium by which any
thing is proved, must be different from that which is proved by it; different
in sense, as well as in terms; otherwise the argument will be trifling, merely
proving a thing by itself. For instance, it would be trifling for any one to
argue in this manner. Since the Gentiles who have not the law are a law to
themselves, therefore these not having the law are a law to themselves. Now to
say that a man does the offices of the law to himself, is saying no more nor
less than that he is a law to himself. We are in no other sense a law to
ourselves, than that we do the offices of the law. If this then be what is
intended by the Gentiles doing the things of the law, I think the apostles
antecedent and consequence differ only in terms; and the argument in the text
must am^unt to no more than this, When the Gentiles who have not the law do by
nature the offices of the law to themselves, these having not the law, are a
law, that is, do the offices of a law to themselves! Surely St. Paul did not
argue at this rate. But if the sense be as our translators have rendered, doing
the things contained in the law, the argument is clear and pertinent. Men's
doing the things required in the law without any knowledge of the written law,
is an evidence that they are instead of a law to themselves, and that they have
the work of the law written on their hearts.

2. I humbly conceive, that the original word (poie) here used is not proper to
express the elicit or immanent acts of the mind and conscience, by which alone
men are, or do the offices of a law to themselves. It properly signifies to
perform some action. Aristotle uses it to express the doing of what are called
actions or performances, in distinction from the immanent acts of the soul.
Ethic. lib. 6.
And I think the word is commonly, if not always used in this sense in the new
testament. When the conscience of men does the office of a law, this cannot
properly be called (poiesis) a doing or performance. But to do the things
contained in or injoined by the law is properly expressed by the word here
used. It often bears this sense in the new testament, particularly in the verse
immediately preceding this under consideration, the doers (poietai) of the law
unquestionably means the doers of the duties contained in the law. And it ought
not to be supposed, without evident reason, that the apostle should immediately
use the same word in effect to express a meaning entirely diverse.

3. The following verse seems much to confirm the interpretation we plead for.
"The gentiles," says the apostle, show the work of the law written in their
hearts. How do they show it? By those actions, no doubt, which he had just
mentioned, viz. doing the things contained in the law. Or to use Dr. Owen's
words, They do many things which it requires, and forbear or refrain from many
things which it forbids, and so show forth it is work and efficacy. They show
it as believers do their faith, that is by their works. But such actions as
bear no conformity to the impression of the law on men's hearts, do not show or
evidence such an impression. And inward acts of men's minds are not visible.

4. The stream of expositors runs the same way. All our english expositors and
divines (except Mr. Glass, from whom I took the objection here considered) so
far as I have yet found, follow our translation. With these agree the most
eminent foreign divines, particularly Calvin, Gryneus, Hemingius, Piscator,
Alting, Mastricht, Vossius, etc. besides those referred to in Pool's Synopsis.
Origin, and Augustine, among the ancient fathers, I find understood the
apostle's words in the same sense. It is worthy of notice, that Augustine,
though much pressed with this text by the Pelagians, who endeavored by it to
prove that men might attain to true righteousness by the powers of nature, yet
in his answer, never intimates that the apostle only means that the gentiles do
the offices of the law, though this interpretation would have been very
convenient for his purpose; but acknowledges that, Their thoughts will thus far
excuse them in the day of judgment, that they shall receive a lighter
punishment, because by nature they have in some sort done the things of the
law. Ad hoc eos in die judicii cogitationes suae defendent, ut tolerabilius
punientur, quia naturaliter quae legis sunt utcunque fecerunt. August. contra
Julian. lib. 4 cap. 3.
I shall only add, that in the Syriac, which is accounted the most ancient and
valuable of all the old versions, this verse is rendered, according to the sense
we plead for, as appears by the translation of it in the polyglot bible. It
seems that this sense of the apostle's words which we oppose was unknown in the
ancient church. Mr. H. will perhaps think I have been very wickedly Page 90.
employed, in producing the suffrage of the learned respecting the sense of a
text. But in matters of criticism, the judgment of the learned, I suppose, is
not altogether to be despised, at least by th^se who are conscious of their own
deficiencies.

This exception, being I hope removed, and the true meaning of the text
vindicated, our argument from it in support of the point we have undertaken to
defend, is now left to the consideration of all impartial enquirers after
truth. To me, I confess, the text speaks as home to the point as can be desired.

IV. The words of the evangelist, Mark vi. 20. will furnish us with another
proof of the doctrine we plead for. Herod feared John, knowing that he was a
just man and a holy, and observed him, and when he heard him he did many
things, and heard him gladly. Herod an unregenerate man, not only had a
reverence for John Baptist as a righteous man, and heard him gladly, but he did
many things which John taught and exhorted him to do. The same things that he
heard he did. None can be so wild as to imagine the meaning to be, that Herod
did many things contrary to what he was taught; or merely that he was busy in
doing something. He was not only a hearer of the word, but in part a doer of
the work. Henry.
Herod did many things which John in preaching moved him unto. P^^^i^s.
Now John being full of the Holy Ghost, taught and exhorted his hearers to do
nothing but what was their duty. If then Herod did any thing that John exhorted
him to do (the text says he did many things) then John exhorted to such duties
as may be done by an unregenerate sinner. Mr. H. indeed tells us that John said
not a word of unregenerate duties, but preached and inculcated nothing short of
true repentance. P. 148. But St. Mark, who was more likely to know, informs us
that he preached such duties as Herod practiced. And we may now fairly return
him his own compliment; Mr. H. and they who join with him are wiser than John
the Baptist; and if he was wise and right in his preaching they are not so.
Ibid.

V. Another argument I shall take from Phil. iv. 8. Finally my brethren,
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report, if there be any virtue, if there be any praise,
think on these things. It will perhaps be thought that this text is not so
pertinently cited in the present controversy, being addressed to professed
believers who for ought that I know were all regenerate. I have not cited it
because straightened for proofs, but for a particular reason, which will presently
appear.

Two things are to be enquired into for the opening this text, and our argument
grounded upon it: viz. Whether the hearers of the gospel in general are bound
by this precept to an immediate attendance to the duties here enjoined? And
whether the duties are of such a nature, that an unregenerate sinner is able to
perform any thing of what is here inculcated? For the first Mr. H. has happily
saved us the trouble of proving it; he having granted as fully, and more fully
than we desire, that the exhortations to duty which in scripture are addressed
to the regenerate, bind the unregenerate to obedience, as much as if they had
been particularly directed to them.

All that is wanting then in order to form a solid argument to our purpose from
this text, is to show that the unregenerate have a next power to practice these
duties; that is, to speak the truth, to behave justly, temperately, amiably,
and in a word, practice those virtues which are of general good report. Now
these things are so manifestly in the power of the unregenerate, that no one I
think will deny it on any other pretense than this; that the apostle means only
such a practice of these virtues as implies or presupposes a principle of true
holiness infused in regeneration.

Now though it be true that men ought to do all these things in the exercise of
faith and love, and that the want of holy principles and ends is an essential
defect in the most shining virtues; yet it is carefully to be observed, that it
is not a principle of grace that constitutes or denominates men's behavior
true, honest, etc. in the common acceptance of the words. Though a man cannot
live in a holy manner while unregenerate, yet he can live justly, temperately,
and speak the truth. It is the substance and matter of actions, not their
flowing from supernatural principles, that constitutes them just, laudable, and
of general good report. A man may speak the truth, and deal honestly and behave
temperatel^, and the like, without the grace of regeneration. And these things
are the duty of the unrege^erate by virtue of this precept. For whatsoever
things are true, etc. are strictly enjoined. And it is a beggarly pretense,
destitute of any proof from scripture or reason, to say that there is no
obligation on any one to speak the truth, and practice the other virtues here
recommended, except on supposition of it is being done from a holy principle.

It is not to be allowed to any arbitrarily to suppose, that when only the
substance and matter of a duty is expressly enjoined in a scripture precept,
there is no obligation on any to do what is enjoined, unless the performance be
every way qualified as it ought to be. To omit any requisite circumstances of a
duty is a sin, but to omit the substance of the duty also is a double sin.
Lying and injustice are in themselves sins abstract from all circumstances.
Consequently truth and righteousness are in themselves commanded duties. It is
not to be allowed to any arbitrarily to suppose, that when the apostle urges a
regard to whatsoever things are true without limitation, he means not to exhort
men to regard truth, unless on certain suppositions, and with the conjunction
of such circumstances, as are not necessary to constitute the virtue of truth,
according to the common acceptance of the word, however necessary they may be
to constitute an action spiritually good. The scriptures are to be taken
according to the common meaning of the words and phrases therein used, unless
some weighty reason appear for a singular and appropriate sense.

The practice of moral virtues in men unregenerate is in it is kind good,
lovely, laudable. It was on this account that God loved Cyrus. Isai. 48.14. God
loved Cyrus, says Mr. Pool, with that particular kind of love which God has
for such men as excel others in any virtues, as Cyrus did. In which sense
Christ loved the young man. Mark 10.21. Then Jesus beholding him loved him, Not
with a special and saving love, (says Dr. Collins, Mr. Pool's continuator) but
he loved him with such a common love as he loves all his creatures with, and
especially such as are better than others. All that can be concluded from hence
is, that acts of moral righteousness are pleasing to God. It was on account of
such virtues as the apostle recommends that Jesus loved this young ruler. It
was not merely love of benevolence that is here chiefly intended; much less
pity to him as one peculiarly stupid and hardened in pride and enmity against
God. The pharisees were as proper objects of pity on this account as any; while
maliciously watching for something to accuse him. But we do not read that
beholding them he loved them, but he looked round with anger being grieved at
the hardness of their hearts. His love to this person is commonly understood to
have been a friendly complacency in him, on account of his amiable character
and behavior. In this young man we have a proof and example that a virtuous
behavior is amiable even in the unregenerate. Mr. H. indeed gives a different
account of this matter. "Nor is there any reason," says he, to think that
Christ loved him on account of any thing amiable in his character. He
"beholding him," looking on him as a poor, ignorant, stupid, proud enemy to
God, and in a most wretched condition, this excited in him the l^ve of pity and
benevolence to him. This I suppose is all that is meant by his loving him P.
82. What "the happy people who shall live in the last days" (to whom Mr. H.
makes his appeal Page 54.
) may think of this gloss, I shall not pretend to divine. Those who live in
these degenerare times, for what I can yet find, are very generally of opinion
that it is neither just, nor even handsomely probable. I shall not however stop
to object to it, but return to the point in hand, from which we had almost
digressed.

Whenever any external duty is enjoined in scripture, without any limitation of
the performance to qualified subjects, or involving the circumstances of the
external action into the substance of the duty (as is the case in baptism, the
Lord's supper, etc.) There is then a general obligation to perform the
substance of the duty, though it should be defective in it is circumstances.
Thus external moral duties are immediately and in themselves enjoined on all,
whether regenerate or not. Thus when the Israelites were commanded to keep the
passover, it was their duty to do it, and in so doing they did as the Lord
commanded Moses and Aaron. (Exodus xii. 28.) Though we have no reason to think
that the body of the people kept it in a holy manner. When Paul in his voyage
to Italy exhorted those who sailed with him to take some meat, because it would
be for their health; though it was their duty in eating to aim sincerely at the
glory of God, which as unregenerate many of them were not in a next capacity to
do; yet if any one should say, that the apostle did not mean to invite any to
eat while unregenerate, and consequently, that none of this character did any
thing that he invited them to do, but directly contrary, when they took some
meat; must we not conclude that such a one had confounded himself, and the
plain sense of the scripture, with foolish subtilties? Common sense would
conclude, that what Paul invited them to do, and what the historian says they
did, was no more nor less than the natural action of eating simply considered;
an action which neither includes, nor excludes the exercise of a holy
principle; and that there is no more difficulty in supposing that such kind of
actions may be enjoined by God, for wise and good ends; than that they may
lawfully be advised to by a good man. God has a right indeed to require the
doing of those things, which without a special direction from him it would not
be lawful for any man to order or advise. But who will imagine that men may
lawfully advise to the doing of that, which would be inconsistent with the
holiness of God to require? But of this more in the next section. To sum up the
matter, when the apostle in this text exhorts to the practice of moral duties,
and when in other parts of the new testament men are called to an attendance on
the outward means of conversion, is the duty of all those who hear the call of
the gospel to perform these duties as to the substance, whether they are in an
immediate capacity to perform them in a holy manner or not. That is, it is
their duty to do that which an unregenerate sinner is able to do; which was to
be proved. And this is what is meant by those who say that God requires both
the performance and the goodness of the duty. Nor is the distinction here
suggested, either " new Works whose goodness does not cleave necessarily to the
doing of them, but to the manner of doing them wicked men may perform. Dr.
Edward Reynolds on the sinfulness of sin.
or unintelligible" to some, whatever it may be to Mr. H. Page, 127.
whose exceptions, founded on mistaken principles which have been already
confuted, might easily be shown to be of no weight: But I leave them to the
consideration of the intelligent reader: And, will finish my observations on
this text with one remark, which I have all along had in view.

It is a vain and groundless suggestion, that the apostles did not exhort to
any thing as matter of duty which the unregenerate are able to perform. To
correct this mistake which has been too confidently maintained by some, was my
principal design in discussing this text. The apostles often inculcate external
duties which the unregenerate are able to perform as to the substance of them.
And such precepts oblige the hearers of the gospel in general to such a
performance of them as they are capable of, whether regenerate or not; and are
to be indiscriminately inculcated on all, to stir them up to endeavors of
obedience. We have a good warrant to limit the duties of profession of faith
and baptism, to qualified subjects. For it is plain from scripture that the
belief of the heart ought always to accompany the confession of the mouth,
otherwise it ought not to be made. And says Philip to the Eunuch, proposing to
be baptized, If thou believe with all thine heart thou may. But what
warrant have we from scripture to say to men, "If ye are regenerate and true
believers, then ye may and ought to speak the truth one to another, to be just
in your dealings, to be temperate and chaste in your behavior, to read and
hear God's word, and pray to him: Otherwise, and without these qualifications,
these things are not your duty, nor required at your hands; and all endeavors
to do any of these things while unregenerate, are as unwarrantable and
presumptuous, as for an infidel to receive the outward seals of the covenant."
Let any precept or authentic precedent for such a manner of preaching be
produced, and it shall be attended to. In the mean time; we have a warrant to
urge an attendance to the precepts of the gospel, without foisting in any
limitations or conditions not contained in those precepts. We have a warrant to
call upon sinners to reform their vicious lives, and attend seriously the means
of conversion without delay according to their present ability, whether
regenerate or not. We have a warrant to assert that the apostolic writings
abound with exhortations to such actions as the unregenerate are able to
perform; to challenge some substantial evidence of those who assert the
contrary; page 130.
or else reject it as an arbitrary hypothesis, how importunately soever they
may beg to have it conceded to them. How much good such exhortations have done,
(which Mr. H. is quite sure is but very little page 132.
) I enquire not at present.

VI. Another argument may be taken from diverse testimonies from the old
testament, manifesting God's approbation or favorable notice of the actions of
unsanctified men, when for the substance conformable to his will; and his
rewarding them with temporal blessings, because or on account of them. Thus
Jeremiah was sent with this message to the Jews, chap. 34.15. "Ye were now
turned, and had done right in my sight, in proclaiming liberty every man to his
neighbor"; though they soon after fell from it. 2 Chronicles. 25.2, 3, 4. "Amaziah
did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect
heart." And particularly, in punishing his father's murderers, he "did as it is
written in the law in the book of Moses." And of his father Joash it is said,
chap. 24.2. that "he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord all the
days of Jehoiada"; though afterward he fell to idolatry, and put to death the
priest who reproved him for it. 2 Kin. 10.30. "The Lord said unto Jehu, because
thou have done well, in executing that which was right in mine eyes, -- thy
children of the fourth generation shall sit on the throne of Israel. But Jehu
took no heed to walk in the law of the Lord God of Israel with all his heart."
2 Chronicles. 11.4. "Rehoboam, and the people obeyed the words of the Lord, and
returned from going against Jeroboam." And afterward when he and all Israel
were punished for forsaking the law of the Lord, yet when they humbled
themselves, "the word of the Lord came to Shemaiah, saying, they have humbled
themselves, therefore I will not destroy them, but I will grant them some
deliverance," chap. 12.7. Ahab's humiliation was favorably noticed by God.
"Because he humbles himself," (says God) "I will not bring the evil in his
days." 1 Kings 21.25 -- 29. So was the repentance and reformation of the
Ninevites. Jonah 3 -- 10. "God saw their works, that they turned from their
evil ways, and God repented of the evil that he said he would do unto them, and
he did it not." And this instance is mentioned by our Savior, as what would in
the day of judgment condemn the impenitent Jews. Other instances there are
which I stay not to collect.

It appears from these passages that unregenerate sinners have done that which
was in some respect right in God's sight: Of which he has expressed his
approbation: Which was commanded in his law: Which he calls obeying his word:
Because, or on account, of which he has averted threatened judgments, suspended
punishments, granted temporal blessings; even such blessings as imply the
continuance of spiritual privileges. Now these things cannot be said of any
actions, which it was not the duty of such persons to do. And if the
unregenerate have done what was their duty in any instances, there is still a
power in the unregenerate to do some things which are their duty: And
conversely some things are their duty, for the doing of which they have a power.

Mr. H. labors in the fire to defend himself against these plain testimonies,
which speak so fully and expressly in opposition to his cause. If he could have
submitted his reasonings to the wisdom of God speaking in the scriptures, "I
suppose" (to speak in borrowed language) "that a great part of his performance
would never have seen the light." P. 6.

His exceptions aim at these two things. 1. To confute the supposition, that
the persons here mentioned did any thing of which God expressed his
approbation, or took a favorable notice, or out of respect thereto granted any
blessings to the persons. 2. Show that consistent with the denial of all these
things, a natural and easy meaning may be put on these texts.

As to the first part of his reply, we will first review the evidence which
these texts give to the points by him objected to; and then examine his
objections.

The scriptures declare in express words that persons allowed to be
unregenerate, did that which was right in God's sight: According as it is
written in the divine law: That they obeyed the words of the Lord: And that
temporal favors were promised and granted, because of their doing these
things. If then it be any expression of approbation to tell a person he has
done right and well, and promise temporal blessings because of such doings; if
this imports taking any favorable notice of such performances; and if
bestowing a favor because a person has done right, be the same with rewarding
it, or bestowing a blessing on account of, or out of respect to such a right
conduct; then none can deny that the unregenerate have done what they were
commanded to do, what God expressly approved, took favorable notice of, and
rewarded, unless a man will dare contradict the scriptures. Mr. H. has however
ventured to do it with much confidence. And though I shall upon the authority
of the scriptures hold these things for undeniable facts, and have a right to
repel every objection that reason may presume to offer against them; yet let us
hear what is objected.

Says he, If God granted favors to Ahab and Jehu, and a great deliverance to
the Ninevites, purely out of respect to their repentance and good deeds, while
they were impenitent, etc. then he may and does show favor to sinners out of
respect to what they are in themselves, their exercises and doings, and without
any respect and relation to Christ the mediator. Therefore if there was no such
mediator, he might show favors to sinners, take a favorable notice of their
doings, and express, etc. his approbation of them; and purely out of respect to
this suspend his punishments, and grant them pardon and salvation. For if he
grants a less good -- out of respect to their character and doings, because
they have done well, -- he may as well grant a greater good, even pardon of sin
and eternal salvation out of respect to this. -- What need then -- of a
mediator in order to obtain -- the favor of God! And thus he concludes, the
whole gospel is overthrown, and Christ is represented as dying in vain. P. 73,
74.

It is here to be observed, that Mr. H. to give his consequences the better
color, has foisted in the word [purely] into the antecedent, implying that his
antagonist meant to assert, that God granted temporal favors to unregenerate
men because they had done well, without any respect to Christ's mediation. But
I find no such thing asserted or intimated by Mr. Mills, or my other differing
from Mr. H. on the point in dispute. Mr. Mills, against whom Mr. H. is
disputing, does indeed say that a great salvation was granted to the Ninevites
out of respect to their repentance. But who excert a wrangler, that seeks a
knot in a bulrush, will pretend or suspect that any thing more is intended than
if it had been said, in the scriptural phrase, that this favor was granted to
them because they repented.
If then we take away the word purely, which ought not to have been inserted,
the antecedent is in every part fully supported by scripture. Certain it is
that God granted favors to Ahab and Jehu, and a great deliverance to the
Ninevites, because of their repentance and good deeds, let men object as they
please. That the dispensation of favors to the children of men is founded on
Christ's mediation, we have not denied. What christian then shall dare suggest,
that if God has done that which his word abundantly assures us he has in fact
done, then the gospel is overthrown, and Christ has died in vain. If those
unsound consequences drawn out by Mr. H. from the principle he opposes, depend
entirely on the supposition that favors are granted to men purely because they
have done well, without any respect to the dispensation of grace; why has he
been at all this pains to confute his own figment, and destroy a man of straw
of his own making? His artillery must be better aimed, if he means it should do
any execution.

He must not (while he allows the truth of the scriptures) deny that God
granted favors to Ahab and Jehu, and a great deliverance to the Ninevites,
whatever were the ground or reason of it. And he must say that these favors
were granted either out of respect to Christ's mediation, or they were not. Let
him choose his alternative.

If he shall say that God grants favors to sinners through Christ's mediation,
takes a favorable notice, and expresses his approbation of their doings; and
if this be not subversive of the gospel; then neither is our argument: Unless
it be inconsistent to suppose that a favor may be granted to men because of
their doings, and also out of respect to Christ's mediation. But this cannot be
said, unless we will be so profane as to say, that facts expressly recorded in
the scriptures are subversive of the gospel. For that God suspended the
punishment of Ahab, and promised temporal blessings to Jehu, because the one
humbled himself, and the other did well in executing that which was right, the
scriptures in express words declare.

If he shall say that these temporal favors, and these expressions of divine
approbation, are not granted out of respect to Christ; then his argument will,
if it prove any thing, convict himself of overthrowing the gospel. It will
condemn himself as much as he supposes that it condemns his opponents; unless
he should say, that it is inconsistent with the necessity of Christ's atonement
to bestow favors on sinners because of their doings, without any respect to
the mediator; but not so, to bestow favors on sinners, neither because of
their doings, nor out of respect to the mediator. But this surely cannot be
pretended. Whether it be more agreeable to divine wisdom, supposing that he
grants favors to sinners without any respect to the mediator, to grant them
also without any regard to their behavior, I enquire not. The necessity of an
atonement in order to the pardon of sin is no more nor less taken away on the
one supposition than on the other. Would it not be as good reasoning as Mr. H's
to argue as follows? "If God by an act of sovereign goodness, without any
regard either to the mediation of Christ, or the behavior of the sinner, may
grant a less good, a less deliverance and salvation; he may as well, in mere
sovereign bounty, grant a greater good, even the pardon of all sin, and eternal
salvation. He may as well remit the punishment of sin forever without any
atonement, or any outward reformation of the sinner, as he can suspend
punishment for the least moment. What need is there then of a mediator and
atonement, etc. And he may be challenged, as boldly as he challenges others,
page 74*
to show that it is more inconsistent with the necessity of an atonement for
sin, to suppose that God grants favors to sinners because of their
reformation, than to suppose that they are acts of sovereign irrespective
bounty; all respect to the mediation of Christ being in both cases alike
excluded. I wish Mr. H. to consider, whether his way of arguing must not
unavoidably lead us to conclude that there is no need of an atonement in order
to the pardon of sin. He concludes that it must be allowed as a necessary
consequence, that if without respect to the mediator, God may grant a lesser
good to a sinner, he may also a greater. If he may suspend the punishment of
sin for a time, he may do so forever; and so not punish sin at all Dr. Twisse
argued in this manner against the absolute necessity of satisfaction for sin,
as a foundation for it is being forgiven. He concluded that a mitigation and
suspension of punishment must be allowed to be consistent with justice; and so
argued as Mr. H. has done, that on this supposition, justice does not
absolutely and necessarily require that sin should be punished at all. The
learned may find this argument answered, in Dr. Owen's latin Diatribe de
justitia divina, and in Turretine's disputations de necessitate satisfactionis
Christi; who have shown, that justice admits of a latitude and variety of
dispensation in the punishment of sin: That various manners, circumstances, and
degrees of punishing a sin, are alike consistent with justice; and
consequently, these things are determined not by justice, but by a wise and
holy sovereignty. If the author's consequences are just, I see not but that the
absolute necessity of the atonement a priori must be given up; which I would
however be loath to call a subversion of the gospel, when I find such great and
good divines as Augustine, Calvin, Musculus, Twisse, Vossius, Goodwin, Norton,
Stoddar^, Rutherford, etc. did not hold to it. I suppose it will not be thought
by any that Christ purchased a suspension and mitigation of punishment for the
devils. And yet it is certain that the full degree of punishment to which they
are condemned is not at present inflicted on them. They are reserved in chains
under darkness, like prisoners, to the judgment of the great day; to which
there is a plain reference in their beseeching and adjuring Christ not to
torment them before the time. Now if our author's argument be valid, we may as
well argue in the following manner. If the punishment of the devils may be
mitigated and suspended for a time, without any atonement for their sin; it may
be mitigated to the utmost supposable degree, and for the longest supposable
duration; consequently the punishment of sin may be perfectly remitted, and
that forever. What need is there then of an atonement, when the sinner may have
a full and everlasting reprieve, equivalent to a pardon without it? The truth
is, it belongs not to us to limit the prerogative of the Deity. And they who
are so rash as to pretend to do it by reasonings a priori, will find that they
meddle with things too high for them.


The objections to the plain sense of these testimonies being found of no
weight, let us now consider the "natural and easy meaning" of these texts,
which Mr. H. thinks is not pressed with the intolerable consequences above
mentioned. The sum is, "God in his conduct toward these persons
aforementioned, and in what he says of them, acts and speaks not as the
searcher of hearts, but has respect only to what was visible, to their external
appearance and conduct." P. 75.

Answ. 1. That sense of these texts on which our argument is founded, being
obnoxious to none of those absurdities with which he charges it, nor any other,
for what yet appears; we have a right to call for direct and positive scripture
evidence of this hypothesis, before we receive it. Of this, according to my
best observation, his book affords nothing. Nor has he told us how it could
properly be said of any one, without any respect to his heart, that his heart
was or was not perfect, upright, etc. when his behavior was externally right.

2. This hypothesis affords no relief against any of those absurdities with
which he supposes our interpretation of these texts to be pressed. The very
same objections lie equally against the principle on which he proceeds in his
exposition. For I ask, how is it, according to Mr. H's reasoning, consistent
with the divine purity, and the necessity of an atonement for sin, for God to
speak of, and conduct toward men, as if their character and behavior was
right and acceptable to him; having respect only to their external conduct,
without searching their hearts. The divine conduct herein is either on account
of Christ's mediation, or it is not. If not, then in case there had been no
mediator or atonement, God might have spoken of, and conducted toward sinners,
as if their actions were right in his sight. He might have taken a favorable
notice of their external shows of repentance and reformation. He might have
expressed his approbation of them as right in his sight. He might have averted
temporal judgments, suspended punishments, promised and granted temporal
blessings, purely because of, or out of respect to men's visible character,
without acting as the searcher of hearts. Not only so, but he might, without
searching men's hearts, have forgiven their sins, promised and bestowed eternal
life, having respect only to their outward behavior. And thus there would be
no necessity of Christ's dying to purchase these blessings for us, which might
all be conferred by God on sinners, acting herein not as the searcher of
hearts, but having respect only to what is visible, to their external conduct
and behavior.

But if it be said, that it is only on account of Christ's mediation that God
can consistently with his righteousness speak of, and conduct toward sinners
as if they were truly penitent, and had done what was right in his sight;
promising and bestowing temporal blessings, not as the searcher of hearts, but
having respect only to their external conduct; then we may on this principle as
well vindicate our doctrine from his objections, as he can his own hypothesis
against the same objections, which lie full as strong against it.

Plainly then, when he will tell us how it can be reconciled with the divine
purity to speak of, and conduct toward sinners, not as the searcher of hearts,
but merely according to their visible behavior; and clear his own hypothesis
from the consequences he draws from the doctrine he opposes; then I suppose
that a man of his discernment, or even half an eye, will easily see that the
doctrine he opposes may in the same way be as well vindicated. Methinks it is
somewhat odd, first to deny and dispute against the fact, viz. that "God
expresses his approbation of some actions of sinners, and grants temporal
rewards to them because of such actions," and then immediately suppose the same
fact, and introduce a scheme to account for it, or show it to be consistent
with the divine perfections, and the truth of the gospel.

3. Allowing our author's interpretation, I would gladly be informed, why it
may not be supposed that the divine being may as well act the part of a
legislator as of a judge, not as the searcher of hearts, but having respect to
men's outward behavior? In other words, why may he not make laws which respect
only the outward actions of men, as well as give judgment, and execute laws,
only according to men's outward and visible conduct? Is it not natural to think
that the execution of laws ought to correspond with the meaning of them, and of
the legislator in them? That promises would not be fulfilled on a condition
entirely diverse from, and even contrary to that which is annexed to them? That
a blessing promised to the performance of some duty, or act of obedience, would
not be given by a righteous judge to an action implying no duty, or obedience,
or any part of it, but the very reverse in a high degree? Does it any more
imply God's giving up his right to holy obedience from his creatures, for him
to require them to do something, which in itself does not contain whatever is
essential to true holiness, than it does to declare his approbation of such an
action when done, and bestow blessings on the doer because of it? We may have
occasion before we have done to remind ourselves of these things. That there
may be no ground to suggest, that our author's design has been misrepresented,
the reader is to observe, that the argument of Mr. Mills from these passages is
designed to prove that the awakened and reformed sinner is less guilty in the
sight of God than the stupid profligate. Which is a diff^rent point from that
which is the subject of our present debate, viz. that some actions of the
unregenerate are commanded duties. Mr. H. denies both: And though his direct
design be to answer Mr. Mills's argument, yet he has shaped such an answer as,
if it concludes any thing to his purpose, will conclude equally against both
these points; and indeed more directly against the latter than the former. For
he contends, that if God has expressed his approbation and favorable notice of
any actions of the unregenerate, promised and granted temporal blessings
(purely) because of them, then Christ is dead in vain. It was therefore
necessary for us to consider this argument, so far as it is pointed against
ours. And accordingly I have endeavored to show that his exceptions are either
impertinent, if they lie only against the word purely which himself has added,
or if they lie against the facts as we have stated them, then the scriptures
and his own principles are equally obnoxious to his own objections. It is the
principle on which both arguments are founded that he objects to, and I defend.
But indeed the dispensing of temporal blessings, according to the real
characters of men, compared with one another, as viewed by the searcher of
hearts; and because of their being comparatively better, is no more
inconsistent with the necessity of an atonement, than dispensing the same
blessings according to their visible character, and because they have in some
instances behaved aright. I am far from thinking that men are in this world
treated according to their real comparative character, or indeed always
according to their external conduct. But if it were supposed, it could not be
shown to be inconsistent with the divine puri^y, or the necessity of an
atonement.


On the whole, when the scriptures declare any actions to be good and right,
according to the commandment of the Lord, and that the doers are rewarded
because of them, this is as sure an evidence that the performance thereof was
their duty, as the requirement of them would be. This the scriptures declare of
some actions of the unregenerate, which must therefore be concluded to be
duties.

VII. The next argument is founded on a principle expressly acknowledged by the
author, as well as the generality of professed christians: That God has
encouraged unregenerate sinners to attend the means of grace. It will here be
necessary to show what is meant by encouragement; the rather because it is said
the word is ambiguous, which has misled many in their reasonings on it. page
137.
But I have not observed such an ambiguity as is here pretended. Encouragement
I think properly signifies a ground or reason of hope. It may be used
metonymically for the effects and adjuncts of encouragement in the proper
sense. If a sick man sees reason of hope that he shall recover, he has then
encouragement respecting his recovery. If any one has ground to hope his
endeavors will be for his advantage, he has then encouragement to endeavors.

Commands, exhortations, invitations, etc. may be reasons and inducements to
obedience, but simply considered they are not encouragements. When they are
enforced with a prospect of good to be obtained by a compliance with them,
there is then an encouragement or ground of hope annexed to them. Promises are
encouragements: But there may be encouragements which are not promises: There
may be other reasons of hope. A divine promise is a ground of sure hope: But if
there be only a probable reason to hope for some good, there is then a lower
encouragement. There are some encouragements for sinners to hope for salvation
which are not connected with any of their endeavors; such as the divine
goodness, the all-sufficient atonement, the absolute promises of mercy. There
are other encouragements or reasons of hope to sinners, if they attend on the
means of grace; that is, the greater probability of obtaining salvation in this
way. It is on these our argument is grounded.

This may suffice to show what we mean by encouragement. It is simply a reason
of hope. The other sense mentioned by our author page 137.
seems to be a mistake. Exhortations are often enforced with encouragements.
But exhortations are properly as distinct from annexed encouragements, as
commands are from annexed reasons. Be this as it may, it is in this sense we
say, and he acknowledges, that God encourages the unregenerate to attend on the
means of grace. "Sometimes," says he, encouragement means that which gives a
hope and prospect of success in any business and pursuit. -- In this sense God
encourages sinners, let their hearts be as sinful and opposite to him as they
will, to attend the means of grace. ibid.


The manner in which God encourages human endeavors is various. Sometimes by
promising success; sometimes by signifying in his word that there is some
probability our labor may not be in vain. Thus the apostle encourages
ministers to instruct opposers in meekness, if peradventure God will give them
repentance. 2 Timothy 2.25
And God having commanded Jeremiah to write the words he had spoken, adds this
encouragement to the command. It may be that the house of Judah will hear all
the evil that I purpose to do to them, that they may return every man from his
evil way, that I may forgive their iniquity. Jer. 36.3.
And there are exhortations to reformation, which seem to be enforced with this
lower degree of encouragement. Daniel exhorted king Nebuchadnezzar to break off
his sins by righteousness, and his iniquity by showing mercy to the poor, if it
might be a lengthening out of his tranquillity. Dan. 4 27.
This form of exhortation is not unfrequent in scripture. The words of Peter to
Simon of Samaria are perhaps a parallel instance to that last quoted. "Repent
of this thy wickedness, and pray to God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart
may be forgiven thee." Acts 8.22.
God also encourages human endeavors by examples of success recorded in his
word. The proficiency David made in spiritual knowledge by studying God's word
is an encouragement to us to do as he did. The same is suggested from the happy
fruits of the Bereans searching the scriptures daily. The numerous examples
recorded in scripture of sinners converted, and saints edified by the preaching
of the gospel, encourage an attendance to this ordinance. The instances of
God's hearing the prayer of saints and sinners are a general encouragement to
this duty. The mercy of God to sinners on their humbling themselves, and
forsaking their evil courses, is an encouragement to repentance and
reformation. Again God encourages our endeavors when he shows us by our own
observation, that they are commonly successful: And finally when according to
the laws of nature they operate as causes or means of advantage to us. Thus men
are encouraged to apply themselves diligently to the business of their lawful
calling, because such endeavors are naturally conducive to the end at which
they aim.

But is seems to be a matter of no great importance in what manner God gives us
a ground of hope that our endeavors will probably be of advantage to us. If
the encouragement be real, and not a fond presumption, it is a just reason of
action laid before us by God, to excite us to it. If we have good evidence that
a particular action is our duty, it matters not how we obtained it, whether by
the natural light and reason of our own minds, or by supernatural instruction
We are by the authority of God bound to do it. So if we have a just ground of
hope that our doing a particular action will be to our real good, this
encouragement is a just reason for acting proposed to us by God, to prompt us
thereto, in whatever way it is proposed to us.

I now proceed to show, how it appears from God's encouraging men unregenerate
to attend the means of grace, that this is their duty. God never encouraged any
one to do that which was not his duty. He never prompts men to do that which
ought not to be done, and which is indeed nothing but sin, by giving them a
just and real ground of hope that it will be to their everlasting benefit. This
we are warranted to assert, not only from the holiness of his nature, but from
the plain words of St. James. "Let no man say when he is tempted I am tempted
of God; for God cannot be tempted of evil, neither tempts he any man." Jam.
1.13.
There are two senses in which men are said to be tempted. 1. For the trial or
discovery of what is in their hearts, whether they will abide steadfast in the
practice of duty, when it will expose them to trouble, and interferes with
their worldly interests and enjoyments; or whether they will refrain from sin,
when there is a prospect of avoiding the troubles of this life, and obtaining
temporal good things by the commission of it. In this sense God is said to
tempt or prove men; by putting them in such circumstances, that the practice of
their duty shall cost them much self-denial, and the advantages of worldly
riches honors and pleasures, shall be apparently on the side of sin; and by
permitting satan and wicked men to represent these allurements in a strong
light to the mind, to entice and deceive it into a compliance, or otherwise
suggest such thoughts as tend to sin. All this may easily be reconciled to the
divine purity; since there is no real encouragement given, no just ground of
hope, that a consent to the temptation will be of advantage to us in the end.
The command of God, with the high sanctions enforcing obedience, are motives
infinitely stronger in themselves, than can ever be urged in any temptation. 2.
There is another sense in which men are said to be tempted, viz. when
inducements or motives to sin are set before them on purpose to persuade them
to it. Whoever thus tempts any one, really aims to persuade him to a
compliance, and not to prove his integrity. Such a one will accordingly
endeavor to propose such inducements as will be most likely to prevail, and
effect the design he has in view. In this sense we are tempted by satan and
wicked men; but let no man say or think in his heart that he is thus tempted to
sin by the holy God. He may put it to our choice whether we will choose
affliction with the people of God, rather than enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season: But at the same time he proposes a recompense of reward, to encourage
us to a firm adherence to our duty; and lets us know that bitterness and poison
are mingled in the cup that solicits our appetite. If God gives men a real and
just reason to hope that their attending the means of grace will be for their
everlasting advantage; it he has so ordered things that this is the most likely
way to escape the greatest evil, and be happy forever, and he "lets men know"
it, as our author owns; p. 137.
then either what God encourages them to do is their duty, or what they ought
to do; or else he lays before them I m^st powerful inducement to sin: And that
not to prove their integrity, but to persuade them to do that which is in
itself mere sin. Mr. H. must on his own principle own that God encourages the
unregenerate to sin: That he lets them know that their doing what they ought
not to do will probably be for their eternal interest; that so men might have a
just and real (^ot a deceitful) reason of hope to move them to the commission
of it. But must we not then say that this would be tempting men to evil? Laying
before them so strong an inducement, as must and will prevail it duly
apprehended and weighed? And to give the greater efficacy to the inducement, or
shall I call it temptation, the operation of the holy Spirit goes with it, to
set it home on the heart. These things seem almost too shocking to be
mentioned. May any christian admit the supposition, that the divine being has
so ordered and constituted things, that any one should have a reasonable
inducement, a real encouragement to an action, the doing of which is not his
duty but utterly and totally sinful? God forbid. If he has so ordered things
that an attendance on the means of grace is the most likely way to escape
eternal misery and be happy forever; and if he has let sinners know it; this is
as certain evidence that an attendance on the means of grace is their duty, as
the sanctions annexed to a divine command are that it is our duty to obey it.

This argument from encouragements Mr. H. seems rather to despise, then
endeavor directly to confute. Some things however ^e has said, which he
thinks, if considered, must convince any one that "God may and does encourage
his creatures to that in doing which they are utterly sinful." P 138. This may
be taken in two senses. If he means, that the unregenerate are sinners for not
doing w^^ they are encouraged to in a holy manner; and that the action in the
compound sense is unholy or sinful, as being defective in principle and end;
this is nothing to the purpose of answering our argument. We allow and contend
for all this. But we say, that when God encourages the performance in itself,
or in the divided sense, he does not encourage the sinfulness of the agent, or
the sinful defects or irregular circumstances cleaving to the performance.
These have no tendency to his advantage. It is the substance of the duty that
is the means of good. It is this that God encourages to; and to this sinners
ought to attend. It he means, that God encourages men to such actions the doing
of which is sinful; (which it is incumbent on him to prove if he would answer
our argument) I can see nothing, though I have considered what he has said,
that makes this appear in the least probable. That the reader may judge for
himself, I will lay before him in our author's words the substance of his reply.

To encourage a person to any particular way of conduct is to let him know that
this is the most hopeful way to miss of the evil he dreads, and obtain what he
sets up as the object of his pursuit, be that what it will. -- In this sense
God encourages men, let their hearts be as sinful and opposite to him as they
will, to attend on the means of grace. He has so ordered things, that this is
the most likely way to escape the greatest evil, and be happy forever. So that
when they come to view things in any measure as they are, and are above all
things afraid of eternal destruction, and desirous of future happiness, they
will be induced from a principle of self love or selfishness even that very
principle that sets their hearts against God, and leads them into all the
wickedness they practice, with great care and anxiety to attend on these means.
The whole encouragement as laid before them lies in it is being the most hopeful
way to promote their interest, and answer the end which they are pursuing. P.
137.

Here indeed something is asserted; but how it weakens our argument, or proves
that men are encouraged to that the doing of which is sin, I do not see: Unless
the meaning be, "that God lets men know that attending the means of grace will
probably secure their happiness, at the expense of his own glory, and the
interest of the universe:" Which how wild and extravagant (...) assertion
soever it may seem is really implied in his scheme. For he h^les that
selfishness is the only principle of action in the unregenerate: That this
principle is in it is own nature enmity to being in general: That it is directly
opposite to benevolence: That the end it proposes is opposite to the interest
of being in general: That the unregenerate have no conception or desire of true
happiness. These things he inculcates abundantly. Now if we compare these
things with what he has said about God's encouraging an attendance on means,
this must appear to be the sum of his doctrine, "Though the end which
unregenerate sinners aim at be directly opposite to the interest of being in
general; though the object they are pursuing be not true happiness or
salvation; yet God has so ordered things, that he lets them know that there is
encouragement, or ground of hope, that by attending the means of grace they may
obtain what they set up as the object of their pursuit; however opposite to his
own glory, to the good of being in general, and their own true happiness.
Though they are aiming at the worst end which can possibly be imagined; and
acting from a principle directly opposite to benevolence, yet when they come to
see things in any measure as they are, they find a real ground of hope, that by
attending on the means of grace they shall carry their point. And this view of
the case being exactly suited to touch and work upon their enmity against God
and being in general, which is the only principle of action they have, whereby
they can in their present state be prompted to do any thing, hence they are
moved with care and anxiety to attend on means." If this be the truth of the
matter I own our argument must fall, but if it does it will carry away with it
that apostolic maxim on which it is grounded, and even the pillars of revealed
and natural religion, leaving us afloat in the dismal abyss of manicheism or
atheism.

VIII. That it is the duty of the unregenerate to attend the means of grace
will further appear, if we consider the ends for which the ordinances of the
gospel were instituted, and it is precepts revealed to, and enjoined on, the
children of men. This important argument I will endeavor to open distinctly in
the order following.

1. Duties are enjoined in the word of God in order to some end besides or
beyond the bare performance of the actions required. They are required not
barely as debts or duties, but as means designed, and fitted to subserve the
ends and purposes of divine wisdom and goodness. This is especially evident
with respect to the means of grace. Thus an attendance to the word of God is
enjoined, as the means of obtaining divine knowledge, faith, conversion,
sanctification, consolation and the like: Consideration is enjoined, as a means
of escaping destruction: Prayer, as the means of obtaining needed blessings
temporal and spiritual: Striving, as the means of obtaining an entrance into
the strait gate: Seeking the Lord, as the means of finding him: Laboring for
the mean which endures to everlasting life, as the means of obtaining it. In
this respect the precepts of divine revelation, founded on the dispensation of
grace, differ from the injunctions of the law of nature. This requires duties
merely as right, or because due. That requires them in order to certain ends,
which the wisdom and goodness of God has connected with them, and designs by
means of them to accomplish.

2. Such an attendance to duties, as unregenerate sinners are capable of, may
and does answer some of those ends, for which these duties were enjoined in the
word of God. God had various ends in view in the institution of religious
ordinances, and giving out his commands to mankind; some of which respect
believers alone, some respect those who are to be regenerated and effectually
called, and some the world of mankind in general. By means of these precepts he
designed to restrain the outbreakings of wickedness in the unregenerate; to
direct and influence them to the practice of those virtues, whereby they might
be useful to others in the world, and obtain those temporal comforts and
advantages which he is willing they should here enjoy. And he designed
especially that those who are in due time to be effectually called, who by
nature are equally depraved with the rest of the world, might, while in their
unregenerate state, be in some measure restrained from the full indulgence of
their lusts. When they are ready to rush into such courses, as without a
miraculous interposition would undo them, and cast them out of the reach of
divine mercy, in the ordinary ways in which God is pleased to exercise it; then
the command meets their conscience like a flaming sword, and turns their
course. In this manner they are in some sort bound to their good behavior, and
kept within reach of those means, by which they are at length recovered from
darkness to light, and from the power of satan to God. And by thus bearing
God's yoke, though with the spirit of bondage, they are in some manner trained
to it, and fitted to walk and work in it the better when they receive the
spirit of adoption. This use of the divine commands, is well represented by the
great Calvin, as follows. Sed tamen haec coacta express^que justitia, etc. That
is in english, This forced and extorted righteousness is yet necessary for the
public community of mankind, the peace whereof is hereby consulted, while care
is taken that all things might not run into confusion, which would be the case,
if all were left at their full liberty. Besides, it is not unuseful to the
children of God to be under this discipline, while before their vocation, being
destitute of the spirit of sanctification, they are wanton in carnal folly. For
while through dread of divine vengeance they are withheld from external
profligacy, although being as yet unsubdued in their minds they make small
advances for the present, yet they are in some measure accustomed to bear the
yoke of righteousness; that when they are called they might not be altogether
rude and novices to discipline, as to a thing they a^e unacquainted with. This
office or use of the law the apostle seems properly to have touched, when he
declares, that the law was not made for a righteous man, but for the
unrighteous and disobedient, etc. 1 Timothy 1.9. For he shows that it is a
restraint on the triumphant lusts of the flesh, which would otherwise run at
large beyond measure. Some have need of a curb to hold them in, that they may
not so give the reins to their carnal wantonness as utterly to cast off all
regard to righteousness. For where the Spirit of God does not yet rule, there
lusts sometimes boil forth in such a manner, that the^e may be danger lest they
sink the mind subject to them into forgetfulness and contempt of God. And this
would be the case, if the Lord did not make use of this remedy against it.
Those therefore whom he has appointed to inherit his kingdom, if he does not
immediately regenerate, he keeps unto the time of his visitation by means of
the law under fear; not indeed that holy and pure fear which ought to be in his
children, but such as is useful to this purpose, that they may be trained up to
true piety, according to their present capacity: For whoever have lived any
time in ignorance of God, will confess that this has happened to them, that by
the curb of the law they might be held in some kind of fear and obedience to
God, till being regenerate by the spirit they might begin to love him. Instit.
Lib. 2. Cap. 7. Sect 10, 11. See also Turrettines Instit. loc. xi. quaest. 22.
Sect. 9. Alting. loc. commun. part 1. loc. 7.


To prepare those for regeneration who are in due time to be the subjects of
this grace, to keep them in a diligent attendance to those means whereby God is
wont to ingenerate faith and repentance in the hearts of his elect, is one end
for which an attendance on these means is prescribed to the hearers of the
gospel. They are therefore commanded to search the scriptures: To hear the
preached word: To pray for the pardon of sin; and for the holy Spirit, for all
those purposes (I suppose) for which he is ordinarily bestowed; one of which is
to be the efficient principle of regeneration and conversion: To strive to
enter in at the strait gate: To consider the issue of impenitent wickedness,
lest God fear them in pieces: To labor not for the meat which perishes, but
for that meat which endures to everlasting life. By these and such like
commands, which God has in his word directed to the hearers of the gospel in
general, without limiting them to qualified subjects, he impresses their
consciences with a conviction, that an attendance to these means is their
present duty, whether they are regenerate or not; and that a neglect of such
attendance, according to their present light and ability, will be an act of
high disobedience and contempt of God, and most dangerous to their own souls;
so that they dare not live in the neglect of these means. And when they are
tempted to cast off fear, and return to their former courses; they are bridled
and kept back by these commands, and influenced, notwithstanding the
reluctances of their vain inclinations, to continue in the use of the common
means of conversion.

All who maintain that there is ordinarily a work of illumination and
conviction, preparatory to regeneration, hold that this is wrought in the soul,
in and by a serious attendance to the means of grace. It is also by attending
to these means that the first acts of spiritual life are drawn and put forth.
The ordinances of the gospel were designed to awaken humble and prepare men for
the grace of regeneration; to be instrumental of working faith in them, whereby
they we first savingly united to Christ. Now that attendance on means whereby
men are prepared for regeneration, must of necessity be previous to it. That
attendance whereby faith is first obtained, cannot be an act of acceptable
obedience, according to the new covenant; since faith is implied in every act
of gospel holiness. Such an attendance on means then as goes before
regeneration and conversion, may and does answer an important end for which the
ordinances of the gospel were instituted.

That these commands, enjoining on the hearers of the gospel an attendance on
the means of grace, were given to excite the unregenerate as well as others to
serious endeavors of obedience, may be argued from God's making use of these
commands to keep them waiting on him in the way of his blessing. For if there
be any weight in the common argument from final causes, we may justly argue
that these commands were given with a design to answer all these wise and good
ends, to which they appear so well adapted, and to which daily experience shows
that they are ordinarily applied. Therefore,

3. Since such obedience to these commands as the unregenerate are capable of
yielding, answers some of those ends for which these commands were given; it
appears that such obedience is enjoined in and by them. For a command has no
power or tendency to influence the conduct of men, otherwise than by binding
them to such a behavior on their peril. It is no otherwise fitted to restrain
the wickedness of sinners, and prompt them to a laudable and useful behavior,
than by forbidding the one, and enjoining the other. It is a conviction of duty
imprinted on the conscience by the command, and of the danger of going
presumptuously contrary to it, that binds men to their good behavior. It was
then one design of God's promulging those precepts which have been mentioned,
to impress the hearers of the gospel in general with a conviction that it is
their duty to attend to them, according to their present ability; and by this
conviction to put the unregenerate as well as others upon endeavors of
reformation, and an attendance on the means of conversion, as has been
declared. We must therefore either say that these commands require such
endeavors of obedience in the unregenerate, as they were designed by God to
produce; or else we must say that God in giving these commands designed that
they should be instrumental unto the reformation of men's lives, and to excite
and keep them in an attendance to the means of grace, by imprinting a false and
deceitful conviction of duty on the consciences of the unregenerate. But since
it is so necessary on various accounts that men should think it to be their
duty to reform their lives, and attend the means of conversion, though
unregenerate; and without such a conviction some of the wise and good ends of
God's giving men th^se commands cannot be answered by them: Why on my seek to
persuade unregenerate sinners that these things are not their duty, and so as
much as in them lies frustrate God's wise and good designs? If any imagine
themselves to have found that these designs of divine goodness and wisdom are
ca^^ed on by delusion, I should think they had acted more advisedly to have
kept such discoveries to themselves.

I do not find that our author has directly attempted to answer this argument
from the end of God's prescribing duties to the unregenerate, something however
I find capable of being framed into an objection; which is therefore to be
considered.

It is said, that supposing the command or God required an attendance on means
previous and preparatory to regeneration, and the sinner should be urged hereto
from this consideration, it would not have the least influence upon him, or be
any motive to him to comply. He is by the supposition only seeking his own
interest, and cares nothing about God or duty to him, in themselves considered,
or for their own sakes. P. 149. Therefore it seems it would be in vain for God
to make use of commands, to influence the conduct of such persons.

Answ. 1. The commands of God carry other motives of obedience with them,
besides the will and authority of the great legislator. They are enforced with
most important sanctions, which were designed to have their influence into the
conduct of men. Our author says that "the authority of a law lies wholly in the
threatening." This indeed is a grievous mistake. Yet on the other hand it must
be owned, that the threatening is one reasonable inducement to comply with it is
requirement. Men often submit to the will of the higher powers, for wrath, as
well as for conscience sake. A servant will obey his master's commands if he
fears the effects of his displeasure though he may not love him, or have any
regard to his will considered simply in itself. The commands God gave to the
Israelites had an influence on the behavior of those whose hearts were not
right with him. As soon as men know that they are commanded to do any
particular actions, they may know that it is not safe for them to disobey. Is
it not strange that men should at one time say (in effect) that the threatening
is the only thing that binds men to obey the laws of God; and at another time,
that the command of God can have no influence on those who are moved only by
it is sanctions? It is not in vain to press the commands of God on sinners, to
move them to a compliance with their duty, if any thing essential to the
commands (as the sanctions are allowed to be) tends to move them to a
compliance.

2. It will be impossible to convince those, who view things in any measure as
they are, that such a conduct as is not their duty has any probable tendency to
promote their final interest. It would be a most irregular constitution of
things, unsuitable to the wisdom and holiness of God, if that which was
directly contrary to duty, the doing of which was mere sin, should have such a
direct tendency to promote a man's final and eternal interest, as that he
should have a reasonable encouragement to do it. I know sin may be overruled
for good; but I deny that the word or providence of God holds forth any
encouragement to do what is simply evil, that good may come to the evil doer.
However then sinners may disregard the consideration that such a conduct is
their duty, yet it will be impossible for us on good grounds to persuade them,
that it will probably be conducive to their final good, unless we can assure
them that it is agreeable to their duty. Otherwise this doctrine must be
maintained, viz. That "sin is through the divine interposition an advantage to
the sinner, AND THIS IS AN ENCOURAGEMENT TO IT." Mr. H. in his great wisdom (to
compliment him again in his own style p. 150.
) has devised this method of treating with sinners, to encourage them to attend
on means, though it be not their duty, and though their doing so is mere sin,
by persuading them that this will be for their final interest. In this he is
guilty of the absurdity of supposing that a man may have just reason to think
it will be for his final advantage to do that, the doing of which is sin.

3. There is in human nature a moral sense, which perceives the fitness and
beauty of a creature's being obedient to the commands of it is creator and
rightful sovereign. There is such a sense of duty imprinted on men's
consciences, from a natural view of the excellency greatness and majesty of
God, as disposes them to some kind of obedience to his will, though destitute
of a spiritual discernment and taste. It is therefore Mr. H's supposition, not
ours, that the unregenerate act merely from self-love. But this matter has been
before considered.

Corollary. When a divine precept enjoins any human performances or endeavors
as means in order to some further end, such a manner of performance as is
adapted to subserve the end proposed is thereby enjoined, however short it may
fall of what we are in duty obliged to. It is certain that such doings as are
very defective and worthless considered as duties, may be useful and important
considered as means. The design and direct meaning of such commands as require
the use of means, is rather to be determined from a due consideration of the
ends to which such means have relation, and what a manner of performance is fit
to answer such ends, than from considering what is the whole of our duty in
this matter, and in what manner we must behave, in order to answer fully our
obligations. Such a manner of attending means as is sufficient for those ends
for which they are principally enjoined, may not be sufficient to acquit us, as
having fully discharged our duty. When God commanded the Israelites to go
forward when the Egyptians had pursued them to the red sea, his direct design
was to prescribe a means of their deliverance from the enemy. And when we
consider the end for which he so commanded them, we must conclude the meaning
was, that they should go forward according to their present ability, though he
knew that they were a rebellious generation. And though they would not obey in
the manner they ought, unless they did it in the exercise of perfect love to
and trust in God; yet they might obey in such a manner as to answer the end for
which they were ordered to proceed, without any exercises of holy trust or
love. And we may truly say, as the scriptures do in like cases, that they did
as the Lord commanded them; they did what was their duty, and what they were
required to do, according to the true meaning; at the same time that they did
not act from such holy principles, and for such holy ends as they ought to have
done. So when Christ commanded the multitudes to sit down that he might feed
them, we justly conclude from the end for which he s^^^dered them, that his
meaning was that they should put themselves in a convenient order to have food
distributed among them, whether they truly believed on him or not. And when
they sat down, though many of them no doubt in unbelief, they obeyed his orders
in their true meaning; and the direct end of his so ordering them was answered,
though they did not do all that was their duty. So when believers are commanded
to show forth their faith by their works, to give diligence to make their
calling and election sure, to work out their salvation, we justly conclude,
that these precepts require such sincere though imperfect endeavors of
obedience as they are capable of in this life. For such endeavors are well
fitted to answer the ends for which they are required, though they are never
conducted in all respects as they ought to be. And in like manner the
endeavors of the unregenerate in attending on means, are adapted to answer the
ends for which they are required so to do. And the true and primary meaning of
those commands which prescribe the use of such means to them, is to be
estimated from the ends for which such an attendance is prescribed: And it must
be concluded such a manner of attendance as is conducive to such ends is
required, how far short soever it may be of a discharge of their whole duty. If
nothing short of a full and perfect discharge of duty were prescribed as the
means of obtaining spiritual or temporal blessings, such means would be so high
above the reach of man in his depraved state, that he never could hope for any
advantage from endeavors to use them, though it be his own fault that he does
not perfectly fulfill his duty.

But for the further illustration and vindication of this argument, and of the
evidence it gives to the point in hand, some scripture precepts which we have
had occasion to mention must be further attended to.

The words of our Savior to the Jews, of whom he testifies that they would not
come to him that they might have life, are in this view worthy of notice.
"Search the scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are
they which testify of me." Joh 5.39. It is objected by Mr. H that the text in
the original may as wel^ be rendered indicatively, ye do search; that this sense
is thought to be countenanced by the following words, and ye will not come to
me that ye might have life; and that it is preferred by most of the noted
critics on the original; in proof of which Pool's Synopsis is referred to.

This may be of weight against our making use of this text in the present
dispute; but it will not really weaken our argument, which way soever it may be
understood; since there are other texts not liable to this exception, as full
to our purpose as this is according to the English translation. Our Author
allows enough for our purpose in his observations on this text. The force of
our argument depends on other points of more importance than this criticism.
And therefore I have chosen to cast my remarks on this point into the margin,
that they might not interrupt our attention to other matters.

It is true the word (ereunate) is the same in the indicative and imperative
mood Yet I think as much and more may be said in favor of our English
translation, than for the other reading. Mr. H. mentions the next following
words as favoring the sense by him proposed. The reader must judge for
himself. I cannot see much if any thing in it. He says further, that most of
the noted critics translate it indicatively, and refers us to Pool as an
evidence. But Pool says no such thing. He quotes four or five that have so
rendered it. And he quotes as many who have rendered it imperatively. And I
suppose, from what I have observed, that the greater part of modern expositors
and divines take it in the same sense. It is well known to those who have read
the controversies between the protestants and papists, that this text is
commonly improved to show that the people ought to search the scriptures. The
learned Piscator, though he renders the word indicatively, yet he not only
allows the other way of rendering it, but makes this notable concession in
favor of it. It must be confessed that the verb at first fight seems to be put
in the imperative mood; since the pronoun (humeis) is not prefixed, as indeed
it ought to be (to the indicative) according to the custom not only of the
Greeks, but Hebrews, whose manner of expression is usual with John, and the
other apostles. Comment. in loc. It was taken imperatively by the ancients,
particularly by Irenaeus, Origin, Chrysostom, learned Greek fathers; as also by
Augustine: and in the most ancient Syriac version. Our translators therefore
seem to have had good reason for rendering the word in this manner. And I have
accordingly chosen to follow their translation. But if it should be thought
precarious, our argument may be well maintained without it, as will soon appear.




Our argument from this text is as follows. Searching the scriptures is an
instrumental duty, conducing not only to the edification of believers, but also
to prepare men for the state of regeneration, to instruct awaken and humble
sinners, and by the blessing of God ingenerate faith in their hearts. It is an
ordinance designed, and ordinarily blessed by God for the conversion of
sinners, and for producing in them those preparatory dispositions which usually
make way for this great change.

When therefore our Savior directed the Jews to search the scriptures, it is
not to be doubted, but he prescribed this as a means in order to those ends, to
which an attendance to this ordinance is ordinarily conducive; and primarily
for those purposes which were in the first place necessary to be answered, in
order to their being savingly benefited by them. And as they appear to have
been not only unregenerate, but in a great measure unprepared for the exercises
of repentance and faith, being filled with prejudices against Christ, and
insensible of the sinfulness and danger of their present state; it was in the
first place necessary that they be led into juster apprehensions of things,
that they be awakened, and convinced of their need of a spiritual physician;
and made to attend more seriously to the evidences of Christ's divine mission.
This was the first step toward their obtaining a saving knowledge of him as
Mediator, in order to which they are directed to search the scriptures. It must
not be thought that Jesus in directing the Jews to the use of means, in order
to their coming to the saving knowledge of him, should wholly overlook the
first or next end, to which the means he prescribed were ordained; and have
respect only to a remoter and consequent end, which cannot ordinarily be
attained without the intervention of the former. If a preparatory work of
awakening and conviction, by means of the scriptures, was needful in order to
their believing on him to salvation; then this was the primary or next end for
which he directed them to search the scriptures. And if they were unbelievers,
it was first necessary that they obtain faith by attending to the scriptures,
before they be thereby edified and confirmed in faith. In short, Christ
directed them to search the scriptures for every necessary and useful purpose
which they are fitted to subserve, that they might be saved through faith in
him. But an attendance to the scriptures is conducive to valuable purposes
previous to regeneration and faith: These are therefore respected, and that
primarily and immediately, when the unregenerate and unbelievers are called
upon to attend this duty.

Now whoever exhorts others to search the scriptures as the means of preparing
them for the grace of regeneration, and ingenerating faith in them, must
necessarily mean such an attendance to this ordinance as they are capable of
previous to regeneration and faith. For as the means must in nature go before
the end, so whoever directs to any action or endeavor, as means, cannot
without manifest absurdity intend such endeavors as contain or presuppose the
end for which they are appointed. This would be, as if a physician should
prescribe such means in order to recover his patient to health, as cannot
possibly be used unless he is first in good health. Besides, there is nothing
in the expression here used that would lead any one to suspect, that such an
attendance and no other must be intended, as presupposes regeneration and faith
in Christ; or in short any other manner of searching the scriptures than they
had a present or next power for, though unbelievers. This is fully granted by
Mr. H. when he says, the word in the text may as well be translated
indicatively "ye do search;" unless he shall say that the same word necessarily
means a holy act in the imperative mood, and an unholy act in the indicative.
On the whole, it appears to have been our Savior's design, to persuade the
Jews to search the scriptures diligently according to their present light and
ability, though unregenerate. And he enforces his exhortation with a reason,
which was suited to persuade those who believed not on him to an immediate
compliance, v^z. because they thought the scriptures contained the words of
eternal life. And this is a further evidence, that the duty here prescribed was
what they might be persuaded to, while unregenerate and unbelieve^s.

Our Savior's words, Luke 13 ^24. are another proof that the unregenerate ought
to give an earnest attendance to the means of conversion. Strive to enter in at
the strait gate, for many I say unto you shall seek to enter in and shall not
be able. Our author endeavors to prove that by the strait gate is meant the
entrance into heaven, and not the entrance into a state of grace or holiness.
Striving, he says, in scripture signifies the exercises of true christians. But
it does not appear that striving bears this appropriate sense more than
seeking. He says further, that the unregenerate never truly strive for what
they do not truly desire. But this will equally conclude against seeking what
they do not desire. Yet the text says that many will seek in vain to enter in
at the strait gate. Other reasons are mentioned (and more are in reserve) which
seem not to be conclusive. However I see no necessity of contending about this
matter. But I say, if our Savior exhorts the heaters of the gospel to strive
for salvation, then he exhorts to all those endeavors which are ordinarily
needful and subservient to this end. For the word strive, meaning no more than
earnest endeavor, is to be understood as including all necessary endeavors.
Now some endeavors in the use of means are ordinarily necessary previous to
regeneration and conversion. For Mr. H. owns that it is in the way of diligent
and painful attendance on appointed means that men are usually prepared for
regeneration, and are enabled and persuaded to turn to God by faith in Christ.
This is that striving which it is in the first place necessary that an
unregenerate sinner be persuaded to in order to salvation; and therefore the
exhortation in the text, as addressed to such, primarily enjoins that striving
which is in the first place necessary for persons of this character; that is,
such endeavors as are in order to regeneration and conversion, and so are in
nature previous thereto. When a series of endeavors of a different kind are in
their place and order all necessary and conducive to a certain end, not only
the last link of the chain, which is immediately connected with this end, but
all the other links whose connection with it is more remote are really of the
nature of means in order to it. And any one directing to the use of means in
general in order to such end, must be understood to direct to the whole series
of necessary means, in their proper place; and primarily to that the use of
which is in the first place necessary, though but mediately and remotely, and
perhaps in itself not infallibly connected with the end proposed.

The design of this exhortation is to excite the hearers of the gospel to
strive without delay, before the door of heaven is shut against them. Many of
these are unregenerate; who must therefore either defer striving until they are
regenerate, or they must strive in such a manner as they have a present power
to do. True it is, that their inability to act in a holy manner does not excuse
the defective manner of their attendance on means; and they ought to be humbly
sensible of it. But it is as true, that in their present state they will not
and cannot attend on means otherwise than in a defective manner. And shall
their inability to do their duty in a holy manner, which is itself culpable,
cause that it shall not be their duty to do it at all, unless they do it in a
holy manner? No surely. Do the thing as far as you can, (says Mr. Shepard) else
if you owe another a debt, you will not pay, because not for a good end.
Parable of the ten Virgins, part 1. chap. 7. sect. 5.
Such a defective manner of attendance on means is in it is place useful and
necessary, to restrain men from many sins, to prevent a stupid disregard of
their eternal interests, a profane contempt of God and religion, to keep them
in the ordinary way of God's blessing, to prepare them for the state of
regeneration, with the consequent duties of the christian life. It appears then
well worthy of divine wisdom and goodness to command and encourage such
endeavors, which however defective and worthless, considered as duties, are in
their place subservient to the designs of his mercy.

To the same purpose are our Savior's words to the Jews, who followed him
because they had eaten of the loaves. Joh. 6.27. Labor not for the meat which
perishes, but for that meat which endures to everlasting life. These words I
have elsewhere explained to this effect. The meat which endures to everlasting
life is the same with the bread of life mentioned ver. 35. And this is Christ;
who is so called by an expressive metaphor, because he is the object of a
christian's faith, that faith by which he lives, which is as it were his daily
food. To labor for this food which nourishes the soul to everlasting life, is
to use the appointed means for obtaining a saying knowledge of and faith in
Christ, with union to and in erest in him. Dr Collins in the continuation of
Pool's annotations (which I had not consulted when I wrote what is here
referred t^) understood the phrase in a larger sense. Under the notion of that
meat which endures to everlasting life (says he) unquestionably comes
whatsoever is necessary by God's revealed will, that we may have in us the
hopes of glory here and may actually enter into that glory hereafter. Such as
are first, the knowledge of the gospel, then believing of it, and the
acceptance of that Savior, and way of salvation, which God has revealed for
lost sinners, and that holiness of life which God ha^h made necessary to it.
Though I see no sufficient reason to correct the sense I formerly gave of these
words, yet if any should think the exposition of this learned author is to be
preferred, our argument from the text would suffer no disadvantage either in
respect of strength or plainness.
To this the unregenerate are exhorted. An attendance on all the means which
God has appointed, and encouraged sinners to use that they may obtain this
bread of life, is here enjoined. Now there is an attendance on means ordinarily
necessary to prepare sinners for the work of regeneration, to give them the
first knowledge of Christ, and so persuade and enable them savingly to believe
on him, and turn to God through him. As therefore the word labor properly
signifies any kind of endeavors, it must be understood to include all those
endeavors in the use of means, which are necessary, or any way conducive to
the end proposed; as well those which are previous to regeneration and
conversion, as those which are afterward to take place. Yea those endeavors
are primarily intended, which are in the first place proper for persons in the
state of those Jews here spoken to; that is, such endeavors as are preparatory
to regeneration and conversion. In my sermons from this text, I had argued,
that Christ exhorted the unbelieving Jews to endeavors in order to obtain
faith in him, and therefore since the use of means is in nature prior to their
end, it must be concluded that he exhorted to such endeavors as unbelievers
were capable of. It was same surprise to me to find that Mr. H. had so entirely
mistaken my design, which I then thought, and still think, was obvious enough,
as to represent the argument in this absurd light; "that because these Jews
were disinclined to any thing truly good, therefore they were not exhorted to
any thing contrary to their present inclination;" ^ike which there is nothing
from the beginning to the end of the book he has in view, which acknowledges
and supposes, that sinners may be and are commanded to do that for which they
have neither a present inclination nor habitual power. And though I have
endeavored to prove that an attendance on the means of grace is enjoined on
the unregenerate by the divine command, yet I never a^gue their obligation to
such an attendance as they are capable of while unregenerate, merely because
the command is directed to such persons, or because the duty is enjoined on
such; But I argue from their obligation to comply with each part of the duty
separately, as well as with the who^e in a^l ^^s circumstances conjunctly. I
argue from the end to which the duties here exhorted to bear the relation of
means; and the absurdity of involving the end in the prescription of means
order to i^. It may be the present duty of a man to be possessed of the end,
for the obtainment of which he is required to use means. But it would be absurd
to prescribe the end as the means of itself. When our author comes to see that
his flourish took it is rise from a too gross mist^ke of his own, it will I hope
lead him to some useful, though perhaps not very pleasant reflections.


In the same manner we might argue from other texts: But these are I suppose
sufficient, unless our author's exceptions should be found heavy enough to turn
the scale against us. Let us then attend to them. Says he,

1. Our Savior does not direct the Jews to search the scriptures with all their
prejudices, and in the exercise of enmity against him, and with a desire and
design to prove from them that he was an impostor. P. 128. And the same answer
is equally applicable to what has been said from the exhortations to labor,
and strive, etc.

Answer. Our Savior did not direct the Jews to be prejudiced against him, and
hate him, while searching the scriptures. Nor did he direct them to be
unregenerate or unbelieving. But that he exhorted them to search, and strive,
and labor according to their present ability, notwithstanding their unbelief,
unregeneracy, and even prejudices and enmity against him, we have good reason
to conclude; since their serious attendance to these things appears to be a
very fit means of removing their prejudices and enmity against him, and by the
blessing of God leading them to a true knowledge of and faith in him. We have
not the least shadow of evidence that he thought an attendance on means could
be of no advantage to deliver them from their prejudices and evil dispositions.
What reason have we then to doubt, but that the removal of these impediments to
their conversion, so far as they really took place in the minds of his hearers,
was one end, for which he directed them to the use of means? And then we may be
sure that he did not intend solely or primarily such an attendance as implies
or presupposes the removal of all these impediments.

It is added, They ought to have searched the scriptures with a heart ready to
embrace and practice the truth. (Who doubts it?) And therefore our Savior
doubtless injoins this [only] upon them. This consequence we must deny, until
our author shall make it appear, that such precepts as injoin an attendance on
the means of grace undoubtedly require nothing short of sinless perfection, as
necessary to those ends for which they are prescribed, for this is no more than
men's duty. Until then I shall hold it as a sure maxim, that such actions as are
very defective, and fall far short of that perfection which they ought to have,
considered as duties, may yet be very useful as means, and well adapted to
answer important purposes in subserviency to the conversion and salvation of
men. And therefore when the scriptures direct men to duties, as means of
obtaining spiritual or temporal blessings, we ought not to think that the means
prescribed as necessary to these ends must needs include a perfect conformity
to the law in all respects, (though this is no more than our duty) but such a
performance of duties as is fit to subserve these ends is, I should think,
doubtless prescribed, though much short of what we ought to do. If I should
say, that men ought to search the scriptures and perform other duties with a
sinless perfection of love and obedience to God, and therefore our Savior
doubtless enjoins nothing short of this, as the means of coming to the
knowledge of him as mediator; which he knew no man would ever do in this state
of imperfection; and so proceed to cashier unregenerate and regenerate
endeavors together, would it not be as good reasoning as this of Mr. H's?

But it is further pleaded, when Christ tells them to search the scriptures, he
directs them to do it disposed and inclined to do the will of God, and not with
a disposition directly opposite to that which was necessary in order to answer
the end proposed. That such a search of the scriptures is intended as was
necessary and conducive, in it is proper place, to answer the end proposed, I
readily grant. But that a regenerate heart in searching the scriptures, and
attending the other means of grace, is not necessary in order to their
answering some good purposes, in subserviency to men's coming to the knowledge
of Christ as mediator, (which Mr. H. grants was the end for which Christ
directed to search the scriptures) has been I suppose proved; and is upon the
matter conceded by those who allow that there is a preparatory work to
regeneration, wrought in the soul by means of the word of God.

Our author's first exception is, I would hope, now removed. But if this fails,
he has another at hand. Says he, When Christ directs and commands to seek first
the kingdom of God, and labor for the meat that endures to everlasting life,
he doubtless directs to that seeking and labor by which men will certainly
obtain what they seek and labor after. P. 128. And in another place he says,
It seems to me very dishonorable to Christ, and contrary to his wisdom and
faithfulness and goodness, to suppose that he has given any direction and
command to sinners in order to their salvation, which they may punctually
observe and do, and yet miss of salvation. Therefore he concludes that no
endeavors of the unregenerate are commanded or directed to.

Answ. There are many directions given to men, and various duties prescribed as
means some way conducive to their conversion or salvation. If men are ever so
exact and punctual in observing some directions, and attending to some means
directed to by Christ, but utterly negligent of others; is it any dishonor to
his wisdom goodness and faithfulness, if they miss of salvation? Hearing the
gospel is one of the means of salvation, but not the only one; we must also
believe, and obey it. Studying the word of God is the means of attaining to all
that knowledge which is necessary to our glorifying God: But it is not a single
transient act of attention hereto that will be sufficient to furnish us for
every good work. A course of diligent application to the means of instruction
is necessary for this purpose. That labor and striving enjoined on men by
Christ may be taken two ways, 1. In the compound sense, as including all those
endeavors which are required in order to the end proposed, whether previous or
consequent to regeneration. Now it is not to be thought that any one who thus
labors and strives, that is, who punctually observes all the directions Christ
has given in order to salvation will miss of it. 2. This labor and striving
may be taken in the divided sense, signifying any particular endeavor, or act
of attendance to any one of the means of grace and salvation. Now though each
particular endeavor in the use of means is in itself a compliance with our
Savior's direction, which prescribes a diligent attendance to all, and each of
the means subservient to the end proposed; which includes at the same time each
transient act, and a constant persevering course or series of acts; yet there
is no difficulty at all in supposing, that men may in some particular instances
comply with our Savior's direction, and yet neglecting some of the necessary
means of salvation may miss of it.

But it may be asked, if a man labors and strives as well as he can while
unregenerate, must we not necessarily conclude from the goodness and
faithfulness of Christ that he will certainly attain to a saving conversion? I
answer 1. This does not necessarily follow. I do not know that there is any
promise in the gospel of regenerating and converting grace to the endeavors of
the unregenerate. God may oblige us to wait upon him for his blessing, in the
diligent use of appointed means, and let us know that we have encouragement to
hope for a blessing in this way, and no other; and yet reserve to himself a
sovereign liberty of granting or withholding his blessing. This he has done in
other cases. He has commanded us to train up our children in the way wherein
they should go, in hopes that when they are old they will not depart from it;
to use means for the preservation of life and health; to labor working with
our hands, that we may have to give to him that needs; and yet has given us
no absolute assurance, that our endeavors shall secure to us the ends they are
fitted to subserve. An unpromised blessing may be necessary to render the means
effectual; and yet it may well become the wisdom and goodness of God to command
and encourage us to use the means. Surely Mr. H. will not say that it is
dishonorable to the faithfulness of God to grant unpromised favors, by
blessing means ordinarily, though not always successful. Nor can I think he
will, on second thought, find any thing more unworthy of the divine
perfections, in requiring us to use such means, in order to obtain such
unpromised favors. 2. I do not think there ever was a sinner that attended the
means of conversion as well as he was able while unregenerate. It seems then to
be a matter of meet speculation, how we resolve a case, which we have no reason
to think ever was, or will be found among the children of men. If it should be
supposed, that those who strive in all respects as well as they can while
unregenerate, shall assuredly obtain converting grace; yet I think all that are
the subjects of this grace must own, that it was to them a sovereign unpromised
favor. But 3. If it did indeed follow from our doctrine (as it does not) that
there is a sure connection between sinners attending God's appointed means
according to their best ability, and their obtaining converting grace; this
would be no confutation of it. For we have much clearer and surer evidence that
unregenerate sinners are commanded to attend the means of grace, than we have
that their best endeavors may fail of issuing in their conversion. Our
doctrine will therefore sooner prove this consequence to be true, than this
consequence will prove our doctrine to be false. Our doctrine is supported by
direct and positive evidence: But all that can be said against an inseparable
connection between sinners attending the means of grace according to their
present capacity, and obtaining special and saving grace, is, that it wants
proof. Mr. H. has indeed attempted a direct and positive proof, that there are
no promises of special grace to the doings of the unregenerate. But his
arguments only prove that there are no promises of salvation to such doings;
which is quite a different point. This may be denied, quite consistently with
the supposition of a sure connection between a sinner's attending the means of
conversion, and obtaining converting grace. It is thought an easy task to show
the insufficiency of his arguments to his proposed design; and that he
undertook needlessly an anus probandi to which he was unequal. Be this as it
may, the issue of the present debate, and the force of the argument we have
been insisting on, is not affected by any thing he has said.

Having thus answered to our author's objections, it may here be proper to
offer some remarks on what he has said in confutation of a maxim, which he says
many hold to, and build much upon; namely, that whatever is said to the
unregenerate in scripture by way of exhortation and command, can require and
propose nothing but what they may do, and yet continue unregenerate. P. 133. I
know of none who told to this doctrine; there may however be many for any thing
I know. If there are, I wish he had argued more to the purpose in confutation
of it, than the most of what he has said appears to be. But indeed I cannot
help suspecting that he has mistook the meaning of those he disputes against.
If he has, it is not the only mistake of this kind that he has made. I will
therefore endeavor to state the matter plainly as I understand it, and then
consider his arguments.

The requirements of God's commands may be considered in a twofold view, viz.
as duties, or debts of obedience simply; and as means, designed and fitted to
subserve the purposes of divine wisdom and goodness. Divine commands,
considered as mere declarations of duty, oblige all mankind to perfect
obedience; and also to every supposable degree of holy obedience, however short
of perfection; and also to each part of the duty in the compound sense; however
such part taken by itself may not contain whatever is implied in an act of
perfect, or sincere evangelical obedience. In this view the law, and each
command is to be preached and inculcated on all, in it is full length and
breadth, as duty. Thus the precepts of the gospel requiring repentance, faith,
new obedience, external reformation, attending on means, are to be urged as the
present duty, of all to whom the gospel is preached. And though it is certain
that no man in this world will or can comply with these precepts, with that
perfection of obedience in all respects which is his duty, yet they who have a
principle of true holiness may, by the assistance of special grace, have a
sincere respect to all God's commands; and this is their duty. And though the
unregenerate have not a next power to yield sincere evangelical obedience to
all or any of God's commands, yet they can, by God's common assistance, do many
things required, as to the substance and matter, and this is their duty. But
their not doing these things in a holy manner is their sin; and a regenerate
person's not doing his duty in a perfect manner is his sin; for which both are
equally inexcuseable.

But if we consider duties as means appointed by God to subserve the purposes
of his goodness to the children of men; then we say, 1. That perfect conformity
to the rule of our duty not being an appointed means of salvation is not, as
such, prescribed to any: That exercises of true faith not being appointed means
to unbelievers of obtaining a saving knowledge of, and faith in Christ, are
not, as means to this end, prescribed to any unbeliever: That the exercises of
a holy principle not being the appointed means of preparing the soul for the
infusion of a principle of holiness are not, as such, prescribed to any
unregenerate sinner. 2. God has not enjoined on any the impracticable task of
exercising supernatural powers or principles before they are furnished with
them, as the means of obtaining any blessings temporal or spiritual. To
prescribe impossible means would be the same thing as to prescribe none. Faith
and repentance are means of salvation only to those who are enabled to believe
and repent. And commands to believe and repent, in order to salvation, do not
require men to do these duties by the powers of nature, but by the assistance
of special grace. Such commands are designed, as moral inducements to excite
and draw forth into act the principle or power for such exercises, communicated
to the soul by the holy Spirit. Yet, 3. The hearers of the gospel are to be
immediately called to believe and repent; and these commands and exhortations
are to be enforced with a promise of pardon and salvation if they comply with
them, and a threatening of damnation if they remain impenitent and unbelievers.
For this is the immediate duty of all, whether regenerate or not. And the
inculcation of it, by the blessing of God, is a means of good both to saints
and sinners. The former are hereby stirred up to renewed exercises of faith and
repentance. And in the la^^er the work of conviction and humiliation may,
through the influence of the holy Spirit, be promoted. Hereby they are led into
a just view of the misery and danger of a state of sin; and are excited
earnestly to implore the mercy of God, whose grace alone can renew and sanctify
their natures, and work in them that faith and repentance without which they
cannot be saved; and diligently to attend on all the appointed means of
conversion. Besides, there is reason to hope, that the effectual influences of
the holy Spirit will accompany these exhortations to some, enabling and
persuading them to a saving compliance. And finally the exhortations to believe
and repent imply, by necessary consequence, an obligation to something which
men have a power for while unregenerate: That is, a serious attendance to the
means of grace; as shall hereafter be shown. But 4* Some things are prescribed
in scripture, as means conducive to the spiritual and temporal good of men,
which they have a next power to comply with while unregenerate; as has been
shown. These things are not only the immediate duty, but the next means, to
which the hearers of the gospel are called to attend without delay, according
to their present ability, whether they are regenerate or not. The performance
of these duties, as to the substance, is in the power of men, by God's common
assistance; and this is absolutely prescribed, as means tending to their
spiritual good. The performance of these things in a holy manner, is prescribed
as next means of obtaining spiritual blessings conditionally; that is, if they
are furnished with a principle or power enabling them to such a manner of
performance. But a holy manner of performance, though it be the present duty of
all the hearers of the gospel, and though it be the necessary means of
salvation to all, yet it is not absolutely prescribed, as the next means of
obtaining spiritual blessings, to men while unregenerate. For, as was said,
acts of holiness, as means of salvation, are prescribed to men to be done not
by the powers of nature, but by the assistance of special grace. When therefore
the unregenerate are in scripture called to an immediate attendance to such
means as they have a next power to attend on, by God's common assistance; the
absolute and primary intendment of such exhortations is, that they should do it
seriously and diligently, according to their present capacity. I add 5. That
God's denying special and effectual grace to those who are favored with the
outward means, is a penal consequence of their neglecting to do what they had a
next power to do in a way of attendance on means; and this neglect is
accordingly to be considered as the principal cause and occasion of their
eternal ruin. And consequently, though free grace is the original cause of men's
salvation, yet not unregeneracy simply considered, nor the denial of special
grace, but free will abused is the original proper cause of their perdition.
These things are required of us in order to regeneration, and it is in the
power of our own wills to comply with them: And we may observe concerning them,
that the omission of them, the neglect of men in them, is the principal
occasion and cause of the eternal ruin of the souls of the generality of them
to whom, or amongst whom the gospel is preached. This is the condemnation that
light is come into the world, but men loved darkness rather than light, because
their deeds are evil. Joh 3.19. The generality of men know full well that they
do in this matter no more what they are able, than what they should. All
pleadable pretenses of inability and weakness are far from them. They cannot
but know here, and shall be forced to confess hereafter, that it was merely
from their own cursed sloth, with love of the world and sin, that they were
diverted from a diligent attendance on the means of conversion, and the
sedulous exercise of their minds about them Owen on the Spirit p. 193.

It is true man has not a power to believe and repent: But yet withal I say he
has a power to do those things upon the neglect of which God denies him
ability to believe and repent. Dr. Preston's, 9th sermon on Romans 1.19.20.

God is justified in the denial of his special grace to those who do not make a
due use of his common gifts and graces. And indeed here will lie men's
damnation, because they do not make a just use of that common grace which they
have, and might make a better use of than they do. If they would be faithful in
that, God would not deny them the true riches. Collins's Continuation of Pool's
Annot. on Luke 16.11.

It does not appear that God does condemn any man simply for not being
regenerate, but for not using the means appointed to such an end, for not
avoiding those si^s which hindered his regeneration, and which might have been
avoided by him if he would, though indeed every unregenerate man will be
condemned. Our Savior in the last judgment does not charge men with their
unregeneracy, but with their omissions of what they might have done, and that
easily; and commissions which they might have avoided, Mat. 25.41. Charnock's
Works, Vol. 2. p. 106.

The cause of men's final and everlasting ruin may be referred, in one view of
it, to God's withholding those gracious influences, which if they had been
imparted would indeed have subdued the greatest perverseness. But his
withholding these is not merely an arbitrary act, but a just punishment of men's
wickedness, and of their obstinate folly, in trifling with the means of grace,
and grieving his spirit until it was provoked to withdraw. Doddridge on
Regeneration, Sermon. 7.

To the same purpose speak the ancient Fathers, viz. Irenaeus, Clement,
Chrysostom, Augustine, Prosper, etc.




These observations, it is hoped, may help Mr. H. to understand the principles
on which our argument proceeds better than he appears to have done; that if he
should not think fit to admit them, he may at least be able to oppose them more
pertinently.

Let us now attend to his reasoning. Says he, 1. If this maxim be true, then
another is as true, viz. that it is not the duty of the unregenerate to repent
and believe the gospel. P. 133. Answ. It is granted that the maxim as he has
stated it is not true; and his inference from it is just, if such a repentance
and belief of the gospel be intended as flows from a holy principle. But though
repentance, and faith, and perfect obedience to the law be the present duty of
the unregenerate, it will not follow that any of these things are the next
means necessary for them to use, in order to obtain spiritual blessings; or
that they are in this view prescribed to them considered as unregenerate. For,
as was said, though the end for which the gospel directs men to the use of
means may be their present duty, yet we are not to suppose absurdly, that it is
therefore prescribed as the means of itself. Our author's argument if designed
to confute any maxim that we "hold to or build upon" aims toto caelo wide of
the mark; and so I leave it. If he will prove that faith and repentance are not
only the present duty of the unregenerate, but the prescribed means for
obtaining faith and repentance at first, and of preparing the soul for the
grace of regeneration, we will consider it.

2. It also follows, that sinners are not to be exhorted or commanded to do any
thing from higher and better views dispositions and principles than they have.
Ibid. Answ. This does not follow, either from our principle, or from the maxim,
as he calls it, which himself has mentioned. We say that such endeavors as men
have a present power for are prescribed, and to be exhorted to as means; but we
do not say that such endeavors are all that is to be inculcated as duty.
Besides, how can it be proved to be a just consequence, that if men are to be
exhorted to act from such principles and powers as they are furnished with,
then they must be exhorted to act from no higher views than they have at
present? It is the proper use of exhortations to lead men into different views
from what they are supposed to have, not to create new principles and powers of
action. True christians have a principle of grace, and are to be exhorted to
act from it: But they sometimes have unworthy views and dispositions, from
which they are not to be exhorted to act. And would any one of good
understanding, except Mr. H. imagine that exhortations calling men to act from
such principles and powers as they have and are capable of exercising, imply
that they must act from such views and dispositions as at present actually take
place? The unregenerate and regenerate are endowed with such principles, as
render them capable of acting from higher and better views than they often
have: And it is the design of exhortations or moral suasion to work on these
principles, and put them in exercise. But it is added, The only reason why
impenitent enemies to God may not be exhorted to repent and love God, if there
be any reason for this, is, that this requires higher principles than those
which they now act from. And for the same reason no person may be exhorted and
commanded to do any thing which his heart is now set against. Answ. We grant
that sinners are commanded to repent, and love God with all their hearts, and
in one word to be perfect; and this is to be inculcated as duty. Yet though
this is no more than their duty, there is a good reason why all this is not to
be pressed on them as the necessary means of salvation; for God has not
prescribed sinless perfection, as (...) means or way of salvation. We grant
that faith and repentance are to be inculcated on all the hearers of the
gospel, not only as duty, but as necessary means of salvation. Yet there is a
good reason, why a holy attendance on the means is not prescribed to sinners,
as necessary in order to a saving conversion; viz because this would make the
end it is own means. Nevertheless men may, in order to conversion, be properly
exhorted to act from other views, than they have at present; and to do those
things which their hearts may now be set against: And such exhortations may
prevail with them, by working on such principles as they are at present endowed
with. And if i^ be necessary that a man's present views be changed, in order to
his attending on means to any advantage, it is highly proper that this be
exhorted to. Nor is this prescribing the end as means of itself.

When Peter exhorted Simon to pray to God; if he exhorted to this as a means of
obtaining converting grace, he did not absurdly direct him to exercise this
grace in prayer, in order to obtain it; though he might properly exhort him to
pray from higher views and motives than merely worldly ones. And when Christ
exhorted the Jews to labor for the meat which endures to everlasting life; he
directed to all those endeavors which are ordinarily necessary, either by
immediate or remote connection with the end here propounded. And since some
endeavors are ordinarily necessary previous to regeneration, it is with good
reason concluded, that such endeavors are here exhorted to though far short of
their whole duty. But it does not follow from this conclusion that they were
not directed to act for this end with higher views and aims than purely to get
their fill of bread, (though this consequence has been drawn " by one who would
be loath to have his talent at clear reasoning called in question," to return
him once more his own compliment) unless it be proved that so long as they were
unregenerate they were mere animals incapable of acting with higher views than
to fill their bellies. Besides, let Mr. H. if he can, show that it is
unsuitable to divine wisdom, to allure men to an attendance on the means of
instruction, even with the hopes of temporal enjoyments. The Sinai covenant,
would, I suspect, prove a troublesome objection against all arguments a priori,
or from antecedent fitness, which he, or any one else could offer to that
purpose. But he goes on,

3. Yea it hence follows, that men are not to be exhorted to do any thing
contrary to their prevailing inclination.

Answ. This seems to be only a repetition of his last consequence in other
words. And the same answer may be returned. It is one thing to inculcate acts
of religious obedience, simply as duty; and another to inculcate such acts, as
means of obtaining spiritual blessings. To ^xh^^t men to act according to their
present power, is a different thing from exhorting them to act according to
their present inclination. The consequence must therefore be denied. Our author
however attempts to prove it. Says he, if men's prevailing inclination in one
case is a good reason why they may not be exhorted and commanded to do that
which is contrary to it, it is as good a reason in any other case of this kind
whatsoever. That men are commanded to do that for which they have neither a
present inclination, nor a present power to incline, through the mere influence
of moral suasion, we have often granted. Though if any should deny that men are
commanded to do any thing for which they want a principle or secondary power,
our author must argue more to the purpose, than he does in this place, if he
means to confute them. Is the next power of inclining or willing upon the
proposal of moral inducements, the same thing with the act of inclination or
willingness, which by means of motives is educed from it? In other words, is
the subjective ground of action, the action itself? Is the cause and the effect
the same thing? The author "seems to take this for granted, and build much upon
it as an undoubted maxim. And he is not alone in it. Other preachers and
writers have represented the matter in this light," who (whether they are
guilty of " ransacking the scriptures" or not) would have been capable of "
distinguishing" and reasoning " to better purpose." had they not been deceived,
by not duly attending to the difference of the ideas confounded together under
the name of moral inability. Whether an "express vindication of this notion
will be undertaken," time will show.

The proposal and vindication of the preceding arguments has run out to such a
length, that I will mention but one more, and that very briefly.

IX. The hearers of the gospel are commanded to repent and be converted that
they may be saved; and this infers an obligation on all to attend the means of
conversion. Such commands implicitly require whatever is necessary to be done
by us, in order to a compliance with them. Now some endeavors of men while
unregenerate are ordinarily necessary to their first conversion. An active
attendance to the divine word is the means of faith and repentance; and as such
is virtually enjoined in the command to believe and repent: If men are under
any obligation to attend to the command to repent and be converted, or to obey
this command, they are under obligation to all that which is implied in this,
or necessary on their parts in order to it; therefore are under obligation to
hear and attend to the truths contained in God's word with the utmost concern
and diligence. Hopkins on the means of grace. p. 138. The reading of this with
other passages of the same tenor in the tract here quoted, brought to mind
Augustine's remark on Tertullian. Quoniam est acutus, interdum contra epinionem
suam visa veritate superatur.
But an attendance to the means of our first conversion is in nature prior to
conversion.

If it be said, that men are commanded to attend the means of conversion,
provided they do it with an honest, that is, a new regenerate heart; and it is
in such a way of attending means that faith is obtained: I answer, 1. In order
to conversion it is necessary that men attend means previous to regeneration;
that those preparatory dispositions may thereby be wrought in the soul, without
which the author says, it would not be a wise act in God to regenerate a
sinner. Such an attendance on means is then necessary on our part as does not
imply a new heart; and of consequence this is virtually enjoined in the command
to repent. This is, if not the next, yet the remoter means of conversion.
Though a man while unconverted does not comply with the command requiring
conversion; yet if he diligently attends on God's appointed means, he therein
does something implicitly required in that command, and which is therefore his
duty. 2. Suppose a man has a new heart, or a power for holy acts created in
him; yet until he is a believer he is not united to Christ, or accepted in him.
If then a regenerate unbeliever is called to the use of means in order to
obtain faith, and is encouraged to do so with a promise that he shall in this
way obtain a saving knowledge of, and so an interest in Christ the mediator;
(which is Mr. H's opinion if I understand him) p. 128. Sermon. on Regen. p. 44.
then methinks we have found a conditional promise of that grace whereby we are
first united to Christ; the condition of which promise is complied with
previous to our acceptance of and union to him; and so a blessing inseperably
connected with salvation is promised to us, not as being in Christ, but as
acting with a good and honest heart, and it would seem (according to his
reasoning) out of respect purely to the goodness and honesty of our exercises,
and so I fear this notion will prove as subversive of the gospel, as promises
to unregenerate endeavors. For until we are united to Christ, our honest
hearts with their exercises are only an inherent qualification, which does not
denote that special relation to the mediator which gives us an interest in the
blessings of the covenant.

I find nothing urged by Mr. H. tending to enervate our argument, but what has
been already answered. He says, the word of God always requires us to be ready
to receive the truth in love; if we do this we shall not attend on means as do
the unregenerate. True. This is always our duty. Hence he concludes that
Sinners are not required to attend on means in any one instance as such, or
with an impenitent unbelieving heart. P. 139. To this we answer, as before,
that unregeneracy and an impenitent unbelieving heart, are not required as
adjuncts or qualifications of men's attendance on means; but the attendance
itself is absolutely required of men, though unregenerate and impenitent; and
has, by the appointment and blessing of God, a subserviency to their saving
conversion, as well as to other desirable purposes. Nor is it any objection,
that such an attendance comes far short of the duty required of men in the word
of God. A perfect compliance with our duty in any instance is not an appointed
means of salvation. Mr. H. says truly, As God does not make the depraved will
of sinners the rule of their duty, so he does not make the rule of their duty
the rule of his conduct in giving or not giving a new heart; I add, neither
does he make the rule of their duty the rule of his will and wisdom, in
prescribing to us the means of obtaining temporal and spiritual blessings. He
goes on to ask, Why did the apostles direct men immediately to repent, and be
converted, and believe on Jesus Christ? I answer again, 1. Because it was their
duty. 2. It was the necessary means of salvation. 3. Such calls are vehicula
gratiae, in and with which God is wont to convey his special grace to some,
enabling and persuading them to an immediate compliance. And 4. That a diligent
waiting on God in the use of appointed means for further light and grace might
be promoted in all, according to their present ability. It may be the next duty
of sinners to believe and repent, and yet a further attendance on the means of
grace, with further degrees of light and conviction in consequence of such
attendance, may be necessary for them, before they can savingly believe and
repent; in which case this is to be exhorted to as the next means of salvation.
Persons that are not humbled are called to come to Christ. Their next work
indeed is not to come to Christ, but to come out of themselves and so come to
Christ; to forsake all other confidences, and so build on Christ; to throw away
all other hopes, and flee to this hope that is set before them. Stoddard's
safety of appearing, etc. p. 254. See also Norton's Orthodox Evangelist, p.
130, 193, etc.


To close our plea I might mention the intolerable consequences which appear to
me to be inseparable from the denial of the important truth hitherto defended;
but as I have somewhere hinted a little, at some of them; as it might look too
much like uncharitableness to dwell on these things, and might seem to imply a
charge against Mr. H. and some other worthy men, as if they allowed or held to
such principles as, I believe, they heartily detest; and as this would lengthen
an essay already grown to an undesirable bulk; I shall therefore wave this,
with some other things which I thought at first to have added; and prepare to
stand on the defensive, against what is pleaded on the other side of the
question. Which will accordingly be attended to in the next section.

SECT. IV. A Reply to Mr. Hopkins's Arguments.
MR. H's first and principal argument, founded on our Savior's discourse with
the scribe, concerning the first and great commandment, has been already
represented and answered to. But as he has, in order to illustrate and confirm
his reasoning, added some things, the examination of which did not then so
properly fall in our way; I will here in the first place briefly attend to them.

He quotes that text in Isai. 1.12. as a clear confirmation of his argument and
doctrine. When ye come to appear before me, who has required these things at
your hands? On which he thus glosses. These things were required, but not for
their own sake, but only as an expression of their respect and love to God.
Therefore when this ceased to be exercised and expressed, and they appeared not
to have the love of God, but the contrary, their attendance on these externals
was not doing any thing that was required of them. These things were not
required of them as they performed them. Therefore in their attendance on them
they really did nothing that was required of them, and so did not the least
part of their duty. P. 119.

Answ. We have no reason to think that their attendance on the externals of
religious worship is here called an abomination, and what was not required of
them, merely or principally because they were unregenerate. For at other times,
when the Israelites attended on the ordinances of divine worship, there is no
hint that what they did was not required of them, but on the contrary, it is
repeatedly said that "they did according to the commandment of the Lord,"
though they acted not from a principle of true holiness. Some testimonies to
this purpose I have had occasion to mention, concerning that rebellious
generation, whose carcases fell in the wilderness; who not only were, but
appeared to be destitute of true love to God, by their daily perverseness and
murmuring against him, for which they were rebuked, threatened and punished from
time to time. Yet there is not one word intimating in the least that it was not
required of them, ungodly as they were, to keep the passover, and sabbath, and
offer the sacrifices prescribed in their law: But on the contrary, in doing
these things they are said to have done according to the commandment of the
Lord. (...) 12.28. Numb. 9.5.8.20, etc.
If these things were required of the unregenerate Israelites, however
destitute of love to God, in the time of Moses, we may be sure that it was not
their unregeneracy, or want of holy love, simply considered, that was the
reason why they were in the time of Isaiah challenged in this manner, "who has
required these things at your hands?"

And here I must refresh our author's memory, which seems a little to have
failed him. We have lately heard him pleading, that God in his conduct toward
the people of Israel, and in what he says of them, acted not as the searcher of
hearts; but has respect only to their external appearance and conduct. If so,
it was not the want of inward holiness that was the cause why their religious
performances are declared to be an abomination, and not required at their
hands; but it was the irregularity of their outward behavior. The prophet
appears evidently, in this passage, to reprove them for their transgressions of
the Sinai covenant; the condition of which was external obedience, and it is
sanction, temporal blessings and judgments. The sins with which he charges them
are outward acts of disobedience: And the motives with which he persuades them
to repentance are the promises and threatenings of the Sinai law. "If ye be
willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land: But if ye refuse and
rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword." Ver. 19, 20.

The persons here addressed were grossly immoral in their lives; and yet
affected to appear zealous in their attendance on religious ordinances;
thinking, it seems, as did the pharisees afterward, hereby to cloak their
neglect of the weightier matters of the law. For this end they overcharged
God's altars, with their free will offerings; which though allowed and accepted
when offered in a right manner, yet were not absolutely required by any divine
precept. There was not such a multitude of sacrifices absolutely required, as
the expression here naturally imports. They observed the sacred festivals, it
is probable, with a solemn parade; and yet in an irregular manner, not
according to the rules prescribed to them. They might then be very justly
reprimanded with "who has required these things at your hands, to tread my
courts in this manner, and on such an errand, when your hands are full of
blood, oppression, and all kinds of unrighteousness?" This text is therefore
far from proving any thing to our author's purpose. His observations from it
have been before considered.

Another text quoted by him is Jer. 22.23. I spoke not to your fathers, nor
commanded them, in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt,
concerning burnt offerings and sacrifices: But this thing commanded I them,
saying, obey my voice. From which he argues in the same manner as above.
Expositors agree that the negative expression is meant comparatively. The sense
is, To obey is better than sacrifice.

He goes on, None will suppose, I presume, that the devils did any duty, when
they cried out, Thou art the Christ the Son of God. Or when the chief devil in
the possessed man prayed to Christ in the name of the rest, in the most earnest
manner, I beseech thee torment me not. And will any one imagine that the --
unregenerate do any more duty in their external words and actions, than the
devils did in the instances mentioned? P. 119. "Wonderful argument"! If he will
prove that the devil confessed Christ voluntarily, and not by constraint; that
he was by revelation from God commanded so to do; that this was the instituted
means of obtaining a blessing; that God encouraged him to hope for mercy in
this way; that he confessed Christ, and prayed to him from a conviction of
conscience that it was his duty; then this matter will be further considered.

Our author proceeds to discourse of self-love, and natural conscience,
endeavoring to show that they are no principles of obedience. The substance of
what he has said, has been examined in the second section. They are principles,
whereby men are directed and prompted to do such kind of actions, as have been
proved to be enjoined on them; so are their duty. But he objects, "there is no
love to God and our neighbor, while men act only from natural principles."
Answ. Not to insist that there is some kind of good will to others, natural to
mankind; we say, that something besides love is required, and something which
may be done from other principles than holy love; as has been proved. He pleads
further, "there is no obedience in acting merely from natural principles."
Answ. It is not pretended that all acts which flow from self-love and natural
conscience, are acts of obedience to God. But the doing of such actions as men
are commanded to do, though from natural principles, is obedience; unless the
scriptures miscall it. Though an erroneous conscience is not a principle of
obedience, in those things wherein it errs; yet when it is dictates are
according to truth, prescribing what is really matter of duty, (which we have
proved is the case, when it represents to the unregenerate their obligation to
do what is enjoined on them, according to their present ability) then it may be
a principle directing and disposing them to do what is their duty. It is added,
If the dictates of conscience are according to truth, they declare that love to
God and our neighbor is all that is required. Answ. Prove it, and answer our
reasons to the contrary, otherwise you beg in vain. It is further pleaded,
there is but one principle of obedience, which is love to God and our
neighbor. This also we deny, 1. Because we have proved that there are other
principles of obedience. 2. Because love, being itself an act of obedience,
(Mr. H. says it is the whole of obedience) must therefore flow from some
principle prior to, and diverse from itself. I add that love alone is not an
adequate principle of obedience, in those actions which may be supposed to flow
from it. It Is operations must be guided by faith, and a right conscience,
otherwise they will be irregular; however good the principle of love is in
itself. As to what is said of self-love, I have elsewhere considered that
point. I will not return those exclamations of absurdity, which our author so
profusely pours forth at all differing from him on these points; but only query
in his own words on another occasion, "are we the only persons that are
confused and bewildered?"

His second argument is as follows: All God's commands to his creatures are an
expression of his will and heart, which is the same with their being a
transcript of his moral perfections, as the common phrase is. But God's moral
perfection is his holiness: And his will is holy. Therefore whatever command is
an expression of his will, must require holiness. That which requires any thing
else, is no expression of his moral perfections; therefore cannot be the
expression of the will of God, and so cannot be his command. P. 122.

Answ. The holiness of God may be expressed in those commands, which require
the doing of that which is not in itself holiness; it what is commanded be not
sin, but good in it is kind; and if the end for which it is commanded be
agreeable to his wisdom and holiness. All the works of God are expressions of
his will and holy perfections; yet he is the proper cause of other effects
besides holiness. There is an actual concurrence and cooperation of divine
providence with men, even in their sinful actions; though he be not the author,
or positive cause of their sinfulness. And this providential concourse is an
expression of his holiness; yet the effect is not a holy action in the
creature. His moral perfections are manifested, in his so constituting the
connection of things with each other, that those means which have nothing of
true holiness in them should conduce to the happiness of those who use them;
and in letting men know it, that they might have encouragement, or a reasonable
inducement to be in the use of such means; and in prescribing an attendance to
them by his sovereign authority, on pain of incurring the effects of his high
displeasure, as a motive to such attendance. Indeed if such actions were
prescribed, the doing of which is sin; or if any real encouragement were held
forth to men, either in God's word, or in the constituted connection of means
and ends, that they might have a reasonable inducement to such actions, (as our
author maintains) we could not reconcile this with the divine holiness. But far
be such imaginations. God's prescribing to the Israelites the keeping of the
passover, in order to their preservation from death by the destroying angel;
was it not an expression of his moral perfections? And yet the prescribed means
for this end was the outward act of killing a lamb, sprinkling the blood, etc.
which the unregenerate performed. All the commands, counsels, or advices of a
good man, ought to be expressions of his holiness; yet Paul, and even our
Savior commanded, or advised to the doing of that, which did not imply any holy
exercise, as has been noted. And, unless I am misinformed, our author and
others like minded will not scruple to advise to an attendance on the means of
grace, upon the supposition of a state of unregeneracy; though they own that
they have no instruction from the scriptures for so doing. I will suppose that
such advices are thought by them to be expressions of benevolence and holiness;
not of sin, and enmity to being in general; notwithstanding the actions advised
to are not holy exercises. Why must it then be thought inconsistent with the
holiness of God to enjoin such actions? Moreover the perfect holiness of God is
expressed in the constitution of the new covenant, with the means or conditions
of salvation therein required; yet not perfect, but sincere acts of holiness,
are, according to the new covenant, the prescribed way of our walking with God,
and obtaining eternal life. On the whole, the principle on which this argument
of Mr. H. depends, viz That a command requiring any thing short of our whole
duty, can be no expression of the holiness of God, being entirely destitute of
proof; a bare denial of it had been sufficient, according to the laws of
disputation. And yet I have, beyond what is incumbent on a respondent, offered
such evidences of the falsehood of this principle, as are perhaps a sufficient
confutation. So I pass to his

Third argument, which stands thus: Duty to God always supposes something given
to God, and done for him, out of regard and respect to him. But where there is
no true love to God there is no true respect paid to him; nothing is offered to
him or done for him in the intention and design of the doer. Therefore there is
really no duty done. Nothing that is due to God is given; and so no command
that he can give is obeyed. P 122.

Answ. Duty may be taken either in the compound, or in the divided sense. In
the former sense it essentially includes a holy respect to the will and
authority of God, with every other circumstance implied in an act of true
holiness. In the latter sense, each particular part of the compound duty is in
itself matter of duty. For whatever is contained in, and enjoined by the divine
command, is duty: But actions externally good are enjoined in the divine
command in themselves, as well as a holy respect to God in the performance. If
a man has no respect to God in doing an action good in itself, he is guilty of
sin in the manner of the performance; but the performance is not, for the
substance, contrary to the divine command. On the other hand, if through
culpable ignorance, or an erroneous conscience, he neglects to do an external
duty commanded by God; for instance, if he should neglect to pray, or give
alms, when he ought to do it, thinking that it was his duty to forbear these
things, until he had clear and sore evidences of his regeneration; he would
undoubtedly be guilty of a sin of omission, however he might be supposed to
have a sincere respect to God, and to what he apprehends is his will, in such
forbearance of his duty. But if a man should neglect to do external duties,
regardless of the command of God; such a one would violate a double obligation,
and incur a double guilt. Disregard of the authority of God is in itself sin:
And the omission of an external duty, as to the substance, is in itself sin.
Consequently the performance is in itself required, so is duty. For it cannot
be in itself sin to omit that, the doing of which is not in itself duty. The
commands of God enjoin duties both in the compound, and in the divided sense:
They enjoin the whole conjunctly, and each part severally and by itself; as has
been already shown. Our author's definition of duty being fallacious, his
argument founded on the fallacy must fall.

Something however seems to be aimed at, which will require further
consideration. And therefore (craving pardon for taking the liberty) I will
endeavor to mend the argument a little by putting the word obedience instead
of duty, as being of a less general signification. Obedience does indeed imply
a respect to the will and command of another; though duty in the divided sense,
does not necessarily imply such a respect. An act of religious obedience
involves in it is substance not only the performance of an action which is in
itself the matter of duty, but also a regard to the command of God, as a reason
and motive to the performance. If it should then be said, that allowing
unregenerate sinners may perform actions materially good, which may be termed
the matter of duty; yet since they have no true respect to God or his commands
in any of their performances, there is nothing of obedience in what they do,
however good and useful in itself. I answer,

1. Supposing there is nothing of religious obedience in their doings, yet they
ought to do actions materially good; and if they do so they will not incur that
guilt which inseperably attends the neglect of them in itself, or for it is own
sake. There is an obligation to do the action, as well as to have a respect to
the command of God in doing it, as has been observed. If we should suppose the
unregenerate to be perfect atheists, yet we may truly say that they ought to be
just and kind in their behavior toward mankind. And in this case, though
there would be nothing of religious obedience in any of their actions, yet they
could not be charged with the sin of omitting those acts of justice and
kindness, which they would otherwise be guilty of, besides their atheistical
disregard of God. But,

2. There are two kinds of obedience to the commands of God spoken of in
scripture, and a twofold respect to him. A conviction of the greatness and
majesty of God, his power and right to punish his rebellious creatures, the
righteousness of his commands, and the obligation and fitness of a creature's
being subject to the will of it is creator and supreme ruler, has a tendency to
put men upon some endeavors of obedience to his commands, from the natural
principles of self-love and the moral sense, however destitute of a principle
of true holiness. Such endeavors of obedience are good in their kind, as well
as the principles and motives prompting thereto; and they are commanded by God,
on supposition of a state of unregeneracy, as has been proved. And they who
neglect diligent endeavors to do what God has commanded; according to their
present ability, though unregenerate, will find that their wilfully refusing to
do what they had a next power to do, in a way of religious obedience, will
terribly add to the guilt they are chargeable with, for not doing such duties
as at present they are incapable of, for want of a principle of holiness. There
is another kind of obedience attended with, and flowing from a divine and
supernatural principle, with a spiritual discernment of spiritual things. This
is peculiar to the regenerate, who have a holy respect to God and his will. If
then Mr. H. means to assert, that a holy respect to God is implied in whatever
is duty, or obedience of any kind; he does but humbly beg the question. If he
means, that the unregenerate have no kind of regard to God or his command, this
we are warranted to deny, both from scripture and experience; nor do I find one
word offered in confirmation of it.

His fourth argument is, If God should command the unregenerate to do any
thing, as such, and which they may do consistently with their having no love to
him, and being under the power of perfect and reigning enmity against him; this
is, in some degree, if not wholly giving up his demands on them which require
them to love him, to repent, and embrace the gospel. P. 122, 123.

Answ. We deny the consequence. If indeed nothing was required of men, as duty,
but what they were able to do from natural principles while unregenerate; this
would imply that the demands of the law were, in some degree, given up. But
this supposition we reject. Will Mr. H. say, that God has given up the demands
of his law, in prescribing to men, endeavors which fall short of sinless
perfection, as means of obtaining temporal or spiritual blessings? Or will he
say, that nothing short of sinless perfection is prescribed, as necessary, or
subservient to these purposes? Has not God, in the new covenant, required such
duties and exercises, as means of salvation to believers, which are practicable
by them in this state of imperfection, through the assistance of that grace
which he affords to them, notwithstanding this state of imperfection is their
sin? It becomes not p^or worms, to give law to their maker. We (...) better be
more modest than to say, that if God prescribes any endeavors of ours, short
of sinless perfection, as the means of obtaining needed blessings; then he must
of necessity give up the demands of his law, and act dishonourably to his
character and government; lest happily we be found replying against him, and
blasphemously censuring the constitutions of his infinite wisdom.

God has more regard to his own honor, and the honor of his law, than we
have; and he knows better what becomes his divine majesty. Yet he has required
sincere though imperfect endeavors of obedience, as the way and means of
making our calling and election sure, and having an entrance ministered to us
abundantly into his heavenly kingdom. And in the Sinai covenant, not a perfect
conformity to the whole moral law was enjoined (...) the necessary condition of
enjoining the temporal and spiritual privileges, granted to that favored
people who were subject to it. For in this covenant provision was made for the
imperfection of their obedience. Yea further, the condition of this covenant
did not necessarily imply any exercises of true holiness. An external
observance of God's laws and ordinances secured the divine blessing and
protection to that nation. See Erskine's Dissertation on the Sinai Covevant.
How then can it be shown, that the obligation of the divine la^ is in any
measure made void, it God enjoins on the unregenerate an attendance to means,
according to their present ability, in order to obtain those spiritual
blessings they need? Mr. H. will never be able to prove this to eternity,
unless he can overthrow the old and new testaments.

Our author introduces the similitude of a king treating with his rebellious
subjects: And argues, that if it would be dishonorable to him and his
government, to require of, or propose to them, any thing lower than immediate
submission, and a full return to their duty; then much more would it be
dishonorable to God, to enjoin on men any thing they can do while
unregenerate. But it may easily be shown, that a king might, without giving up
his authority in the least, propose to, and require his disaffected subjects to
do something, much short of a full return to their duty. And whatever the
honor and support of human laws and government may require, a way has been
found (blessed be God) wherein the honor of the divine law and government is
maintained and magnified, without his making perfect obedience for the future
the necessary means, and indispensable condition of our obtaining mercy. It can
no more be concluded that his demand of holy obedience is given up, because he
has prescribed to men an attendance to the means of grace while unregenerate;
than it can be concluded that his demand of perfect obedience is given up,
because he has enjoined on believers a sincere respect to his commands,
according to the measures of grace they have received; though they are unable
in this life perfectly to keep any of his commandments. The conclusion of this
argument seems worthy of notice. Says he, The only reason, I conceive, why any
have run into this notion of God's appointing duties to the unregenerate, to be
done by them while such, and have not rather been shocked at it, is that they
^^ok on them as in some measure at least excusable for not l^ving God and
embracing the gospel, this being above their power, and what they cannot do
while unregenerate, although (poor creatures!) they are quite willing and
desirous to do what they can. P. 124. That there are some who hold to this
notion, on reasons different from what is here assigned, he may now inform
himself. But what is most remarkable in this sentence. (which contains more
remarkables than I shall stay to point out) is the uncharitable judgment here
expressed, concerning all differing from him in sentiment on this point. All
com^o^^able apprehensio^s or hopes, that some holding to the notion ^e opposes,
might perhaps not see or allow, that sinners were excusable on this principle
for not ^^ving God, are expressly disowned. The ONLY reason why ANY have run
into this notion is, as he supposed, because they think sinners are excusable.
What he thinks of their state, who look upon man's impotency to duty as any
excuse, he elsewhere tells us. Says he, Such have not the true knowledge of
God's law, and have not been convinced of sin, as God's people are. That is
they are unregenerate. Sermon on Rom 7.7. p. 21. All then without exception who
think that God has appointed duties to the unregenerate to be performed by them
while such, have not the true knowledge of God's law, nor have been convinced
of sin as God's people are, so are unconverted, as he supposes. I do not
remember ever to have met with so hard and extensive a censure. Christians
however have shall reason to complain of this, in comparison with the reason
they have to resent the hard speeches, which are uttered against the divine
majesty, by those who say, that it is dishonorable to God to do that which, if
the scriptures be true, he has in fact done. This is a sample of the spirit he
shows toward all dissenting from his opinion. The lump is thoroughly fermented
with the same sour leave^. I note it here once for all, having never that I
remember mentioned it before, and never intending to mention it again. Whether
this be justifiable, himself may consider if he please, my aim is to plead for
what I take to be the truth. I can say with sincerity concerning him, (though
he may hereafter twit me with it, as he has done by Mr. Mills, in like case) I
charitably hope that he is a true servant of Christ: Though I must add, that
christians would regard him with more complacency, if his discourses savoured
more of that meekness of wisdom recommended by the apostle. I may not imitate
him in his hard censures, for I fear my God. Nor can I think that it would be
any damage or disadvantage to a good cause, if our zeal in contending for it
were tempered with those charitable sentiments expressed by the great Dr. Owen.
I doubt "not" (says he) but that men may for a season not know, may disbelieve
and deny some fundamental articles of christian religion, and yet not be
absolutely concluded not to hold the head by any sinew and ligament; to have no
influence of life by any other means. Was it not so with the apostles when they
questioned the resurrection of Christ, and with the Corinthians who denied the
resurrection of saints? On the Perseverance of Saints, p. 91,


The fifth and last argument is now to be considered. If God commands the
unregenerate to do that which they may do while in a state of rebellion, and
while they are with all their hearts opposing him, and in the exercise of
perfect enmity against him, [that is, while unregenerate] I see not why this is
not a commanding sin and rebellion, and making this their duty. It must be so,
if all they do is sin and rebellion, which, I think is certain to a
demonstration; for in the exercises of a moral agent there is, there can be no
medium between holiness and sin. P. 124.

Answ. If we carefully and distinctly consider what it is that God commands
unregenerate sinners to do, in order to obtain spiritual and temporal
blessings; and then enquire wherein consists the sinfulness of their actions,
or in other words, wherein they are inconformable to the divine law; we shall
be able easily to see that what God requires is not sin, but the whole
sinfulness of the performance is a circumstance, or adjunct, which the depraved
creature has added to an action good in itself. What God has enjoined on
sinners as the means of good to them, is actions materially good; for instance,
the reformation of their lives, and an attendance on the means of grace. This
surely is not sin in itself: If it was, it would be forever unlawful for a man,
in any case, to reform, or use means. Actions which are in themselves
essentially sinful, that is, forbidden in all possible cases, may not be done
either by the unregenerate or the regenerate; for instance, wilful lying; this
is unlawful, even supposing the liar should therein sincerely aim at the glory
of God; which, through error of conscience, is a possible case. Such actions
are for the substance and matter of them inconformable to the divine command.
There is no need of enquiring into the character of the agent, or for what ends
he acted, in order to determine that he did evil. But an attendance on the
means of grace is not absolutely, and in all cases forbidden. On the contrary,
it is absolutely enjoined on all the hearers of the gospel; consequently the
omission of it is sin in itself: And we may be sure, without any further
enquiry, that he who neglects these means, having opportunity and capacity of
attending upon them, therein is blameable. When any one sins in attending on
means, it is an accidental defect; and the fault lies not in the action itself,
or in the divided sense, for that is absolutely commanded, and the omission
would be sin in itself; but the fault lies in the wrong manner and
circumstances of the performance: And this irregularity in the circumstances,
constitutes the action a sin taken in the compound sense, as including it is
circumstances, though in itself it be good and a commanded duty.

We say then, that God has absolutely commanded the hearers of the gospel,
without distinction, to attend the means of religion: But he has not enjoined
any of those irregular circumstances, or defects, with which the performances
of the unregenerate are corrupted. These defects he has forbidden: Yet he has
absolutely enjoined the actions themselves, in the divided sense, as matter of
duty, and as means of good to men; notwithstanding the sin men may be guilty of
in the manner and circumstances of the performance; and though it is certain,
that so long as they are unregenerate, they neither will nor can perform them
in a holy and spiritual manner. And if it be doubted, whether this be not the
same in effect as to command the sinful defects, which through the agent's
fault will certainly be conjoined with the commanded action, if he does it at
all; however metaphysicians may puzzle themselves and others in their
endeavors to answer the knotty question, and perhaps after all their subtle
reasonings resolve it wrong, I suppose a child that knows his right hand from
his left would intuitively know to the contrary.

Eusebius had a little son scarce four years old, when he thought fit to send
him to school with his hornbook. The child was very loath to go, having a mind
to spend his time in play with idle companions. Child, says the father, I
intend you shall go to school today. I hope you will go willingly, and learn
to read as fast as you can. No, says the child, I don't want to go. What not
want to learn to read? I do not want to learn. I had rather play at home. I am
sorry for that, my son: It is because you do not know what is good for your
self. I would have you go cheerfully, and try to learn like a good boy; but
whether you are willing or not, you must go; or I shall be angry with you. The
child fearing the effects of his father's displeasure, sets out with great
reluctance, fretting and crying as he goes. Presently an acquaintance meets
him. Where are you going, says he, in this sorrowful mood? I am going to
school, says the child. But why do you go to school? Because my father bid me,
and threatened me if I would not go. Did your father bid you to be loath to go,
and to cry, and murmur as you was going? No: he bid me go willingly. But I hate
to go; and he knew it; yet he said I must go if I did not love it, and if I did
cry. But if your father knew that you hated to go to school, and would cry if
he made you go, then when he bid you go, he bid you cry as you went, did not he?
I tell you, father did not bid me cry as I was going; he chid me for crying;
but he told me that I should go though I was ever so unwilling, and cried ever
so much. I ^sk now, would not such an answer be perfectly agreeable to the plain
dictates of common sense? Whatever close reasoners can do, I am much mistaken,
if children cannot plainly see, that to command one absolutely to do an action,
though it should be ever so certain that it will be done in a faulty manner if
done at all, is entirely different from commanding the faulty manner, as well
as the performance. Nor is this in any measure implied in that.

But says our author, "It must be so" (that is to command men to do any thing
while unregenerate must be commanding sin) if all they do is sin, which is I
think certain to a demonstration. I answer, if we take the actions of the
unregenerate in the compound sense, including the manner and all the
circumstances of their performances; then it is true, they are not holy but
sinful; though the actions in themselves, or in the divided sense may be good.
For an action must be conformable to the law in manner and circumstances, as
well as in it is substance, otherwise it cannot be denominated holy. It may be
conformable to the command in one respect, and not in another. In whatever
respect it agrees with the command, it is good, and matter of duty; though if
in any respect it be essentially defective, there is no true holiness in it;
but taken as including such defects, it is on the whole sinful. One sin is
enough to denominate a man a sinner in the eye of the law, though all his other
actions are conformable to it. And one defect or irregularity in an action is
enough to denominate it sinful in the eye of the law, though in all other
respects conformable to it. But though all the actions of the unregenerate in
the compound sense swerve from the rule of duty in some respects, so are to be
accounted sinful; yet some of their actions do not swerve from the rule in
every respect, so are not all sin, or every way sinful, but are materially
good. Now it does not imply commanding sin, to command the doing of that which
is in itself good, though it should be certain that it will not be done in a
holy manner. For in this case the sin does not lie in what is commanded, that
is, in the substance of the performance, but wholly in the irregular manner and
circumstances, which, though foreseen, are not commanded but forbidden.

To prove that all the doings of the unregenerate are sin, our author argues,
that In the exercises of a moral agent there can be no medium between holiness
and sin. But he either mistakes the meaning of this maxim, and holds it in an
untrue sense; or else it makes nothing to the purpose of his argument. It may
be true that no actions of a moral agent in the compound sense, taking in all
their adjuncts and circumstances, are of an indifferent nature, neither right
nor wrong upon the whole: And it is true, that no actions of the unregenerate
are upon the whole, in all respects, either good or indifferent. They are all
sinful in their manner and circumstances. But an action materially good, may,
according to the different manner and circumstances of it is performance, become
sinful or holy in the compound sense; though no possible circumstances can make
an action materially forbidden become an act of holiness. And there are
numberless actions materially indifferent, that is not absolutely commanded or
forbidden; which yet cannot be either done or forborne without such concomitant
circumstances, as may render them on the whole, pro hic and nunc, either
perfectly right, and so holy, or some way wrong and improper. Now an action
right in some respects and wrong in others, is not holy in the eye of the law,
which requires a rectitude in every respect; consequently it is in the compound
sense sinful: And yet being conformable to the law in some respect, for
instance as to the matter of it, it has therefore something belonging to it
which is (not indifferent but) good, and matter of duty; which however does not
contain all that goodness which is essential to true holiness. Of this nature
are the best actions of the unregenerate. To require these in themselves, or in
the divided sense, is not requiring sin; for in this sense they are not sin:
Nor is it requiring indifferent actions, which would be an absurd supposition;
for when required, they would be no longer indifferent but duty, whatever they
were before. And however certain it may be that men will defile these duties by
their manner of performing them, this is no part of what God requires of them,
nor has it any tendency to their good.

I may further add, that since the best duties of believers are sinfully
defective, it may as well be argued, that God commands sin, in requiring of
them such duties as they are able to perform in this state of imperfection; as
that he commands sin if he prescribes an attendance on means previous to
regeneration. It will be said, that so far as they obey the divine command,
their actions are not sinful. True. But in one respect, that is in the strength
or intenseness of their exercises, all they do comes far short of what is their
duty. Must we then conclude, that if God prescribes evangelical obedience to
christians as duty, and as the necessary means of salvation, then he prescribes
the sinful imperfection as well as the obedience, since he knows that it will
be imperfect? I hope not. Nor is there any more necessity to conclude, that in
prescribing an attendance on means to the unregenerate, the sinful defilements
with which he knows their endeavors will be corrupted, must be also commanded.
In short, Mr, H's argument is nothing but that sophistical one, called by
logicians, Argumentatio a sensu composito ad sensum divisum.

He endeavors however to vindicate it. Says he, Take away the sin, and
separate it from every thing else, and there remains nothing in which there is
any moral agency, and so nothing in which there is either sin or duty, and
therefore nothing which can be the subject of command: Consequently if the sin
be not commanded, nothing is commanded. Ibid.

Answ. The word sin may be taken in two senses. 1. As signifying the whole
compound action with all it is circumstances, which is in some respect irregular
and wrong. But if this be the sense here intended, our author's assertion will
be absurdly trifling, and nothing to his purpose; amounting only to this, take
away the whole of the sinful action, and no action will remain. And we may as
well say, take away the whole imperfect action of a believer, which as being
imperfect is sinful, and nothing will remain wherein moral agency is exercised.
2. By the sin of an action is properly meant that in or belonging to it which
is in itself forbidden, and which constitutes the compound action in that
respect faulty, or inconformable to the law; whether the fault lies in the
substance of the action, or in it is end, or it is other circumstances, or in all
of them. Now if those actions which are supposed to be enjoined on the
unregenerate were contrary to the divine command in every respect, then indeed
it would be true, taking away the sin would remove them wholly; and if every
thing in them were supposed contrary to the command, it would be absurd ever to
make it a question whether any thing in them were commanded. But this we deny.
Such actions as God has enjoined on the unregenerate are in themselves good;
their sinfulness does not lie in the matter, but in the manner of the
performance. And if it should be said that there is no moral agency exercised
in the matter of the performance, this would be the same as to say that there
is no morality in the substance of external duties; which is demonstrably
false. The morality of an action is nothing else but it is relation to the
divine law commanding or forbidding it; in other words, it is being commanded or
forbidden by God. Now it has been proved, and is exceedingly evident from the
scriptures, nor that I know of expressly denied by any, that the divine laws
extend to the imperate or effective, as well as the immanent acts of the soul.
They require a right behavior, as well as right principles, and affections.
Men's outward actions may be contrary to the law, when their designs are good.
And their behavior may be right, when their ends are not such as they ought to
be. When men perform external duties from natural principles, the sinfulness
lies in their not having and exercising holy principles, rather than in their
exercising natural principles in such a manner of behavior: It lies in not
aiming at the end they ought, rather than in aiming at an end they ought not to
respect. Consequently the sin adhering to such actions lies in omission, rather
than commission. And it is so far from being true that to take away the sin is
taking away the action, in the divided sense; that if we take away the action
materially good, and leave the same principles, ends, and other circumstances
conjoined with the omission of it, the sin instead of being taken away or
lessened, would be inhanced.

Mr. H. proceeds in the defense of his argument. There is a natural connection
between requiring the unregenerate to pray, as such, and requiring them to sin.
Ibid. Answ. To require their unregeneracy, and sinful exercises in their
prayers, as well as the prayers themselves, would indeed be requiring them to
sin. These God does not require. But to require the prayers in themselves,
notwithstanding the sin with which they will certainly be defiled, while men
remain unregenerate, has no connection with the requirement of sin, as has been
shown. Besides, let our author consider, whether God's requiring christians to
perform evangelical duties, though imperfect, has a natural connection with his
requiring their imperfection, as well as the duties themselves? Whether his
encouraging the unregenerate to use the means of conversion, implies or has a
natural connection with an encouragement of the sinfulness, as well as the use
of means? Whether when himself advises to the same, on supposition of a state
of unregeneracy, he really means to advise to the sinfulness as well as to
diligent endeavors? May we not hope that a due consideration of these things
may yet lead him out of his mistake?

He adds, If the prayers of the wicked are an abomination, i. e. wholly sinful,
then to require them to make such prayers, is for God to require them to do
what is an abomination to him, and wholly sinful. And this is the same, I
think, as to require them to sin. P. 125. We may here return again the same
answer as before. Prayers and other acts of religious obedience as performed by
the unregenerate are, taking in all their circumstances, sinful; because in
some respects inconformable to the rule of their duty. And to require such
prayers, in the compound sense, would be requiring the irregular circumstances
together with the substance of the performance. This God has not done. But the
prayers and other religious actions of the unregenerate are sometimes
materially and in themselves such as they ought to be; and also right in some
of their circumstances. Consequently, they are not all sin, or in every respect
contrary to the divine law. And to require them to make such prayers, and
perform such actions, as are right and good for matter, and manner in some
respects; though it be certain that in other respects and circumstances they
will be essentially faulty, is infinitely different from commanding them to
sin, as has been often noted.

But he further pleads, If it be men's immediate and indispensable duty to be
holy and embrace the gospel, no reason can be given why this should not be
required of them immediately. Answ. There is no reason why all this, and much
more, even perfect obedience to the law, should not be required of men as their
immediate duty. But he adds, Or why any thing less or lower than this should be
required at all. Ibid. Answ. The wisdom of God has seen fit to prescribe
something less and lower than a perfect compliance with our whole duty, as the
means of obtaining needed blessings. And we have good reason for what we do,
when we speak as the oracles of God.

Something further is added to the same purpose; but I have not observed any
thing which may be thought to require particular notice, except what has been
already spoken to somewhere in this essay.

Conclusion.
I Have now in some manner gone through my proposed undertaking. And upon the
whole of our author's performance (so far as it has fallen under present
examination) I must say, that it is not the " metaphysical," that is, as he
explains it, the "close sound reasoning" p. 63.
contained in it that has (in my opinion) troubled those dissenting from him on
this point. The words indeed are often hard, but the arguments are soft and
yielding enough. His design was, I charitably hope, in the main good; viz. to
bring sinners off from a self-righteous trust in duties; but he has carried the
matter to such an extreme as, I think, will not abide the test of scripture and
reason: And so it is to be feared has disserved, and raised prejudices against
some important truths of the gospel, for which he would appear a zealous
advocate. However the whole is referred to the candid consideration and
impartial judgment of those who have their senses exercised to discern good and
evil, and who are disposed to give every argument, or reason, it is just weight,
how inconsiderable soever the person may be who urges it, or however defective
his manner. Wishing that without favor or prejudice, truth may be embraced,
and error rejected; which is all that any one can reasonably desire who
disputes in earnest, and in the integrity of his heart, and not from a mean
ambition of worsting another in an argument. And may God in his infinite mercy
pardon whatever is amiss either in the matter or manner of these our debates,
preserve us from unchristian animosities, and uncharitable disaffections
toward one another, unite christians more and more in judgment and heart, keep
them from dangerous extremes, cause truth and holiness to prevail, to the
abundant edification of the church, and the honor of the glorious gospel of
the blessed God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

AMEN.

