AN ESSAY UPON NURSING AND THE MANAGEMENT of CHILDREN, FROM Their BIRTH to
THREE YEARS of Age.

BY W. CADOGAN, FELLOW of the COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS, Late PHYSICIAN to the
FOUNDLING-HOSPITAL.

In a LETTER to a GOVERNOR.

Published by Order of the GENERAL COMMITTEE for transacting the Affairs of the
said Hospital.

THE TENTH EDITION.

Revised and Corrected by the AUTHOR.

LONDON, Printed: BOSTON, Reprinted for COX and BERRY, in King Street.
MDCCLXXII.

SIR,
IT is with great pleasure I see at last the preservation of Children become
the care of Men of Sense: it is certainly a matter that well deserves their
attention, and, I doubt not, the Public will soon find the good and great
effects of it. The FOUNDLING HOSPITAL may be of more use to the world, than was
perhaps at first imagined by the promoters of it; it will be a means not only
of preventing the murder of many, but of saving more, by introducing a more
reasonable and more natural method of nursing. In my opinion, this business has
been too long fatally left to the management of Women, who cannot be supposed
to have proper knowledge to fit them for such a task, notwithstanding they look
upon it to be their own province. What I mean is, a philosophic knowledge of
Nature, to be acquired only by learned observation and experience, and which
therefore the unlearned must be incapable of. They may presume upon the
examples and transmitted customs of their Great grandmothers, who were taught
by the Physicians of their unenlightened days; when Physicians, as appears by
late discoveries, were mistaken in many things, being led away by hypothetical
reasonings to entertain very wild conceits, (...) which they were greatly
bewildered themselves, and misled others to believe I know not what strange
unaccountable powers in certain herbs, roots, and drugs; and also in some
superstitious practices and ceremonies; for all which notions, their being no
real foundation in Nature, they ought to be looked upon as the effects of
ignorance, or the artifices of designing Quacks; who found their account in
pretending to great knowledge of their occult qualities, and imposing upon the
credulous. The art of Physic has been much improved within this last century;
by observing and following Nature more closely, many useful discoveries have
been made, which help us to account for things in a natural way, that before
seemed mysterious and magical; and which have consequently made the practice of
it more conformable to reason and good sense. This being the case, there is
great room to fear, that those Nurses who yet retain many of these traditional
prejudices, are capitally mistaken in their management of Children in general,
and fancying that Nature has left a great deal to their skill and contrivance,
often do much harm where they intend to do good. Of this I shall endeavor to
convince them, by showing how I think children may be clothed, fed, and
managed, with much less trouble to their Nurses, and infinitely greater ease,
comfort, and safety, to the little ones.

THE Foundlings under the care of the Hospital, I presume, will be bred in a
very plain, simple manner: they will therefore infallibly have more health,
beauty, strength, and spirits; I might add understanding also, as all the
faculties of the mind are well known to depend upon the organs of the body; so
that when these are in good order, the thinking part is most alert and active;
the contrary, when they are disturbed or diseased. When these advantages appear
in favor of Children so brought up, as I am confident in time they will, it may
serve to convince most Nurses, Aunts, Grandmothers, etc. how much they have
hitherto been in the wrong, what mischief is done to Children, and what
multitudes are destroyed or spoiled, as well by cramming them with cakes,
sweetmeats, etc. till they foul their blood, choke their vessels, pall the
appetite, and ruin every faculty of their bodies; as by cockering and indulging
them, to the utter perversion of their naturally good temper, till they become
quite froward and indocile.

When a man takes upon him to contradict received opinions and prejudices
sanctified by time, it is expected he should bring valid proof of what he
advances. The truth of what I say, that the treatment of Children in general is
wrong, unreasonable, and unnatural, will in a great measure appear, if we but
consider what a puny valetudinary race most of our people of condition are;
chiefly owing to bad nursing, and bad habits contracted early. But let any one,
who would be fully convinced of this matter, look over the BILLS OF MORTALITY;
there he may observe, that almost half the number of those who fill up that
black list, die under five years of age: so that half the people that come into
the world, go out of it again before they become of the least use to it, or
themselves. To me this seems to deserve serious consideration; and yet I cannot
find, that any one man of sense and public spirit has ever attended to it at
all; notwithstanding the maxim in every one's mouth, that a multitude of
inhabitants is the greatest strength and best support of a Commonwealth. The
misconduct to which I must impute a great part of the calamity, is too common
and obvious to engage the idle and speculative, who are to be caught only by
very refined researches; and the busy part of mankind, where their immediate
interest is not concerned, will always overlook what they see daily; it may be
thought a natural evil, and so is submitted to without examination. But this is
by no means the case; and where it is entirely owing to mismanagement, and
possibly may admit of a remedy, it is ridiculous to charge it upon Nature, and
suppose that infants are more subject to disease and death than grown persons;
on the contrary, they bear pain and disease much better, fevers especially (as
is plain in the case of the smallpox, generally most favorable to Children)
and for the same reason that a twig is less hurt by a storm than an oak. In all
the other productions of Nature, we see the greatest vigor and luxuriancy of
health, the nearer they are to the egg or the bud; they are indeed then most
sensible of injury, and it is injury only that destroys them. When was there a
lamb, a bird, or a tree, that died because it was young? These are under the
immediate nursing of unerring Nature, and they thrive accordingly. Ought it not
therefore to be the care of every Nurse and every Parent, not only to protect
their Nurselings from injury, but to be well assured that their own officious
services be not the greatest the helpless creatures can suffer?

IN the lower class of Mankind, especially in the country, disease and
mortality are not so frequent, either among the adult or their children. Health
and posterity are the portion of the poor, I mean the laborious. The want of
superfluity confines them more within the limits of Nature: hence they enjoy
blessings they feel not, and are ignorant of their cause. The Mother who has
only a few rags to cover her child loosely, and little more than her own breast
to feed it, sees it healthy and strong, and very soon able to shift for itself;
while the puny insect, the heir and hope of a rich family, lies languishing
under a load of finery that overpowers his limbs, abhorring and rejecting the
dainties he is crammed with, till he dies a victim to the mistaken care and
tenderness of his fond Mother. In the course of my practice, I have had
frequent occasion to be fully satisfied of this, and have often heard a mother
anxiously say, The Child has not been well ever since it has done puking and
crying. These complaints, though not attended to, point very plainly to their
cause. Is it not very evident, that when a Child rids its stomach several times
in a day, that it has been over-loaded? when it cries, from the encumbrance and
confinement of its clothes, that it is hurt by them? While the natural strength
lasts (as every Child is born with more health and strength than is generally
immagined), it cries at or rejects the superfluous load, and thrives apace:
that is, grows very fat, bloated, and distended beyond measure, like a
house-lamb. But in time, the same oppressive cause continuing, the natural
powers are overcome, being no longer able to throw off the unequal weight; the
Child, not now able to cry any more, languishes and is quiet. The misfortune
is, these complaints are not understood! it is swaddled and crammed on, 'till
after gripes, purging, etc. it sinks under both burdens into a convulsion-fit,
and escapes any farther torture. This would be the case with the lamb, was it
not killed when it is full fat.

THAT the present method of nursing is wrong, one would think needed no other
proof than the frequent miscarriages attending it, the death of many, and ill
health of those that survive. But the persuading you of it may be a needless
task; if you have ever thought about it, I doubt not but you are already
convinced it is so. However, since you desire my sentiments upon the subject,
taking it for granted you think with me, that most of our Nurses are in a wrong
method, I will endeavor, in as few words as possible, to tell you what I think
a right one.

YOU perceive, Sir, by the hints I have already dropped, what I am going to
complain of is, that Children in general are over-cloathed and over-fed; and
fed and clothed improperly. To these causes I impute almost all their
diseases. But to be a little more explicit. The first great mistake is, that
they think a newborn infant cannot be kept too warm: from this prejudice they
load and bind it with flannels, wrappers, swathes, stays, etc. which all
together are almost equal to it is own weight; by which means a healthy Child in
a month's time is made so tender and chilly, it cannot bear the external air;
and if, by any accident of a door or window left carelessly open too long, a
refreshing breeze be admitted into the suffocating atmosphere of the lying-in
bedchamber, the child and Mother sometimes catch irrecoverable colds. But, what
is worse than this, at the end of the month, if things go on apparently well,
this hot-bed plant is sent out into the country to be reared in a leaky house,
that lets in wind and rain from every quarter. Is it any wonder the child never
thrives afterward? The truth is, a newborn Child cannot well be too cool and
loose in its dress; it wants less clothing than a grown person in proportion,
because it is naturally warmer, as appears by the thermometer, and would
therefore bear the cold of a winter's night much better than any adult person
whatever. There are many instances, both ancient and modern, of infants exposed
and deserted, that have lived several days. As it was the practice of ancient
times, in many parts of the world, to expose all those whom the parents did not
care to be incumbered with; that were deformed, or born under evil stars; not
to mention the many Foundlings picked up in LONDON streets. These instances may
serve to show, that Nature has made Children able to bear even great hardships,
before they are made weak and sickly by their mistaken Nurses. But, besides the
mischief arising from the weight and heat of these swaddling-cloaths, they are
put on so tight, and the Child is so cramped by them, that its bowels have not
room, nor the limbs any liberty, to act and exert themselves in the free easy
manner they ought. This is a very hurtful circumstance; for limbs that are not
used will never be strong, and such tender bodies cannot bear much pressure:
the circulation restrained by the compression of any one part, must produce
unnatural swellings in some other; especially as the fibers of infants are so
easily distended. To which doubtless are owing the many distortions and
deformities we meet with everywhere; chiefly among Women, who suffer more in
this particular than the Men.

IF Nurses were capable of making just observations, they might see and take
notice of that particular happiness, which a Child shows by all its powers of
expression, when it is newly undressed. How pleased! how delighted! it is with
this new liberty, when indulged for a few minutes with the free use of its legs
and arms. But this is not to last long; it is swaddled up as before,
notwithstanding all its cries and complaints.

I WOULD recommend the following dress: A little flannel waistcoat, without
sleeves, made to fit the body, and tie loosely behind; to which there should be
a petticoat sewed, and over this a kind of gown of the same material, or any
other that is light, thin, and flimsey. The petticoat should not be quite so
long as the Child, the gown a few inches longer; with one cap only on the head,
which may be made double, if it be thought not warm enough. What I mean is,
that the whole coiffure should be so contrived, that it might be put on at
once, and neither bind nor press the head at all: the linen as usual. This I
think would be abundantly sufficient for the day; laying aside all those
swathes, bandages, stays, and contrivances, that are most ridiculously used to
close and keep the head in its place, and support the body. As if nature, exact
Nature, had produced her chief work, a human creature, so carelessly unfinished
as to want those idle aids to make it perfect. Shoes and stockings are very
needless encumbrances; besides that they keep the legs wet and nasty, if they
are not changed every hour, and often cramp and hurt the feet: a child would
stand firmer, and learn to walk much sooner without them. I think they cannot
be necessary till it runs out in the dirt. There should be a thin flannel shirt
for the night, which ought to be every way quite loose. Children in this
simple, pleasant dress, which may be readily put on and off without teazing
them, would find themselves perfectly easy and happy, enjoying the free use of
their limbs and faculties, which they would very soon begin to employ when they
are thus left at liberty. I would have them put into it as soon as they are
born, and continued in it till they are three years old; when it may be changed
for any other more genteel and fashionable: though I could wish it was not the
custom to wear stays at all; not because I see no beauty in the sugar loaf
shape, but that I am apprehensive it is often procured at the expense of health
and strength of body. There is an odd notion enough entertained about change,
and the keeping of children clean. Some imagine that clean linen and fresh
clothes draw, and rob them of their nourishing juices. I cannot see that they
do any thing more than imbibe a little of that moisture which their bodies
exhale. Were it, as is supposed, it would be of service to them; since they are
always too abundantly supplied, and therefore I think they cannot be changed
too often, and would have them clean every day; as it would free them from
stinks and sournesses, which are not only offensive, but very prejudicial to
the tender state of infancy.

THE feeding of Children properly is of much greater importance to them than
their clothing. We ought to take great care to be right in this material
article, and that nothing be given them but what is wholesome and good for
them, and in such quantity as the body calls for toward it is support and
growth; not a grain more. Let us consider what Nature directs in the case: If
we follow Nature, instead of leading or driving it, we cannot err. In the
business of Nursing, as well as Physic. Art is ever destructive, if it does not
exactly copy this original. When a Child is first born, there seems to be no
provision at all made for it; for the Mother's milk, as it is now managed,
seldom comes till the third day; so that according to this appearance of
Nature, a Child would be left a day and a half, or two days, without any food.
Were this really the case, it would be a sufficient proof that it wanted none;
as indeed it does not immediately; for it is born full of blood, full of
excrement, it is appetites not awake, nor it is senses opened; and requires some
intermediate time of abstinence and rest to compose and recover the struggle of
the birth and the change of circulation (the blood running into new channels),
which always puts it into a little fever. However extraordinary this might
appear, I am sure it would be better that the Child was not fed even all that
time, than as it generally is fed; for it would sleep the greatest part of the
time, and, when the milk was ready for it, would be very hungry, and suck with
more eagerness; which is often necessary, for it seldom comes freely at first.
But let me endeavor to reconcile this difficulty, that a Child should be born
thus apparently unprovided for. I say apparently, for in reality it is not so.
Nature neither intended that a Child should be kept so long fasting, nor that
we should feed it for her. Her design is broke in upon, and a difficulty raised
that is wholly owing to mistaken management. The Child, as soon as it is born,
is taken from the Mother, and not suffered to suck till the Milk comes of
itself; but is either fed with strange and improper things, or put to suck some
other Woman, whose Milk flowing in a full stream, overpowers the newborn
infant, that has not yet learnt to swallow, and sets it a coughing, or gives it
a hiccup: the mother is left to struggle with the load of her milk, unassisted
by the sucking of the Child. Thus two great evils are produced, the one a
prejudice to the Child's health, the other the danger of the Mother's life, at
least the retarding her recovery, by causing what is called a milk-fever; which
has been thought to be natural, but so far from it, that it is entirely owing
to this misconduct. I am confident from experience, that there would be no
fever at all, were things managed rightly: were the Child kept without food of
any kind 'till it was hungry, which it is impossible it should be just after
the birth, and then applied to the Mother's breasts; it would suck with
strength enough, after a few repeated trials, to make the milk flow gradually,
in due proportion to the Child's unexercised faculty of swallowing, and the
call of it is stomach. Thus the Child would not only provide for itself the best
of nourishment, but, by opening a free passage for it, would take off the
Mother's load, as it increased, before it could oppress or hurt her; and
therefore effectually prevent the fever; which is caused only by the painful
distention of the lacteal vessels of the breasts, when the milk is
injudiciously suffered to accumulate. Here let me describe a case of pure
Nature, in order to illustrate this material point yet farther. When a healthy
young Woman lies-in of her first Child, before the operations of Nature have
been perverted by any absurd practices, her labor would be strong, and, as I
have chosen to instance in the case of a first Child, perhaps difficult; but in
a few minutes after her delivery, she and her Child if it be not injured, would
fall into a sweet sleep of six or seven hours: the Mother, if no poisonous
opiate has been unnecessarily given her, would awake refreshed, the Child
hungry. A little thin broth with bread, or some such light food, should then be
given her; and soon after the Child be put to suck. In one hour or two the milk
would infallibly flow; and, if nothing else be given it, the Child would grow
strong, and she recover perfectly in a few days. This is the constant course of
nature, which is very little attended to, and never followed. The general
practice is as soon as a Child is born, to cram a dab of butter and sugar down
it is throat, a little oil, panada, caudle, or some such unwholesome mess. So
that they set out wrong, and the Child stands a fair chance of being made sick
from the first hour. It is the custom of some to give a little roast pig to an
infant, which, it seems, is to cure it of all the Mother's longings. Much
nonsense has been propagated, and believed, about Women's longings, without any
foundation in truth and nature. I wish these matters were a little more
enquired into, for the honor of the sex, to which many imperfections of this
kind are imputed, which I am sure it does not lie under.

HERE I may be asked, What is to be done with the Child born sick, that,
instead of sleeping, cries incessantly from the birth, and is hardly to be
quieted by any means? Let good care be taken that it is not hurt by the
dressing, or rather let it not be dressed at all, but wrapped up in a loose
flannel. If notwithstanding this precaution, it still continues crying; instead
of feeding it, for it is certainly a preposterous thing to think of feeding a
Child because it is sick, though possibly this may stop its mouth for a little
while; let it be applied to the Mother's breast, perhaps it may bring the milk
immediately; which would be the best medicine for it in such a case; or the
nipple in its mouth may quiet it, though it does not bring it. And it is
certainly better it should be quieted without food than with it, which must
necessarily make it worse. Sometimes indeed the child may be so very ill, that
it will not even attempt to suck. In such a case, which I think can happen but
rarely, where Children are unavoidably to be dry nursed, let the physic I shall
recommend a little farther on, be given, a little every hour, 'till it takes
effect; still attempting to bring it to suck the Mother's milk, which is the
best Physic or food it can take.

WHEN a Child sucks it is own Mother, which, with a very few exceptions, would
be best for every Child and every Mother, Nature has provided it with such
wholesome and suitable nourishment; supposing her a temperate Woman, that makes
some use of her limbs, it can hardly do amiss. The Mother would likewise, in
most hysterical nervous cases, establish her own health by it though she were
weak and sickly before, as well as that of her offspring. For these reasons I
could wish, that every Woman that is able, whose fountains are not greatly
disturbed or tainted, would give suck to her Child. I am very sure, that
forcing back the milk, which most young Women must have in great abundance, may
be of fatal consequence: sometimes it endangers life, and often lays the
foundation of many incurable diseases. The reasons that are given for this
practice are very frivolous, and drawn from false premises; that some Women are
too weak to bear such a drain, which would rob them of their nourishment. This
is a very mistaken notion; for the first general cause of most peoples diseases
is, not want of nourishment as here imagined, but too great a fullness and
redundancy of humors; good at first, but, being more than the body can employ
or consume, they stagnate, degenerate, and the whole mass becomes corrupt, and
produces many diseases. This is confirmed by the general practice of
Physicians, who make holes in the skin, perpetual blisters, issues, etc. to let
out the superfluity. I would therefore leave it to be considered, whether the
throwing back such a load of humor, as a Woman's first milk, be most likely to
mend her constitution, or make her complaints irremediable. The Mother's first
milk is purgative, and cleanses the Child of it is long-hoarded excrement; no
Child, therefore, can be deprived of it without manifest injury. By degrees it
changes its property, becomes less purgative, and more nourishing; and is the
best and only food the Child likes, or ought to have for some time. If I could
prevail, no Child should ever be crammed with any unnatural mixture, till the
provision of Nature was ready for it; nor afterward fed with any ungenial
alien diet whatever, at least for the first three months: for it is not able to
digest and assimilate other aliments sooner. I have seen very healthy fine
Children, that never eat or drank any thing whatever but the Mother's milk for
the first ten or twelve months. Nature seems to direct this, by giving them no
teeth 'till about that time. There is usually milk enough with the first Child;
sometimes more than it can take: it is poured forth from an exuberant,
overflowing urn, by a bountiful hand, that never provides sparingly. The call
of Nature should be waited for to feed it with any thing more substantial, and
the appetite ever precede the food; not only with regard to the daily meals,
but those changes of diet, which opening, increasing life requires. But this is
never done in either case, which is one the greatest mistakes of all Nurses.
Thus far Nature, if she be not interrupted, will do the whole business
perfectly well; and there seems to be nothing left for a Nurse to do, but to
keep the Child clean and sweet, and to tumble and toss it about a good deal,
play with it, and keep it in good humor.

WHEN the Child requires more solid sustenance, we are to enquire what, and how
much, is most proper to give it. We may be well assured, there is a great
mistake either in the quantity or quality of Childrens food, or both, as it is
usually given them; because they are made sick by it; for to this mistake I
cannot help imputing nine in ten of all their diseases. As to quantity, there
is a most ridiculous error in the common practice; for it is generally
supposed, that whenever a Child cries, it wants victuals; and it is accordingly
fed, ten, twelve, or more times in a day and night. This is so obvious a
misapprehension, that I am surprised it should ever prevail. If a Child's wants
and motions be diligently and judiciously attended to, it will be found that it
never cries but from pain: now the first sensations of hunger are not attended
with pain; accordingly a Child (I mean this of a very young one) that is
hungry, will make a hundred other signs of its want, before it will cry for
food. If it be healthy and quite easy in it is dress, it will hardly ever cry at
all. Indeed these signs and motions I speak of are but rarely to be observed;
because it seldom happens that Children are ever suffered to be hungry. In a
few, very few, whom I have had the the pleasure to see reasonably nursed, that
were not fed above two or three times in four and twenty hours, and yet were
perfectly healthy, active, and happy; I have seen these signals, which were as
intelligible as if they had spoken.

THERE are many faults in the quality of their food: it is not simple enough.
Their paps, panada's, gruels, etc. are generally enriched with sugar, spice,
and sometimes a drop of wine; neither of which they ought ever to taste. Our
bodies never want them: they are what luxury only has introduced, to the
destruction of the health of mankind. It is not enough that their food be
simple, it should be also light. Several people, I find, are mistaken in their
notions of what is light; and fancy that most kinds of pastry, puddings,
custards, etc. are light, that is, light of digestion. But there is nothing
heavier in this sense than unfermented flour and eggs boiled hard, which are
the chief ingredients of those preparations. What I mean by light, to give the
best idea I can of it, is any substance that is easily separated, and soluble
in warm water. Good bread is the lightest thing I know; the power of due
fermentation, in which consists the whole art of making it, breaks and
attenuates the tenacious particles of the flour, so as to give it these
qualities I mention, and make it the fittest food for young Children. Cowes
milk is also simple and light, and very good for them; but it is injudiciously
prepared: it should not be boiled, for boiling alters the taste and property of
it, destroys it is sweetness, and makes it thicker, heavier, and less fit to mix
and assimilate with the blood. But the chief objection is, that their food is
wholly vegetable, the bad consequence of which is, that it will turn sour in
their stomachs. The first and general cause of all the diseases of infants, is
manifestly this acescent quality of all their food. If any of these vegetable
preperations I have named, be kept in a degree of heat equal to that of a
Child's stomach, it will become sour as vinegar in a few hours time. These
things are therefore very improper to feed a Child wholly with. Some part of
it is diet should be contrived to have a contrary tendency; such as we find only
in flesh, which is the direct opposite to acid, and tends to putrefaction. In a
due mixture of these two extremes, correcting each other, consists that
salubrity of aliment our nature seems to require. As we are partly carnivorous
animals, a child ought not to be fed wholly upon vegetables. The Mother's milk,
when it is perfectly good, seems to be this true mixture of the animal and
vegetable properties, that agrees best with the constitution of a Child;
readily passes into good blood, requiring but a gentle exertion of the powers
of circulation to break and subdue it is particles and make them smooth and
round, and easily divisible. I would advise therefore, that one half of infants
diet be thin light broths, with a little bread or rice boiled in them; which
last is not so acescent as any other kind of meal or flour. These broths should
be made with the flesh of full-grown animals, because their juices are more
elaborate; especially if they have never been confined to be fatted. The juices
of a young ox, taken from the plough, make the finest flavoured and most
wholesome soup. I believe it is for the same reason, the flesh of all wild
animals has a higher taste than that of tame, saginated ones, and is therefore
most agreeable to the palate of the luxurious: but this is to be understood of
those creatures that feed on corn or herbage. The other part of Childrens diet
may be a little toasted bread and water boiled almost dry and then mixed with
fresh milk, not boiled The LONDON Bakers are suspected of putting Alum in their
bread, which would be very pernicious to Infants; therefore rusks, or the
biscuits called tops-and-bottoms, or rice may be used instead of it. These will
not turn sour so soon as common bread; which quality is undoubtedly an
objection to using much of it, especially when Children are weakly. The safest
and best method in my opinion is not to feed them at all; at least till they
are six or eight months old. The finest Children I ever saw lived wholly upon
sucking till after that age.
. This without sugar, spice, or any other pretended amendment whatever, would
be perfectly light and wholesome, of sufficient nourishment, something like milk
from the cow, with the additional strength and spirit of bread in it. Twice a
day, and not oftener, a sucking Child should be fed at first; once with the
broth, and once with the milk thus prepared. As to the quantity at each time,
it is appetite must be the measure of that; it is hunger should be satisfied, but
no more; for Children will always eat with some eagerness full as much as they
ought: therefore it must be very wrong to go beyond that, and stuff them 'till
they spew, as the common method is. They should not be laid on their backs to
be fed, but held in a sitting posture, that swallowing may be easier to them,
and that they may the more readily discover when they have had enough. When
they come to be about TEN or TWELVE MONTHS old, and their appetite and
digestion grows strong, they may be fed three times a day; which, I think, they
ought never to exceed their whole lives after. By night I would not have them
fed or suckled at all, that they might at least be hungry in the morning. It is
this night feeding that makes them so overfat and bloated. If they be not used
to it at at first, and, perhaps, awaked on purpose, they will never seek it;
and if they are not disturbed from the birth, in a week's time they will get
into a habit of sleeping all or most part of the night very quietly; awaking
possibly once or twice for a few minutes when they are wet, and ought to be
changed. Their meals, and in my opinion, their sucking too, ought to be at
stated times, and the same every day; that the stomach may have intervals to
digest, and the appetite return. The Child would soon be quite easy and
satisfied in the habit; much more so, than when taught to expect food at all
times, and at every little fit of crying and uneasiness. Let this method be
observed about a TWELVEMONTH, when, and not before, they may be weaned; not
all at once, but by insensible degrees; that they may neither feel, nor fret at
the want of the breast. This might be very easily managed, if they were
suffered to suck only at certain times. Were this plan of nursing literally
pursued, the Children kept clean and sweet, tumbled and tossed about a good
deal, and carried out every day in all weathers, I am confident, that in six or
eight months time most Children would become healthy and strong, would be able
to sit up on the ground without support, to divert themselves an hour at a
time, to the great relief of their Nurses, would readily find the use of their
legs, and very soon shift for themselves.

IF it be asked, whether I mean this of children in general, and that weakly
ones, born of unhealthy parents, should be treated in the same manner; I
answer, that it is not so common for Children to inherit the diseases of their
parents, as is generally imagined; there is much vulgar error in this opinion;
for people that are very unhealthy seldom have Children, especially if the bad
health be of the female side; and it is generally late in life when chronic
diseases take place in most Men, when the business of love is pretty well over:
certainly Children can have no title to those infirmities, which their parents
have acquired by indolence and intemperance long after their birth. It is not
common for people to complain of ails they think hereditary, 'till they are
grown up; that is, 'till they have contributed to them by their own
irregularities and excesses, and then are glad to throw their own faults back
upon their Parents, and lament a bad constitution, when they have spoiled a
very good one. It is very seldom that young Children are troubled with
family-distempers: indeed, when we find them affected with scrophulous or
venereal complaints we may reasonably conclude the taint to have been
transmitted to them; but these cases are very rare in comparison of the many
others that are falsely, and without the least foundation, imputted to Parents,
when the real cause is either in the complainants themselves, or bad nursing
that has fixed them early in wrong habits. In one sense many diseases may be
said to be hereditary, prehaps all those of malformation; by which I mean not
only deformity and distortion, but all those cases where the fibers and vessels
of one part are weaker in proportion than the rest; so that upon any strain of
the body, whether of debauch or too violent exercise, the weak part fails
first, and disorders the whole. Thus complaints may be produced similar to
those of the Parent, owing in some measure to the similitude of parts, which
possibly is inherited, like the features of the face; but yet these diseases
might never have appeared, but for the immediate acting cause, the violence
done to the body. Most distempers have two causes; the one a particular state
of the solids and fluids of the body, which dispose it to recive certain
infections and impulses; the other, the infection or impulse itself. Now what I
contend for is, that though this predisponent state or habit of the body be
heritable, yet the diseases incident to these wretched heirs may be avoided, by
preventing the active cause; which may be done in many cases by a due attenton
to the non-naturals, as they are called; in plainer words, by a temperate,
active life: in Children, by good nursing. Therefore I conclude, that instead
of indulging and enfeebling yet more, by the common methods, Children so
unhappily born; that which I am recommending, together with the wholesome milk
of a healthy Nurse, is the best, the only means to remedy the evil, and by
which alone they may by degrees be made healthy and strong. And thus, in a
generation or two of reasonable temperate persons, every taint and infirmity
whatever, the king's evil and madness not excepted, would be totally worn out.

THE plain natural plan I have laid down is never followed, because most
Mothers, of any condition, either cannot, or will not undertake the troublesome
task of suckling their own Children; which is troublesome only for want of
proper method; were it rightly managed, their would be much pleasure in it, to
every Woman that can prevail upon herself to give up a little of the beauty of
her breast to feed her offspring; though this is a mistaken notion, for the
breasts are not spoiled by giving suck, but by growing fat. There would be no
fear of offending the husband's ears with the noise of the squalling brat. The
Child, was it nursed in this way, would be always quiet, in good humor, ever
playing, laughing, or sleeping. In my opinion, a Man of sense cannot have a
prettier rattle (for rattles he must have of one kind or other) than such a
young Child. I am quite at a loss to account for the general practice of
sending infants out of doors, to be suckled or dry-nursed by another Woman, who
has not so much understanding, nor can have so much affection for it as the
Parents; and how it comes to pass, that people of good sense and easy
circumstances will not give themselves the pains to watch over the health and
welfare of their Children; but are so careless as to give them up to the common
methods, without considering how near it is to an equal chance, that they are
destroyed by them. The ancient custom of exposing them to wild beasts, or
drowning them, would certainly be a much quicker and more humane way of
dispatching them. There are some, however who wish to have Children, and to
preserve them, but are mistaken in their cares about them. To such only I would
address myself, and recommend it to every Father to have his Child nursed under
his own eye, to make use of his own reason and sense in superintending and
directing the management of it; nor suffer it to be made one of the mysteries
of the Bona Dea, from which the Men are to be excluded. I would advise every
Mother that can, for her own sake, as well as her Child's to suckle it. If she
be a healthy Woman, it will confirm her health; if weakly, in most cases it
will restore her. It need be no confinement to her, or abridgment of her time;
four times in four and twenty hours will be often enough to give it suck;
letting it have as much as it will take out of both breasts at each time. It
may be fed and dressed by some handy reasonable servant, that will submit to be
directed; whom likewise it may sleep with. No other Woman's milk can be so good
for her Child; and dry-nursing I look upon to be the most unnatural and
dangerous method of all; and, according to my observation, not one in three
survives it. To breed a Child in this artificial manner, requires more
knowledge of Nature, and the animal economy, than the best Nurse was ever
mistress of, as well as more care and attention than is generally bestowed on
Children; the skill of a good Physician would be necessary to manage it
rightly. I am very glad this is not the method of the Hospital: I believe there
is not the least color of objection to any part of the management of that most
useful and excellent charity, as far as it depends upon the directors of it.
Sending the Children out to Country-nurses, under the care of Inspectors, is
undoubtedly the best method they could take; but how far these Nurses and their
Inspectors (who, I suppose, are to be some good Gentlewomen in the
neighborhood) may be persuaded out of their old forms, to treat their
Nurselings a little more reasonably, is matter of much doubt. I fear they will
be too tenacious of their prejudices, as well as opinionated of their skill, to
be easily convinced they are in the wrong; and who shall undertake the task?
However, I despair not of seeing a reformation one day or other; and to
contribute to it as as much as lies in my power, I will give you my opinion as
to the precautions necessary to be taken in the choice of these Nurses; and
likewise a few reasons why the Children, entrusted to their care, should be
treated somewhat differently from those who are nursed in a more natural way,
and suck their own Mothers. I make no doubt, but great care is taken, that the
Nurses recommended to the Hospital be clean and healthy Women. But this is not
enough; the preference should be given to the middle-aged; because they will
have more milk than the very young, and more and better than the old. This is a
material consideration, as I suppose they have each her own Child to suckle
besides. Those between twenty and thirty are certainly of the best age. But
what I think of the utmost consequence is, that great regard should be had to
the time of their lying-in, and those procured, if possible, who have not been
bro't to bed above two or three months. The reason of this is, that Nature
intending a Child should suck about a twelvemonth, the milk seldom continues
good much longer. About that time, Women in general, though they give suck, are
apt to breed again: some, indeed, that are very sanguine, will breed sooner;
these, notwithstanding their milk, are apt to be troubled with the catamenia,
which disturb it greatly; and therefore are not so proper to be made Nurses of.
But, whether they breed or not, it is my opinion, that after a year's time, or
thereabouts, however it may agree with the Child that has sucked it from the
first, their milk will become stale and vapid, at least very unfit for a
newborn infant; that if it be deprived of it is own Mother's milk, ought
undoubtedly to have what is most like it; the newer it is, the more suitable in
all respects to it is tender nature. Yet it is a common thing for a Woman to
suckle two or three Children successively with the same milk.

A NURSE ought to have great regard to her diet: it is not enough that she be
sober and temperate, her food should consist of a proper mixture of flesh and
vegetables: she should eat one hearty meal of unsalted flesh-meat every day,
with a good deal of garden stuff and a little bread. Thin broth or milk would
be best for her breakfast and supper. Her drink should be small beer, or milk
and water; but upon no account should she ever touch a drop of wine or strong
drink, much less any kind of spirituous liquors: giving ale or brandy to a
Nurse is, in effect, giving it the Child; and it is easy to conclude what would
be the consequence.

THE Children, likewise, thus sent out, require a particular treatment. The
plan I would lay down, could I prevail, should be that of Nature, excluding Art
and foreign aid entirely. But when this is broke in upon, a little adventitious
skill becomes indispensably necessary; that if we are not perfectly right in
following closely the design of Nature, we may cooperate a little, and not be
totally wrong in counter-acting it, as is too often the case. What I mean is,
that every Child, not allowed the Mother's first milk, whether it be
dry-nursed, or suckled by another Woman, should be purged in a day or two after
the birth; and this purging continued for some time: not by regular doses of
physic, that may operate all at once; but some lenient laxative should he
contrived, and given two or three times a day, so as to keep the Child's body
open for the first nine days, or fortnight; lessening the quantity insensibly,
'till it be left off. It should be so managed, that the operation of the
artifical physic may resemble that of the natural. This is so material, that,
for want of it, most Children within the first month break out in pimples all
over; the Nurses call it the red-gum, and look upon it to be a natural thing,
and that the children will be unhealthy that have it not. So indeed they will
be in all likelihood; and it is better that these foulnesses, which become
acrid and hot by remaining too long in the body, should be discharged through
the skin; than not at all; or that they should be lodged in the blood, or fall
upon the vitals, to lay the foundation of numberless future evils; but it is
chiefly owing to the neglect of this method at first. A Child that sucks it is
own mother, unless it be greatly over-fed, or kept too hot, will never be
troubled with this humor at all. If the Children that are brought to the
Hospital be not above a month old, and if it be found, upon enquiry, that they
have not sucked their own Mothers, something of this kind prescribed them would
not be too late and improper. The following form may be used: Take manna, pulp
of cassia, of each half an ounce; dissolve them in about three ounces of thin
broth. Let the Child take two spoonfuls three times a day, varying the quantity
according to the effect; which, at first, ought to be three or four stools in
four and twenty hours.

ORDERS should be given these Nurses to keep the Children awake by day, as long
as they are disposed to be so, and to amuse and keep them in good humor all
they can; not to lull and rock them to sleep, or to continue their sleep too
long; which is only done to save their own time and trouble, to the great
detriment of the Childrens health, spirits, and understanding. With regard to
feeding them, as it is not likely they should have milk enough to support two,
their own, and the Hospitial-child; it is best they should begin immediately
according to the method I have recommended, if they or their inspectors can be
persuaded to think it right; which however, I would not have understood so
strictly, but it might sometimes be a little varied, preserving only the
intention, I would advise, however, if it be thought proper, now and then, to
give them, as they grow up, a little bread and butter perfectly sweet and
fresh, and allowed but in very small quantity; otherwise it will be apt to turn
bitter and rancid in the stomach, and foul all the juices of the body. A Child
may be allowed any kind of mellow fruit, either raw, stewed, or baked; roots of
all sorts, and all the produce of the kitchen-garden. I am sure all these
things are wholesome and good for them, and every one else, notwithstanding the
idle notion of their being windy, which they are only to very debauched
stomachs; and so i^ milk; but no Man's blood wants the cleansing refreshing
power of milk more than his, whose stomach, used to inflammatory things of high
relish, will not bear the first chill of it. To Children, all this kind of
food, taken in moderation, is perfectly grateful and salutary. Some may think
that they carry into the stomach the eggs of future worms; but of this I am not
very apprehensive; for I believe there are few things we eat or drink, that do
not convey them. But then they can never be hatched in a healthy inside, where
all the juices are sweet and good, and every gland performs it is office: the
gall in particular, would destroy them: bullocks gall has been found to be a
good and safe vermifuge. It is my opinion, we swallow the eggs of many little
animals, that are never brought into life within us, except where they find a
fit nest or lodgment in the acid phlegm or vitiated humors of the stomach and
bowels. Were these totally discharged every day, and the food of yesterday
employed in nourishment, and the superfluity thrown off to the last grain, no
worms could ever breed or harbor in our vitals. As soon as the Children have
any teeth, at six or eight months they may by degrees be used to a little
flesh-meat; which they are always very fond of, much more so at first, than of
any confectionary or pastry wares, with which they should never debauch their
taste.

BREEDING teeth has been thought to be, and is fatal to many Children; but I am
confident this is not from Nature: for it is no disease, or we could not be
well in health 'till one or two and twenty, or later. Teeth are breeding the
greatest part of that time; and it is my opinion, the last teeth give more pain
than the first, as the bones and gums they are to pierce, are grown more firm
and hard. But, whatever fever, fits, or other dangerous symptoms seem to attend
this operation of Nature, healthy Children have sometimes bred their teeth
without any such bad attendants; which ought to incline us to suspect the evil
not to be natural, but rather the effect of too great a fullness, or the corrupt
humors of the body put into agitation by the stimulating pain the tooth causes
in breaking its way out. This, I believe, never happens without some pain, and
possibly a little fever; but if the blood and juices be perfectly sweet and
good, and there be not too great a redundancy of them, both will be but slight,
and pass off imperceptibly, without any bad consequence whatever. The chief
intention of the method I am recommending is, to preserve the humors of the
body in this state; and therefore, if it succeeds, Children so managed will
breed their teeth with less pain and danger than are commonly observed to
attend this work of Nature.

AS I have said, that the first and general cause of most of the diseases
infants are liable to is the acid corruption of their food; it may not be amiss
just to mention an easy and certain remedy, or rather preventative, if given
timely, at the first appearance of predominating acid; which is very obvious
from the crude, white, or green stools, gripes and purgings occasioned by it.
The common method, when these symptoms appear, is to give the pearl-julep,
crab's eye, and the testaceous powders; which, though they do absorb the
acidities, have this inconvenience in their effect, that they are apt to lodge
in the body, and bring on a costiveness, very detrimental to infants, and
therefore require a little manna, or some gentle purge, to be given frequently
to carry them off. Instead of these, I would recommend a certain fine insipid
powder, called Magnesia alba, which, at the same time that it corrects and
sweetens all sournesses, rather more effectually than the testaceous powders,
is likewise a lenient purgagative, and keeps the body gently open. This is the
only alkaline purge I know of, and which our dispensatories have long wanted. I
have taken it myself, and given it to others for the heart-burn, and find it to
be the best and most effectual remedy for that complaint. It may be given to
Children from one to two drams a day, a little at a time, in all their food,
'till the acidities be quite overcome, and the concomitant symptoms disappear
entirely. I have often given it with good and great effect, even when the
Children have been far gone in diseases first brought on by prevailing acid.

IT is always easier to prevent diseases than to cure them; and as neither
Children, nor indeed grown persons, are ever seized with chronic diseases
suddenly, the progress of decaying health being perceptibly gradual, it is no
difficult matter for a Physician of common skill to observe the first step
toward illness, and to foretell the consequence, in all those whose habit of
life is well known to him. But to Parents and Nurses in general, these
observations may not occur; I will therefore point out a few certain signs and
symptoms, by which they may be assured that a Child's health is decaying, even
before it appears to be sick. If these are neglected, the evil increases, grows
from bad to worse, and more violent and apparent complaints will follow, and
perhaps end in incurable diseases, which a timely remedy, or a slight change in
the diet and manner of life, had infallibly prevented. The first tendency to
disease may be observed in a Child's breath. It is not enough the breath be not
offensive; it should be sweet and fragrant like a nosegay of fresh flowers, or
a pail of new milk from a young cow that feeds upon the sweetest grass of the
spring; and this as well at first waking in the morning, as all day long. It is
always so with Children that are in perfect delicate health. As soon,
therefore, as a Child's breath is found to be either hot or strong, or sour, we
may be assured that digestion and surfeit have fouled and and disturbed the
blood, and now is the time to apply a proper remedy, and prevent a train of
impending evils. Let the Child be restrained in it is food; eat less, live upon
milk or thin broth for a day or two; be carried, or walk if it is able, a
little more than usual in the open air. Let a little of this powder, or any
other proper physic, be given; not that I would advise physic to be made
familiar, but one dose administerd now would prevent the necessity of a great
many, that might afterward be prescribed with much less good effect.

IF this first symptom of approaching illness be overlooked, the Child, who, if
it was healthy, would lie quiet as a log all night, will have disturbed sleep,
restlessness, terrifying dreams; will be talking, starting, kicking and
tumbling about; or smiling and laughing, as is common with very young Children
when they are griped, and the Nurses say they see and converse with Angels.
After this will follow loss of appetite and complexion, check of growth, decay
of strength, cough, consumption; or else colicks, gripes, worms, fits, etc.
diseases that require all the skill of a good Physician; and happy for them, if
the utmost he can employ will restore them to any degree of lasting health.

THERE is one thing more which I forgot to mention in it is proper place, and
therefore I must take notice of it here; that is, the degree of exercise proper
for Children. This is of more consequence that all the rest; for without it,
all our care in feeding and clothing will not succeed to our wishes: but when
by due degrees a Child is brought to bear a good deal of exercise without
fatigue, it is inconceivable how much impropriety and absurdity in both those
articles it will endure unhurt. A Child, therefore, should be pushed forwards,
and taught to walk as soon as possible. A healthy Child a year old will be able
to walk alone. This we may call the era of their deliverance; for this great
difficulty surmounted, they generally do well, by getting out of the Nurse's
hands to shift for themselves. And here I must endeavor to correct a great
mistake, which is, that most people think it wrong to put weakly Children upon
their legs, especially if they are the least bent or crooked; but whoever will
venture the experiment will surely find, that crooked legs will grow in time
strong and straight by frequent walking, while disuse will make them worse and
worse every day. As they grow daily more and more able, let their walks be
gradually increased, 'till they can walk two miles on a stretch without
weariness; which they will be very well able to do before they are three years
old, if they are accustomed to it every day. To lead them such a walk should be
imposed as an indispensible task upon their maids; for to them it will be the
highest pleasure; so far from a burden to them, that if they perform the daily
duty, they will, from the impulse of their own active vigor, be found running,
leaping and playing, all day long. Thus, a dull, heavy Child may be made
playful and sprightly, a weakly one healthy and strong, and confirmed in good
habits and perpetual health.

THERE are some other little niceties, that, were they observed in the nursing
of Children, would be of some use to them, such as making them lie straight in
bed, I do not mean extended like a corpse, but that their limbs may be free and
easy. I have sometimes seen Children a year or two old lie doubled up in bed as
in the womb, especially in cold weather, and from the constraint of their
posture fall into profuse sweats. This will be prevented if they are laid
straight, and sleep relaxing all the muscles of the body, the knees will
naturally be bent a little. They should be taught to use both hands alike; for
employing one more than the other, will not only make the hand and arm so used,
but also that side of the body, bigger than the other. This is sometimes the
cause of crookedness. It would likewise not be amiss to forward their speaking
plain, by speaking plain distinct words to them, instead of the namby-pamby
style, and giving them back their own broken inarticulate attempts; by which
means, I believe, some Children scarcely speak intelligibly at seven years of
age. I think they cannot be made reasonable creatures too soon.

THESE few loose thoughts on the subject of nursing Children, I send you for
your private satisfaction, if they be lucky enough to give you any. I have
neither time nor patience to think of form and order, or supporting them by
affected demonstrations taken from mechanical principles and powers. All I have
endeavored is to be intelligible and useful; and therefore I have avoided, as
much as possible, all terms of art; together with learned quotations, as often
produced out of vanity, and to show deep reading, as for the sake of proof. If
you think it may be of any use to publish this Letter, I am not unwilling it
should appear; if not, do with it what you please. I deliver it up as a
FOUNDLING, to be disposed of as you think proper. I shall only add, by way of
persuasive to those who may be inclined to make trial of the method I
recommend, that I am a Father, and have already practiced it with the most
desirable success.

FINIS.
P. S. IT is now above twenty years since I wrote the foregoing essay, and
though I have made a few alterations, it was only to explain those passages
that contained any apparent difficulty or obscurity; I have never yet found
cause to alter essentially any one opinion delivered in it. I have through the
whole industriously labored at the greatest plainess and simplicity, and yet
my meaning has been much mistaken. Some have very strangely expected to find in
it the general cure of Childrens diseases, though it be professedly wrote only
to prevent them, by establishing good health; a very different thing (whatever
people may think) from the cure of diseases. Sick or weak Children, whether
such by Nature or made such by bad Nursing, cannot perhaps be brought
immediately into the habits here recommended, but must first be cured of their
maladies by a skilful physician, who, if he be also an honest man, will
introduce these or similar habits of management, to continue them in health and
strength. But in treating their diseases, as well as in nursing them I am very
sure many capital errors are committed. I object greatly in particular to the
frequent use of antimonial and mercurial medicines; which, though they give
sometimes a little temporary releif, by discharging crude and phlegmatic
humors, killing worms, etc. I am very confident a repeated use of them breaks
the blood, relaxes the fibers, and is every way destructive to the constitution
of Children. Present relief seems to be all that is desired, and therefore all
that is intended by medication; the slow but permanent effects of good habits
few have patience to expect. Others have neglected essentials, to lay stress
only upon trifles: A Lady of great sway among her acquaintance told me not long
ago, with an air of reproach, that she had nursed her Child according to my
book, and it died. I asked, if she had suckled it herself? No. Had it sucked
any other woman? It was dry-nursed. Then Madam, you cannot impute your
misfortune to my advice, for you have taken a methed quite contrary to it, in
the most capital point. Oh but, according to my direction, it had never worn
stockings. Madam, Children may die, though they do or do not wear stockings.


George-street, Hanover-square, 17 July, 1769.
Cox and Berry, Have for Sale at their Store in King Street, BOSTON:

A very large Collection of BOOKS in all ARTS and SCIENCES, Bibles, Prayer
Books various Sizes, and a great variety of little Books for the Instruction
and Amusement of Children. ALSO,

A COMPLETE ASSORTMENT of STATIONARY, Viz.

Writing Paper of all Sorts, Account Books, a great Variety of Pocket Books,
Ivory, Tortoishell and Patent Ass Skin Memorandum Books, Ink Powder and Patent
Cake Ink, Quills, Sealing Wax and Wafers, Ink Chests, Black and Red Pencils,
Penknives, Pounce and Pounce Boxes, Ivory Folders.

The following esteemed Books To be had very Cheap.

SERMONS to young Women, by James Fordyce, D. D. an eminent dissenting Minister
in London.

Though this Author is a professed advocate for that sex, which leads the
world, he does not however address them in the usual strains of flattery and
adoration, but in the sober and impartial style of friendship. He entertains
the highest idea of their importance and destination; and does not consider
them in that debasing light in which they are too often considered, as formed
only to be domestic drudges, and the slaves of our pleasures; but as intended
to be reasonable and agreeable companions, faithful and affectionate friends,
the SWEETNESS and the CHARM OF HUMAN LIFE. There are no compositions of this
kind in the English language in which are to be found greater delicacy of
sentiment, correctness of imagination, elegance of taste, or that contain such
genuine pictures of life and manners. Happy the Mothers who follow his Maxims
in forming the taste and manners of their daughters! Happy, thrice happy the
daughters who are blessed with such mothers.

Orton's Memoirs of the Life, Character, and Writings of the late Dr. Philip
Doddridge.

Every serious Christian must receive great satisfaction and edification from
the perusal of the life of the learned and pious Doctor Doddridge, whose
integrity, humility, affectionate temper, lively and animated devotion,
rendered him one of the most shining ornaments of the Church of Christ.

Providence, an Alegorical Poem, in three Books, Illustrated with Notes. By the
Rev. John Oglevie.

The reader of taste, during the perusal of this admirable poem (which is not
inferior to any in the English language) will enjoy ineffable delight in all
its variety. The description of the beautiful and luxuriant Scenes of Nature,
-- of the genial seasons, -- of the rural haunts of innocence and peace, will
now expand the heart with joy, and now sooth into the tenderest complacency. --
The strength and cogency of the proofs in favor of Revealed Religion, adorned
with all the graces of poetry, it is hoped will contribute to convince the
judgment, and impress the mind with the warmest sentiments of gratitude. -- The
scenes of misery and distress incident to Human Life drawn by the pen of so
feeling a writer, and heightened with the true colors of genius, will wring
the throbbing breast with pangs of commiseration, will awake all the finer
movements of the soul, and improve the reader in the virtues of Humanity.

Gough's Practical Grammar of the English Tongue, being the best Book of the
kind extant.

Containing the most material Rules and Observations for understanding the
English Language well, and writing with propriety; with a compendious
Dictionary of English Words properly accented.

The Frugal Housewife, or Complete Woman Cook.

Wherein the Art of Dressing all Sorts of Viands, with Cleanliness, Decency,
and elegance, is explained Five Hundred approved RECEIPTS, in Roasting,
Boiling, Frying, Broiling, Gravies, Sauces, Stews, Hashes, Soups, Fricassees,
Ragoos, Pasties, Pies, Tarts, Cakes, Puddings, Syllabubs, Creams, Flummery,
Jellies, Giams, and Custards. Together with the BEST METHODS of Potting,
Collaring, Preserving, Drying, Candying, Pickling, and making of English Wines.
To which are prefixed, various Bills of Fare, for Dinners and Suppers in every
Month of the Year; and a copious Index to the Whole.

By SUSANNAH CARTER, Of LONDON.

N. B. Any Person, by attending to the Instructions given in this Book, may
soon attain to a competent Knowledge in the Art of Cookery, etc. -- And it
likewise contains more in Quantity than most other Books of a much higher Price.

Patent Medicines.

The STOMACH PILLS.

THEY are useful in all Diseases of the Stomach and Bowels, where there is no
formed Fever. The Inventor wishes not to impose on the Public; let their
effects when tried establish their Character. If from eating too much Fruit, or
too many Vegetables, from too great a Variety or Quantity of Food, or Drink, or
from Drinking bad Wine, Cider, Beer, Punch, or Spirituous Liquors of any kind;
if from a Costive Habit, a Deficiency of Bile, tough Phlegm, cold or wet Feet,
too thin Clothing, or too little Sleep; if from any or more of such like
Causes, the Stomach or Bowels are disordered, One, Two, or Three of these
Pills, taken at any Hour of the Day or Night, will procure immediate relief,
require not the least Confinement; and are very useful at Sea, by keeping the
Body regularly open.

They are also the best Physic for pale Complexions, and at the turn of Life;
and are of great Service in bringing an ill-formed Gout to a regular Fit.

N. B. Nothing procures Sleep so readily, or so effectually takes off that
Restlessness which arises from a Stomach loaded at Night with too much food or
Drink.

The famous Dr. HILL's Pectoral Balsam of Honey, -- A new discovered Remedy for
Coughs, Consumptions, Asthmas, etc. etc. -- It is the greatest Preserver of the
Lungs, and if it be in the power of medicine to stop the Ravage of that cruel
Disease the Consumption, this Balsam will effect it.

Dr. HILL's Elixir of Bardana, a safe and absolute cure for the Rheumatism. It
also relieves those afflicted with the Gout, reduces the Number, and shortens
the Continuance of the Fits

Dr. HILL's Essence of Water-Dock. -- Authors of the highest Credit have
affirmed, that it is an absolute and certain Cure for the Scurvy, Leprosy, and
all obstinate cutaneous Disorder.

Dr. HILL's Tincture of Sage, -- For preventing the Decays of Age, and
lengthening Human Life. It also prevents all the Disorders that attend a
sedentary Habit; and relieves instantly in Faintness, Tremblings, and every
Kind of Discomposure.


