Mr. Leavenworth's Election SERMON, MAY 14, 1772.

CHARITY illustrated and recommended to all Orders of Men; In A SERMON
Delivered before the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Colony of Connecticut, at
Hartford, on the Day of their ANNIVERSARY ELECTION, MAY 14, 1772.

BY MARK LEAVENWORTH, A. M. PASTOR of a Church of CHRIST in WATERBURY.

-- FAITH, HOPE, CHARITY, these Three: but the greatest of these is CHARITY.
ST. PAUL. THERE must be public Virtue, or Government cannot stand. -- There
must be private Virtue or there cannot be public. Dr. Secker, A. Bp. Cant. (As
quoted by Dr. Johnson.) NEW LONDON: Printed by T. GREEN, Printer to the
Governor and Company.

AT a GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Governor and Company of the Colony of
Connecticut, holden at Hartford, on the Second Thursday of May, Anno. Domini,
1772.
ORDERED, That Mr. Joseph Hopkins, and Capt. Timothy Judd, return the Thanks of
this Assembly to the Reverend Mr. Mark Leavenworth, for his Sermon delivered
before the Assembly, on the 14th Instant; and desire a Copy thereof, that it
may be printed.

George Wyllys, Sec'y

An Election SERMON.
I TIMOTHY I. V. NOW the End of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure
Heart, and of a good Conscience, and of Faith unseigned.
THIS short but pithy sentence, contains in it all the virtues of the divine
and the social life. If we might be so happy as to penetrate to the bottom of
it, to reach the quintessence, to unfold the subject matter of it, Charity, in
its nature and rise, its genuine tendency, effects, objects and operations, we
should see that it will dilate and expand itself so as to reach every order of
men, not only in their general callings as christians, but in their particular
callings, connexions and relations to each other as members of community. For
as the truth contained in it, is not too low for the greatest monarch on earth,
so neither is it too high for the meanest peasant to be conversant with. And
were the hearts of men generally opened to give entertainment to it, they would
instantly become the epistle of Christ, and presently be known and read of all
men. And the law of charity being written not with ink, but by the Spirit of
the living God; not in tables of stone, but in the fleshly tables of their
hearts; of a cursed and miserable, this would soon become a blessed and happy
world! -- It was a quality radically concreted with the human nature; but by
the seduction and apostasy was lost.

As the creation sprung from the Creator, all was good: And as man came forth
of the hands of his MAKER; ( man, the beauty and glory of the lower creation)
he was innocent and upright: In the moral image of his glorious author, -- all
was love -- all was harmony. But when pride entered some of the celestial
inhabitants, and proved the defection of those prime apostates, the devil and
his angels, envy and malignity wrought for the seduction of man made in the
image of God; and proved fatally successful. Man was lost! his heart was turned
off from its proper center and objective blessedness. That sense of moral
excellence, (the light of the knowledge of the glory of God,) in which
radically lay his spiritual life, was gone. Pride, malignity, discord and
enmity took place. His sun was set! darkness and the shadow of death overspread
him. His appetites, which were made and designed to be subordinate, gained the
ascendent. Man fell under the curse: and instead of an innocent regard to that
felicity which arose from the heart's being swallowed up primarily in love to
the glorious Being, and a sense of moral beauty, a supreme regard to self, and
to creature good, took place. Hence all that jarring, discord, confusion and
bloodshed which ensued, all over this miserable world; as well as all those
pains, disorders, and distresses of human nature; which finally reduce us to
the dust, whence we were taken. The curse of God's law fell upon us, which
condemns to eternal pain for every transgression and disobedience. And the very
ground is cursed for man's sake, in consequence of his sin. Yea, the animate
and inanimate world sustains the weight. The creature or the creation groans,
being burdened and pained for deliverance. And from this guilty depravity, in
which lies our spiritual death, and has so universally spread itself through
the human nature, arises all that unkindness from friends, and all that
bitterness from enemies, which we see and feel in this apostate world. In a
word, mankind were ruined and lost: Death entered by sin, and passed upon all,
for all have sinned and come short of the glory of God.

UPON this plan proceeds the wonderful work of redemption and recovery for
lost man, by the Redeemer and Sanctifier: by the Son of God who came to seek
and to save that which is lost, and by the Spirit of God to make application.
Here was room for mercy, mere mercy to take place; -- divine wisdom and counsel
found out the way, for the exercise of it. A way glorious, clear beyond the
reach and penetration of the most exalted of created nature, till it was opened
to view by the man whose name is the Brouch; who was to build the temple of the
Lord; to build the Temple of the Lord, and to bear the glory. Zech. 6.12.
Of which early discoveries began to be made soon after the apostasy; and were
after renewed and made more plain to Abraham, Moses, David and Isaiah, who saw
his glory and spoke of him. And when the fullness of time was come that the
predictions which went before of him should be accomplished; such as this with
many others; Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his
name Emanuel; the Spirit of the Lord came upon her, and the power of the
highest over shadowed her. And the holy thing born of her; -- Here, note, is an
exemption from all the human race by ordinary generation; the holy thing born
of her is called the Son of God. In a time of general expectation he made his
entrance into the world, in a way not agreeable to the general taste; not with
public observation; not in worldly splendour, as the princes and nobles of this
world -- but in humble obscurity, he made a stable his birthplace, and a
manger his cradle. However, it was to the observation of the upper world,
attended with a pomp and magnificence truly caelestial; becoming the dignity of
the Person. The heavenly inhabitants were active and admiring spectators of the
surprising scene. The morning stars sang together, etc. A caelestial messenger
brought the tidings down to earth. And immediately there was with the angel an
innumerable multitude of the heavenly host: Those aetherial minstrels filled
these lower regions, singing praises, and giving glory to God in the highest,
and proclaiming peace, good will to men. Thus was fulfilled that prediction;
when he brings his first-begotten into the world, be says; And let all the
angels of God worship him. And what was the occasion of all this sublime
solemnity? This day is born in the city of David a Savior, which is Christ the
Lord. And he was designed to save them from their sins, (and therefore not
agreeable to men's taste, for they love their sins) and to recover those who
were ruined and lost by sin; to restore them to the image of God; to the
cordial practice of the duty and felicity pointed out in our text, CHARITY.

WHICH word contains in it the substance of the law and religion of innocence,
and the religion of the gospel. CHARITY is an agreeable found to most, and
often in the mouths of men in general; but too often a stranger to their
hearts: and perhaps little understood in the genuine nature and effects of it.

IN discoursing on the words, let us

I. (...) a little to the nature, the rise, objects and operations of it.

II. VIEW it as the end of the commandment.

III. MAKE some application, agreeable to the subject and occasion.

I. WE are to attend a little to the nature, rise, objects and operations of
charity.

IF we consult the sacred oracles, we shall find it a primary and radical
virtue of the christian life: clear above, and specifically different from any
thing we are possessors of in this fallen state, either by natural birth, or
the force and influence of mere education. That which is born of the flesh is
flesh, agreeable to its own principle depraved. To be carnally minded therefore
is enmity against God. The loyal subjects of God's moral government, as such,
are born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the wiil of man.
And as to the glories of that king and kingdom, with which charity is primarily
conversant, they are revealed not by flesh and blood.

CHARITY in its nature is the same with love, a divine or a true christian
love: which is a holy exercise of heart toward its proper objects; and is the
root and substance of all godliness. That it is the same in its nature with
holy love, may be seen by observing that the same word, agape, in the original
language of the new testament, here translated charity, is every where used,
where the word love is used in our translation, i. e. a holy or christian love.
To mention but one instance out of innumerable; Hope makes not ashamed,
because the love of God agape tou theou, is shed abroad in the heart. And where
it has not only the supreme and glorious Being, but fellow creatures as the
object of it, as in our text, and elsewhere, it seems to be judiciously
translated charity: And comprehends the substance of both tables.

IT IS of a divine original, the fruit of a gracious efficacy. For the fruits
of the Spirit are love, etc. It arises out of a pure heart: a heart purified or
renewed by grace; put into a disposition to see and feel the weight of the
arguments and motives to love; which never fail to operate where they are
properly apprehended: as they always are when the seed falls into good ground;
or truth enters an honest and good heart -- and of a good conscience: a
conscience regulated according to truth; called some times a pure conscience.
When the mind and conscience is defiled, every thing is out of order. Unto them
who are defied and unbelieving, is nothing pure; but even their mind and
conscience is defiled. Tit. 1. 15.
Conscience may be called the eye of tie soul; a discerner of the things which
are excellent, and of the excellence of then -- and of the guilt and turpitude
of the reverse. But if the eye be evil, viciated and defiled, the whole body is
full of darkness. Let the veil, which consists in a temper, propensity or
exercise of heart directly the reverse to charity, be taken off and the light
of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, will shine
into the heart; we behold his glory -- the heart is sprinkled from evil
conscience; -- holy affections inkindle in the soul, rise into zeal and server
in the greatest and best cause: and in their benevolent effects, like the kind
and radient beams of the sun, diffuse themselves to every proper object.

THE apostle adds -- and of says unfeigned: a found and permanent faith; by
way of distinction from that which is temporary and transient, withering away
in time of temptation -- and from that which is in pretense, and not in truth;
or that which is erroneous and unsound. Which was the case with some in the
church at Ephesus, which began to degenerate in Paul's day; who besought
Timothy to charge some not to teach any other doctrine; me heterodidascalein,
not to teach heterodoxy; which some had fallen into, inconsistent with that
form of sound words delivered to them: and had turned aside to vain jangling;
desiring to be teachers of the law, not understanding what they said, nor
whereof they affirmed. And before the decease of the apostle John, that church
was complained of as having lost her first love. When a church or people
degenerate, or fall into errors inconsistent with the truth and simplicity of
the gospel, they lose their love or purity toward God, and their charity toward
men. He who comes to God, must believe his being and perfections, or his true
character; which is most especially exhibited in the truths revealed in his
holy law, and in the glorious gospel of Jesus Christ. When those truths are
received, and that character duly apprehended in the excellence of it, (as it
always is when the truth enters an honest and good heart), charity or a holy
affection unvariably ensues, and is coming to God. For it is a uniting of the
heart to the glorious and worthy object.

HE therefore, who receives the record of God, on divine testimony, or
believes in his heart, that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God; and will not
be ashamed of the gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God to every one who
believes, and gives entertainment to the truth as it is in Jesus.

As to the objects of charity, that noble, that divine and extensive virtue, it
is not bounded by the utmost limits of creation. It extends clear beyond all
created nature. As it is virtuous, noble and sublime in its nature, so it soars
alost to the most noble and sublime objects; the unbounded and incomprehensible
excellence of the Creator and Redeemer. As it is said of hope, so may it be
said of charity, out of which hope springs: it enters into that within the
vail, whither the forerunner is for us entered. If our affection is bounded by
the creature, or limited to created good, we have no portion in God, nor at
present capable of enjoying any. Charity, if it take a survey of all creatures
and things below the skies, and then stretch its wings and arise to the upper
and invisible world, rove among created caeclestial inhabitants, the general
assembly and church of the firstborn, and the spirits of just men made perfect,
can find nothing in them, which can be its utmost bounds, or its principal and
primary object. It cannot be bounded by, or rest in any thing short of
uncreated excellence, the sum and comprehension of being and blessedness, the
perfections and glories of God and the Lamb who sets on the throne. As it is
written, Thou shall love the Lord thy God. This is the old and the new
commandment, the law and the gospel. Those therefore who are risen with Christ,
have their affections on things above where Christ is at the right hand of God.
Charity, the end of the commandment, is a compliance with this divine precept,
without which there is no cordial compliance with any injunction of divine
revelation.

THE greatest and best of beings, the Being of glorious and unbounded
excellence, is the primary object of this holy affection. And if so, it fixes
on him, in a special and peculiar manner on account of that in his character,
which renders him most especially worthy, excellent and amiable; which is his
moral perfections; wherein lies his peculiar glory, and his amiableness. As he
is glorious in holiness, charity views him and centers in him, according to
that character: otherwise is not according to truth. But as it rejoices in the
truth so more especially in the glorious truth of the divine character: the
amiableness and moral beauty of which is its primary objective ground. And as
the superlative excellence of the divine Being, exhibited in his works and in
his word, so the divine law and glorious gospel of the grace of God are objects
of it. Thy word is very pure, wherefore thy servant loves it. Charity
rejoiceth in the word more than in all riches. And it is sweeter than honey to
the taste. It esteems his precepts, clothed with all their attractive and all
their tremendous fanctions, concerning all things to be right; is well suited
with them. And as the Redeemer, the ascended Emmanuel, in his divine and
mediatorial glories, is an object of this divine virtue, so the glorious gospel
of the grace of God wherein he has brought life and immortality to light, is
the center of its exercise and of its joy.

A^ to the tendency and operations of it, in regard to God its primary object,
they are all divine, all glorious. As it is itfelf an assimulation to the deity
who is love; so it tends more and more to lead the subject of it, to aspire
after conformity to God, 'till he is swallowed up in likeness and enjoyment.
For it is a participation of the divine nature, and its ambition can be bounded
by nothing short of being filled with all the fullness of God. It renders
Christ the chief of ten thousand, and altogether lovely: sits under his shadow
with delight, and his fruit is sweet to its taste. It is ardently fond of every
thing which has a favorable aspect upon his cause and interest in the world: Is
never so much in its element as when that flourishes, nor so much out of it as
when that is under decay and suffering. It sensibly knows what it is in good
earnest to offer up that petition, Thy kingdom come, thy will be done. It feels
the weight and efficacy of gospel motives, not only to join itself, but forever
to leave to the Lord as its portion and blessedness: and the language of it to
others is, Come taste and see that the Lord is good.

IN a time when the christian world is all in the heave, and one says this and
another that is right; lo, here is Christ, or lo, there; and their language
confounded like that of Babel, Charity rests in God as its portion, and says,
The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice. It makes God its dewlling place in all
generations: and when wearied with the avocations, temptations or snares of
time, it on reflection assumes this language, Return unto thy rest, O my soul.
As it is grieved at the dishonor of God, the violation of his law, (I beheld
the transgressors and was grieved) so it resolves to adhere to him, oppose who
will; depart from me ye evil doers; for I will keep the commandments of my God.
It carries the soul above the pomps and allurements of the present world: it
cheerfully submits to self-denying duties at the call of God. It was this gave
Abraham the victory in that severest of combats between nature and duty, when
called to lay violent hands on his dear and only son Isaac -- -- This
influenced Moses to despise the pomps and pleasures of a royal court, when in
competition with the cause of his God; choosing rather to suffer affliction
with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. It is
a principle of dependence on God and the Redeemer for all supplies relative to
the natural and the divine life: renounces therefore all confidence in the
flesh, and rejoiceth in Crist Jesus, in whom dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead. And by way of consequence, a spirit of adoption always attends it,
which is a spirit of prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, in the name of
the Lord Jesus.

As to self, I shall only observe that the felicity of the subject consists in,
or immediately result from it: for it is a principle of consolation and joy in
God and the divide Emmanuel, whom having not seen ye love; and in whom tho now
ye see him not, yet believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of
glory. Here is charity out of a pure heart and of faith unfeigned. A good
conscience is implied: divine consolation joy unspeakable results from or
consist in it.

CHARITY always has respect to some being or quality as its object; and the
apprehended amiableness or worth of the object, (which is likewise its ground
and motive) the higher, it rises, the stronger it operates, and the greater the
felicity resulting from it. It may be questioned, whether it is possible in the
nature of things, for a rational or social creature as such (which is the same
with a moral agent) to enjoy happiness abstract from all consideration of
relation to society? If not, whether the happiness of a rational creature, as
such, is not wholly of the social kind? And if so, it may be asserted that
there can be no happiness to a moral agent without love; and even all that
happiness radically consists in it. This reasoning seems to be countenanced and
confirmed by divine revelation. That which duty and virtue consists in,
happiness consists in: but duty and virtue according to revelation, consist in
love: therefore happiness. This therefore is the sum of the law, to love the
Lord thy God with all the heart; and thy neighbor as thy self: Therein we have
fellowship one with another; and truly our fellowship is with the Father and
with his Son Jesus Christ. The consolation which results from it, the stranger
intermeddles not with. It is that which attends the subject of it through life;
at home and abroad -- in private and public life; its joy in prosperity; its
support in adversity; even in the valley of the shadow of death: Its language
is, Thou shall guide me by thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory. Whom
have I in heaven but thee etc. Mystesh and my heart fail, but thou art the
strength of my heart and my portion forever. Charity never fails.

MOREOVER, charity has not only the divine perfections and government, but
fellow men for the object of it: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
Though we are made more immediately and primarily the guardians of our own
interest and happiness, yet charity considers the interest of another of as
much worth and importance as our own, and is disposed to further and promote
it. It extends its benevolent exercises not to a few individuals and friends
merely, to whom indeed it is grateful for all benefactions and manifestations
of favor and respect, but it wishes well to enemies, and forgives injuries;
and conducts as the offspring of that glorious Being who causes his sun to
rise an the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and unjust. [It
is of a patient and longsuffering disposition, under the evil things with which
it is tried in this tempting and thorny world, in the course of divine
providence: and is a spirit of that forbearance recommended in the sacred
oracles, one toward another, under common infirmities and failings: Forbearing
one another in love. While it neglects not justice and equity, kindness is its
genuine make and tendency, It suffers king and is kind: Yea it bears all
things: endures all things. It is the fulfilling of the law of kindness; which
is, that we love our neighbor as ourselves. We mean not to fail in kindness to
ourselves: and if our regard to ourselves, be the measure of regard to others,
we shall be kind to them. Their persons, their interest, their honor and
reputation will be the objects of our tenderness. Charity is kind. Hence a
natural consequence of this is, that it is not subject to envy, or of an
envious disposition. The spirit which is in the world lusts to envy: But this
heaven-born principle is of a more noble and sublime make. Charity envieth not:
It is ever attended with the clothing of humility, the ornament of meekness
and quietness of spirit, which in the sight of God is of great price: In
opposition to a haughty, imperious, self-exalting and vainglorious
disposition: It vaunteth not itself; is not puffed up: Nor easily provoked to
wrath and revenge, which is the genuine spirit and tendency of pride and
unmortified passion. It is ever of a decent and seemly temper and behavior.
The apostle exhorts, Whatsoever things are lovely and of good report; think on
these things. This is the property and operation of charity. It does not behave
itself unseemly -- A decent behavior may be the effect of education; but it
will be the effect of charity, though education were deficient -- It thinks no
evil; will not give lodging in its breast to evil and sinful thoughts, nor be
forward to conceive jealousies and evil surmisings of others. It covers a
multitude of failings. It rejoiceth not in iniquity, either our own or others,
but rejoiceth in the truth. It believes all things contained in the record God
has given of his Son: It hops for the accomplishment of all things wrapped up
in the sacred promises of him whose faithfulness shall never fail: And its hope
is an anchor to the soul. It is of a noble, generous and catholic disposition;
seeks not her own, 1 Cor. 13 Chap
but the good of others.]

IT highly regards the interest of the community -- will labor to further and
promote it -- will exert itself to the utmost in that respect, according to the
sphere in which it acts, whether public or private: It animated Job, Moses,
Samuel, David, etc. those public men in the common interest: It prefers the
public to private or personal interest, honor or profit: yea, it extends its
benevolence to the world of mankind; and when it can do nothing more it will
prostrate itself before the throne of God in behalf of a miserable and guilty
world. But its special complacency is in the saints, and excellent in the
earth. It cordially wishes the prosperity of Zion, out of regard to God, and
the eternal interest of men; and prays for the peace of Jerusalem.

CHARITY will excite him who rules, to do it with diligence: Will fill him
with concern that he may be a minister of God for good, to the community, which
is the design of his institution. It will excite him in quest of all that
political knowledge which is necessary for the faithful and successful
discharge of his exalted trust: That he may know bow to go in and out before
the people. It will distribute justice impartially; will despise the gain of
oppression, and shake the hands from holding of bribes; not Favoring the cause
of the rich more than the poor. The cause which it knows not will it search
out; will listen to the cries of the widow and fatherless; remove heavy
burdens, and let the oppressed go free. It has an irreconcilable disgust to
arbitrary and despotic measures -- to absolute and unlimited monarchy; which is
of the nature of tyranny: wherein the lives and fortunes of men are at the
capricious will and humor of the ruler; which is so far from being a lawful
government, that it is the iligitimate offspring of pride and domination; it
has its origin from beneath, and is usually brought about by force or intrigue;
and commonly pregnant with a series of mischief, cruelty, oppression and
bloodshed. Under it the inslaved people groan 'till they are so sunk and
debased that they are abandoned as to any sense of liberty and the rights of
men; which happens not 'till they have lost all sense of public and private
virtue; and are invelop'd in a thick and impenetrable cloud of ignorance and
wickedness: Then, and not 'till then are they prepared to pay their stupid,
crouching and servile devoirs to usurpation and despotism.

CHARITY is a cardinal quality of a true patriot: It effectually engages the
ruler to pursue the civil interest of the state and community, and as a means
of it, to discountenance and supress vice and immorality, which ever has a
threatening aspect, both natural and moral, on the common weal; -- and to
promote and encourage virtue and religion: as righteousness exalts a nation,
but sin is the reproach, debasing and ruin of a people. Thus he will not bear
the sword in vain, but be a terror to evil doers, and a praise and
encouragement to such as do well: But will take care that he keep within the
proper limits if his jurisdiction, and invade not the natural or constitutional
rights of the people; either to indulge humor or avarice, or to gratify a
faction: For he knows that such acts of arbitrary power, not being the exercise
of lawful authority, are unjust, wicked, and not in their nature binding.

WHEN Pilate the Roman governor in Judea, told the king of Israel that he had
power to crucity and power to release him; Jesus answered, Thou could have no
power against me, were it not given thee of God. Wherefore, he who delivered me
to thee, has the greater sin. A plain innuendo that he had no just power
against I him, as he found no legal fault in him: and therefore his excercising
any, was transgressing the limits with which heaven had circumseribed his
authority. And though he does not tell him in plain terms that it was a great
piece of wickedness in him to pretend to any; yet, in as much as God had given
him none, it was so in him who had delivered him into his hand, as if he had a
right to crucify him; when there was no crime could be proved against him; but
all was done at the importunity and clamor of his factious enemies. He who
delivered me to thee has the greater sin. Him therefore, being delivered by
the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, have they taken, and WICKED
HANDS have crucified and slain.

IN private life charity is a principle of subjection and obedience to the
higher powers; as the powers which be are ordained of God. So that they are his
ministers, attending continually on this very thing. It is therefore willing to
render honor to whom honor is due; -- tribute to whom tribute, and custom to
whom custom, for the maintaning of government. In a word, it will render to
Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God the things which are God's.

IT will be in subjection not for wrath, but for conscience sake; and that
voluntarily; for it desires the peace, happiness and good order of society.

IT is a spirit of prayer and supplication, for all orders of men; for kings,
and those in authority; that we may lead quiet and peaceable lives, in all
godliness and honesty.

IT is indeed very fond of the natural and, constitutional rights of a free
people, civil and religious; and will be very jealous of any distant approaches
of incroachment upon them, by any exorbitant claims of power. Mutual charity
will ever secure mutual confidence between rulers and people. Put on charity
therefore. which is the bond of peace and perfectness. It is the unity of the
Spirit in the bonds of peace: The mutual duties of defense and protection,
repect, obedience and support are effectually secured by it.

IT rejoiceth in the wealth and flourishing of the community; and has a
distaste to every thing which has a tendency to depress, impovrish and destroy
it. And as the prosperity of the community depends on the flourishing and
prosperity of individuals, it will give attention to prudence, industry and
economy: -- Will avoid that unnecessary profuseness in expense, whether in
superfluous ornaments of the body, or gratification of the appetite, which has
a natural and moral tendency to hurt ourselves, injure our fellow-men, and
bring judgments on our land. In a word, it will most effectually teach us to
deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, to live soberly, righteously and godly
in the present world: To look for another and better country; for the blessed
hope and glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ.

IT is a principle of trust in, and dependence on God, through Jesus Christ. It
rejoiceth in, and holds fast the truth as it is in Jesus; especially relative
to the recovery of ruined man, by the matchless grace and manifold wisdom of
God, through the Redeemer: which is the instruction, the joy and wonder of
angels, principalities and powers in heavenly places. It is its consolation,
its meat and drink, to live and walk in the way of truth and duty. It is a part
of heaven brought down to earth, and is to live and grow up toward a state of
perfect blessedness. Charity never fails.

ARE any of the subjects of it employed as messengers of the Lord, as ministers
of his kingdom, it will animate them with zeal in his cause, to turn the
disobedient to the wisdom of the just. It will pray them in Christ's stead to
be reconciled to God. -- To turn from darkness to light, and from the power of
satan to God: that they may receive remission of sins and inheritance among
those who are sanctified. And it will feed his sheep and feed his lambs. It
will feed them with knowledge and understanding: Not giving heed to fables --
which minister questions rather than godly edifying. It will naturally care for
the state of the churches and the souls of men. Will not usurp dominion over
their faith, but be helpers of their joy. Teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever he has commanded: Which is the extent and limitation of their
instructions: to the faithful discharge of which he has annexed that gracious
promise of his presence; Lo, I am with you always, even to the end.

II. WE come now to the second thing proposed, viz. to view charity as the end
of the commandment -- Which is already so far anticipated, that but few words
are necessary. -- And here let us observe, that the apostle's primary and
immediate reference, by the commandment, is to the charge or injunction which
Paul besought Timothy to lay upon some to teach no other doctrine. As may be
seen by looking into the original text, and comparing the words used; which are
of the same derivation. He desired Timothy, hina paranggeilees, that thou
should charge some, not to teach any other doctrine. Then adds, now the end,
tees paranggelias, of this charge, this injunction, is charity. However, we are
not to understand it exclusive of other precepts and injunctions; for where is
the same reason, there should be the same interpretation. But there is the same
reason to say of other precepts and injunctions of religion, the end of them is
charity. The precepts of the law, the discoveries, doctrines, calls and
injunctions of the gospel, all point out and aim at this end; this noble and
caelestial virtue: This therefore is the old and the new commandment, the law
and the gospel: and this is the fulfilling of them: On this bangs all the law
and the prophets. As we have considered, it radically contains all the virtues
of the divine life, personal and social: and is the root and origin of all true
morality. If any man love me, he will keep my word. John 14.23.
Love is the fulfilling of the law. Rom 13.10


REMARK I. IF charity be the end of the commandment, containing in its bosom
all the virtues of the christian life, and is a radical virtue, the sum of all
conformity to God, then without it we have no cordial conformity to God in any
of the precepts and injunctions of religion; but our whole mind and conscience
is defiled, and nothing is pure. And the want of it in a moral agent, implies
in it that temper and exercise of heart which is the root and comprehension of
all corruption and vice. And though we could speak with the tongue of men and
angels, and have not charity, we should be as sounding brass and a tinkling
cymbal. And though we have the gift of prophesy, and understand all mysteries and
all knowledge; and though we had all faith, so that we could remove mountains,
and have no charity, we are nothing; 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3
and ever lie open exposed to the snares of a depraved heart, an evil world,
and subtle devil; which have made shocking work with this apostate race. How
came Cain to rise up against and murder his brother? The want of charity. --
And the same cause brought in all that inundation of wickedness which caused
the governor of the world to repent that he had made man on the earth, and to
destroy a world of them with a deluge; spread vice and debauchery through Sodom
and the cities of the plains, and brought upon them the vengeance of eternal
fire: Sold Joseph into Egypt: raised murmurings in the Israelites against God
Moses, and brought destruction on them in the wilderness; led them off to
idolatry in Canaan, and the wrath of God fell upon them: removed the
candlesticks from the Asian churches; has spread vice and debauchery, cruelty,
tyranny, oppression, bloodshed and misery over this globe. Hence vanity of
vanities, all is vanity. And we of New England shall have nothing to save us
from the highest pitch of abomination, but what is called restraining grace,
when once our charity is gone; for without this we are nothing.

FROM all which we may remark,

II. THE vast difference between this, and that modern charity which seems to
be in the mouths of many, but is well consistent with an impure, an unrenewed
heart, an evil conscience and a feigned faith. [The one is the root and
comprehension of all virtue public and private, and the other has nothing of
the nature of true and genuine virtue in it. The one is a supernatural and
divine principle, and the other flows from principles merely human and
depraved. And as their origin, so their objects and tendency are specifically
different. The one (a disinterested virtue) has him who is glorious in holiness
for its primary and its ultimate object; while mere self is the rise, the hinge
and the center of the other.]

IT seems to lie some times in liberal benefactions to the public and the poor:
and may arise from a natural softness and generosity of temper and
constitution, or from other causes and motives. Thus our mother country is said
to abound in this kind of charity. Hence a noted writer of their own says, They
hope their charity will cover the multitude of their sins; Salm. Geo. p. 226.
and save them from destruction. But an inspired writer intimates, that "we may
give all our goods to feed the poor," yet be destitute of charity. Beneficence
is indeed the genuine effect of true charity: and it tends on proper occasions
to cover the sins of others, but to purge out and destroy our own. Not to
expect salvation in them, but to be saved from them. For this cause was the Son
of God manifested, to take away our sins, and to destroy the works of the
devil. On the other hand, it is the tendency of this species of modern charity,
by benefactions to purchase a salvation consistent with the life and power of
sin. A mere ideal project, arising from the DECEITFULNESS of sin.

In some, it seems to consist in a good opinion of others, while living; but
especially to find them out in heaven, evidence or not, when dead and gone.
Apostolic charity wishes the eternal salvation of men ardently; but is no blind
and credulous principle, forming opinions and maxims without foundation to
support them. Sometimes it is garnished with the epithet of catholic: and so
extends its good opinion to all parties and professions of men, however
different and opposite in their sentiments and practice. This evinces that it
has no principles of its own, or basis for its support. [According to this
pagans, infidels, and popish idolators, who wear the mark of the beast, stand
near as fair for heaven as christians.] However, it is not of that sort which
never fails. It is capable of retiring into itself, and becoming of a very
contracted spirit. While the object is at a distance, or to serve a turn, it
will make a specious show; but, stand in the way of its ambitious or party
views, it will become bitter and censorious; will repeat and aggravate
failings, and often find them where there are none: will run into parties and
intrigues, if not factions: will stigmatize such as differ from them, or stand
in their light, with epithets of reproach, or some discriminating marks of
odium. [Yet will cry out and call upon others for charity, meaning a good
opinion of them, and approbation of their temper and conduct.] Would be thought
very charitable, but indulge a temper and conduct very inconsistent with
evangelic Neither is this charity free from the imputation of self
Inconsistency. Arians, Socinians, and Arminians exercise this sort of charity
toward Calvinists. Bishop Beveridge was a Calvinist in doctrine; and the
Arminians, etc. from that day to this, have esteemed him to be one of the best
men in the church. But yet they will say, if they believed Calvinistic
doctrines to be agreeable to the bible, they would renounce in This is just as
many have done. Many of the deists And infidels in England have been convine'd,
that the bible supported Calvinistic doctrines, which they could not submit to,
and therefore renounced revelation. A carnal unbelieving heart is as opposite
to bible doctrine as to Calvinistic doctrine: for it is enmity against God: And
if so, it is enmity against the doctrines of God's book. Those doctrines which
suit an impenitent, unhumbled heart, are not the holy truths of the bible.
All such kind of charity, consistent with an unhumbled, an unbroken and
impenitent heart, how high soever it arises, differs not materially in its
general nature and origin, or very essentially in its object, from that which
once pressed a clamorous outcry from a popular multitude; GREAT IS DIANA, OF
THE EPHESIANS.

[IT may be called modern by way of distinction from apostolic charity; not
because it is of late date; for it took its rise from the apostasy, and has
lived and reigned in this guilty world ever since. It often discovers itself in
a biggoted fiery zeal in favor of a cause, and against those of different
sentiments and practice. As it is the offspring and spirit of pride, and
carries in it much fondness for self; so it usually affects domination; and
would have every one bow under its scepter. It has therefore made dreadful work
in this part of the creation. Hence the ancients had trial of cruel mockings
and scurges; yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment. They were stoned, they
were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword: They wandered about
in sheep skins and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented] And hence
the Israelites killed the true, cherished and encouraged the false prophets,
who prophesied smooth things. Dug down God's altars, and stoned those who were
sent unto them. And finally filled up their measure in rejecting and killing
the prince of life. A very charitable deed; for they said he was a deceiver, a
blasphemer, and had a devil: And we have a law, and by our law be ought to die.
The cause operated among jews as well as gentiles, in respect to his apostles
and primitive christians, according to the prediction of the divine Emmanuel;
He who kills you will think be does God service. For they persecuted them
unto death, in all the most cruel, horrid and barbarous forms which the malice
of earth and hell was able to invent. [It has disposed their successors to fill
up the measure of their fathers; for in whatever different shapes this sort of
charity operates, it is always enmity against God. When it took place and
gained the ascendent in the christian church, it raised the Romish hierarchy to
that enormous size in which it has appeared in the world; set the man of sin in
the seat of God; exalted above all that is called God.] Constituted the
mystical Babylon, which shall fall and sink as a millstone into the sea. It
erected the Romish inquisition, that holy engine of catholic barbarity; of
which they scarcely look on a man worthy to be a member, 'till he has so far
lost the traces of humanity, or (as they express it) 'till grace has so far got
the ascendent of nature, that he can behold, and even execute the most shocking
cruelties on friend or foe, without any sensible emotions of the softer
passions of human nature. IT established the order of jesuits, filled with
artifice, subtilty and intrigue for maintaining the Roman pontiff and his
catholic cause: Those unclean spirits, like frogs who proceed out of the mouth
of the dragon out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false
prophet. (Rev. 16.13) -- working miracles; who go forth unto the kings of the
earth, and of the whole world -- It spread desolation on the discovery of the
new world, in South America, till many large and populous kingdoms were laid
waste and depopulated; Bp. Keuet. Ser, before the society.
driving thousands of them to the waters to baptize them, and then dispatching
them to heaven. And what greater piece of catholic charity than this? as
baptism, according to them, is regeneration; and had they been suffered to
live, they would have fallen into sin after baptism. The same kind of charity
deliberately and coolly massacreed many thousands of protestants in France and
Ireland; and the actors thought they were doing God service, as much at the
English court and their ecclesiastical devotees did while they were making
havoc of protestant non conformists, in the reign of the Stuarts; -- And why
shouldn't they? for they acted from the same principle, and had the same
general object in view.


IT has usurped dominion over the kings of the earth; deposed and
excommunicated them, and interdicted kingdoms; brought fire and faggot into
England, and consumed many of the best men in it with flames; set up and long
maintained a protestant inquisition in this nation, under the name of a court
of ecclesiastical commission; and that of the star chamber nearly allied to it.
In which despotic and arbitrary power were displayed to the life, and exerted
till a great part of the nation groaned under the burden of their oppressions,
in civil or religious causes; their goods risled, their persons molested and
crowded into stinking goals, 'till all the prisons in the nation were filled:
Where many good people pined away a miserable life, and gave up the ghost; some
in the cause of religion, and others of civil liberty; 'till oppression made
wise men mad, and they rose up and destroyed their oppressors -- It drove
thousands of good families into the wilds of America, for the sake of civil and
religious rights in the successive reigns of the male branches of the Stuart
family, those scourges of the nation. THE same kind of charity which wrought
for the exiling of our fathers, pursues us their children with bitter
invectives and reproach -- represents us as d sloyal, rebellions and seditious
in the state, and calls for military guards on the whole country. And in the
church we are represented as deserving the heaviest reproach that can be cast
upon us, who with our native soil, have abandoned our native manners and
religion -- living wihout remembrance or knowledge of God, and in the most
brutal profligacy of manners -- That we are become insidels, barbarians and
heathen. (Bp. of Land^ff's sermon before the society) -- Having few means of
instruction afforded us, and the good impressions brought with us worn out; the
sabbath profaned, and the most essential of the christian ordinances
neglected, and the face of religious worship hardly kept up. (Bp of Lincoln's
sermon before the society.) Again, when pleading for an American episcopate,
after which they so much languish for the government of their clergy and
people, confirmation, etc it is added, by the Bp. of Bristol, in his sermon
before the society, p. 26.27. BUT there are men who will receive neither law
nor gospel from us; who clamor for liberty, but yet are the most imperious of
task masters and tyrants; who contend for unlimited toleration for themselves,
but yet are to all others most intolerant, whenever they get power into their
own hands These and many such like are the representations made of the colonies
without distinction, by the highest dignitaries in the church, on those high
anniversary occasions, in the parish church of St. MARY L BOW, and spread all
over the nation. -- The design of which is obvious. And if they had come from
less men than bishops, especially from our equals, we might possibly give a
different answer; but in this case will only say, Nemo omnibus horis sapit?
Even great men are not always wise.

But from the whole we may note,

1. THAT the bishops are of the mind they ought to give us law, and that we
ought to receive it from them. But if it be a fault in us to think differently
from them in this, as well as some other points, we hope we shall be excused,
as it is an unavoidable one; notwithstanding all their professions of lenity
and moderation, and willingness that we enjoy our own rights and liberties.

2 THIS is what we apprehended before, that they were aiming to pave the way to
give us law, whenever a favorable opportunity should present; and is some what
alarming.

3 As to the gospel, we have received it long ago, more incorrupt, from another
quarter; and do not therefore (...) need of it from them; and we hope, by the
will of God, to perpetuate it to posterity.

4. THE clamours made against us in church and state, have one and the same
meaning. Their general object is one; to bring on a revolution in church and
state, and subvert our liberties, which have ost us dear.

5. THIS imputation of such an intolerent spirit, borrowed from one of his
lordship's agents in America, must be understood to reach those colonies, this
in particular; ^^ich his lordship very well know, has a legal establishment for
the support of their missionaries. But it may answer one end among such have
not the means of better information. Pray good people give us some more money
to convert presbyterian and congregational people of New England, to our
excellent church. It may be remarked, the were it not for a particular design,
it would be somewhat difficult to account for their keeping up their clamours
against the colonies; for they say they have gained over a third part of the
people to their profession; "So that now there is a goodly appearance of
religion." And they say they have many numerous congregations in these
barbarous clines. More than a hundred and forty thousand people have been
baptized; -- That more than a hundred and fifty thousand bibles and common
prayer books have been distributed, as well as other treatiles, and instructive
small tracts innumerable. "That they are at the further charge of more than a
hundred missionaries, schoolmasters and catechists for the further propagation
of the gospel and instruction of the young and ignorant."

WE also may say without vanity, That we have more than ten churches and
congregations to their one, where the word of God is steadily and faithfully
preached, and the ordinances administered -- That we have baptized more than a
hundred and fifty to their one; and distributed among ourselves more than a
hundred and fifty bibles and other treatises and pious small tracts to their
one; and are at the farther charge of supporting more than forty ministers,
schoolmasters and catechists to their one, for the farther propagation of the
gospel, and the instruction of the young and ignorant. So that we imagine we
are not without means of instruction, even though they had not put to a helping
hand. And our people, as degenerate as they be, still deserve at least as good
a character for religion and morality as their converts.

IT is very easy for men in their turns, once a year, when they have a design
to serve, to mount the desk and exclaim against a whole country of people three
thousand miles off, at all adventures; especially when they have the advantage
of taking the description from their own country. For according to public
witnesses of their own, no country is so corrupt with drunkenness and idleness
as England is at present, consuming all orders of people: And the excellent law
against drunkenness, s^e^^^^^ idle and dissolute practices, and all vice in
general are sc^rce numerable; but such is the gross neglect of them as if they
had not been enact. ^ Vice and prophanness reign triumphant. Salm, geog. p. 245


If this be true, the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint. As there
is confessedly no godly discipline in the church, so there is no execution of
laws by civil magistrates for suppression of vice and debauchery. And when they
plead for an American bishop for the governing their clergy and people, etc it
might be said, "Physician heal thyself."

HOWEVER, we are not so intolerant as to object against their enjoying their
constitution to the full, were they but able and willing to give us security as
to our own liberties, which were too dearly purchased to be easily and readily
given up.

Mr. Salmon in his geography, p. 246, may be supposed to give as prelatic
sentiments, when he says, that episcopacy is so weekly established that every
man is at liberty to dissent, etc A plain intimation that they look on an
establishment with a toleration, but a weak business; and therefore only a
favorable opportunity it waited for, to reduce it to its ancient footing; and
when such an one presents, who does not know that court minions enough may be
found to resume and brandish the sword so long laid aside. We have not yet
forgot the Bomerine and Laudian worm wood and gall.




But the peculiar wisdom of him who reigns on high, is able to bring good out
of evil, and has turned all to the advancement of the wealth, honor and
greatness of the kingdom; and to the advantage of us the successors of those
emigrants from their native country; has paved the way for the establishing
this charming colony on the most advantageous (...); which is as capable of
being independent on our neighbors as any other colony in the land. A happy
people! were we but sensible of it, and of the right way of preserving our
happiness, (felices sua si bona norint) which is in great measure wrapped up in
charity. It has paved the way for the joys of the present occasion, wherein our
eyes behold our teachers, and our ears hear the voice saying, this is the way,
walk ye in it. Likewise behold our rulers, the fathers of our country, who are
of ourselves, and of our own choosing; whose interest is in common embarked
with ours; and are not only our civil fathers but our christian brethren; men
of charity and men of prayer, as Moses. Men who will naturally care for our
state; shining and exemplary ornaments in our churches; men (as we charitably
suppose) fear God and hate covetousness -- wise men and known among our tribes;
under whose administrations we enjoy all advantages to lead quiet and peaceable
lives in all godliness and honesty. He who rules in heaven, and sits king
forever, has indulged us these peculiar and joyful privileges. They who are
wise and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord.

THE discourse now turns itself more immediately to the present occasion; and
those who possess the peculiar honors of the day, -- the Honorable the
Governor and Company of this Colony, including both Houses of Assembly, will by
natural decency, as well as common custom, claim the first part in our humble,
respectful, but free address.

HONORED and worthy Fathers,

WE have been told by some, that this passage of sacred writ, (with how much
justice every one is at liberty to judge) Know ye not that the saints shall
judge the world? means, that a christian magistracy should be set up in the
world. The comment seems agreeable to some ancient prediction relative to
gospel days. As, I will restore your judges as at the first, and your
counselors as at the beginning, and the like. The passage is this day
fulfilled in our eyes, and is the joy of our hearts. We beseech you therefore
to remember that the hopes and confidence of this people, under God, is reposed
in you: and their meain is, that you should serve the public, and not merely
serve yourselves of them. And the same is God's meaning, who has raised you to
the honor of this trust. And how vile in his sight, as well as basely
ungrateful to your country must you be; if, by a mean, careless, inattentive
and supine disposition, or any worse cause, you should either betray their
rights, or not prosecute their best interest? Rulers hold their character at
their peril; their shining superiority will degrade or exalt them. And we hold
ourselves under obligations of gratitude, first to the governor of the world,
and then to your honors, for that charitable and that respectable character
held up to public view in this worthy senate; -- for your charitable care and
tenderness of our public rights, civil and religious, when they have been
brought into danger. We look upon you, under God, the guardians of our
distinguishing privileges, which have been dearly purchased, and by charity are
highly prized. We thank you for the salutary and good laws which from time to
time have been enacted, for the preservation of peace, property and every
personal and social interest -- for the suppression of vice, prophanness and
immorality -- for the encouragement and support of virtue and religion in all
our towns and churches, whereby the whole country is divided into
ecclesiastical societies or parishes for religious purposes, in which gospel
administrations are every where supported by law: so that your public conduct
and the state of public facts, is a contradiction to the representations which
some have the effrontery to make of us, in two respects;

1. THAT we have not the ordinances of the gospel, the knowledge of God, or the
means of religion and virtue.

2. That we are of such an intolerant spirit that we can bear no profession but
our own, Bishop of Bristol's sermon. before soci.
when at the same time we have a known legal fund for the support of the
profession of such as would fasten the charge upon us: a lenity and support
unexampled by any country, in respect to those who dissent from its
constitution.

WE thank you for your pious care in regard to the execution of laws for the
suppression of immorality; and your charitable and judicious appointment of
executive authority, in which we pray you may abound more and more in your
circumspection; and for all your charitable attention to our schools of
learning, both public and private: by means of which knowledge, human and
divine literature, has been diffused through this colony, and into many other
parts of this land. What was all the boasted literature of Greece and Rome,
those ancient seats of the muses, compared with Connecticut under favor of
your countenance? That the whole country in greater or less degrees reap the
agreeable and salutary effects: That many, who have not had the advantage of a
public education, as well as many who have, are become qualified for eminent
use in the commonwealth; and every church furnished with a learned ministry of
their own choosing. We ask the continuation of your countenance in this regard.
Suffer; honored sirs, the apostolic direction, Above all things put on
charity; which always has a favorable aspect on knowledge, virtue and liberty;
which are in close connection. It is a most public-spirited virtue; will have a
salutary influence on all your consultation -- will seclude all low, selfish
and party designing views and intrigues. Have you any men of that character
among you, it will dash them out of countenance when they see their artifice
and intrigues frowned upon by a spirit of charity and general benevolence,
which will view them as spots and blurs in your character, and unsalutary
excrescences in your body, and no honor to your constituents. As their
intriguing spirit is ever resless to forward men of their own turn, it will be
attended with more extensive influence and danger to the public order and good
of society than at first view will be readily imagined. -- Charity will be as
the candle of the lord to intricate paths. At least it will dispose your minds
to search after truth, and to feel the weight and force of its arguments which
is half the battle. The meck will be guide in judgment, and the meek will be
teach his way. -- A principal object of this public virtue is the common good:
But separate this from regard to the divine honor and law of God, and your
charity will be very same and defective, and you will pursue the object very
ineffectually. Charity will aim at this object in all your acts, and when made
will see to the execution -- Will take heed to prefer men who love order and
government, and will exert themselves for it; and are friendly to all our
rights and privileges as men, as Englisshmen, as christians and colonists: Men
who discountenance idleness and growing profuseness, and other vices: who will,
by example and authority encourage industry and good economy, the natural
supports of our liberty -- men who know how to distinguish between lawful and
licentious liberty: the latter of which, taking occasion from some late
occurrences, has been for some years struggling for the ascendant in church and
state; has in great measure gained the point in the former, and soon will in
the latter, provided there be none to give out execution: Then will you bear
the sword in vain, and we are an undone people. It is reported, that in some of
our populous towns the laws against vice, particularly profaneness are openly
trampled on with too little notice of authority. If this be the case, it will
spread itself like a contagion, our children will be ruined, and woe to this
land! Woe unto thee if my soul depart from thee. Wherefore be strong, and quit
you like men. All the judicious and good people in the land will be with you:
And what is infinitely more Jehovah will be with you.

YOUR honors will remember withal, that though as rulers you sustain the
exalted character of God's, you must die like men, and be your selves brought
to another tribunal above any earthly one, which will be as impartial and
decisive for you as for the meanest subject on earth.

WILL your honors indulge us another word? This respectable body has often
been minded of the public good, as the object of attention, and the end of your
institution; but when particulars have been entered on, there is one point has
scarcely ever been touched; which may be one reason it has been so little
thought of, and attended to by the legislature, and yet may be viewed as a
point of great importance to the public; besure when it comes to our own
personal case, we are wont to view it in that light: And it is strange it is
not more considered in that light by the public. Our lives and health we are
wont to regard above every thing in the present world, and the foundation of
all the rest: and the vital and salutary springs in this curious animated
machine, which is fearfully and wonderfully made, lie deep and much out of
common observation; and are liable to a vast variety of accidents, by which
health is impaired and life endangered. There are healing remedies provided by
the author of nature for many of these cases: but when the patient is taken
into the hand of such as have never been at the pains to penetrate into the
human structure, to learn wherein a healthy state consists, what is essential
to it, nor to learn the nature of medicine, the doctrine of diseases, their
causes, symptoms and curative indications, nor to distinguish between things
that differ, his case is danger of proving fatal for want of skill, when it was
not so in the nature and circumstances of it. And we being as unable to
distinguish between the prosessors of the medical art as many of them are
between the objects of their profession, securely repair to them, as an ox to
the slaughter, and a bird to the snare of the fowler, not knowing that it is
for our life. It is as impossible to be able practitioners in the more common
way without studying the principles of their profession, as it is to be
mathematicians without the knowledge of figures, or to understand the motions
and situation of the heavenly bodies without the study of astronomy. It is an
affair, may it please your honors, of so much consequence, that in many
countries it has commanded the attention of the civil state, both ancient and
modern, Will not charity to this people call for some inquiries in this
respectable body, whether the art of healing may not, at least gradually, be
put upon some more respectable footing. We have some among us of that
profession, of a penetrating and inquisitive genius, worthy of honor; and
there no method can be entered upon to encourage and increase their number, and
to discourage ignorant and rash adventurers? by which means generations to come
will rise up and call you blessed.

HONORED senators, we wish you a blessing out of the house of God -- that he
will guide you by his counsel and afterward receive you to glory.

AND now in the next place it may be said, that among all the subjects of God's
moral kingdom, there is no order of men who stand in greater need of being the
subjects of the kind and efficatious influence of charity than those who are to
feed the sheep and the lambs of Christ's flock.

Wherefore,

REVEREND and highly esteemed in love for your work sake; How sublime, how
worthy, and how ponderous the trust committed to you! too weighty for the
shoulders of angels. And how excellent the deposited treasure! yet it is
committed to earthen vessels; frail, feeble and sinful mortals! but, behold,
here is wisdom -- That the excellence of the power may be of God, and not of
us. Wherefore your dignity in the eye of your Lord and master, and your success
with depend much on your charity, in which is included humility, meekness and
dependence. Your primary and immediate object is truth, and the inculcating of
it on the minds of men, for the eternal interest of individuals and the good of
commmunity. You are to put them in mind to obey magistrates, to be ready to
every good work: And to follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which
none shall see the Lord. You are to give yourselves to reading, to meditation
and to prayer (for who is sufficient for these thing) that your prositing may
appear to all -- And that you may be as scribes well instructed to the kingdom
of heaven, able to bring forth out of your treasure, which is inexhaustable,
things both new and old. If you love your master, you will love his cause, love
your people, love mankind and one another -- Well take heed to yourselves and
your doctrine, that you may both save your own souls and them who hear you. The
same mind will be in you which also was in Christ Jesus. And you with strive
together for the faith of the gospel: Avoiding all bitterness, wrath, malice,
envy and evil speaking -- Thinks what a mixture of indignation and piety is
some times raised in setious and judicious breast, (in reading some public and
inconsistency of the author with his professed design and motive in writing, a
regard to truth; and avoid it. Not that we are studiously to avoid the most
public inquiries and searches after truth. But dear brethren, while you contend
earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints, remember that he who has
chosen you ia this warfare, rides prosperously, because of truth, through the
influence of truth, meekness and righteousness: And remember that your brother
will determine, and all judicious men will determine that you have no more
right to treat him with contempt, rancour and virulence than he has to treat
you in the same manner. And though such conduct may please the corruption or
gratify the viciated humors of a party, yet it ordinarily subserves not the
object in view, or which ought to be in view. Verily this wisdom comes not from
above. You need not then be told the quality and rise of it: For we speak as to
wise men. In a word, which is to say all above all things put on charity, which
is the bond of perfectness, and will animate you in the sacred employment,
render you solicitous to be free from the blood of all men. And to that end you
will make Christ and his atonement and those truths in close connection
therewith, the grand theme of your ministrations; will render you faithful unto
death, and your end will be everlasting life. We are stuards of the mysteries
of God, and it is required of stuards that a man be found faithful: And the
time is coming when it will be said, Give an account of thy steward-ship, for
thou must be no longer steward. We have wise and godly rulers; blessed be God:
let us then conduct as wise and charitable teachers, and there will be hope
that this people will be lead as by the hand of Moses and Aaron in the way they
ought to go.

NEXT we turn to the freemen of this corporation. The continuation, gentlemen,
of our singular blessings under God, depend much on you. Will not charity to
this beloved colony, to your country, to your wives, your sons and daughter,
children of God's people, a numerous rising generation, influence your minds
and conduct to be faithful to your trust, to remember the oath of God which is
upon you; not only to be true and faithful to his majesty, but to the interests
of this dear colony as established by charter? And let us always have chosen
out from among us wise, uuderstanding and faithful men, to have the rule over
us, and to be guardians of our distinguishing rights? and to perpetuate them to
posterity, Now the end of the commandment is charity.

FINALLY to the body of this people.

LATELY our country was shocked as with an earthquake: -- The shocks were
repeated -- was all in trembling for her liberties -- come into salutary
resolutions; was almost persuaded to put on sackcloth and fit in ashes. But our
repentance was superficial; What a shining contrast do our eyes now behold all
over this land! The world rejoiceth, but will not charity tremble? Is the
bitterness of death past? No, the arrows are still pointed at the heart of our
liberties. But not to dwell here. Charity bespeaks your attention to the
important objects of it and recommends itself to your entertainment from the
innate worth and excellence of it, and from the fruits and blessings which
never fail to attend it. It produces personal joy unspeakable and full of
glory. It spreads its kind influence on those round about it. It is the bond of
social happiness. It is the end of the commandment. It will set us all right,
in proportion to the degree and extent of it, both in regard to God and one
another. It will bring down the blessing of heaven upon us, and we shall be a
happy people. The lion will lie down with the lamb, etc. -- Love one another
and walk in the light of the divine countenance. -- We shall be guided by the
divine counsel, and afterward received to glory, where love will for ever dwell
and reign without mixture.

AMEN.

