JERUSALEM'S PEACE WISHED. A SERMON, PREACHED TO THE ANCIENT AND HONORABLE
ARTILLERY COMPANY. IN BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND, JUNE 1, 1772. BEING THE ANNIVERSARY
OF THEIR ELECTION OF OFFICERS.

BY NATHANAEL ROBBINS, A. M. Pastor of the CHURCH in MILTON.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by J. BOYLES, in Marlborough-Street. MDCCLXXII.

PSALM CXXII. 8. For my Brethren and Companions Sakes, I will now say, Peace be
within thee.
THIS psalm, and indeed the whole book of psalms, was for the most part
composed by David, and publishes the glory of its author more than the most
pompous elogies; and we find the author of Ecclesiasticus has consecrated this
epitaph to his memory, which is more durable than either marble or brass; as
the fat (says he) was taken away from the peace offering, so was David chosen
out of the people of Israel: He played with lions as with kids, and with bears
as with lambs: He slew a giant when he was young, and took away reproach from
the people: For he called upon the Most High Lord, and He gave strength to this
mighty warrior, and to set up the horn of his people, so the people honored him
with ten thousands; and praised him in blessings of the Lord: For he destroyed
the enemies on every side, and brought to naught the Philistines his
adversaries: In all his works he raised the Holy One Most High; and blessed the
Lord with words of glory; the Lord took away his sins, and and exalted his horn
forever: He gave him a covenant of Kings, and a throne of glory in Israel -- He
was, it is evident, very sollicitous for the welfare of Jerusalem; and
therefore we find him in our context calling upon others to pray for its
welfare; for all good to it, particularly that its inhabitants might be united
amongst themselves, and that they might be preserved from the incursions of
enemies: He encourages them thus to seek the public welfare, by assuring them,
that in so doing they seek their own: He is desirous of the preservation of
peace in the fortifications of Jerusalem; or, if they should be attacked at any
time, they might not be taken, but be a means of securing the city: He wishes
prosperity to the great men, who have the conduct of public affairs, and indeed
to all his subjects; for all these he discovers a cordial affection;
accordingly when he sees all the tribes cheerfully resorting to the testimony
of Israel, and finds it to be a settled point, that Jerusalem must be the
place, where God will record his name: He does not say, let the priests and the
prophets whose business it is, and the people who have nothing else to do,
pray, and I Will fight for the public peace: no, but now he says himself, peace
be within thee, i. e. Jerusalem -- seemingly resolved to do every thing in his
power for the public good: It is true Jerusalem was his own city, and the
interests of his family were lodged in it: but it does not appear, that his own
security and the glory of his empire were chiefly in his view; no, but he was
desirous of peace and prosperity, for the sake of all his fellow citizens, and
of all the Israelites, whom, though his subjects, he owned for his brethren and
companions in the chief privileges and blessings enjoyed at Jerusalem.

What I propose from the words, chosen for the foundation of a discourse on
this occasion, is,

In the first place to show, what we are here to understand by Jerusalem.

And in the second place, what by the peace to be wished for to it.

And, by Jerusalem in our day, we are to understand the christian church. --
When David spoke these words he had respect to the Jewish church, which was
then the only visible people God had in the world: But under the gospel the
christian churches are the circumcision: They are God's people, and the
promises of God to his people belong to them: But it is the visible church of
Christ in general, perhaps, that we are here to understand by Jerusalem; for
David seems here to resolve to seek the prosperity of Jerusalem for his
brethren and companions sake: And God, whose kingdom rules over all, does, in
his unerring Providence, make unsound professors to be sometimes as an hedge
about his own people: And the case is such, that the pulling up of the tares
endangers the wheat also; and further still there may be, and there is reason
to hope, that many who are now only visible christians, are chosen of God, and
shall in due time be called into his kingdom, the kingdom of grace: And
accordingly we find that Christ prayed for his sheep of the other fold, or for
those that were not yet called: And thus should christians wish and pray for
the prosperity of Jerusalem. We are not by Jerusalem here to understand one
particular church only, or society of professing christians; but all the
churches of such professors; the whole protestant christian church, considering
them as a body, or a nation, or a community, as they are distinguished from
heathens, to whom the oracles of God are not committed, and as they are
distinguished from antichrist; as they unite in naming Christ's name, and
professing his religion: This I understand to be the Jerusalem that we are to
wish peace to or in. I might add, that this people has both civil and
religious privileges to be committed to the divine care: And by Jerusalem, we
may understand God's people in their civil and religious capacities.

But I proceed as was proposed, in the second place, to show what we are to
understand by the peace wished, desired, or prayed for to or in Jerusalem. And
peace here may be understood as including temporal prosperity in general. It is
indeed comprehensive of all prosperity: So David seems to understand peace
here, the praying for the peace of Jerusalem recommended in the context, he
considers as an expression of love to her, and he says, viz. Peace be within
thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces; and in the text, and verse
following, he says, Peace be within thee; and I will seek thy good: So that
here prosperity in general was what he desired: And we find peace, in the idiom
of scripture, comprehending under it all manner of safety, welfare and
prosperity that can be desired: It is said Deuteronomy. 24. 6. Thou shall not seek
their peace, nor their prosperity forever; -- where peace and prosperity intend
the same thing; and we read that the Lord will speak peace to his people, i. e.
he will speak them a blessing: So Christ said to his disciples, -- Peace be
with you; which was a word of blessing in general: To wish peace to Jerusalem
then, is to wish her prosperity in every respect: Peace in opposition to
calamitous judgments, to distresses and perplexities. God's own people, as well
as others, are liable to sicknesses, famines, and the common calamities of
life; and, by these, that peace and quiet of Jerusalem has sometimes been much
disturbed: These are tokens of divine anger, and as such ought to be
deprecated: When the pious inhabitants of Jerusalem hear God threatening these
judgments at any time, they are afraid, and will cry to Him to spare his
people; yet as for ourselves, so for Jerusalem, with respect to the outward
dispensations of divine Providence, we must submit to the wisdom and
sovereignty of the supreme ruler. This peace has various branches; the health
of the people is one -- their plenty another -- their fences in the various
branches of business, etc. -- For these we are to watch and pray -- as also,
for prosperity in all matters of civil government, that, in all difficult
affairs, the Lord would direct and bring about a peaceful time; and however
light any may make of this temporal prosperity, yet they are good things, and
such as God knows we need, and as he has promised to his people that walk in
his ways.

Again, -- By the peace to be wished for in Jerusalem, may be meant their unity
in opposition to heresies and divisions. The men of Jerusalem do not always
think and speak the same things; they are not at all times of one accord, of
one mind: The visible church has often been rent with divisions, and its peace
spoiled with heresies: for if the truths of religion be denied, the true
citizens of Zion will think themselves obliged to contend for the truth. --
Those, who have mistaken apprehensions of the truths of religion, are commonly
as sollicitous to support their peculiar tenets, as hypocrites are to appear to
be real christians; and though to contend for the truth is preferable to giving
it up, yet religious controversies are usually productive of pernicious
consequences to the church: So that it is greatly to be desired by all the
friends of Zion's prosperity, that professing christians should unitedly
receive, hold fast and maintain the truth as it is in Jesus. -- How desirable
the sight, to see the citizens of Zion united in thought and affection, all
true friends, to true religion! It is enjoined on christians, to behave as
members of the same body, united to the same head, and having the same common
interest; and they are warned against schisms and divisions; so that all
well-wishers to Jerusalem's welfare must be afflicted, in a degree, when
christians contend: And on the contrary, rejoice when their peace is great; --
their unity -- their strength and beauty.

Again, -- By the peace of Jerusalem here may be intended, the promotion of her
religious interests, in opposition to infidelity and wickedness. -- Jerusalem's
prosperity doubtless includes prosperity on religious accounts: This is the
main thing for which its pious inhabitants are more sollicitous for her peace,
than for the peace of other nations. When infidelity, vice and wickedness
prevail in a nation: when the laborers in the Lord's vineyard spend their
strength for naught, and in vain; how gloomy the prospect of peace! In this
case rivers of water will run down the eyes of Zion's friends. Those of this
character cannot be easy to see sinners hardening their hearts, and going on in
sin under the enjoyment of the means of grace: They cannot indeed but wish to
have the whole earth filled with the knowledge and glory of the Lord, and to
have Jerusalem a praise in the earth. The saints are the excellent in the
earth: In their eyes vile persons are contemned: They therefore must needs
rejoice to see men walking in the truth, and will accordingly exert themselves
for this prosperity of Jerusalem. -- When infidelity and profaneness and all
wickedness prevails, they look upon it as fore boding Jerusalem's adversity,
and will accordingly weep before God in the language of the prophet, saying
(each one) O Lord I have heard thy speech and was afraid: O Lord revive thy
work in the midst of the years, in the midst of the years make known, in wrath
remember mercy.

Again, -- The peace of Jerusalem may be understood as including rejoicing in
the Lord, in opposition to mourning. -- Jerusalem has her days of adversity;
there are times when her inhabitants see not those tokens of the divine
presence, which they have been wont to see: instead of rejoiceing in God, their
language is that of David, "How long will thou forget me, O Lord forever? how
long will thou hide thy face from me?" The church, instead of the garment of
praise, have sometimes the spirit of heaviness: But even then, it is
encouraging to think, that there is a time appointed in infinite wisdom, to
which eternal truth has fixed her deliverance: God himself will arise and have
mercy upon her, in contempt of all the opposition made by her enemies: The zeal
of the Lord of hosts shall do this as the psalmist expresses it, "For this, God
will appear in such a glory as kings themselves shall stand in awe of:" All
that are cordially desirous of Zion's prosperity will weep with them that weep;
they have a tender sympathy and fellow-feeling with those that are in trouble,
and will cry to the Lord to turn his people, and cause his face to shine upon
them; will resolve with the prophet, for Zion's sake, not to hold their peace,
and for Jerusalem's sake not to rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth
as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burns.

I proceed to observe, that Jerusalem's peace certainly intends peace in the
most common acceptance of the word, i. e. in opposition to wars. -- Jerusalem,
God's own covenant people, are liable to the calamities of war here in this
evil world; she has enemies that would swallow her up, if the Lord were not
her refuge, strength and shield: As Jerusalem of old was sorely chastened, and
once laid waste by enemies; so the christian protestant church has been also
sorely chastened by men her enemies; and they are not all destroyed: We may not
therefore conclude, that we shall never again be engaged in war. The French are
found to be amongst the inveterate antichristian enemies to the English
nation: These, both by interest, and the prejudices of their religion, are set
against us; and should war break out amongst the nations, (which may be sooner
than we expect) we may depend upon it, that such our enemies will appear, as
will exert themselves for our destruction. -- Thrones and dominions,
principalities and powers are subject to Him, whose dominion rules over all:
As by Him kings reign, so he cuts in sunder the spirits of princes, scatters
their counsels, and disappoints their wisest measures, such as are the most
peaceable and prudent: So that how good soever our prospect of peace may be,
through the wise and prudent counsels of the guardians of our Jerusalem: Yet
what changes may be in the right Hand of the Most High, concerning us, in this
respect, who is able to say? All endeavors for the preservation of peace in
Jerusalem may be disappointed; and we may be obliged to hear the found of the
trumpet; the alarm of war. War is a calamity, by which God sometimes punishes
his people for their sins; and when we reflect upon and consider the many sins
prevailing in our Jerusalem, the impudence many of its inhabitants are grown up
to in sin; the ingratitude and decay of religion, that is pure and undefiled
before God; when we consider how little of a spirit of repentance and
reformation is to be seen, after the many repeated threatenings and warnings
from God in his word, and from the watchmen of his Jerusalem, and by his
judgments; What can we reasonably expect, but to be judged for those things,
and punished, either by the sword of the enemy, or some other Judgment? Are we
not too nearly in the condition of those supine regardless people, of which we
read in the Is It of Zephaniah, concerning which the prophet says, "It shall come
to pass at that day, that I will search Jerusalem with candles, and punish the
men that are settled upon their lees; that say in their heart, the Lord will
not do good, neither will he do evil." And if so, why should we not expect to
be doomed as they were? Therefore of them it is said, Their goods shall become
a booty, and their houses a desolation; their blood shall be poured out as dust
and their flesh as the dung; neither their silver nor their gold shall be able
to deliver them. However in some proportion to the prospect of war, all the
friends of Zion, all the pious inhabitants of Jerusalem, will be sollicitous
for the continuance of the blessing of peace; unless circumstances should
arise, in which it should appear necessary to engage in war, for the greater
good of the whole. Our enemies may wrongfully invade us; and their injustice
may be so great, that unless a public war be undertaken, (which by the way is
also to be managed by the authority of the community) neither our possessions
nor any thing dear to us in the world, our lives, will be far from being
secure: And by thus attempting the obstruction of such our enemies, it may be,
that we may not only secure ourselves, but others also, who otherwise, might be
afterward destroyed by them. Our natures are so constituted, that we cannot
but approve of kind and benevolent actions; and abhor those that are malevolent
and cruel: And it is accordingly unnatural, to begin to hurt unprovoked; and
consequently the numerous calamities of which war is productive to mankind,
virtue must require the authority of a community, not to entertain a thought of
increasing their dominions, etc. at the expense of the innocent. Nevertheless
self-defence may require the use of warlike weapons, or taking up arms to
prevent an incursion evidently intended, and the effusion of human blood, which
would be the probable consequence of it. But now can this be done with any
probability of success, without well disciplined troops? David, who well knew
the safety of making God his trust, and that this was his principal defense; we
accordingly find praying to him for all kinds of prosperity in Jerusalem; yet
we also find him blessing God, who had taught his hands to war, and his fingers
to fight: As he was designed for Israel's champion, he must be a soldier, must
be furnished with military skill. Valiant soldiers are, under God, the security
and fafety of his people; upon these, peace and the comforts of it very much
depend: For these awe, and guard against, encroaching enemies; or are a defense
against those that invade and would spoil her. -- David's reign produced many
bold and brave men, which he took care to have well skilled in all the arts of
it, and to these (under God) his numerous victories were very much owing; yet
he had respect to eminent valor and military skill, appears by his appointment
of Joab to be his chief captain and general of the forces of Judah, and
afterward captain general of all the forces of Israel and Judah; as also in
his preferring brave men, men of war, and fit for the battle, as we find he
did, men that had been disciplined, trained up to military exercises, that
could handle shield and buckler, that could use both offensive and defensive
weapons: And indeed we are taught the necessity of expert and valiant soldiers
by our own experience and reason: To these, under God, are owing our lives, our
religion and the liberty we enjoy. Had it not been for the valiant and martial
achievements of those of our ancestors, who had skill in the art of war, our
forefathers would have been extirpated by the numerous tribes of Indians which
so frequently attempted their destruction. To these, under God, the frequent
calls to rejoicing in conquests, that have since been made, are very much
owing. To what else can it be owing, that the names of Pepperell, Wolse and
Amherst, and others that might be mentioned, carry in them so joyful a sound,
but because they were brave, faithful, and virtuous officers? Reason teaches
the necessity of expert and valiant soldiers, that they may be able (when
called) to play the men, for the public safety and welfare: Without this, our
Jerusalem might be a very easy prey to our enemies, if they were few, compared
with what they are. However, there is (as one well expresses it) so much true
manliness and grandeur in military exercise: It inspires the mind with such
just, honorable and exalted notions and dispositions: It so much tends to
banish a littleness and meanness, and fill men with greatness of spirit, (for a
truly valiant soldier would disdain to kill even his enemy, in a little
underhand and sneaking manner) that every person that has any relish for what
is just, manly and honorable, would labor to maintain it for the good of
mankind. And we find it observed of the old Romans, that as a martial spirit
decayed among them, in proportion luxury prevailed; and consequently effeminacy
and a train of vices overspread them; which as it sunk their population, so by
degrees ended in the ruin of their country. And it is said to be found true in
general, that where a generous and military spirit sinks and decays, luxury and
wickedness, that brings a people low, overflows as a flood, even against the
restraints, and under all the advantages of religion. Religion certainly was
never designed to countenance the least pretension to taking away from men, or
depriving them of, the necessary or prudent means of self-preservation, and
self defense, or safety of their families or country: And though Solomon, that
wisest of men, had said, that wisdom is better than weapons of war; he could
not mean to discountenance a skillful and prudent management of them. It is
true he reigned in a peaceable time, and was honored; for God made all quiet
round about him, that he might build an house in his name, and prepare his
sanctuary forever (as the author of Ecclesiasticus expresses it) yet he knew
that his father was a man of war; who, when he found that God had refused him
the privilege of building him a temple, and had reserved the work for his son,
encouraged his military officers and soldiers; and fought with and subdued his
enemies on every side; that when his son should come to undertake that great
affair, he might meet with as little molestation as possible: He well knew, how
that, when the use of the bow had for some time been neglected by the children
of Judah in some measure, his father nobly exhorted them to return more
generally to the use of it, to exercise themselves in that weapon (then a
principal one) whereby he had discovered his concern for the armies of Israel;
and so left him an example: And indeed an example to the principal military
officers in all succeeding ages, to countenance and encourage the use of arms,
and art of war. And we find that Saul and Jonathan are in the scriptures termed
the beauty of Israel; their flower and glory, principally on account of their
military skill and bravery in war. We also there find many grand and
distinguishing characters given to men on the same account: What a name did
Abraham, the father of the faithful, gain to himself by his victorious
overthrow of the four kings; and that with the trained soldiers of his own
house? But it would be too tedious to attempt at this time to give you the
particular characters of Gideon, Jephtha and Sampson, of Joshua and the judges,
of Jehoshaphat, Asa, Hezekiah, etc, so renowned for their military skill and
warlike actions. Moreover -- The art becoming a soldier, we find mentioned
also in the New Testament* John the baptist does not condemn, but regulate, the
office and employment of soldiers; when they desired to receive the word of
command from him, he does not advise them to cast away their arms, abandon war,
and so appear no more as military men in the field; which he would have done
without doubt, had their office and employment been unavoidably sinful: Instead
of that, he only advises them to manage their employment inoffensively. And we
find our Savior Himself minding his disciples to expect, that their enemies
would be more fierce upon them, than they had been: And accordingly he gives
warning, that he amongst them, that had no sword, wherewith to defend Himself,
might find great want of one, and might therefore be ready to wish, some time
or other, that he had sold his garment and bought one. -- After all, we find
peace among the blessings, that God has promised to his church in the latter
days: It is said, that in the last days it shall come to pass, that the
mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the
mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills, and people shall flow unto
it, and many nations shall come and say, come and let us go up to the mountain
of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his
ways, and we will walk in his paths; for the law shall go forth of Zion, and
the word of the Lord from Jerusalem; and he shall judge among many people, and
rebuke strong nations afar off; and they shall beat their swords into
plow-shares, and their spears into pruning hooks: Nation shall not lift up a
sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more: But they shall sit
every man under his vine, and under his fig tree, and none shall make them
afraid; (says the prophet) for the mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it.
Such as are now hateful, hating one another, will then have hearts glowing with
love to God; and this principle of love will produce universal harmony and
peace: Surely such a change as this in this corrupt apostate world must needs
be desirable. It is a delightful thought, that the prayers of the saints in all
ages, for the prosperity of Zion, shall be answered; and the glorious things
spoken of her in the sacred oracles fully accomplished.

But I hasten to some improvement of what has now been offered.

And first; -- It is evident from what has now been offered, that they are
unworthy to be citizens of Jerusalem, that don't wish peace to her. That man is
unworthy to partake with God's people in their civil and religious privileges,
that is not an hearty friend to them, and who does not really desire the
welfare of God's people, with whom he is a sharer in those privileges: He is
of a temper very diverse from that expressed it my text. As the psalmist says
of them that love Zion's prosperity, that they shall prosper; so on the
contrary, they, that do not love her prosperity, are not likely to prosper:
Whether they will be marked out for wrath in the present world, or not, is not
so easy for us with certainty to determine: There are however, passages of
sacred writ that express their liableness to it; and they are certainly
unworthy of a name and place among God's people; and when the great separation
shall be made of the tares from the wheat, then all the enemies of Jerusalem
will be put away, and shall not partake of the heavenly inheritance, with them
that are hearty friends, and particularly such to the people of God.

Secondly; we infer that every cordial well-wisher to Jerusalem's welfare must
needs be of a public spirit: How general is the disease of a selfish spirit
among mankind? The apostle Paul observing it once said, all men seek their own,
not the things that are Jesus Christ's: How little of real charity is there
amongst the professors of christianity? how few that will deny themselves for
the public good? how few (comparatively) are they, that will exert themselves
in all proper ways for Jerusalem's peace? We should doubtless do well to
consider the necessity of loving Jerusalem's prosperity, as we would answer our
characters as christians; and that we so love it, as to mortify and put away
that narrowness of spirit that is too common amongst men. They that will be
humoursome, and must needs have affairs conducted in a manner exactly
accomodated to their liking, or they will contend, must not be looked upon as
cordial friends to the welfare of Jerusalem. If we love Jerusalem's prosperity,
we must desire to have righteousness and the fruits of it abound, and must
ourselves aim to be righteous in our dealings, and to do as we would be done
unto: If we love the prosperity of Zion we shall be cordial friends to true
religion; and shall not, to favor this or the other party, consent to turn
aside to vain jangling: Our affections will flow out to all that appear to love
the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity; and we shall aim to avoid all the stumbling
blocks, that are the occasion of others falling, and to do our part toward
preparing the way of the Lord, and making his paths straight: Though Zion's
friends will hate the error of them that turn aside from the truth, yet they
will not suffer their resentment to carry them into the contrary error and
extreme: They will account truth to be for Jerusalem's interest, and will be
properly concerned at all times to be on their watch for Jerusalem's sake.

But thirdly; we infer, that such as love Jerusalem should countenance and
encourage improvements in military skill and knowledge. Such only may be said
to love Jerusalem as David did, to whom it is matter of holy rejoicing to go up
to the house of the Lord, and with his people to wait on Him in the ordinances
of it; who hunger and thirst after the spiritual blessings, which of divine
grace, are dispensed there; who sincerely pray for Jerusalem's peace; who study
and conscientiously pursue the things, that make for peace, and wherewith one
may edify another; who prefer Jerusalem above their chiefest joy, and by
consequence will deny themselves for its prosperity, who, for their brethren
and companions sakes, say, Peace be within thee: For the sake of the house of
God, we will seek thy good. These should countenance and encourage improvements
in military skill and knowledge: These improvements ought to be encouraged by
the inhabitants of Jerusalem in general; and especially by her friends. I would
not be understood to mean, that all such should labor to be acomplished
soldiers: For it is not supposed that they have, all of them, a martial spirit;
yet they should promote and encourage it in those that have it, for the
security of Jerusalem: It argues their wisdom to improve all the advantages
they have, for securing her peace and, privileges; and by suitably encouraging
a martial spirit, they may get into good circumstances to dispute it with those
that may wrongfully invade them: They should know that a thorough acquaintance
with military affairs is laudable and necessary: And that persons who improve
in knowledge of this kind, deserve singular respect; and should by no means be
discountenanced by the friends of Jerusalem; who, having a peculiar tenderness
for her, must encourage fighting, as well as praying for her, under given
circumstances. How long we may sit under our vines and fig trees, and have none
to make us afraid, the God of our peace only knows; and should war break out
among the nations, Jerusalem's friends might wish that men of martial spirits
and military accomplishments were more numerous among its inhabitants.

But fourthly; -- We infer that love to Jerusalem will influence its subjects
of a martial spirit to excel in soldiership. Men of this character will
endeavor, in the use and pursuit of all proper means and methods, to acquire
the knowledge of every part of military skill: Not content with understanding
how to use warlike weapons; they will be sollicitous to know how to charge their
enemies successfully; how to take the most advantageous ground; how to advance:
and to make a regular and advantageous retreat; how to defend themselves by
entrenchments; what stratagems to make up; how to pursue a victory when
obtained, etc, that they may be abundantly qualified to fight for the security
and in the defense of Jerusalem: And after all they will depend on that God,
that taught David's hands to war, and fingers to fight; who determines the
event of war in favor of every side, as he pleases; with whom its nothing to
help, whether with many or with those that have power. Those of this character
will march forth at God's providential call, and in his strength, in defense of
the civil and religious privileges of his people, and may reasonably expect to
vanquish their enemies: They are of the called and chosen and faithful, that
will follow the Lamb whithersoever he leads them: They Will not fear the faces of
the enemies of God's people in a righteous cause; but, having the true spirit,
and courage, and resolution of soldiers, will be above cowardice: And, being in
such a state, and of such a temper of mind, as to expect the change to be made
in them by death will be advantageous to them: They Will fear neither guns, nor
swords, nor any other instruments of death, when properly called to engage.

In the fifth place; -- What has been offered on this subject may be applied by
way of address to you, GENTLEMEN of the ARTILLERY COMPANY; at whose request I
now appear in this desk. Gentlemen, you cannot be insensible of it, that
Israel's champion was an eminent friend to Jerusalem, since it is so evident
that he sincerely and fervently prayed for her peace; and bravely fought many
battles for her security and in her defense. It is presumed, that you look upon
his example as worthy your imitation; and that you are accordingly desirous,
that the number of Jerusalem's friends in our day be increased; good rulers
encouraged; and that the peace and prosperity of all your brethren and
companions in the privileges and blessings we enjoy may be promoted; that every
token of the divine anger might be removed from her; that her citizens might be
united in thought and affection; that religion might rerevive and flourish
abundantly in her; and particularly that enemies might not be permitted to
invade her. However, should circumstances be so planned in providence, in which
to engage in war, should be judged necessary by public authority; though you
approve of kind and benevolent actions, and abhor those that are malevolent and
cruel; yet we cannot doubt, but you would, being properly called, cheerfully
exert yourselves, and in the best possible manner, display your improvements in
the art of war, for the welfare of God's people, with whom you are partakers
in civil and religious privileges truly honorable: It has been, and it must be
so, or we could not esteem your ancient company, as now we do, really
honorable. It was for this important purpose, that your company was so long
since formed, viz. That it might be a nursery of acomplished soldiers, that
might, if properly called, do worthily for God and his people. We gratefully
acknowledge, that many are the advantages, which have accrued to our Jerusalem,
from your constitution; and it is reasonably expected, that you be duly
attentive to the original design of it. Gentlemen, as you are volunteers, it is
expected you love the Art Military, and that you are friends to Jerusalem. We
cannot suppose that you would otherwise have been at so great expense of time
and money, for your military accomplishments and accoutrements; or that
otherwise you would lay out yourselves, as now you do, to encourage others of a
martial spirit, to make improvements in military skill and knowledge. You
deserve singular respect from the inhabitants of Jerusalem in general. You are
countenanced by gentlemen of the first character in this part of our Jerusalem,
and have been for many years on these occasions. You now see yourselves
countenanced by the presence of the Captain General and commander in chief, by
the presence of the Lieutenant Governor, and by several others of our most
respectable Magistrates. You are countenanced by the examples of grand and
distinguishing characters in the word of God; and by the Lord of Hosts Himself,
the supreme Ruler over all; both in the old and new testament. May the God of
armies encourage your hearts, and teach your fingers to fight in Jerusalem's
defense, whenever he may call you, in a military character, to dispute our
privileges with our enemies.

To conclude; -- Let us all daily and earnestly plead with God for Jerusalem's
welfare: And may we have grace to do it acceptably; and behave ourselves in
all respects, in a manner correspondent to such a practice, each one doing his
part for the promotion of this important event! And let us be importunate for
the establishment of the mountain of the Lord's house on the top of the
mountains, for great additions to the church, by the calling in of the Jews and
Gentiles. Then may we expect that prosperity (as a hint of divine love and
grace) which we really need; spiritual and eternal, if not temporal felicity:
-- Which God of his infinite mercy grant may be the portion of us all through
Jesus Christ: To whom be all honor and glory, dominion and power now and
forever, AMEN.


