AN ACCOUNT OF THE SUFFERINGS OF RICHARD SELLER, Of KEINSEY, a FISHERMAN, Who
was pressed in SCARBOROUGH-PIERS, in the Time of the two last Engagements
between the Dutch and English, in the Year 1665.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Third-street, opposite
the Workhouse, M DCC LXXII.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE SUFFERINGS OF RICHARD SELLER.
These are (says the Writer) the very words that proceeded from him, who sat
before me weeping, which are as follows,

I WAS pressed in Scarborough-Piers, and refusing to go on board the Ketch,
they beat me very sore on the sand, and I refusing to go on board, they hoised
me in with a tackle, on board of the Ketch that pressed for the ship called the
Royal-Prince, and they bunched me with their feet, that I fell into a tub, and
was so maimed, that they were forced to swaddle me up with clothes: From thence
we sailed into Bridlington-Bay, where Thomas Swailes and Mary Stranger hearing
of me, sent me victuals on board of the Ketch; then we sailed to the Buoy and
Nore, where they hauled me in at a gun-port, on board of the ship called the
Royal-Prince. The 1st day of the third month they commanded me to go to work at
the Capstane; I refused, and told them, that As I was not free to do the King's
work, I would not live at his charge for victuals? then the Boatswain's mate
beat me sore, and thrusting me about with the capstane till he was weary. Then
the Captain sent for me upon the quarter deck, and asked me, Why I refused to
fight for the King, and why I refused to eat of his victuals? I told him, I was
afraid to offend God, for my warfare was Spiritual, therefore I durst not fight
with carnal weapons. Then he fell upon me and beat me with his small cane, then
called for his great cane, and beat me sore, and felled me down to the deck
three or four times, and beat me as long as his strength continued. Then came
one Thomas Horner, (who was brought up at Easington) and said, I pray you,
Noble Captain, be merciful, for I know him to be an honest man, and a good man,
Then said the Captain, He is a Quaker, I will beat his brains out; then falling
on me again, he beat me till he was weary; then called some to help him, for,
said he, I am not able to beat him enough to make him willing to do the King's
service. Then came out the Commander's Jester, and told the Captain, He would
lay a guinea with him that he would make me work, and hale the King's ropes,
and told the Captain, he was a fool; so two guineas were thrown down upon the
deck, then the Jester called for two seamen, and made them make two ropes fast
to the wrists of my arms, and reeved the ropes through two blocks in the
mizen-shrouds, on the starboard-side, and hoised me up aloft, and made the
ropes fast to the gunnel of the ship, and I hung some time; then the Jester
called the ship's company to behold, and bear him witness, that he made the
Quaker hale the King's ropes; so veering the ropes, they lowered me half way
down, then made me fast again: Now, said the Jester, Noble Captain, you and the
company see that the Quaker haleth the King's ropes, and with that he commanded
them to let fly the ropes loose, where I fell upon the deck: Now, said the
Jester, Noble Captain, the wager is won, he haled the ropes to the deck, and
you can hale them no farther, nor any man else. Then the Captain called the
Boatswain's mate, and bid him take the Quakerly-dog away, and put him to the
capstane, and make him work, and beat him and spare him not. So the Boatswain's
mate had me down to the geer-capstane, and thrust me about with the men at the
capstane, and beat me withal, when he could get time; then he went and sat him
down upon a chest-lid, and I went and sat down upon another chest-lid beside
him, then he fell on me and beat me again, then called his boy to bring his two
seizings, and he seized my arms to the capstane's bars, and caused the men to
heave the capstane about, and in three or four times passing about, the
seizings were loosed, no man knew how, nor when, nor could they ever be found,
although they sought them with lighted candles: Then the Boatswain's mate,
seeing what was done, caused all the men to come from the capstane, and took a
Bible, and commanded them all to swear, that they neither loosed me, nor knew
how I came loose, (they all being willing to swear) he then searched their
pockets for the seizings, but could find none, so he let them go; then he
called them all again to him, and said, Hear what I shall say to you; you see
this is a wonderful thing, which is done by an invisible hand, which loosed
him, for none of you could see his hands loosed, that were so near him: I
suppose this man, said he, is called a Quaker, and for conscience sake refuses
to act, therefore I am afflicted, and do promise before God and man, that I
will never beat, nor cause to be beaten, either Quaker, or any other man that
does refuse for conscience sake to act for the King; if I do, I wish I may lose
my right hand.

Then on the third day came the Admiral, Sir Edward Spragg, on board of his own
ship, called the Royal-Prince, and hearing of a man that was pressed on board,
that was called a Quaker; also hearing that the Boatswain's mate had beaten me
much, and had given me over, and had denied to beat me any more, he was
therefore called to come before the Admiral, to answer for himself, why he
would not beat the Quaker? He said, I have beat him very sore, and I seized his
arms to the capstane's bars, and forced them to heave him about, and beat him,
and then sat down, and in three or four times of the capstane's going about,
the seizings were loosed, and he came and sat down by me; then I called the men
from the capstane, and took them sworn, whether they had loosed him or no, but
they all denied that they either loosed him, or knew by what means he was
loosed, neither could the seizings ever be found; therefore I did, and do
believe that it was an invisible Power that set him at liberty, and I did
promise before God and the company, that I would never beat a Quaker again, nor
any man else for conscience sake. The Admiral told him, he must lose his cane:
He willingly yielded it, and told him, he must also lose his place: He was
willing. He also told him, he must lose his right hand: He held it out and
said, Take it from me if you please. So they took his cane from him, and
displaced him. So the Commander gave order to the seven yeomen, to beat me
where ever they met me, for seven days and nights, and make me work: They being
called to an account, what they had made me do? told the Commander, that they
were weary, and could not make me work, so they desired to be excused. Then the
eighth yeoman was called, who promised he would beat me, and make me work; and
he did beat me for a day and a night, when he met with me, and be being weary,
he desired to be excused. Then the Commander sent for me upon the quarter deck
before him, and caused my clothes to be stripped off, shirt and all, from my
waist downward, then he took a view of my body to see what wounds and bruises I
had, but he could find none, no not so much as a blue spot in my skin. Then the
Commander was angry with them for not beating me enough: Then Captain Fowler
answered him and said, I have beat himself as much as would have killed an ox.
The jester said, he had me hung a great while by the arms up aloft in the
shrouds. The men said, They also had beat me very sore, and they might as well
beat the mainmast. Then said the Commander, I will cause irons to be laid upon
him during the King's pleasure and mine. Then the Boatswain was called, and
commanded to call the ship's company together, and make ready the irons: The
Commander, Sir Edward Spragg, said, You Gentlemen sailors and soldiers,
whosoever serves here under me for the King, on board his Majesty's ship called
the Royal-Prince, the Admiral of the blue, you are to take notice, that there
is a man on board, called a Quaker, he is to be laid in irons during the King's
pleasure and mine, for refusing to fight and eat the King's victuals, therefore
I charge you all and every man, that none of you give or sell him any victuals,
meat, drink, or water, for if you do, you shall have the same punishment that
he has. So this being called three times over, he commanded the Boatswain to
take me away and put me in irons. So I being kept in irons six days and nights,
and falling sick of a fever, I grew very weak, insomuch that when I was set out
to ease myself, (which was but once in twenty four hours) I could neither stand
nor go: So the officers that let me out, called some of my countrymen to carry
me into the ship's head to ease myself, and bring me back again to the irons.
Then the officer took pity of me, and bid me lay down upon the bilboes that
night, and he would hap me with a coverlid, so I lay there that night, and next
day till evening; then the officer desired me to go by the way a little, seeing
all was quiet, and see if I could get a little rest: So I being lame of a leg
with the irons, was creeping over the larboard-side of the ship, the Lieutenant
coming down, said, Thou damned rogue, (and many other wicked words) have thou
broken the irons? and with that drew his rapier, and swore he would stab me,
and so drove me back again to the irons, and called the yeomen, and would have
known who let me out, and said he should be punished, and I would not tell him;
but the same yeoman came in the crowd, and I put my hand out to him, and he
locked it, and none knew how: I then being the King's prisoner, I bid them be
gone, they had nothing to do with me: So I remained in irons six days more, and
recovered very well of my weakness: Then on the seventh day at night, several,
all seamen, fell to drinking of brandy, and playing at cards, and became very
loud, the Boatswain's mate hearing of them, came down, and desired them to
leave; they being full of drink, would not, so a quarrel arose, and the
Boatswain's mate cried out Murder, and immediately there came assistance to
him, but the men ran away and hid themselves, only two were taken, and put in
irons with me.

Now I shall speak a little of the Carpenter's mate's kindness to me; when I
had been in irons some days, and my food being taken from me, which was three
day's victuals, that I had left of that which Thomas Swales and Mary Stranger
sent me in Bridlington Bay, he came in the crowd, and joined himself so near
me, that he put about a pint of brandy into my pocket, and no man knew;
likewise some meat, and none knew; and told me he would supply me daily; for,
said he, I have meat of my own, which is not at the King's charge; and said
further, that he had a strict charge given him by his wife and his mother,
before he came on board, that if any Quaker came on board with him, he should
be kind to him; and that he had lately received a letter from them, wherein
they charged him to remember his promise, and be kind to Quakers, if any were
on board: But there being some occasion more than ordinary, he was taken off on
board, and I had nothing for three days and three nights, and the two men
before spoken of, that were in irons with me, while the Commander was with us,
the men would lie no where but upon me, and as soon as he was gone, they laid
off me, and gave me brandy to drink, and promised me they would not hurt me:
Then the Lieutenant came at the middle of the night, and found them lying upon
me, he asked Why they did lie upon me? They said, You would have him killed, so
now we will kill him for you; then he came down the third time in the morning,
and found them lying upon me, for they set one to watch his coming, and he
found them lying very close upon me, so that he could see nothing but my feet,
I being so pressed and weak, that he could scarce hear my voice.

Then the Lieutenant went to Sir Edward's cabin door, and knocked; the boy
answered, Who was there? He told them, It was the Lieutenant that would speak
to Sir Edward, for there had been a mutiny in the ship by some men playing
cards, and they had beat the Boatswain's mate: He told him, he should have laid
them in irons, and not called on him. He said, They are already in the bilboes.
He also said, If it please your Highness Sir Edward, to remember, that there is
a poor Quaker in yet, that was laid in two weeks since, and they will lie no
where but upon him, and they will kill him for us. He bid him go to the yeomen
that had the keys, and take him out of the bilboes, and put up a flag at the
mizen-mast's head, and call a council of war; which was done: Then the Captains
of the other ships all came on board to answer the council of war, before eight
o'clock in the morning, (it being the first day of the week) so I being brought
before the council of war, the Commander asked me, If I would go on board of an
hoy that was a tender, and had six guns? I refused, and desired to stay on
board, and bear the punishment that I had to abide. Then he bid the council of
war go on with their business; so they did proceed, and I being set on a
bulkhead, being so lame with the irons that I could not stand, and hearing them
pass sentence of condemnation upon me. The Judge was a Papist, being governor
of Dover castle, and went to sea on pleasure. So they could not tell at present
what death to put me to: The Judge said, I should be put into a barrel or cask
driven full of nails, with their points inwards, and so rolled to death. But
the council of war taking it into consideration, thought it too terrible a
death, and too much unchristian-like, so they agreed to hang me: And I hearing
them speak several things against me, which I was clear of, had a desire to
arise from my knees where I was set to answer for myself, but I had not any
power to arise or open my mouth, but was condemned within myself, insomuch that
I had not power to breathe unto God; proffering to rise again the second time,
there came a motion within me, and bid me Be still, Be still, Be still, three
times, which I obeyed, and was comforted; then I believed God would arise: and
when they had done speaking, then God did arise, and I was filled with the
power of God, and my spirit lifted up above all earthly things, and wonderful
strength was given me to my limbs, and my heart full of the power and wisdom of
God, and with glad tidings my mouth was opened to declare to the people the
things that God had made manifest to me: With sweat running down, and tears
trickling from my eyes, I told them, The hearts of Kings were in the hand of
the Lord, and so are both yours and mine, and I do not value what you can do to
this body, for I am at peace with God and all men, and you my adversaries; for
if I might have an hundred and thirty years longer, I can never die in a better
condition, for the Lord has satisfied me, that he has forgiven me all things
in this world, and I am glad through his mercy, that he has made me willing to
suffer for his name's sake; and not only so, but I am heartily glad, and do
really rejoice, and with a seal in my heart to the same. Then there came a man
and laid his hand upon my shoulder, and said, Where are all thy accusers? Then
my eyes were opened, and I looked about me, and they were all gone; and one
said, There goes thy chief friend, the judge: Then it arose in my heart, that
I had news for him from the power of God, and I said, Man, come back, I have
news for thee better than ever thou heardst in any Coffee-house, or elsewhere;
and answer for what thou have done. Then came a Lieutenant, and said, Sir
Edward, this is an hypocrite Quaker. I said, Commander, I entreat thee to look
upon me a little, so I loosed my knee-string and put down my stockings, and let
him see how the blood and rotten stuff ran down my leg round about; he said,
put up thy stocking, there is enough. Then presently came an ancient soldier,
and loosed down his knee-strings, and put down his stockings, put his cap under
his knees, and begged his pardon three times: Then said he, Arise up soldier,
and speak; and he entreated him and said, Noble Sir Edward, you know that I
have served his Majesty under you many years, both in this nation and other
nations by the sea, and you were always a merciful man; therefore I do entreat
you in all kindness, to be merciful to this poor man, who is condemned to die
tomorrow, and only for denying your order, for fear of offending God, and for
conscience sake; and we have but one man on board out of nine hundred and
fifty, but one which does refuse for conscience sake, and shall we take his
life away? Nay, God forbid: for he has already declared, that if we take his
life away, there shall a judgment appear upon some on board within eight and
forty hours, and to me it has appeared, therefore I am forced to come upon the
quarter deck before you, and my spirit is one with his; and therefore I desire
you in all kindness, when you take his life away, to give me the liberty to go
off on board, for I shall not be willing to serve his Majesty longer on board
of ship: So I do entreat you once more, to be merciful to this poor man: So God
bless you, Sir Edward, I have no more to say to you.

Then came the chief Gunner, that had been a Captain, and loosed down his
knee-strings, and did beg his pardon three times, being upon his but knees
before Sir Edward: Then he said, Arise up Gunner and speak. So he said, If it
please your Worship, Sir Edward, We know you are a merciful man, and therefore
I entreat you in all kindness, to be merciful to this poor man, in whom there
remains something more than flesh and blood, therefore I entreat you, let us
not destroy that which is alive, neither endeavor to do it: And so God bless
you Sir Edward, I have no more to say to you. Then he went away. Then the
Commander desired me to go down and take my leave of my friends (this day) that
were on board; so he gave order, that any that had a mind to give me victuals
might, and that I might eat and drink with whom I pleased, and that none should
molest me that day. Then came the Lieutenant, and sat down by me while they
were at their worship, and he would have given me brandy, but I refused: Then
the dinner came up to be served, and several gave me victuals to eat, and I did
eat freely, and was kindly entertained that day; then the night being come, a
man kindly proffered me his hammock to lie in that night, because I had lain
long in irons, and I accepted of his kindness, and laid me down, and slept well
that night. The next morning being come, it being the second day of the week,
on which I was to be executed, about eight of the clock in the morning, the
rope being reeved upon the mizen-yard's arm, and the boy ready to turn me off,
and boats having come on board with Captains of other ships that were of the
council of war, who came on purpose to see me executed; I was thereupon called
to come to be executed, then I coming to the execution place, the Commander
asked the council, How their judgment did stand? So most of them did consent,
and some of them were silent. Then he desired me freely to speak my mind, if I
had any thing to say before I was executed: I told him, I had little at present
to speak. So there came a man and bid me go forward to be executed, so I
stepped upon the gunnel to go toward the rope; the Commander bid me stop there
if I had any thing to say. Then spoke the judge, and said, Sir Edward is a
merciful man, that puts that Heretic to no worse death than hanging. Sir
Edward turned him about to the Judge, and said, What said thou? I say,
replied he, you are a merciful man, that puts him to no worse death than
hanging. But, said he, what is the other word that thou said, that Heretic:
I say, said the Commander, he is more a Christian than thyself; for I do
believe thou would hang me, if it were in thy power. Then said the Commander
unto me, Come down again, I will not hurt an hair of thine head, for I cannot
make one hair grow. Then he cried, Silence all men, and proclaimed it three
times over, that if any man or men on board of the ship would come and give
evidence, that I had done any thing that I deserved death for, I should have
it, provided they were credible persons. But no body came, neither opened a
mouth against me then. So he cried again, Silence all men, and hear me speak:
Then he proclaimed, that the "Quaker" was as free a man as any on board the
ship was. So the men heaved up their hats, and with a loud voice cried, God
bless Sir Edward, he is a merciful man: The shrouds, and tops, and decks being
full of men, several of their hats flew over board, and were lost.

Then I had great kindness showed me by all men on board, but the great
kindness of the Lord exceeded all, for the day I was condemned to die on, was
the most joyful day that ever I had in my lifetime, and so remained exceeding
joyful, until the very time that I was proclaimed a free man. But soon after
troubles came upon me again, for I being laid upon the deck one night, as it
was my usual lodging-place, there was something appeared to me, and struck me
as it were dead, and I being in great dread and fear, believed our ship was to
engage such a day of the month, with the wind at South-East, then appeared also
a small cloud to me about as big as an hat; after being engaged, the same cloud
spread and became a great one, insomuch that it darkened part of the ship, then
I stepped over on the starboardside of the ship, into the shrouds, and looked
aft, and I saw a thick water arising in the wake of the rudder, then I feared
the ship was near ground. This appeared to me three times that night, and I
would gladly have put it from me, but I could not: Then I did believe, and was
satisfied of the truth of it, then I was at peace and quiet in my mind, but
then I was to make it known to the pilot, and I did believe it was death by law
to discourage them; so I thought, then I should give them an occasion that they
should take away my life; but I could not rest, eat, drink, or sleep, until I
had declared it; so I breathed unto God, and desired that he would find me a
way to reveal it, so it remaining with me two days and two nights, and being
walking upon the deck, and taking notice of the chief Gunner of the ship, I was
ordered to go to him, and walk with him; very solitary were both of us, and he
perceived I had something to say to him, of some weighty matter, so he desired
me to speak my mind to him, and I told him, I had such a weighty matter to
declare, that it was death by the law to declare it, I desired that he would
stand true to me in that respect, and he promised me fidelity in the presence
of God, before whom we were, that he would be true to me in all respects, and
if one suffered, both should suffer. Then we espied the mate of the ship
walking, he being a sober man, we drew near to him, and he perceived we were
both afflicted, and desired to know what was the matter? So we told him, We had
a weighty matter, and if he would be as faithful to us, as we were one to
another, we would declare it to him: so he promised to be faithful to us, for
he did believe it did concern him: Then we told him the matter, and he was
fully satisfied of the truth of it; but, said he, it does belong most of all to
the pilot; so we must speak to him, and he being such a brickle, high-spirited
man, we scarce knew how to speak to him, but calling him to us, and walking
with him, he took notice of our heaviness, and asked our business with him; we
told him, we had a matter to declare to him of great concern, therefore we
desired him to be faithful to us, and we would declare the matter to him, and
he promised to be as faithful to us, as he supposed we were one to another; so
they told him the matter, then he asked, Who saw it? I told him, I see it. Then
he fell into a rage, and seemed to fly from his promise, and said, he would go
and tell the Commander, so away he went, and said, he would have me executed
speedily: I said, let him go, better I die, than the whole company perish; but
they said, if thou die, we will all die. Then he came to us again near weeping,
and told us, that when he came before the Commander, his mouth was stopped, that
he could not speak a word good or bad: He was very tender, and praised God that
he had such a messenger. Then he took me by the hand, and desired me to tell
him the name of the sand, I told him, I did not know, I never came there, but
at that time I looked up with my Eyes, and told him where-abouts the sand laid;
so he desired me to go to the Compass, and he asked me, if I knew the Compass?
I told him, very well; so I showed him upon what point of the compass the said
sand laid, and he took a book out of his pocket, and found the sand, and the
name of it. Some days after we were engaged on that very point with the
Hollanders, and as soon as we were engaged, the cloud appeared to me, and came
and darkened the ship, then I stepped into the main-shrouds, and I saw the thick
water, then I showed the pilot it, and he called two of the best men to the
lead, they cried five fathom and a quarter; then the pilot cried, Starboard
your helm; then the Commander cried, Larboard your helm, and bring her too; the
pilot said, he would bring the King's ship no nearer, he would give over his
charge: The Commander cried, Bring her too. The pilot cried to the Leadmen,
Sing aloud that Sir Edward may hear, (for the outery was very great amongst the
officers and seamen, because the ship was so near a ground, and the enemies
upon them) so they cried, a quarter less five: The Commander cried, we shall
have our Royal-Prince on ground, take up your charge, pilot. Then he cried
hard, Starboard your helm, and see how our ship will veer; so she did bear
round up: The men at the lead cried, five fathom and a better depth; then the
Commander cried, God preserve the Royal-Prince: Then the pilot cried, be of
good cheer, Commander: They cried six fathom, then nine fathom, then fifteen
fathom, then sixteen fathom. The Hollanders then shouted, and cried. Sir Edward
runs. Then he cried, Bring her too again, and the fight continued till the
middle of the day was over, and it fell calm: And the ships being engaged on
head of us, we could see nothing but fire and smoke; so out of that smoke I
espied a fire-ship designed to lay us on board of the larboard-bow: then I
cried to the chief gunner to come to me quickly, and I showed him the fire-ship
coming to board us on the larboard-bow: Then he fired a chase gun with a ball
in her, and as soon as the smoke was gone from the gun, we espied the fire-ship
all on a fire, blown up, and what remained of her sallied on board of the
Cambridge, and only burned her ancient. The fight continued, and my employ was
to carry down the wounded men, and look out for fireships, and the Commander
was mightily pleased with my service, and said, It would have been a great pity
that my life should have been taken away before the engagement, and the chief
Gunner said, I was instrumental, through mercy, not only for giving notice of
the ship coming on ground upon the sand, but also for preventing of the
fire-ship that was near to board us, who gave me the first notice, whereof I am
witness. And the Lieutenant said to the Commander, that there was not a more
undaunted man on board except his Highness.

Eight days after, we were engaged again with the Hollanders, and the officers
sent for me upon the Quarter Deck, and asked me what I would do that day? I
told them, I was willing to do as I had done before; they desired I would do
that service, and take that care upon me, only to look out for fire ships
coming on board: I told them, I was free to do it, likewise to carry down the
wounded men if there was occasion; so presently we engaged, but not one
fire-ship troubled us that day, but we lost about two hundred men. The
Lieutenant meeting me, he asked me, If I had received any wounds? I told him, I
had received none, but was well. He asked me, How came I to be so bloody? Then
I told him, It was with carrying down wounded men. So he took me in his arms,
and kissed me, and that was the same Lieutenant that persecuted me so with
irons at the first. Then we came to the Buoy and Nore again, and then went up
near Chatham, and the King coming on board, the Lieutenant desired me to go and
walk upon the deck with him in sight of the King, that happily some might give
him notice of me, hoping I might be brought to a trial, and have my liberty;
but I did not understand that he had any intelligence of me. The next day the
same Lieutenant came to me, and desired me to walk along with him upon the
quarter deck: I being somewhat unwilling, told him, I did not use to go upon
the quarter deck, unless I was called by the officers: He said, my uncle has
much business, and does forget you, so walk along with me, I desire you: And I
did as he desired me, and he being with me, walked away and left me alone; the
Commander being there, and several Captains with him, he came from his company
to me, and laid his hand upon my head and said, Thou have done well, and very
well too: So he walked by me and I blushed; then he asked me, Why I blushed? I
told him I desired to know wherein I had done so well: He said, by encouraging
them which should have encouraged both thee and me. Then said he, Thou shall
have thy liberty to go on shore. I asked him, If I might go on shore to
recruit, or go to my own Being? He said, I should choose whether I would. I told
him, I had rather go to my own Being: He said, I should do so. Then I told him,
There was one thing that I requested of him yet, that he would be pleased to
give me a Certificate under his hand, to certify that I am not run away: He
said, Thou shall have one to keep thee clear at home, and also in thy fishing;
for he knew I was a Fisherman. So he called the Captain, and ordered him to
write me a Certificate, and bring it to him; which he did with speed, but he
did not like it, but flung it him again, and ordered him to make me one more
legible; then he brought another, and he signed it and gave it me, and wished
me well, and said, he desired to hear from me if I got well home, and I told
him, I would send him a letter, and so I did: But soon after I got into London,
two press-crews came to me, and said, This is Sir Edward's Quaker; you are
welcome to shore, will you please to go to the Tavern with us? I told them, I
would not go, nor drink any thing: Then they wished me well home.

Also they proffered me my pay, before I came off on board, and said, I
deserved it as well as any man on board; but I refused, and told them, I had of
my own, that I hoped would serve me home. And the Lieutenant was troubled
because I would take nothing; he would have given me twenty shillings, but I
would not take it,"

Thus ends the remarkable Narrative of the Sufferings of this faithful sailor,
who rather than violate his conscience by being instrumental to destroy other
men's lives, endured with much patience many and sore trials, persevering
faithful in his testimony against War and Fighting, even to death; to which he
was wholly resigned, and from which he was preserved by a singular providence
attending him, in those moments of time which he thought would have been his
last. But the virulence of the Popish Judge against him as an Heretic, gave
the Commander, Sir Edward Spragg, who professed himself a Protestant, such
disgust, that scorning to be made a tool to execute the vengeance of a Papist
in this Case, he delivered the innocent man from the death he was condemned to:
Being thus preserved alive, he was made instrumental to the saving of the ship,
and the lives of many therein: and by the exercise of an undaunted Christian
courage and constancy, triumphed over the malice of his adversaries, who,
conscience of his innocence, at length became his friends and favorers.

FINIS.

