A SERMON, Preached at the EXECUTION OF Moses Paul, AN INDIAN; Who was executed
at New Haven, on the Second of September, 1772; for the Murder of Mr. Moses
Cook, late of Waterbury, on the 7th of December, 1771. Preached at the Desire
of said PAUL.

By SAMSON OCCOM, Minister of the Gospel, and Missionary to the Indians.

NEW HAVEN; Printed and Sold by T and S. Green.

The PREFACE.
THE world is already full of books; and the people of God are abundantly
furnished with excellent books upon divine subjects; and, it seems, that every
subject has been written upon over and over again: and the people in very deed
have had precept upon precept, line upon line, here a little and there a
little; and so in the whole, they have much, yea, very much they have enough
and more than enough. And when I come to consider these things, I am ready to
say with myself, What folly and madness is it in me to suffer any thing of mine
to appear in print, to expose my ignorance to the world.

It seems altogether unlikely that my performance will do any manner of service
in the world, since the most excellent writings of worthy and learned men are
disregarded. But there are two or three considerations that have induced me to
be willing, to suffer my broken hints to appear in the world. One is, that the
books that are in the world are written in very high and refined language, and
the sermons that are delivered every sabbath in general, are in a very high and
lofty style, so that the common people understand but little of them. But I
think they cannot help understanding my talk; it is common, plain, every day
talk: little children may understand me. And poor Negroes (...) and fully
understand my meaning, and it may be of service to them. Again, it may in a
particular manner be serviceable to my poor kindred, the Indians. Further, as
it comes from an uncommon quarter, it may induce people to read it, because it
is from an Indian. Lastly, God works where and when he (...) and by what
instruments he sees fit, and he can and has used weak and unlikely instruments
to bring about his great work.

It was a stormy and very uncomfortable day, when the following discourse was
delivered, and about one half of it was not delivered, as it was written, and
now it is a little altered and enlarged in some places.

INTRODUCTION.
BY the melancholy providence of God, and at the earnest desire and invitation
of the poor condemned criminal, I am here before this great concourse of people
at this time, to give the last discourse to the poor miserable object who is to
be executed this day before your eyes, for the due reward of his folly and
madness, and enormous wickedness. It is an unwelcome task to me to speak upon
such an occasion; but since it is the desire of the poor man himself, who is to
die a shameful death this day, in conscience I cannot deny him; I must
endeavor to do the great work the dying man requests.

I conclude that this great concourse of people have come together to see the
execution of justice upon this poor Indian; and I suppose the bigest part of
you look upon yourselves christians, and as such I hope you will demean
yourselves; and that you will have suitable commiseration toward this poor
object. Though you cannot in justice pray for his life to be continued in this
world, yet you can pray earnestly for the salvation of his poor soul,
consistently with the mind of God. Let this be therefore, the fervent exercise
of our souls: for this is the last day we have to pray for him. As for you,
that don't regard religion, it cannot be expected, that you will put up one
petition for this miserable creature: yet I would entreat you seriously to
consider the frailty of corrupt nature, and behave yourselves as becomes
rational creatures.

And in a word, let us all be suitably affected with the melancholy occasion of
the day, knowing that we are all dying creatures, and accountable unto God.
Though this poor condemned criminal will in a few minutes know more than all of
us, either in unutterable joy, or in inconceivable woe, yet we shall certainly
know as much as he, in a few days.

The sacred words that I have chosen to speak from upon this undesirable
occasion, are found written in the epistle of St. Paul to the
ROMANS VI. 23. For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal
life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
DEATH is called the King of Terrors, and it ought to be the subject of every
man and woman's thoughts daily; because it is that unto which they are liable
every moment of their lives: and therefore, it cannot be unseasonable to think,
speak and hear of it at any time, and especially on this mournful occasion; for
we must all come to it, how soon we cannot tell; whether we are prepared or not
prepared, ready or not ready, whether death is welcome or not welcome, we must
feel the force of it: whether we concern ourselves with death or not, it will
concern itself with us. Seeing that this is the case with every one of us, what
manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness; how
ought men to exert themselves in preparation for death continually; for they
know not what a day or an hour may bring forth, with respect to them. But,
(...) according to the appearance of mankind in general, death is the least
thought of. They go on from day to day, as if they were to live here forever,
as if this was the only life. They contrive, rack their inventions, disturb
their rest, and even hazard their lives in all manner of dangers, both by sea
and land; yea they leave no stone unturned that they may live in the world, and
at the same time have little or no contrivance to die well: God and their souls
are neglected, and heaven and eternal happiness are disregarded; Christ and his
religion are despised -- yet most of these very men intend to be happy when
they come to die, not considering that there must be great preparation in order
to die well. Yea there is none so fit to live as those that are fit to die;
those that are not fit to die are not fit to live. Life and death are nearly
connected; we generally own that it is a great and solemn thing to die. If this
be true, then it is a great and solemn thing to live; for as we live, so we
shall die. But I say again, how little do mankind realize these things? They
are busy about the things of this world as if there was no death before them.
Dr. Watts pictures them out to the life in his psalms: See the vain race of
mortals move
Like shadows over the plain,
They rage and strive, desire and love,
But all the noise is vain.
Some walk in honor's gaudy show,
Some dig for golden ore,
They toil for heirs they know not who,
And strait are seen no more.


But on the other hand, life is the most precious thing and ought to be the
most desired by all rational creatures. It ought to be prized above all things;
yet there is nothing so abused and despised as life, and nothing so neglected:
mean eternal life is shamefully disregarded by men in general, and eternal
death is chosen rather than life. This the general complaint of the bible from
the beginning to the end. As long as Christ is neglected, life is refused, and
as long as sin is cherished, death is chosen; and this seems to be the woeful
case of mankind of all nations, according to their appearance in these days;
for it is too plain to be denied, that vice and immorality, and floods of
iniquity are abounding every where amongst all nations, and all orders and
ranks of men, and in every sect of people. Yea there is a great agreement and
harmony among all nations, and from the highest to the lowest to practice sin
and iniquity; and the pure religion of Jesus Christ is turned out of doors, and
is dying without; or, in other words, the Lord Jesus Christ is turned out of
doors by men in general, and even by his professed people. "He came to his own,
and his own received him not." But the devil is admitted, he has free access to
the houses and hearts of the children of men: Thus life is refused and death is
chosen. But in further speaking upon our text, by divine assis^^^ce, I shall
consider these two general propositions:

I. That sin is the cause of all the miseries that befall the children of men,
both as to their bodies and souls, for time and eternity.

II. That eternal life and happiness is the free gift of God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

In speaking to the first proposition I shall first consider the nature of sin;
and secondly shall consider the consequences of sin, or the wages of sin, which
is death.

First then, we are to describe the nature of sin.

Sin is the transgression of the law: -- This is the scripture definition of
sin. Now the law of God being holy, just and good; sin must be altogether
unholy, unjust and evil. If I was define sin, I should call it a contrariety to
GOD; and as such must be the vilest thing in the world; it is full of all evil;
it is the evil of evils; the only evil, in which dwells no good thing; and is
most destructive to God's creation, where ever it takes effect. It was sin that
transformed the very angels in heaven, into devils; and it was sin that caused
hell to be made. If it had not been for sin, there never would have been such a
thing as hell or devil, death or misery.

And if sin is such a thing as we have just described; it must be worse than
the devils and hell itself. -- Sin is full of deadly poison; it is full of
malignity and hatred against God, against all his divine perfections and
atributes, against his wisdom, against his power, against his holiness and
goodness against his mercy and justice, against his written law and gospel;
yea, against his very being and existence. Were it in the power of sin, it
would even dethrone God, and set itself on the throne.

When Christ the Son of the Most High, came down from the glorious world above,
into this wretched world of sin and sorrow, to seek and to save that which was
lost, sin, or sinners rose up against him, as soon as he entered our world, and
pursued him with hellish malice, night and day, for above thirty years
together, till they killed him.

Further, sin is against the Holy Ghost; it opposes all his good and holy
operations upon the children of me. When, and wherever there is the out-pouring
of the Spin of God, upon the children of men, in a way of conviction and
conversion; sin will immediately prompt the devil and his children to rise up
against it, and they will oppose (...) work with all their power, and in every
shape. And if open opposition will not do, the devil will mimick the work, and
thus prevent the good effect.

Thus we find by the scripture accounts, that whenever God raises up men, and
uses them as instruments of conviction and conversion, the devil and his
instruments will rise up to destroy both the reformers and the reformed. That
it has been from the early days of Christianity, to this day We have found it
so in our day. In the time of the outpouring of the Spirit of God in these
colonies, to the conviction and reformation of many; immediately sin and the
devil influenced numbers to rise up against the good work of God, calling it
delusion, and work of the devil. And thus sin also opposes every motion of the
Spirit of God, in the heart of every Christian; this makes a warfare in the
soul.

2. I shall endeavor to show the sad consequences or effects of sin upon the
children of men.

Sin has poisoned them, and made them distracted or fools. The Psalmist says,
The fool has said in his heart, there is no God. And Solomon, through his
Proverbs, calls ungodly sinners fools; and their sin he calls their folly, and
foolishness. The Apostle James says, But the tongue can no man tame, it is an
unruly evil, full of deadly poison. It is the heart that is in the first place
full of deadly poison. The tongue is only an interpreter of the heart. Sin has
viriated the whole man, both soul and body; all the powers are corrupted; it
has turned the minds of men against all good, toward all evil. So poisoned are
they, according to the prophet Isaiah v. chapter 20 ver. "Woe unto them that call
evil good, and good evil* that put darkness for light, and light for darkness;
that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter." And Christ Jesus says in
John iii. 19, 20. "And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the
world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil.
For every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light,
lest his deeds should be reproved." Sin has stupefied mankind, they are now
ignorant of God their maker; neither do they enquire after him. And they are
ignorant of themselves, they know not what is good for them, neither do they
understand their danger; and they have no fear of God before their eyes.

Further, sin has blinded their eyes, so that they cannot discern spiritual
things; neither do they see the way that they should go, and they are deaf as
adders, so that they cannot hear the joyful sound of the gospel that brings
glad tidings of peace and pardon to sinners of mankind. Neither do they regard
the Charmer charming never so wisely. -- Not only so, but sin has made man
proud, though he has nothing to be proud of; for he has lost all his excellency,
his beauty and happiness; he is a bankrupt, and is excommunicated from God; he
was turned out of paradise by God himself, and become a vagabond in God's
world, and as such he has no right nor title to the least crumb of mercy in the
world: yet he is proud, he is haughty, and exalts himself above God, though he is
wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind and naked. He glories in his shame.
Sin has made him beastly and devilish; yea he is sunk beneath the beasts, and
is worse than the ravenous beasts, of the wilderness. He is become ill-natured,
cruel and murderous; he is contentious and quarrelsome. I said he is worse than
the ravenous beasts, for wolves and bears don't devour their own kind, but man
does; yea we have numberless instances of women killing their own children;
such women I think are worse than she tigers.

Sin has made men dishonest and deceitful, so that he goes about cheating and
defrauding and deceiving his fellow men in the world: yea, he is become a cheat
himself, he goes about in a vain show; we don't know where to find man. Some
times we find as an angel of God; and at other times we find as a devil, even
one and the same man. Sin has made man a liar even from the womb; so that there
is no believing nor trusting him. The royal psalmist says, "The wicked are
estranged from the womb, they go astray as soon as they are born, speaking
lies." -- His language is also (...) he had a pure and holy language, in his
innocence, to adore and praise God his maker, he now curses, swears, and
profanes the holy name of God, and curses and damns his fellow-creatutes. In a
word, man is a most unruly and ungovernable creature, and is become as the wild
ass's colt, and is harder to tame than any of God's creatures in this world. In
short, man is worse than all creatures in this lower world, his propensity is
to evil and that continually; he is more like the devil than any creature we
can think of: and I think it is not going beyond the word of God, to say, man
is the most devilish creature in the world. Christ said to his disciples, One
of you is a devil; to the Jews he said, Ye are of your father the devil, and
the lusts of your father ye will do. Thus every unconverted soul is a child of
the devil, sin has made them so.

We have given some few hints of the nature of sin, and the effects of sin on
mankind.

We shall in the next place consider the wages or the reward of sin, which is
death.

Sin is the cause of all the miseries that attend poor sinful man, which will
finally bring him to death, death temporal and eternal. I shall first consider
his temporal death.

His temporal death then begins as soon as he is born. Though it seems to us that
he is just beginning to live, yet in fact he is just entered into a state of
death: as St. Paul says, "Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.
Man is surrounded with ten thousand instruments of death, and is liable to
death every moment of his life; a thousand diseases await him on every side
continually; the sentence of death is past upon them as soon as they are born:
yea they are struck with death as soon as they breathe. And it seems all the
enjoyments of men in this world are also poisoned with sin: for GOD said to
Adam after he had sinned, "Cursed is the ground for thy sake, in sorrow shall
thou eat of it all the days of thy life." By this we plainly see that every
thing that grows out of the ground is cursed, and all creatures that God has
made for man are cursed also; and whatever God curses is a cursed thing indeed.
Thus death and destruction is in all the enjoyments of men in this life, every
enjoyment in this world is liable to misfortune in a thousand ways, both by sea
and land.

How many ships, that have been loaded with the choicest treasures of the
earth, have been swallowed up in the ocean, many times just before they enter
their desired haven. And vast treasures have been consumed by fire on the land,
etc. And the fruits of the earth are liable to many judgments. And the dearest
and nearest enjoyments of men are generally balanced with equal sorrow and
grief. A man and his wife who have lived together in happiness for many years;
that have comforted each other in various changes of life, must at last be
separated; one or the other must be taken away first by death, and then the
poor survivor is drowned in tears, in sorrow, mourning and grief. And when a
dear child or children are taken away by death the bereaved parents are bowed
down with sorrow and deep mourning. When Joseph was sold by his brethren unto
the Ishmaelites, they took his coat and rolled it in blood, and carried it to
their father, and the good patriarch knew it to be Joseph's coat, and he
concluded that his dear Joseph was devoured by evil beasts, and he was plunged
all over in sorrow and bitter mourning, and he refused to be comforted. And so
when tender parents are taken away by death, the children are left comfortless.
-- All this is the sad effect of sin. -- These are the wages of sin.

And secondly, we are to consider man's spiritual death, while he is here in
this world. We find it thus written in the word of God. 'And the Lord God
commanded the man, saying, of every tree of the garden thou may freely eat:
but of the tree of the knowledge, of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it,
for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die.' And yet he did
eat of it, and so he and all his posterity, are but dead men. And St. Paul to
the Ephesians says, 'You has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and
sins. -- The great Mr. Henry says in this place, that unregenerate souls are
dead in trespasses and sins. All those who are in their sins, are dead in sins;
yea, in trespasses and sins; which may signify all sorts of sins, habitual and
actual; sins of heart and life. Sin is the death of the soul. Wherever that
prevails, there is a privation of all spiritual life. Sinners are dead in
state, being destitute of the principles and powers of spirtual life; and cut
off from God, the fountain of life: and they are dead in law, as a condemned
malefactor is said to be a dead man. Now a dead man, in a natural sense, is
unactive, and is of no service to the living; there is no correspondence
between the dead and the living: there is no agreement or union between them,
no fellowship at all between the dead and the living. A dead man is altogether
ignorant of the intercourses amongst the living: -- just so it is with men that
are spiritually dead; they have no agreeable activity. Their activity in sin,
is their deadness, and inactivity toward God. They are of no service to God;
and they have no correspondence with heaven; and there is no agreement or
fellowship between them and the living God; and they are totally ignorant of
the agreeable and sweet intercourse there is between God and his children here
below: and they are ignorant, and know nothing of that blessed fellowship and
union there is among the saints here below. They are ready to say indeed,
behold how they love one another! But they know nothing of that love, that the
children of God enjoy. As sin is in opposition to God; so sinners are at enmity
against God; there is no manner of agreement between them.

Let us consider further. God is a living God, he is all life, the fountain of
life; and a sinner is a dead soul; there is nothing but death in him. And now
judge ye, what agreement can there be between them? God is a holy and pure God,
and a sinner is an unholy and filthy creature; -- God is a righteous Being, and
a sinner is an unrighteous creature; God is light, and a sinner is darkness
itself, etc. Further, what agreement can there be between God and a liar, a
thief, a drunkard, a swearer, a profane creature, a whoremonger, an adulterer,
and idolater, etc. No one that has any sense, dare say, that there is any
agreement. Further, as sinners are dead to God, as such, they have no delight
in God, and godliness; they have no taste for the religion of Jesus Christ;
they have no pleasure in the holy exercises of religion. Prayer is no pleasant
work with them; or if they have any pleasure in it, it is not out of love to
God, but out of self-love, like the Pharisees of old; they loved to pray in
open view of men, that they might have praise from them. And perhaps, they were
not careful to pray in secret. These were dead souls, they were unholy, rotten
hypocrites, and so all their prayers and religious exercises were cold, dead,
and abominable services to God. Indeed they are dead to all the duties that God
requires of them; they are dead to the holy bible; to all the laws, commands,
and precepts thereof; and to the ordinances of the gospel of the Lord Jesus
Christ. When they read the book of God, it is like an old almanac to them, a
dead book. But it is because they are dead, and as such, all their services are
against God, even their best services are an abomination unto God; yea, a
sinner is so dead in sin, that the threatenings of God don't move them. All the
thunderings and lightnings of Mount-Sinai don't stir them. And all the curses
of the law are out against them; yea, every time they read these curses in the
bible, they are cursing them to their faces, and to their very eyes; yet they
are unconcerned, and go on in sin without fear. And lastly here, sin has so
stupify'd the sinner, that he will not believe his own senses; he wont believe
his own eyes, nor his own ears; he reads the book of God, but he does not
believe what he reads. And he hears of God, and heaven, and eternal happiness,
and of hell and eternal misery; but he believes none of these things; he goes
on, as if there were no God, nor heaven and happiness; neither has he any fear
of hell and eternal torments; -- and he sees his fellow men dropping away daily
on every side, yet he goes on carelessly in sin, as if he never was to die. And
if he at any time thinks of dying, he hardly believes his own tho'ts. Death is
at great distance, so far off, that he don't concern himself about it, so as to
prepare for it. God mournfully complains of his people, that they don't
consider; O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would
consider their latter end.

The next thing I shall consider, is the actual death of the body, or
separation between soul and body. At the cessation of natural life, there is an
end of all the enjoyments of this life; there is no more joy nor sorrow; no
more hope nor fear, as to the body; no more contrivance and carrying on any
business; no more merchandising and trading; no more farming; no more buying
and selling; no more building of any kind, no more contrivance at all to live
in the world; no more flatteries nor frowns from the world; no more honor nor
reproach; no more praise; no more good report, nor evil report; no more
learning of any trades, arts or sciences in the world; no more sinful
pleasures, they are all at an end; recreations, visiting, tavern haunting,
music and dancing, chambering and carousing, playing at dice and cards, or any
game whatsoever; cursing and swearing, and profaning the holy name of God,
drunkenness, fighting, debauchery, lying and cheating, in this world, must
cease forever. Not only so, but they must bid an eternal farewell to all the
world; bid farewell to all their beloved sins and pleasures; and the places and
possessions, that knew them once, shall know them no more forever. And further,
they must bid adieu to all sacred and divine things. They are obliged to leave
the bible, and all the ordinances thereof; and to bid farewell to preachers, and
all sermons and all christian people, and christian conversation; they must bid
a long farewell to sabbaths and seasons, and opportunities of worship; yea, an
eternal farewell to all mercy, and all hope; an eternal farewell to God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and adieu to heaven and all happiness, to saints
and all the inhabitants of the upper world. At your leisure please to read the
destruction of Babylon; you will find it written in the 18th of the Revelation.

On the other hand, the poor departed soul must take up its lodging in sorrow,
woe and misery, in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, where the worm
dies not, and the fire is not quenched; where a multitude of frightful
deformed devils dwell, and the damned ghosts of Adam's race; where darkness,
horror and despair reigns, where hope never comes, and where poor guilty naked
souls will be tormented with exquisite torments, even the wrath of the Almighty
poured out-upon their damned souls; the smoke of their torments ascending up
forever and ever; their mouths and nostrils streaming forth with living fire;
and hellish groans, howlings, cries and shrieks all round them, and merciless
devils upbraiding them for their folly and madness, and tormenting them
incessantly. -- And there they must endure the most unsatiable, fruitless
desire, and the most overwhelming shame and confusion, and the most horrible
fear, and the most doleful sorrow, and the most racking despair. When they cast
their flaming eyes to heaven, with Dives in torments, they behold an angry and
frowning GOD, whose eyes are as a flaming fire, and they are struck with ten
thousand darts of pain; and the sight of the happiness of the saints above,
adds to their pains and aggravates their misery. And when they reflect upon
their past folly and madness in neglecting the great salvation in their day, it
will pierce them with ten thousand inconceivable torments; it will as it were
enkindle their hell afresh; and it will cause them to curse themselves
bitterly, and curse the day in which they were born, and curse their parents
that were the instruments of their being in the world; yea they will curse,
bitterly curse and wish that very GOD that gave them their being, to be in the
same condition with them in hell torments. This is what is called the second
death, and it is the last death, and an eternal death to a guilty soul.

And O eternity, eternity, eternity! Who can measure it? Who can count the
years thereof? Arithmetic must fail, the thoughts of men and angels are drowned
in it; how shall we describe eternity? To what shall we compare it? Were it
possible to employ a fly to carry off this globe by the small particles
thereof, and to carry them to such a distance that it should return once in ten
thousand years for another particle, and so continue till it has carried off
all this globe, and framed them together in some unknown space, till it has
made just such a world as this is: after all eternity would remain the same
unexhausted duration. This must be the unavoidable portion of all impenitent
sinners, let them be who they will, great or small, honorable or ignoble, rich
or poor, bond or free. Negroes, Indians, English, or of what nations soever,
all that die in their sins, must go to hell together, for the wages of sin is
death.

The next thing that I was to consider is this:

That eternal life and happiness is the free gift of God, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Under this proposition I shall endeavor to show what this life and happiness
is.

The life that is mentioned in our text is, a spiritual life: it is the life of
the soul, a restoration of soul from sin, to holiness, from darkness to light,
a translation from the kingdom and dominion of satan, to the kingdom of God's
grace. In other words, it is being restored to the image of God, and delivered
from the image of satan. And this life consists in union of the soul to God,
and communion with God; a real participation of the divine nature, or in the
apostle's words, it is Christ formed within us; I live, says he, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me. And the apostle John says, God is love, and he that
dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. This is the life of the
soul. It is called emphatically life, because it is a life that shall never
have a period, a stable, permanent, and unchangeable life, called in the
scriptures, everlasting life, or life eternal. And the happiness of this life
consists in communion with God, or in the spiritual enjoyment of God. As much
as a soul enjoys of God in this life, just so much of life and happiness he
enjoys or possesses; yea, just so much of heaven he enjoys. A true christian,
desires no other heaven, but the enjoyment of God, a full and perfect enjoyment
of God, is a full and perfect heaven and happiness to a gracious soul. --
Further, this life is called eternal life, because God has planted a living
principle in the soul; and whereas he was dead before, now he is made alive
unto God; there is an active principle within him toward God, he now moves
toward God in his religious devotions and exercises; is daily comfortably and
sweetly walking with God, in all his ordinances and commands; his delight is in
the ways of God; he breathes toward God, a living breath, in praises, prayers,
adorations and thanksgivings; his prayers are now heard in the heavens, and his
praises delight the ears of the Almighty, and his thanksgivings are accepted.
So alive is he now to God, that it is his meat and drink, yea more than his
meat and drink, to do the will of his heavenly Father. It is his delight, his
happiness and pleasure to serve God. He does not drag himself to his duties
now, but he does them out of choice, and with alacrity of soul. Yea, so alive
is he to God, that he gives up himself and all that he has entirely to God, to
be for him and none other; his whole aim is to glorify God in all things,
whether by life or death, all the same to him.

We have a bright example of this in St. Paul. After he was converted, he was
all alive to God; he regarded not his life, but was willing to spend, and be
spent in the service of his God; he was hated, reviled, despised, laughed at,
and called by all manner of evil names; was scourged, stoned and imprisoned; --
and all could not stop his activity toward God. He would boldly and
courageously go on in preaching the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, to poor,
lost, and undone sinners; he would do the work God set him about, in spite of
all opposition he met with, either from men or devils, earth or hell; come
death, or come life, none of these things moved him, because he was alive unto
God. Though he suffered hunger and thirst, cold and heat, poverty and nakedness
by day and by night, by sea and land, and was in danger all ways; yet he would
serve God amidst all these dangers. Read his amazing account in 2 Cor. 11. 23
and on.

Another instance of mavelous love toward God, we have in Daniel. When there
was a proclamation of prohibition, sent by the king, to all his subjects,
forbidding them to call upon their gods, for thirty days; which was done by
envious men, that they might find occasion against Daniel the servant of the
Most High God; yet he having the life of God in his soul, regarded not the
king's decree, but made his petitions to his God, as often as he used to do,
though death was threatened to the disobedient. But he feared not the hell they
had prepared; for it seems, the den resembled hell, and the lions represented
the devils. And when he was actually cast into the lion's den, the ravenous
beasts become meek and innocent as lambs, before the prophet, because he was
alive unto God; the spirit of the Most High was in him, and the lions were
afraid before him. Thus it was with Daniel and Paul; they went through fire and
water, as the common saying is, because they had eternal life in their souls in
eminent manner; and they regarded not this life, for the cause and glory of
God. And thus it has been in all ages with true Christians. Many of the
forefathers of the English, in this country, had this life, and are gone the
same way, that the holy prophets and apostles went. Many of them went through all
manner of sufferings for God; and a great number of them are gone home to
heaven, in chariots of fire. I have seen the place in London, called
Smithfield, where numbers were burnt to death for the religion of Jesus Christ.
And there is the same life in true christians now in these days; and if there
should persecutions arise in our day, I verily believe, true christians would
suffer with the same spirit and temper of mind, as those did, who suffered in
days past. -- This is the life which our text speaks of.

We proceed in the next place to show, that this life, which we have described,
is the free gift of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Sinners have forfeited all mercy into the hand of divine justice, and have
merited hell and damnation to themselves; for the wages of sin is everlasting
death, but heaven and happiness is a free gift; it comes by favor; and all
merit is excluded: and especially if we consider that we are fallen sinful
creatures, and there is nothing in us that can recommend us to the favor of
God; and we can do nothing that is agreeable and acceptable to God; and the
mercies we enjoy in this life are altogether from the pure mercy of God; we are
unequal to them. Good old Jacob cried out, under a sense of his unworthiness,
"I am less than the least of all thy mercies," and we have nothing to give unto
God, if we essay to give all the service that we are capable of, we should give
him nothing but what was his own, and when we give up ourselves unto God, both
soul and body, we give him nothing; for we were his before; he had right to do
with us as he pleased, either to throw us into hell, or save us. -- There is
nothing that we can call our own, but our sins; and who is he that dares to
say, I expect to have heaven for my sins? for our text says, that the wages of
sin is death. If we are thus unequal and unworthy of the least mercy in this
life, how much more are we unworthy of eternal life? yet God can find it in his
heart to give it. And it is altogether unmerited; it is a free gift to
undeserving and hell deserving sinners of mankind: it is altogether of God's
sovereign good pleasure to give it. It is of free grace and sovereign mercy,
and from the unbounded goodness of God; he was self-moved to it. And it is said
that this life is given in and through the Lord Jesus Christ. It could not be
given in any other way, but in and through the death and sufferings of the Lord
Jesus Christ; Christ himself is the gift, and he is the christian's life. "For
God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." The word says
further, "For by grace ye are saved, through faith, and that not of yourselves,
it is the gift of God." This is given through Jesus Christ our Lord; it is Christ
that purchased it with his own blood; he prepared it with his divine and
almighty power; and by the same power, and by the influence of his spirit, he
prepares us for it; and by his divine grace preserves us to it. In a word, he
is all in all in our eternal salvation; all this is the free gift of God.

I have now gone through what I proposed from my text. And I shall now make some
application of the whole.

First to the criminal in particular; and then to the auditory in general.

My poor unhappy brother MOSES;
As it was your own desire that I should preach to you this last discourse, so
I shall speak plainly to you. -- You are the bone of my bone, and flesh of my
flesh. You are an Indian, a despised creature; but you have despised yourself;
yea you have despised God more; you have trodden under foot his authority; you
have despised his commands and precepts: and now, as God says, be sure your
sins will find you out. And now, poor Moses, your sins have found you out, and
they have overtaken you this day; the day of your death is now come; the king
of terrors is at hand; you have but a very few moments to breathe in this
world. -- The just laws of man, and the holy law of Jehovah, call aloud for the
destruction of your mortal life; God says, "Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed." This is the ancient decree of heaven, and it is to be
executed by man; nor have you the least gleam of hope of escape, for the
unalterable sentence is past; the terrible day of execution is come; the
unwelcome guard is about you; and the fatal instruments of death are now made
ready; your coffin and your grave, your last lodging, are open ready to receive
you.

Alas! poor Moses, now you know, by sad, by woeful experience, the living truth
of our text, that the wages of sin is death. You have been already dead; yea
twice dead: by nature spiritually dead. And since the awful sentence of death
has been past upon you, you have been dead to all the pleasures of this life;
or all the pleasures, lawful or unlawful, have been dead to you: And death,
which is the wages of sin, is standing even on this side of your grave ready to
put a final period to your mortal life; and just beyond the grave, eternal
death awaits your poor soul, and the devils are ready to drag your miserable
soul down to their bottomless den, where everlasting woe and horror reigns; the
place is filled with doleful shrieks, howls and groans of the damned. Oh! to
what a miserable, forlorn, and wretched condition have your extravagant folly
and wickedness brought you! i. e. if you die in your sins. And O! what manner
of repentance ought you to manifest! How ought your heart to bleed for what you
have done! How ought you to prostrate your soul before a bleeding God! And
under selfcondemnation, cry out, Ah Lord, ah Lord, what have I done! --
Whatever partiality, injustice and error there may be among the judges of the
earth, remember that you have deserved a thousand deaths, and a thousand hells,
by reason of your sins, at the hands of a holy God. Should God come out against
you in strict justice, alas! what could you say for yourself? for you have been
brought up under the bright sunshine, and plain, and loud sound of the gospel;
and you have had a good education; you can read and write well; and God has
given you a good natural understanding: and therefore your sins are so much
more aggravated. You have not sinned in such an ignorant manner as others have
done; but you have sinned with both your eyes open as it were, under the light,
even the glorious light of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. -- You have
sinned against the light of your own conscience, against your knowledge and
understanding; you have sinned against the pure and holy laws of God, and the
just laws of men; you have sinned against heaven and earth; you have sinned
against all the mercies and goodness of God; you have sinned against the whole
bible, against the old and new testament; you have sinned against the blood of
Christ, which is the blood of the everlasting covenant. O poor Moses, see what
you have done! and now repent, repent, I say again repent; see how the blood
you shed cries against you, and the Avenger of Blood is at your heels. O fly,
fly to the Blood of the Lamb of God for the pardon of all your aggravated sins.

But let us now turn to a more pleasant theme. -- Though you have been a great
sinner, a heaven daring sinner; yet hark and hear the joyful sound from heaven,
even from the King of kings, and Lord of lords; that the gift of God is eternal
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. It is a free gift, and offered to the
greatest sinners, and upon their true repentance toward God and faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ, they shall be welcome to the life, which we have spoken of;
it is offered upon free terms. He that has no money may come; he that has no
righteousness, no goodness, may come; the call is to poor undone sinners; the
call is not to the righteous, but sinners, calling them to repentance. Hear the
voice of the Son of the most high God, Come unto me, all yea that labor and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. This is a call, a gracious call to
you, poor Moses, under your present burdens and distresses. And Christ alone
has a right to call sinners to himself. It would be presumption for a mighty
angel to call a poor sinner in this manner; and were it possible for you to
apply to all God's creatures, they would with one voice tell you, that it was
not in them to help you. Go to all the means of grace, they would prove
miserable helps, without Christ himself. Yea, apply to all the ministers of the
gospel in the world, they would all say, that it was not in them, but would
only prove as indexes, to point out to you, the Lord Jesus Christ, the only
savior of sinners of mankind. Yea, go to all the angels in heaven, they would
do the same. Yea, go to God the Father himself, without Christ, he could not
help you, to speak after the manner of men, he would also point to the Lord
Jesus Christ, and say this is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear
ye him. Thus you see, poor Moses, that there is none in heaven, or on the
earth, that can help you, but Christ; he alone has power to save, and to give
life. -- God the eternal has appointed him, chose him, authorized, and fully
commissioned him to save sinners. He came down from heaven, into this lower
world, and became as one of us, and stood in our room. He was the second Adam.
And as God demanded perfect obedience of the first Adam; the second fulfilled
it; and as the first sinned, and incurred the wrath and anger of God, the
second endured it; he suffered in our room. As he became sin for us, he was a
man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief; all our stripes were laid upon him;
yea, he was finally condemned, because we were under condemnation; and at last
was executed and put to death, for our sins; was lifted up between the heaven
and the earth, and was crucified on the accursed tree; his blessed hands and
feet were fastened there; -- there he died a shameful and ignominious death*
there he finished the great work of our redemption: there his hearts blood was
shed for our cleansing: there he fully satisfied the divine justice of God, for
penitent, believing sinners, though they have been the chief of sinners. -- O
Moses! this is good news to you, in this last day of your life; here is a
crucified Savior at hand for your sins; his blessed hands are outstretched,
all in a gore of blood for you. This is the only Savior, an almighty Savior,
just such as you stand in infinite and perishing need of. O, poor Moses! hear
the dying prayer of a gracious Savior on the accursed tree, -- Father forgive
them, for they know not what they do. This was a prayer for his enemies and
murderers; and it is for you, if you would only repent and believe in him. O
why will you die eternally, poor Moses, since Christ has died for sinners? Why
will you go to hell from beneath the bleeding Savior as it were? This is the
day of your execution, (...) it is the accepted time, it is the day of
salvation if you will now believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. Must Christ follow
you into the prison by his servants, and there entreat you to accept of eternal
life, and will you refuse it? and must (...) follow you even to the gallows,
and there beseech you to accept of him, and will you refuse him? Shall he be
crucified hard by your gallows, as it were, and will you regard him not? O,
poor Moses, now believe on the Lord Jesus Christ with all your heart, and thou
shall be saved eternally* Come just as you are, with all your sins and
abominations, with all your filthiness, with all your blood-guiltiness, with
all your condemnation, and lay hold of the hope set before you this day. This
is the last day of salvation with your soul; you will be beyond the bounds of
mercy in a few minutes more. O, what a joyful day would it be if you would now
openly believe in and receive the Lord Jesus Christ; it would be the beginning
of heavenly days with (...) poor soul; instead of a melancholy day, it would be
a ^^^^ding day to your soul; it would cause the very angels in heaven to
rejoice, and the saints on earth to be glad; it would cause the angels to come
down from the realms above, and wait hovering about your gallows, ready to
convey your soul to the heavenly mansions, there to take the possession of
eternal glory and happiness, and join the heavenly choirs in singing the songs
of Moses and the Lamb: there to set down forever with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob
in the kingdom of God's glory* and your shame and guilt shall be forever
banished from the place, and all sorrow and fear forever fly away, and tears be
wiped from your face; and there shall you forever admire the astonishing and
amazing and infinite mercy of God in Christ Jesus, in pardoning such a
monstrous sinner as you have been; there you will claim the highest note of
praise, for the riches of free grace in Christ Jesus. But if you will not
accept of a Savior so freely offered to you in this last day of your life, you
must this very day bid farewell to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, to heaven
and all the saints and angels that are there (...) and you must bid all the
saints in this lower world an eternal farewell, and even the whole world. And so
I must leave you in the hands of God; and I must turn to the whole auditory.

Sirs, We may plainly see, from what we have heard, and from the miserable
object before us, into what a doleful condition sin has brought mankind, even
into a state of death and misery. We are by nature as certainly under sentence
of death from God, as this miserable man is, by the just determination of man;
and we are all dying creatures, and we are, or ought to be, sensible of it; and
this is the dreadful fruit of sin. O! let us then fly from all appearance of
sin; let us fight against it with all our might; let us repent and turn to our
God, and believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, that we may live forever; let us all
prepare for death, for we know not how soon, nor how suddenly we may be called
out of the world.

Permit me in particular, reverend Gentlemen and fathers in Israel, to speak a
few words to you, though I am well sensible that I need to be taught the first
principles of the oracles of God, by the least of you. But since the providence
of God has so ordered it, that I must speak here on this occasion, I beg that
you would not be offended nor be angry with me.

God has raised you up, from among your brethren, and has qualified, and
authorized you to do his great work; and you are the servants of the Most High
GOD, and ministers of the Lord Jesus the Son of the living God: you are
Christ's ambassadors; you are called Shepherds, watchmen, overseers, or
bishops, and you are rulers of the temples of God, or of the assemblies of
God's people; you are God's angels, and as such you have nothing to do but to
wait upon God, and to do the work the Lord Jesus Christ your blessed Lord and
Master has set you about, (...) fearing the face of any man, nor seeking to
please men, (...) your Master. You are to declare the whole counsel of God, and
to give a portion to every soul in due season; as physician gives a portion to
his patients, according to their diseases, so you are to give a portion to
every soul in due season, according to their spiritual maladies; whether it be
agreeable or disagreeable to them, you must give it them; whether they will
love you or hate you for it, you must do your work. Your work is to encounter
sin and fatan; this was the very end of the coming of Christ into the world,
and the end of his death and sufferings; it was to make an end of sin and to
destroy the works of the devil. And this is your work still, you are to sight
the battles of the Lord. Therefore combine together, and be terrible as an army
with manners; attack this monster sin in all its shapes and windings, and lift
up your voices as trumpets and not spare, all aloud, call your people to arms
against this common enemy of mankind, that sin may not be their ruin. Call upon
all orders, ranks and degrees of people, to rise up against sin and satan. Arm
yourselves with fervent prayer continually, this is a terrible weapon against
the kingdom of satan. And preach the death and sufferings, and the resurrection
of Jesus Christ; for nothing is so destructive to the kingdom of the devil, as
this is. But what need I speak any more? Let us all attend, and hear the great
Apostle of the Gentiles speaking unto us in Ephesians. 6 chapter from the 10th ver. and
onward. Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might; put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. Wherefore take unto you the
whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand in the evil day, and having
done all to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth,
and having on the breast plate of righteousness; and your feet shod with the
preparation of the gospel of peace: above all, taking the shield of faith,
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked; and take
the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God:
praying always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching
thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication for all saints.

I shall now address myself to the Indians, my brethren and kindred according
to the flesh.

My poor kindred,
You see the woeful consequences of sin, by seeing this our poor miserable
countryman now before us, who is to die this day for his sins and great
wickedness. And it was the sin of drunkenness that has brought this destruction
and untimely death upon him. There is a dreadful woe denounced from the Almighty
against drunkards, and it this sin, this abominable, this beastly and accursed
sin of drunkenness, that has stripped us of every desirable comfort in this life;
by this we are poor, miserable and wretched; by this sin we have no name nor
credit in the world among polite nations; for this sin we are despised in the
world, and it is all right and just, for we despise ourselves more; and if we
don't regard ourselves, who will regard us? And it is for our sins, and
especially for that accursed, that most develish sin of drunkenness that we
suffer every day. For the love of strong drink we spend all that we have, and
every thing we can get. By this sin we cannot have comfortable houses, nor any
thing comfortable in our houses; neither food nor raiment, nor decent utensils.
We are obliged to put up any sort of shelter just to screeh us from the
severity of the weather; and we go about with very mean, ragged and dirty
clothes, almost naked. And we are half starved, for most of the time obliged
to pick up any thing to eat. -- And our poor children are suffering every day
for want of the necessaries of life; they are very often crying for want of
food, and we have nothing to give them; and in the cold weather they are
shivering and crying, being pinched with cold. -- All this is for the love of
strong drink. And this is not all the misery and evil we bring on ourselves in
this world; but when we are intoxicated with strong drink, we drown our
rational powers, by which we are distinguished from the brutal creation; we
unman ourselves, and bring ourselves not only level with the beasts of the
field, but seven degrees beneath them; yea we bring ourselves level with the
devils; I don't know but we make ourselves worse than the devils, for I never
heard of drunken devils.

My poor kindred, do consider what a dreadful abominable sin drunkenness is.
God made us men, and we choose to be beasts and devils; God made us rational
creatures, and we choose to be fools. Do consider further, and behold a
drunkard, and see how he looks, when he has drowned as reason; how deformed and
shameful does he appear? He dis-figures every part of him, both soul and body,
which was made after the image of God. He appears with awful deformity, and his
whole visage is dis-figured; if he attempts to speak he cannot bring out his
words distinct, so as to be understood; if he walks he reals and staggers to
and fro, and tumbles down. And see how he behaves, he is now laughing, and then
he is crying; he is singing and the next minute he is mourning; and is all love
to every one, and anon he is raging, and for fighting, and killing all before
him, even the nearest and the dearest relations and friends: Yea nothing is too
bad for a drunken man to do. He will do that, which he would not do for the
world, in his right mind; he may lie with his own sister or daughter as Lot did.

Further, when a person is drunk, he is just good for nothing in the world; he
is of no service to himself, to his family, to his neighbors, or his country;
and how much more unfit is he in serve God: yet he is just fit for the service
of the devil.

Again, a man in drunkenness is in all manner of danger he may be killed by his
fellow-men, by wild beasts, (...) tame beasts; he may fall into the fire, into
the water, or into a ditch; or he may fall down as he walks along, and break
his bones or his neck; he may cut himself with edgetools. -- Further, if he has
any money or any thing valuable, he may loose it all, or may be robbed, or he
may make a foolish bargain, and be cheated out of all he has.

I believe you know the truth of what I have just now said, many of you, by sad
experience; yet you will go on still in your drunkenness. Though you have been
cheated over and over again, and you have lost your substance by drunkenness,
yet you will venture to go on in this most destructive sin. O fools when will
ye be wise? -- We all know the truth of what I have been saying, by what we
have seen and heard of drunken deaths. How many have been drowned in our
rivers, and how many frozen to death in the winter seasons! yet drunkards go on
without fear and consideration: alas, alas! What will become of all such
drunkards? Without doubt they must all go to hell, except they truly repent and
turn to God. Drunkenness is so common amongst us, that even our young men and
young women are not ashamed to get drunk. Our young men will get drunk as soon
as they will eat when they are hungry. -- It is generally esteemed amongst men,
more abominable for a woman to be drunk, than a man; and yet there is nothing
more common amongst us that female drunkards. Women ought to be more modest
than men; the holy scriptures recommend modesty to women in particular: -- but
drunken women have no modesty at all. It is more intolerable for (...) woman to
get drunk, if we consider further, that she is in great danger of falling into
the hands of the sons of Belial, (...) wicked men* and being shamefully treated
by them.

And here I cannot but observe, we find in sacred writ, a woe denounced against
men, who put their bottles to their neighbors mouth to make them drunk, that
they may see their nakedness: and no doubt there are such devilish men now in
our day, as there were in the days of old.

And to conclude, consider my poor kindred, you that are drunkards, into what a
miserable condition you have brought yourselves. There is a dreadful woe
thundering against you every day, and the Lord says, That drunk^^^^ shall not
inherit the kingdom of God.

And now let me exhort you all to break off from your drunkenness, by a gospel
repentance, and believe on the Lord Jesus and you shall be saved. Take warning
by this doleful sight before us, and by all the dreadful judgments that have
befallen poor drunkards. O let us all reform our lives, and live as becomes
dying creatures, in time to come. Let us be persuaded that we are accountable
creatures to God, and we must be called to an account in a few days. You that
have been careless all your days, now awake to righteousness, and be concerned
for your poor and never dying soul. Fight against all sins, and especially the
sin that easily besets you, and behave in time to come as becomes rational
creatures; and above all things, receive and believe on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and you shall have eternal life; and when you come today your souls will be
received into heaven, there to be with the Lord Jesus in eternal happiness,
with all the saints in glory; which, God of his infinite mercy grant, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

AMEN.

