A JOURNAL OF THE LIFE, TRAVELS, AND GOSPEL LABORS, OF A FAITHFUL MINISTER OF
JESUS CHRIST, DANIEL STANTON, Late of PHILADELPHIA, in the Province of
PENNSYLVANIA.

With the Testimony of the MONTHLY MEETING of FRIENDS in that City concerning
him.

My Covenant was with him of Life and Peace, and I gave them to him, for the
Fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my Name.

MAL. ii. 5. He being dead, yet speaks.

HEB. xi. 4. PHILADELPHIA: Printed and sold by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in
Third-street, opposite the Workhouse.

M DCC LXXII.

THE TESTIMONY OF THE Monthly Meeting of FRIENDS in PHILADELPHIA, CONCERNING
OUR DEARLY BELOVED FRIEND, DANIEL STANTON.
WHEN John the Divine was in exile in the isle of Patmos, "He heard a voice
from Heaven, saying, Write, -- Blessed are the dead, who die in the Lord, from
henceforth, yea says the spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and
their works do follow them;" -- which we believe now is the portion of our
worthy friend, concerning whose faithful services we are engaged from the
united motives of love and duty, to give this testimony; desiring, that all who
read it, and more especially the Youth, may be excited, by his example, to seek
an early acquaintance with the Lord, and to take up their daily cross in the
prime of their days. -- Thus, they also, may become shining lights and
instruments of good to others.

HE was born in this city, in the year 1708, and his father dying before his
birth, and his mother a few years after, he suffered great trials and hardships
when very young: -- Being early concerned to seek the knowledge of God, he had
a fervent desire to attend religious meetings, though subjected to many
difficulties and discouragements, before that privilege was allowed him; yet,
being earnest in his desires to obtain divine favor, he was eminently
supported under great conflicts and probations, and, continuing faithful to the
degrees of light and grace communicated, a dispensation of the gospel ministry
was committed to him, sometime before the term of his apprenticeship was
expired; and abiding under the sanctifying power of truth, he grew in his gift,
and became a zealous faithful minister.

HE was very exemplary in his industry and diligence, in laboring faithfully
at his trade, to provide for his own support, and after he married, and had
children, for their maintenance; and was often concerned to advise others to
the same necessary care; yet he continued fervent in spirit for the promotion
of truth and righteousness, so that he was soon engaged to leave home, and the
nearest connections of nature, to publish the glad tidings of the gospel, --
and frequently visited most of the meetings of Friends in this and the adjacent
provinces, and several times as far as the eastern parts of New England. Having
thus honestly discharged his duty among us above twenty years, and feeling his
mind constrained in the love of the gospel, to visit the few Friends who
remained in some of the West India islands, and from thence the meetings of
Friends in general through Great Britain and Ireland, he communicated his
concern to a few of his most intimate friends, who having unity therewith, he
was encouraged to lay it before our monthly meeting. -- Before he entered on
this weighty service, he passed through a near trial and affliction in the
death of his beloved wife; under which exercise he was graciously supported by
the arm of divine strength, which had often been revealed for his help, in
times of inward conflicts and outward distresses.

HIS concern to travel in the service of truth continuing, and the meeting
having full unity with him therein, he embarked in the fifth month, 1748,
accompanied by our dear friend, Samuel Nottingham, in a vessel bound for
Barbados, and having visited the few meetings in that island, they went by way
of Antigua to Tortola, where they continued some time, having some difficulty
to get a passage to Europe; and their voyage thither was attended with some
singular hazards and dangers, which occasioned their landing in Ireland; where
our friend Daniel continued some months, visiting the meetings of Friends in
that kingdom; -- and after he apprehended himself clear, went over to England,
and visited the meetings generally in that nation, and in Wales and Scotland,
where his meek circumspect conduct and conversation, and lively edifying
ministry, rendered his visit very acceptable and his memory precious.

IN his return home, and for some time after, he was in a low afflicted state
of mind; being apprehensive, that through diffidence, and the want of perfect
resignation to the divine will, he had omitted fully performing the service
required of him, by not visiting the few Friends in Holland: yet he was
mercifully preserved, and after a time of deep exercise, raised again to sing
of the mercies and loving kindness of God on the banks of deliverance.

HE several times, with other Friends appointed to that service, visited the
families of Friends in this city, and between the years 1757 and 1760, being
accompanied by our friend John Pemberton, he visited the families of Friends
generally within, the limits of our meeting; which weighty exercising service,
he was enabled to perform to our edification and satisfaction. After which, he
was frequently engaged to excite Friends to this useful and edifying practice.

IN the twelfth month, 1760, he set out on a visit to the meetings in the
western parts of this province, and from thence in Maryland, Virginia, and
North and South Carolina, and returned in the sixth month following; since
which he frequently visited many of the meetings near home, and some as far as
Long Island, and other parts of the province of New York. Within the last two
years, he visited the families of Friends of some of the meetings in
West-Jersey, in the city of New York, and part of Long Island; and after his
return from this service, with great peace and satisfaction, he expressed his
apprehension that he was now clear of all places, and that his stay here was
near over; -- having an evidence, that he had been faithfully concerned from
his youth to fear and serve God.

HIS chief labor and religious exercises were in this city, where he was a
diligent attender of all our meetings, and often on committees appointed on the
services of the church; in which he was solid and weighty in spirit, waiting
for the springing up of life, being steadily concerned both in and out of
meetings, to live near the divine fountain: Thus he was very frequently
qualified, and enabled to stir up the pure mind, and to recount the gracious
dealings of God to Mankind, and as a faithful ambassador to warn the negligent
to flee from the wrath to come, and to excite the people to bring forth fruits
answerable to the great mercies graciously bestowed on us; and was sometimes
constrained to declare in a prophetic manner, a day of trial, in diverse
instances, very shortly before such a season came to pass.

HE was of late deeply exercised in consideration of the evils of the horse
races, stage plays, drunkenness, and other gross enormities encouraged and
increasing in this city; closely exhorting our youth against those pernicious
and destructive devices of the enemy of mankind; and under the awful sense that
God will judge and punish the wicked and evil doers, he was often fervent in
public supplications, that the Lord would lengthen out the day of his merciful
visitation, and yet try the people longer; which seasons were solemn and
humblingly affecting; manifesting, that although he was very close and sharp in
reproof against evil, yet most tenderly concerned, that the transgressors of
the righteous law of God might be prevailed with to repent, return, and live.

HIS love for the rising generation was very great; which he manifested by his
affectionate notice of them, and especially of those who were religiously
inclined, and his house was open to receive such, his conversation with them
being seasoned with grace, and his counsel instructive and helpful to those who
had seeking desires after the knowledge of truth, often lovingly inviting them
to come, taste, and see, that the Lord is good; greatly desiring, that all who
profess the truth, might walk agreeable to its dictates and be led thereby, as
our worthy predecessors were, into that meekness, humility, and godly
simplicity and plainness, which rendered them conspicuous and shining examples,
and that none might rest short of the enjoyment of the life of religion, his
zeal being great against such, who have the form of godliness, and by their
actions manifest they have not the power thereof; -- and he often fervently
advised and cautioned those who are eagerly pursuing the world, and by the
forfeiting cares, and grasping after (...) treasures, frustrate the good
purpose of the visitation of divine grace to them, and closely reminded those,
who in their small beginnings were low and humble, that now they were
abundantly favored, they should not set their affections on things below, but
remember the rock from whence they were hewn; -- and his concern was great that
those who had the glad tidings of the gospel to publish, might be true examples
to the flock, and adorn the doctrine they had to deliver by a circumspect life
and conversation, and where any by not steadily keeping to that which would
have preserved them, had involved themselves in difficulties, either by letting
their minds out to the gains and profits of this world, or otherwise, his
travail was great for such that they might be brought through, and every cloud
and mist removed.

HE was much employed in visiting the sick and afflicted, to whom he
administered his spiritual advice and experience, and often engaged in humble
prayer for their support; and in the distributing to the necessitous according
to his circumstances, he manifested his benevolent disposition.

AS he had been many years under great exercise and suffering of spirit on
account of the slavery of the poor Africans, and frequently bore testimony
against that unrighteous gain of oppression, he was of late somewhat relieved,
as he found the eyes of the people become more open to see the iniquity of the
practice; and he died in faith, that the light of the gospel will so generally
prevail, that the professors of christianity will find it their duty to restore
to these people their natural right to liberty, and to instruct them in the
principles of the christian religion.

ON the fifth day of the fifth month, he was violently seized with the bilious
cholic, and continued in great pain several days; but afterward being somewhat
easier, he was at our morning and evening Meetings on Firstday, the thirteenth
of the month, in which he was much favored in his public ministry, and
expressed that he thought his time would not be long with us. After this day's
labor, he was again confined, yet being a little recovered he as at our
meeting on Fifthday, the twenty-fourth of the month, which being small, he
expressed his sorrow for it, and encouraged Friends to diligence in the
attendance of week day meetings, the benefit of a faithful discharge of duty
therein being great; -- the next day he was at our monthly meeting, and to his
own and our admiration was enabled to stay through both our sittings, though
the last of them was longer than usual, and he afterward expressed that he
thought himself better in the meeting than when out; -- it was a season of
divine favor, and some weighty matters being before the meeting, he with great
openness spoke pertinently and clearly to them, encouraging Friends to the
supporting and maintaining our christian testimony, against all that is
contrary to it: This was the last public meeting he was at, being the next
morning early seized with a renewed attack of the same disorder, which
increased on him several days, and was so fixed, that all the endeavors of
several skilful physicians and tender nurses, were not effectual to remove it,
though in some measure to mitigate the pain, that he suffered much, not being
able to lie down in his bed several weeks, yet through all he was mercifully
supported, in much resignation, and patience, rather inclining, if it was the
Lord's will, to be released.

FOR two or three weeks before his sickness, he appeared very desirous of
settling every thing he had to do respecting the affairs of this life, and
desired a Friend to review and transcribe the short memoirs he has left of his
travels and religious services, and to write his will, which he executed the
day before he was first taken sick, and then appeared easy in his mind.

DURING the time of his sickness he often expressed his concern least his
Friends should be too anxious for his recovery, saying, if he should live
longer, and through any human frailty or infirmity occasion any reproach, it
would be a cause of sorrow to them.

BY the desire of his Friends who attended him, he rode out several times, though
not without much difficulty, and spent the two last days of his life at the
houses of two of his intimate Friends. As he drew near his end, the strength of
his love to mankind in general, and his Friends in particular, evidently
increased, much desiring the prosperity of truth, and when a meeting time came
had an earnest desire to be with Friends, and particularly the day before his
departure.

DURING his sickness, he frequently expressed himself in a very seasonable,
instructive, and affecting manner; and the evening of the Firstday before he
dyed, several Friends coming in to see him, he spoke a considerable time to
them, having before been desirous of such an opportunity of the company of his
Friends, to sit down and wait upon God, which was his great delight.

THE last day of his life he spent at the house of his Friend Israel Pemberton,
at Germantown, and was unusually free and cheerful, even till ten o'clock at
night, when he undressed himself, and went into bed, remarking on lying down,
that he had not before been able to do so, for five weeks or upwards, and he
soon after fell asleep, but in a short time was awakened by the return of pain
and difficulty of breathing, which through his illness he had been much afflicted
with, so that he was obliged to set up in bed, and thus continued, at intervals
freely conversing with our said Friend, who sat up with him, and he expressed
his great thankfulness that his head was preserved free from pain and his
understanding clear, and that though it had been a time of close trial and deep
probation, he could say he felt the evidence of divine support still to attend
him. -- After which, his pains increasing he got up and dressed himself, and
walking about the room sometime, sat down in an easy chair, in which he fell
into a sweet sleep, and in about three hours departed without sigh or groan.

THUS died this righteous man, who having fought the good sight and kept the
faith, finished his course in full unity with us, and universally beloved by
his fellow citizens, on the twenty eighth day of the sixth month, 1770, in the
62d year of his age and 43d of his ministry. His body was the next day attended
by a large number of people of diverse religious denominations to our meeting
house, and afterward interred in Friends burial ground in this city.

Signed on behalf, and by appointment of our Monthly Meeting, held in
Philadelphia, by adjournment, the 2d of the eighth month 1770. JAMES PEMBERTON,
Clerk.

DANIEL STANTON's ACCOUNT OF HIS LIFE, TRAVELS AND LABORS IN THE Service of
the GOSPEL.
His Birth and Parentage; -- Apprenticeship; -- first coming forth in the
Ministry; -- and first Journey to Rhode Island; -- his marriage and second
Journey to New England, etc.

IN a grateful sense of the many helps and great goodness of the Almighty to my
soul, whereby he has been pleased from my young years to incline my heart to
fear and serve him; it is on my mind to leave some account of my life, travels,
and experience; wishing it may be a means to stir up the pure mind in any, to
obey the will of the Lord, and to serve him, while they have time and
opportunity to perform the same; for he is worthy to be had in everlasting
remembrance, and is a good rewarder of all the sincere in heart; although they
may have tribulations on the earth, they have also the company of Christ our
dear redeemer, who promised to be with his disciples to the end of the world.

The place and time of his birth.
BY the account I have had, I was born in the year 1708, in Philadelphia, in the
province of Pennsylvania, of honest parents, Daniel and Abigail Stanton, and it
was my hard lot soon to be deprived of them both; my father I never saw, he
being lost at Sea sometime before I was born; and my mother died when I was a
child, so that I have but little remembrance of her.

AFTER her death, I met with great hardships, both of body and mind, being
destitute of parents, and of brother or sister, that I was in a lonely state,
and went to live at several places a short time, the last of which (before I
was put apprentice) was in New Jersey, with my mother's brother; during which
time, I went through great difficulties, too tedious to mention.

I LIVED there several years, and had no opportunity to go to any place of
religious worship; but the lord was pleased by his grace and good visitation,
to operate on my mind, that I was made to dread and fear the great almighty
Being, and it was given me to know, that God is a spirit, and they who worship
him, must worship him in spirit and truth; and through the blessed knowledge of
God by his holy spirit, I had great reproof in my own breast for sin and
transgression, and dreaded to speak bad words, or to do what was evil, and was
brought by inward conviction to mourn, and seek for mercy for my soul; and at a
time when I heard of the suffering of my dear Savior on the cross, and how he
suffered unto death, my heart was broken before the Lord, and I went alone and
wept, being much affected with a sense of his suffering by that hard hearted
people, the Jews, and of his being crucified: -- Great was the goodness of the
Almighty to me, in giving me a sense of many things appertaining to Godliness,
in the time of this tender visitation; and I found by the divine witness in
myself, that if I would be a disciple of Christ, I must take up my cross daily,
to that which displeases God; he being greatly to be feared and obeyed, and
was worthy of the deepest reverence that my soul, body and strength could
ascribe to his all powerful name.

ALTHOUGH it was hard to the natural part to become slain to the recreations
and pleasures of this life; fervent were my cries and seeking after the ways of
the lord, and I thought much of eternity in another world.

His first atdendance of meetings for religious worship.
I HAD heard of many forms of worship, but had no opportunity to be with the
people for that service to God, which was a great trouble to my mind; but at
one time I asked leave to go and see a relation, with an intention for him to
show me the way to the meeting of Friends, which was held at New-town in
Gloucester county; he was loath to take the pains to accompany me, not knowing
the solid desire of my mind; but through persuasion, I prevailed with him to go
with me to the meeting, where I was more desirous to get some good, than to be
seen of men. We sat in a part of the meeting together, where we were not much
noticed by any that I know of, and in this blessed opportunity, through the
power of truth, and the good testimony of that dear servant of Christ, John
Estaugh, being attended with the authority of the word of life, my heart was
greatly contrited and my spirit baptized in the presence of God, it was a
joyful day of good tidings to my poor seeking soul, and the eminent and
powerful advice, that did attend that worthy instrument in the Lord's hand for
my salvation, has been like bread cast upon the waters that has been found
after many days.

I WENT from that meeting much satisfied with the way of worship of Friends,
and continued earnest in spirit, that I might have further knowledge of the
blessed truth; my inward exercises were a great deal of sorrow and mourning,
that I might come forward in the work of religion, and do that which was right
in the sight of God.

LIVING with my uncle till near the age of sixteen years, I became uneasy,
being desirous to learn a trade, not knowing what I might have to depend on for
a livelihood, more than the labor of my hands; although my mother left
considerable at her death, under the care of those who she expected would do
justly by me; but it proved otherwise, they depriving me of the whole, to a
small matter, less than twenty pounds: I went on trial to a ship carpenter in
Philadelphia, in condescension to my uncle, it being a trade he rather chose
for me, than I did for myself, and was there sometime, though I soon was
dissatisfied both with the trade, and on account of the wicked conversation of
the people of the yard, who being very vain, were a great exercise to my mind;
though my master and mistress were kind and friendly to me, which was some
comfort; but the greatest satisfaction I had in this world, was that I could
attend religious meetings on the first day of the week, and was often favored
to hear the truth declared in the demonstration of the spirit and power, as
also a secret divine power being at work in my heart, afforded solid pleasure
and profit, in the midst of my trials; for, being soberly inclined, and
delighting to attend religious meetings, I met with scoffings and mockings, and
some in an outrage would bid me go along to meeting, despising my diligence on
that account; but I was enabled through mercy and grace, to bear revilings as
well as many deep distresses, which fell to my lot; being much concerned to
seek after the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; oh the inward travel that
I underwent, none knew but the Lord! And at an evening meeting near where I
sat, a little way from the door, Benjamin Kidd, a Friend of the ministry, then
on a visit to this province, from Old-England, came in and sat just by me, and
in the meeting was eminently favored in prayer, which I have many times
thought was a particular instance of divine mercy to me, in so deep a travel of
soul and spirit, as I had to wade through in several respects at that time.

His apprenticeship.
AFTER being some time at the ship carpenters trade, which not being agreeable
to me, I went again to my uncle's, where came a Friend from Philadelphia, who
having seen me when I lived in town, would have me to go apprentice to him, he
being a joiner; which I accordingly did, believing it would be of good service
for me to have a trade to depend on; and served with him until I was about the
age of twenty two years, and in the time of my apprenticeship, the goodness of
the almighty was great in preserving me through my tribulations, which were
various, beyond my setting forth; but the pure love and fear of the Lord,
accompanying my spirit, and through the divine appearance of light and grace,
Philadelphia.
I was led in a close walking before him; and my understanding was opened to
have a sight of many things, which the spirit of truth leads into; some whereof
were plainness in speech and clothing, few words in conversation, watchfulness
and prayer, choosing rather to be alone, than in the company of those whose
discourse and talking was out of the fear of God.

I MUCH delighted in retirement, and often walked alone and poured out my
complaints before the allseeing eye, that knew the condition of my heart,
desiring that he would be pleased to create in me a clean heart, and to renew a
right spirit within me. I wanted to know the work of reformation effectually
carried on, according to the mind and will of the blessed truth, and the nearer
I kept to what it made manifest, the greater strength and dominion was given me
to overcome the defilements of the world; and a concern came upon me in
observing the pride and vain glory of the times: -- I had very few
acquaintance, and was rather despised and derided by some, who overlooked the
Just Witness of Grace in themselves; I chose rather to suffer affliction with
the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin, for a season; The
sufferings of this present time works for us, as the apostle says, a more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory, and the blessed peace, that our dear
Lord gives to those who follow him whilst here, is a reward sufficient to the
sincere in heart, to hold out to the end.

THE countenance and good example of faithful Friends had a great reach on my
mind, and when I came to be more acquainted with the dealings of the Lord, and
could get frequently to religious meetings, and beheld the sitting of his
servants, and attendance of his ministers, I could say, as did the queen of the
South, who came from far to see the wisdom of Solomon, that the one half had
not been told me, and one greater than Solomon was in the midst of his people;
praised be his great name, even the name of Christ our dear Lord, that greatly
appeared in power and majesty in Sion in those days, to the tendering my heart
and spirit before him time after time, and not only eminently visited my soul,
by his glorious light and truth, but sent many of his servants among us, from
far and near, filled with gospel rain, to the watering the heritage of God; and
the Lord, the master of our assemblies, was pleased to fasten their testimonies
as nails in a sure place.

AFTER many powerful seasons of divine grace, His first appearance in the
ministry.
being favored to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living, as
also to taste and handle of the good word of life, a great concern of soul came
upon me to open my mouth in a public manner, for the cause of religion, and the
prosperity of Sion, which was a great and weighty work for me to engage in,
being one of the meanest in this world, as I thought, and an apprentice lad,
reasons would arise in me against so great a duty, not knowing how I might be
used by my master, and whether it might agree with the unity of Friends, they
being a great and wise people in this city, and by their knowledge and
experience, were gifted with a sight of spiritual things, beyond my low
capacity, as well as zealous for the good cause of God in their day. -- I waded
for a considerable time through much trouble and sorrow of spirit, lest I
should go too fast, or before my divine Guide, for they who go before they are
sent, cannot profit the people, or have peace in themselves, and peace to me
and to do the will of the Lord, was what I most desired; oh! the earnest
prayers that were in my heart that I might be rightly directed in all things,
to the honor and praise of my blessed Lord and master; and a degree of his
mighty power would lay such constraints upon me, that for Sion's sake I could
not rest, and for Jerusalem's sake I could not hold my peace; so that after
many powerful influences of the divine word, at about the age of twenty years I
appeared in a few words, in prayer, at an evening meeting, in Philadelphia, and
after this, sometimes in a few words by way of testimony, as they were put in
my heart, in a great deal of fear and dread of the Almighty Being; and Friends
bore with my appearance with much tenderness, and the ministry of those who
were largely gifted in the mysteries of the kingdom, and like scribes well
instructed thereto, that could bring out of the treasury things new and old,
would correspond with what I had to say in the fear of Lord; which blessed
helps, together with the evidence of peace in my own breast, gave a
confirmation to my mind, that I was in the way of my duty.

AFTER I came forth in this laborious exercise, I dreamed a dream, or saw in a
vision, that I was as a little child born into the world, and my mother was
very tender of me (who I have thought to be the church) but there was an enemy
that sought my life, and as though he would destroy me, but she that was my
mother made her escape, and carried me into the wilderness, and we were
preserved. -- At another time when I was much concerned in spirit for
acceptance with the Lord, I dreamed that I was traveling in a path, in which I
met with some difficulties, and got through them and met with death, and a man
came with a book, and it was said that my soul was acceptable with the Lord. I
have had great cause to speak well of his excellent name for the revealing his
secrets to my understanding, as I kept in his holy fear.

ABOUT the time that I first appeared in words in the congregations of the
Lord's people, and sometime before, the glorious day spring from on high
powerfully appeared amongst us, and several were engaged to speak to the praise
of the Almighty, and to bear testimony to his great and good name, three before
I appeared, and two afterward; the first were Mary Nicholls, Benjamin Trotter,
and Mary Emlen, the next were Joyce Marriot, and Elizabeth Widdifield, who
continued serviceable ministers among Friends. I thought it might be said to be
a time in some measure of the fulfilling the prophecy of the prophet Joel, I
will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall
prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions;
and also upon the servants, and upon the handmaids in those days, will I pour
out my spirit. Joel ii. 28, 29, 30. The plainness, zeal, and pious example of
many Friends in those days, made them as lights in this city, and instructors
to me to follow them, as they followed Christ; and as I kept inward before the
Lord in his rear, he was pleased to reveal his blessed mind and will, in things
concerning the Gospel ministry, which is not to be received from man nor in the
will of man; but by the revelation of Jesus Christ; and as I grew in the gift
communicated to me, he was pleased to give me an open door in the hearts of his
people; praised be his great name for ever more! And sometimes I had drawings
in my mind to go to a neighboring meeting, and what I had to say in their
hearing was well received.

AFTER I had served out my apprenticeship, I wrought journey-work, Expiration
of his apprenticeship.
and lived with my master until his death, which was soon after I was free, and
then wrought with another Friend in the city some time, when having an
opportunity to go to Rhode Island, the place where my father was born, and
several of his relations living there, I was desirous to see them, and while I
was apprentice having an account of some estate that was my father's, laying in
that country; 1731. His first journey to Rhode Island.
on this account, and to see my relations and Friends, I took a journey in the
year 1731, with Henry Frankland, from Old England, who came to America, on the
service of truth, and being about going to those parts, was so kind as to take
my company. He was a solid exemplary worthy Friend, whose ministry and gospel
labor was to edification among Friends. My undertaking this journey was laid
before our Monthly Meeting, and Friends were pleased to give me a certificate.

THE first meeting we went to, was at Burlington, and from thence to several
others in New Jersey, as Little-Egg-harbour, Manesquan, Shrewsbury and
Wood-bridge, and so to New York, and to meetings on the Main, and the Yearly
Meeting at Flushing, and to Friend's meetings pretty generally on Long Island;
several of which were much to satisfaction and comfort; and I was glad to see
and find the near unity that was among Friends, where our lot was cast.

FROM this island we went through Conecticut, which was a baptizing time to me,
being a young traveller, not much acquainted with the difference of places, and
behavior of people from home, their conversation, as also their principles,
through that government being greatly different from Friends, and although high
in profession of religion, seemed to me very little acquainted with the light
and spirit of Christ. It was a dark time, in which I went through much deep
inward suffering. We passed along until we got to Kingstown, near Rhode Island,
where we had a meeting, and then had one on Connanicut, and attended the
Yearly Meeting at Newport, Rhode Island, which was very large, and I hope a
good meeting to a solid remnant. My Friend Henry Frankland, whom I accompanied
so far, proceeded on his journey to visit Friends in New England, and I staid
in order to get my outward affairs settled, and to visit several Friends on
that island, one of which was that dear and worthy Friend Jacob Mott, whose
countenance shined and appeared as a follower and servant of Christ, it did me
good to see him, and when I took my leave of him, his solid advice to me made
lasting impressions on my mind. -- After I had staid some time at this place,
and had seen my relations and Friends, I returned back to Philadelphia, where I
had known in an extraordinary manner, the gracious dealings of the Almighty;
and I endeavored to seek counsel of him to know where I had best settle myself
in the world, and it seemed most suitable for me to continue in this city,
where I wrought journey-work at my trade sometime; after which I rented a shop,
and sat up for myself, humbly desiring of the Lord to add his blessing to my
endeavors, not that I craved great things, but that by an honest industrious
care I might have what was needful, as food and raiment, and desired to do
justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with God. And the abundant mercies and
blessings wherewith he was graciously pleased to make way for me, both in
things spiritual and temporal, were and are gratefully to be remembered by me,
his goodness and peace being as a stream of living water to my soul, when
favored to drink thereat.

I WROUGHT hard at my outward calling when at home, yet not so much confined
but that I kept close to religious meetings; in which the good presence of
Christ our dear Lord, would many times overshadow them, and I have had to sit
under the shadow thereof with great delight, and after such precious meetings
with his people, I found my mind better qualified to attend to my necessary
business and the affairs of life; and when the motions of truth would spring in
my heart to visit religious meetings in places adjacent in Pennsylvania and
New Jersey, I freely gave up to go to them, and sincerely labored therein in
the love of truth, in which I found great satisfaction, and with many Friends,
the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, and I hope in places my labor
was of some service; the praise of which I freely attribute to my great Lord
and master Jesus Christ; blessed be his holy name! he sustained and supported
me, and through his gifs and grace preserved me in the fear of God; his fear
was a fountain of life as well as unspeakable pleasure in my first setting out
in the world for myself; Oh! the streams of the celestial fountain or waters of
life stand open to all that are athirst, that they may drink, and they may have
wine and milk without money and without price. -- I wish that there was a more
general thirst in the children of men, to drink of this water, which Christ our
Lord has promised to give to true believers, and that it should be in them a
well of water springing up into everlasting life; and he has said of himself, I
am the living bread which came down from Heaven, if any man eat of this bread
he shall live for ever. John vi. 51. Oh! how great is his goodness and
condescension to hungering and thirsting souls, and thanks to him for ever
more! they that eat of this living bread, partake of the blessed communion, and
know the supper of the Lord; also sensibly partake of the new wine of the
kingdom; they are like new bottles filled with new wine, and know him to drink
and sup with them of this wine, new in his heavenly Father's kingdom; I take
those to be new bottles that are created a new in Jesus Christ unto good works,
and that know the kingdom of our heavenly Father to be come, and his will to be
done on earth as it is done in Heaven; and as we are taught to pray for this,
it would be well for all mankind to come to the experience of it in themselves;
for Christ our Lord said to some of old, "The kingdom of heaven is within you;"
and the faithful have it in their experience to be the same now: It is a
kingdom that consists of peace and joy to the faithful subjects of his holy
reign and government.

IN the year 1732, 1732.
I found freedom in my mind to accompany my uncle Thomas Chalkley to visit some
of the meetings of Friends in Bucks county and New Jersey, and afterward
Chester county; in the performance of which we had near fellowship together,
and Friends were kind, and I believe glad to see us; several of those meetings
were large, and I hope comfortable to many. He was a near fellowhelper to me in
my religious labors for the promotion of truth, and a bright example in the
meekness and patience of the lamb; I do not know that I was ever acquainted
with a man more inward, whose heart seemed to be more placed upon heavenly
treasure, both in meetings and out of them, than this dear disciple of Christ.

1733. His marriage.
WHEN these visits were accomplished, I having been engaged on account of
marriage to Sarah Lloyd, a virtuous young woman who feared the Lord, daughter
of honest parents, John and Sarah Lloyd of this city, on the fifth day of the
second month, 1733, we accomplished that weighty undertaking in the pure fear
of the Lord, in near affection to each other, and with the unity of Friends;
and after I was agreeably settled, my heart was still given up to go of the
Lord's errands, as he was pleased to send me, and visited Friends in these two
provinces (Pennsylvania and New Jersey) and other places, as the motion of life
engaged me from place to place, and in a short time after I went as far as
Shrewsbury, and some meetings thereaways.

IN the year 1734, 1734.
I visited the meetings of Friends at Salem, Alloways creek, Greenwich,
Cape-May and Great-Egg-harbour, several of which were to satisfaction and
comfort.

AND in the year 1735, 1735. His second visit to New England.
having a concern on my mind to visit Friends in New England, and our
Monthly Meeting in this city, giving me a certificate of their concurrence
therewith, I accordingly proceeded, and was at several meetings in the Jerseys,
from thence I went to the Yearly Meeting at Flushing, on Long Island, where was
our Friend Joseph Gill from Ireland, and several from Pennsylvania, the
meetings were large, and religious labor was bestowed among the people. After
it I visited Friends generally on that island, many of the meetings being very
large and comfortable, attended I trust with the blessed power and presence of
the Lord, which begat great nearness in the best fellowship with the
tender-minded. I then proceeded to meetings on the Main, as West-Chester,
Mamarineck, Rye, and several others; some of which were large and solid; 1735.
New England.
from thence, after being at some meetings in Conecticut, I went forward to
Rhode Island, which was a wearisome travel; but I got to Newport, and met with
a kind reception from Friends, whom I visited in much love, there being a great
number who make a profession of the way of truth; I was glad to see them, and
could have been more so that all lived in possession of the same. From
Rhode Island I took meetings in my way to Nantucket, where on my arriving I was
kindly taken home by Nathaniel Starbuck, whose heart and house were open to
receive the messengers of Christ. -- On this island I met with a great number
of choice exemplary Friends, and had several meetings among them, which I
believe tended to edification. Being clear of this place, I returned to the
Main, and taking meetings in my way, came to Boston, where I spent some time
with Friends, both in public meetings and in their families; they being loving
to me and glad of being visited, their number being small in the whole, but
seemed to be well treated by people of other persuasions, far different from
what it was in the early visits of Friends to that place, in which some of the
servants of the most high, suffered unto death. From Boston I went to Lyn,
Salem, and Newberry, and had comfortable meetings, as also at another place
between Newberry and Dover, and after I had seen Friends at Dover and Cachechy,
and a meeting near Dover, I returned to Salem and Lyn, and staid sometime at my
kind Friend Zacheus Collins's, having met with some disappointment in
traveling, which detained me some weeks, but I constantly attended meetings at
Lyn, and found great openness and unity with Friends there, and believe my stay
tended to some service, for the promoting of near love among the little flock
of Christ in that place, having many blessed opportunities among them. I also
went to the Yearly Meeting at Boston, and back to the Yearly Meeting at Lyn;
which was large and greatly favored with the ministry and service of that
worthy handmaid of the Lord, Lydia Norton. After this, and the Yearly Meeting
at Salem, I parted with Friends in much love, and came on my way homeward,
visiting the meetings generally as they came in course, also some back places,
and at Swansey, Greenwich, and some other meetings, and to Rhode Island; though
some of these meetings were hard and suffering times, and traveling wearisome,
I was favored with a share of peace in my own bosom.

AFTER a little stay at Newport, and some solid times among Friends, I took my
leave and came to Kingstown meeting, and then set forward, passing through
Conecticut with Jacob Barney, who came with me as a guide, and was a good
companion; we reached Mamarineck, and staid a meeting, at which were two
marriages; from thence to Long Island, where I made but a short stay, crossed
at the Narrows and Staten-island, and got to Woodbridge meeting on the first
day of the week, and the next day arrived at my own habitation, in about one
week from Newport, and to my great satisfaction, found my family well, through
the good providence of the Almighty.

AFTER I came home I kept close to meetings, Philadelphia.
and faithfully labored in that ability God gives; being much concerned for
the prosperity of his glorious work amongst us; my outward endeavors were also
blessed, as I kept to industry, and I always found it best to be diligent, and
not slothful in business; yet fervent in spirit serving the Lord; and by living
in this city it was my lot often to visit the sick and those in affliction in
this place, which were heart tendering and humbling times, which ought not to
be forgotten by such who have been humbled under the mighty hand of God, and
whom he has been pleased to relieve; but it is much to be lamented, that too
many when raised from adversity, do forget in time of prosperity the dealings
of the Almighty with them; the world and the uncertain things thereof, lead to
forget what is certain to all men, that they must die, and after death that
they are accountable to the Almighty Author of their being.

IN the year 1737, 1737.
being appointed with several Friends of our Monthly Meeting, to visit the
families of Friends in this city, and having a concern on my mind for the
service, I went to many places with my Uncle Chalkley, and other Friends, to
good satisfaction. For some time I did not go any very distant journey, except
once, as far as West-river, in Maryland, to the Yearly Meeting, in company with
my Friend Robert Jordan; but I diligently attended meetings in this city, and
sometimes those near it, both in Pennsylvania and New Jersey; which I did in
much love, often choosing to go on foot, having in my young years had many
heavenly seasons in that way of traveling.

1744. His third journey to New England.
IN the year 1744, it was on my mind to visit again Friends in New England, and
having the unity of our Monthly Meeting, and my Friend Abel James for a
companion, he being a young man I much esteemed; the latter end of the eleventh
Month, we proceeded pretty direct to Long Island, where we visited most of the
meetings of Friends thereaway, and the favorable presence and goodness of God
being manifested in them, gave me ease of mind, New England.
and united my heart to the faithful among them. When clear there, we went on
the Main, and traveled to Newport, on Rhode Island, where we were lovingly
received among Friends, and after a short stay, we proceeded to Dartmouth, and
were at a meeting there; and so forward through Boston, Lyn, and Salem, having
meetings, in some of which I had satisfaction, and was glad to see Friends with
whom I had some acquaintance in the best fellowship. The furthest place we went
to in this journey was Salem; and were at several meetings on our return to
Newport, which I hope tended to stir up the pure mind in some; although the life
of religion appeared to be at a low ebb with many making a high profession
thereof. After several good opportunities among Friends at Newport, we returned
homewards through Conecticut, making a shore stay to rest at our Friend Thomas
Franklin's, from whence we went to a meeting at New-town, on Long Island, then
to New York in company with several Friends, where we had a meeting, then
proceeded home, where I was glad to see my dear wife and family again,
Philadelphia.
it being through the kindness of divine Providence, and they were very near
and dear to me. This journey was attended with hard travel and hard labor to
my body, also in the exercise of the gift of the ministry; but it was in good
will and much love to the people.

FROM the year 1745 to 1748, I kept much at home at our own meetings; yet went
sometimes to other meetings in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, as in the love of
truth I was drawn forth to visit them; the Lord having a choice people in these
provinces who fear his name, and my heart was often, filled with endeared love
to the upright hearted seed of God, from my first acquaintance among them;
being at times baptized and united together in the one spirit and fellowship,
which is not in the wisdom of man, but from the power of God.

MY dear wife being weakly in body, and had been in a poor state of health for
sometime, departed this life in the fortieth year of her age, on the first day
of the second month, 1748, and I have good reason to believe that she is at
rest, having before her death, expressed that she had made her peace with the
Lord, and the evident tokens of his presence in her sickness, and at her latter
end, much supported my mind in so great a trial, and loss of so good a wife and
tender mother to my children, and one that loved the truth, and the servants of
Christ, who lived an innocent life, being a pattern of plainness, a near
companion, and true help-mate to me according to her capacity, both in things
spiritual and temporal. After her death, in about a week, I buried my youngest
son, and four sons before the death of their dear mother; which were very near
trials; but my greatest help in these as well as many other afflictions that
have fallen to my lot, has been to submit to the blessed will of the Lord, who
gives and takes away. Now having two daughters left, I was much concerned that
the Almighty might be pleased to look in pity on them, as he did in mercy on
me, in my young years, Philadelphia.
and give them wisdom and understanding hearts to walk before him in his most
holy fear; for I soon found after the death of my loving wife, that I must
leave them for a time, and my habitation and near comforts of life, for the
sake of Christ and his blessed gospel, a concern increasing on my mind, not to
delay the time in which I was to perform this errand, to go to islands and
places abroad; this weighty undertaking I made known to my dear Friends, at our
Monthly Meeting in this city, with which they having unity, gave me a
certificate for this purpose, in which they mentioned their prayers for my
preservation through every trial and danger, which were many before my return;
but the Almighty, All-powerful Being, delivered out of them all; glory, honor,
and eternal praise to his eminent name for ever! but before I left home, I
accompanied some Friends to visit several families in this city, which were
solid and comfortable seasons.

His Voyage to Barbados, and Labors there and at the adjacent Islands; and
Voyage from thence to Ireland.

AFTER I had settled my outward concerns, 1748.
and had placed my dear children to be taken care of, until it pleased God that
we should meet again, I left my habitation on the 13th day of the fifth month,
1748, after being on that day at a large meeting in our city, with Samuel
Nottingham, a Friend from Northamptonshire, in Old-England, who was to be my
companion. We came with a great number of our very loving Friends to Chester,
had a solid meeting there that evening, lodged at our worthy Friend Grace
Lloyd's, and next morning taking leave of our beloved Friends, we went on board
the vessel and sat sail for Barbados. On the passage I met with near trials in
spirit, and was at times almost overwhelmed by deep conflicts of soul; but
through the kindness and mercy of God, Barbados.
we arrived safe at Barbados, on the 21st day of the sixth month; where we met
with several Friends who were kind and loving toward us, our dear Friend
Joseph Gamble took us to his house, where we lodged for the most part of the
time. After we had attended meetings at Bridgetown, the Lord being with us,
enabled us by his mighty power to bear a faithful testimony, I trust, to his
eternal Truth, we went to Speightstown, where we were favored with some solid
edifying meetings, though not so large as at Bridgetown; we lodged at our
esteemed Friend Edward Harrison's; we were also at the Spring meeting house,
where we lodged, a Friend living therein, and the next day had a meeting there,
and in the afternoon at Bridgetown, which was large and ended well. We were on
this island twenty-one days, and having seen Friends generally, and been
favored with several edifying seasons, we departed from thence with Captain
Austin, to Antigua, in our way to Tortola; we staid one week and a day at
Antigua, lodged at James Birket's who was very kind to us; but my mind was much
burdened and distressed for that place and people, who are for the most part a
wicked and sinful generation; we had no meeting among them, there being no
Friend on the island, except Friend Birket, and no openness, that I could find
to satisfaction, for the testimony of truth to be declared, only we had some
solid conversation with some. I came away much bowed in spirit for the sins of
the wicked in that island. From thence we went for Tortola, where we landed on
the 28th of the seventh month, and met with several Friends in the evening,
that were glad to see us, at the house of our Friend John Pickering; where, and
at our Friend William Thomas's, we lodged most of the time we were upon that
island, they being truly kind and friendly to us; we were favored with many
good edifying meetings among Friends, there being two meeting houses on the
island, viz. one at a place called Fat-hog bay, the other at the Road; we
attended both of them with diligence, near the space of six weeks, only that we
were once at an island called Joes-Vandikes, Tortola.
where we had a large good meeting.

ON the ninth day of the ninth month, we left Tortola, in order to return to
Antigua, with design to get a passage for England; but being in a vessel the
captain of which knew not how to manage her, we were going a contrary course,
in which if we had proceeded, we might all have been lost; we were much tossed
and driven about, and through persuasions, we prevailed with the captain to
turn back, and he brought us to Santa Croix; but our going into the harbor
called Lime-trees to drop anchor, seemed as if it would have proved fatal to
us, there lying a vessel armed with guns, from which we were fired at three
times, and my companion had like to have been shot; it seems they had a design
to have sunk our vessel, having heard there was a Spanish privateer on the
coast, and the Governor had given orders to keep her off; they suspected our's
to be that vessel; but our mariners being in a great fright, made signals that
we had no ill design; Santa Croix.
when seeing we were in distress, they forbore firing, and through the kind
deliverance of the Almighty we got safe in and dropped anchor. Praised and
worshipped be the name of God, that was nigh at hand, and a present help in the
time of need! may I forever adore his great and eminent name, with all the true
in heart, throughout all generations! he will not suffer those to be confounded
that trust in him, and who desire and endeavor faithfully to serve him. A
particular case concerning privateering, sometime before I left home, now comes
into my mind to mention. Some great men of our city being concerned in fitting
out vessels for that wicked business, which having brought a deep engagement on
my mind, it came upon me as a weighty duty, to go to one of these men,
faithfully to warn him against this unrighteous way of getting riches; I got a
Friend to accompany me, and I cleared my spirit of a heavy burden; he pleaded
for the practice, but used me civilly. -- A new vessel was fitted out sometime
after, called the Tartar, which was much talked of to do great matters in
privateering; but, as I have been informed, she sunk before she got out to sea,
and many or most of the people on board were drowned. I had peace of mind for
having discharged my duty, although I much lamented the unhappy circumstances of
those poor fellow-mortals, losing their lives in such an evil undertaking.

BUT to return to the place where we came to an anchor -- My companion went on
shore at Santa Croix, and would have had me gone with him, but my mind being at
that time much dejected, I chose to stay on board the vessel until next
morning, when I went on shore, and met with my companion, who had agreed with a
captain of a vessel, bound for Spanish-town, near Tortola, for our passage
thither, we put our chests and other things on board this vessel, then went on
shore, and traveled across the island on foot to Bas-end harbor, where the
vessel was to go, choosing rather so to do, than to go round by water; in our
walk we met with people that were kind to us; about noon we called at a house
and dined, and were entertained in a friendly manner; taking leave here, we
went on toward Bas-end, stopping at another house some distance from the town
for a drink of water, the people seeing we were strangers, and being acquainted
with Friends, kindly invited us in, to stay with them until the vessel came
round to the harbor, and informed us that there was no house in the town
suitable for us to be at, which I found afterward was true, for they seemed to
be a very wicked people. We staid with these kind people two nights and part of
two days, and on leaving them we would have satisfied them for the time we were
there; but they would not take any thing for our entertainment, and seemed well
pleased with our company; the man of the house attended us to the water side to
see us embark on board the vessel we had been waiting for, where he parted with
us in a friendly manner: I waited a while on the shore for the Captain to go on
board, there being a vendue, and a great number of people gathered to it, among
them the Governor of the place, (being an island subject to the king of
Denmark) and I have since thought, had we used endeavors, Santa Croix.
we might have had a meeting among them, and I have wished it had happened so,
for I have at times been desirous in a solemn manner for the welfare of that
people; it in a fruitful island, and as good land I think as any I saw in all
my travels, could it be inhabited by men of religious minds, so as to be
fruitful to the heavenly Father, who is willing to do good to mankind in
general; but oh! the islands hereaway, how great and many are the sins of the
people, mournful has been my soul for their many abominations!

Tortola.
WE sat sail, and arrived at Tortola on the 15th of the ninth month. The Captain
and sailors were a wicked company, took some of our things from us, and
demanded considerable more for our passage than we had agreed for, which we
thought unreasonable; but they said we could afford to pay, for that we were
always going about; we told them we had the more need to be saving of what we
had; they hoisted out the boat in an angry manner, and we paid them more than
our passage to put us on shore; they first took use some distance from any
house, and then landed us, which put us to the more difficulty what to do with
our chests, and other necessaries, that they might be safe; but being seen by
one Isaac Pickering (a kinsman to our Friend John Pickering) he sent his lad to
ask us to his house, Tortola.
where we went, and he was so kind as to send for our things, and took care of
them, and lent us horses to go to his uncle's that night, where we were kindly
received, and tenderly sympathized with on the disappointment and trouble, we
had met with; they were dear and affectionate Friends to us on this island. We
were at a meeting at Fat-hog bay, the 16th of the ninth month, and on the
fourth day following, I was at one at the Road, both of them were good
meetings. On the 23d of the month, I was taken ill of a fever at the house of
our Friend Thomas Humphreys, and the next day my kind Friend John Pickering
brought a man and horse and took me to his house, where I remained very ill
several weeks, and some of the time I apprehended I should lay down my life
among them; but it was the blessed will of the Lord to restore me again to some
degree of strength, and I attended several meetings with Friends, wherein I had
satisfaction, and on the 8th day of the eleventh month, I went to Gwan island,
with our Friends James Park and his wife, and staid till the eleventh of the
same, and after having a comfortable time in his family, I returned to Tortola,
it being the meeting day at Fat-hog bay, and it proved to be a meeting to
satisfaction.

AFTER a solid sitting and parting with several at our Friend John Pickering's,
on the 21st of this month, we went on board a vessel bound to the island called
St. Thomas's (belonging to the Dutch) accompanied by our said dear Friend,
Thomas's island.
and Thomas Humphreys, Jonas Lake, and Joseph Ryan, and on the 22d landed
there, and understood that the Captain of the ship, bound for Amsterdam, in
which we were to take our passage, in order to get to England, was very ill. We
lodged at John Demane's one night, and the next day went on board the vessel,
where we staid mostly till the last day of the month, and our dear Friends
abovementioned, after seeing us placed in the ship, parted with us in a
tender, loving manner, and my heart was affected in parting with them: In the
time we lay at anchor, the Captain died, and the chief mate, Robert Stewart,
was appointed Captain in his stead, who was very kind to us in the many
distresses we met with on our passage.

SOME days before we sailed, my companion was taken sick, which so increased,
that on the passage he seemed near unto death, which was a great trial and
exercise to me, being myself weakly and feeble, for we were companions in
tribulation; but through the mercy of the Almighty, he recovered.

AFTER we had been three weeks and some days at sea, a great storm arose, At
sea.
which appeared to be very dangerous, that in order to lighten the vessel, the
seamen threw out several weighty things; after some weeks we got into soundings
in the English channel, and were in hopes to be soon safe landed at some port
in England; but another storm arose, which drove us off to sea, yet in eight
days we again got soundings, but the wind being against us, we could not get
forward to our expectation, and it rather suiting us to go to Ireland, the
Captain altered his course for Kinsale harbor, as the vessel wanted repairs
one of the Rudder-irons being broke, made it difficult to steer the vessel, but
by endeavors, they managed pretty well, and the day we made sail for that
land, we got in sight of the harbor, but night coming on, and being fearful of
rocks and shoals, they put off to sea, and the weather being moderate the fore
part of the night, the seamen were too careless and did not keep so strict a
watch as they ought; but the Captain, as he lay in his cabin had so great an
uneasiness on his mind, that he could not lay still any longer, and went
toward the head of the vessel, and found that instead of being out at sea, we
were near striking on the land, whereupon he immediately awaked the sailors,
and they tacked the vessel about, and were very watchful until the morning,
thus we escaped that danger; In a storm on the coast of Ireland.
in the morning it was very foggy, and a storm arose, and we could not discover
the harbor, but were driven about for a considerable time, they threw over
board one anchor; but the storm continuing and the weather distressing, we were
drove toward the land, and the seamen being almost wearied out, apprehended we
could not keep off much longer; thus we were in great distress, expecting the
vessel would be wrecked, and the Captain being much surprised, came to my
companion and me, telling us he would do what he could to save our lives, for
that we were in great danger of being lost, and he expected we should be drove
on the shore in the night, if we kept off in the day, and was desirous to know
our minds, what he had best to do; whether to run the ship aground while we had
day light, that if any of our lives were spared, we could the better see how to
help ourselves; we not knowing what to advise him for the best, only to trust
in the good providence of God, 1749.
the Captain concluded to steer toward the land; the cries and lamentations of
the people were great for mercy to their souls, apprehending the vessel might
be soon dashed to pieces, and we might suddenly lose our lives; but I had
reason to believe that the Gracious and Merciful Being was pleased to hear our
cries, for the nearer we came to the land the fog cleared away, and they espied
a vessel, which as we approached nearer, we discovered was laying at anchor at
the mouth of Kinsale harbor, where we wanted to be, and as we came on our way,
the harbor appeared plain; Arrives safe in Kinsale harbor.
thus through the great deliverance of the Almighty, we arrived there safe, and
dropped anchor; for this his merciful preservation, our hearts had great cause to
be humbly bowed before him, and the Captain came to me, saying, Now if you have
it in your heart to return God thanks, I will join with you on my bare knees,
and if it had not been for your prayers, we should all have been lost; but I
ascribed this great deliverance to the kind mercy of Divine Providence to us
all; although I can truly say, my soul was earnest in supplication before the
Lord at times on this trying passage, and at one particular season, as I lay in
my cabin, not knowing but that we might be swallowed up in the mighty ocean,
the spirit of prayer came on me, and I was raised on my knees to make
intercession with the All-powerful Being, after which I went upon the deck, and
the Captain seeing me, expressed in a very loving manner his unity and
satisfaction, and I thought that the same good power and presence which
attended my mind, had some reach upon his heart.

OH! in this trying passage, how often did my soul go down into many
discouragements, but I was helped through all, to rely on God's mercy, and on a
time I took the blessed Bible into my hands, and it was as if my eyes were call
on that passage in the prophet Isaiah, xliv. 1, 2, 3. where it is said; Now
hear, O Jacob my servant, and Israel whom I have chosen: Thus says the Lord
that made thee, and formed thee from the womb, which will help thee; Fear not,
O Jacob my servant, and thou, Jesurun, whom I have chosen; For I will pour
water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my
spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring. This gracious
blessing of the Lord to his servants and chosen ones, was a comfort to me, and
in his great condescension he fulfilled his promise to help in the needful time.

Landing at Kinsale in Ireland: -- His Travels and Labors in that Kingdom;
also in England and Scotland, to the Time of returning Home.

IT was on the 24th day of the first month, 1749, in the evening, 1749. Ireland.
that we came to an anchor, in this safe harbor of Kinsale -- when the
officers and people from the town, came on board to see what we had in our
vessel, some of whom staid all night, and my companion and I were confined to
the hearing of their noisy conversation, until the next morning, so that we got
but little rest, and had very little for several nights and days before; the
Captain being gone on shore, returned the next day, and a civil man with him,
who mentioned the names of several Friends that had visited that town, some of
whom had come from America, which was pleasing to me to hear of; they having
left their home a little before me, and had been traveling in the service of
truth. When this friendly man returned on shore, we went with him to his house,
being an inn; where we were civilly entertained, he took care of our chests and
clothing, and provided us with horses, and a guide to conduct us to Cork, being
about ten miles; when we got there, being strangers, we were at a loss to find
our Friends; we alighted at a public-house, and went in and got some
refreshment; my companion inquired of a man in the house after our Friends in
the town, who answered, that there were a great many of the brethren lived
there; he was desired to go to one of them, and inform him that we wanted to
speak with him; in a short time he brought one of our Friends, named Richard
Allen, at the sight of whom I was well pleased, and he lovingly took us to his
house, where soon after came Abraham Fuller, and another Friend, who asked for
our certificates, which they read and were satisfied; our Friend Abraham Fuller
inviting us to his house, we went with him, and made it our home, while I staid
in Cork; we were favored that evening with the company of several Friends,
which I esteemed a great mercy from the Lord, that after being delivered from
so many imminent dangers, we could be with so kind a people as they were to us;
At Cork.
the next day being the first of the week, I was at two meetings with Friends
in that city, and my companion at one of them, which I hope will be remembered
by both of us.

BEING brought unexpectedly and providentially to this land, I much desired
that I might proceed aright in the course of my religious service, for when on
our passage, I expected to land in England, and meeting with many trials of my
faith, and deep sufferings in the West India islands, as also at sea, I was
ready to fear whether my present undertaking was from a right motion, or
required of me to engage in, thinking that if I got safe to England, and saw
some Friends there, and could meet with an opportunity to return home, whether
I had not best so to do, not knowing that my lot would be cast in Ireland; but
Divine Wisdom ordering every thing that is consistent with his Will for the
best, I was made willing to visit Friends of this nation, and from Cork, I went
to Bandon with my companion, where we had a large comfortable meeting, being
many people there besides those of our religious society; then returned to
Cork, where I staid several meetings; leaving my companion in this city, he
being desirous to go home from thence, I proceeded on my journeys, first went
to Youghall, and was favored with a good meeting, after that to Killcommon,
and had a meeting; from thence to Cashall meeting, which was pretty large, and
I hope to satisfaction; I lodged at Solomon Watson's, who accompanied me to
Clonmel, where I was at two meetings, which I hope were of some service to stir
up the pure mind in those who attended them; from this place traveling twenty
miles, Waterford.
in a great deal of rain, I reached Waterford, where my kind Friends Isaac
Jacobs and his wife, received me in a loving, tender manner, which was a
comfort to me at that time, for I had been traveling in the deeps both
inwardly and outwardly, being alone as to an outward companion, (except the
person who was my guide) looking upon myself as a pilgrim and stranger in a
strangeland; but the Almighty helped me, praised be his worthy name; we had a
good meeting at Waterford, from thence I went to Ross, Ross.
at which meeting the wicked were warned of their wickedness; the next day I
had a meeting at Lambstown, in which I was favored with my good master's
presence, and it was to edification and comfort; from this place I went to
Wexford, Wexford.
where the meeting ended to satisfaction; from thence to Joseph Williams's and
lodged, and to the meeting at Cooladine, Cooladine.
and in the evening had a meeting at the widow Stephens's both of them being
comfortable seasons: I then went to John Wright's, and Henry Herrit's, and to
Billicane, having meetings to good satisfaction; after which in company with
several Friends, I went to Dublin, and attended the Half-Year's meeting, which
was large, Dublin.
being there many choice Friends, whom I was glad to see, and the good presence
and kindness, of our dear Lord being witnessed and enjoyed, both in the
meetings for worship, and the discipline, made it a comfortable time to me, not
having seen such a meeting since I left my native land, and the kindness and
friendship that appeared among Friends at this meeting I have often remembered
with comfort of mind, and the near unity I felt in my heart to a remnant among
them, tended to the renewing of my strength and willingness to visit Friends
generally in that nation; and my journey being laid out by Friends, that I
might proceed for the best, in respect to traveling, I went from my kind
landlord's, Peter Judd, several miles to a meeting, and to Killconnor, and was
at a meeting there, which although they were hard suffering times, I hope were of
some service to the solid minded; I had here a tendering time in the family of
Samuel Watson, his dear wife having visited America, I had seen her in my
native land; she was a worthy and serviceable instrument in the Lord's hand to
many I believe where her lot was cast; from hence I went to Carlow, where the
meeting was to me laborious; then to John Lakes, Balitore, Athlone, and
Mountmelick, some of which meetings were comfortable satisfactory seasons; at
Mountmelick, I lodged at Joshua Strangman's, with whom I had great nearness in
spirit, and thought him to be a hopeful young man in the way of truth, and my
soul possessed sweet peace under his roof; from hence I went to Ballinakill,
Monntrath, Munderhead, and Rosegay, and had meetings, some of them being large
and edifying seasons, gave relief to the deep travel of my soul among them, the
blessed power of Truth, which is the crown of our religious meetings, tenderly
affecting our hearts before the Lord; I then went to Limerick, and was at their
meeting in the morning and afternoon, to satisfaction; from thence to Jonathan
Barnes, and was at a meeting at Killcommon-moor, the fore part of which was to
me a time of great leanness and poverty of spirit, but before it ended, was I
believe a time of tender visitation to the people; and I was enabled through
Divine Help, to declare the word of life among them; from thence I went to
Burr, and was at a solid broken meeting, which was a comfortable season; then
to William Litsall's, and Ballymorin, and had meetings; so returned to Athlone,
called the center of Ireland, and lodged at William Sproul's, an ancient loving
Friend, who not only appeared to be, but I believe really was an example in the
way of truth in that place, and had a lasting remembrance in my mind; from
thence I went to the Moat, and Old Castle, at the last place there came to the
meeting a priest, and a pretty many people, who behaved soberly, and I hope it
was a good meeting; the next meeting was Ballahays, which was small, and the
comers to it seemed to be but indifferent professors of the truth, which was
cause of sorrow to my heart; but having cleared myself, I proceeded to
Coothill, and had a meeting to which several came, and behaved soberly; the
next was Cashelshane, which was to satisfaction and comfort; from thence to
Charlemont, which was a large meeting, and I had hard labor to discharge my
duty among them; here came a man and woman, who had been troublesome to
Friends, in offering their intentions of marriage, who could not have unity
with their proceedings, he not being a member of our religious society, and a
disorderly person, but at the conclusion of the meeting, they took each other
as man and wife, which imposition occasioned the meeting to break up in
disorder; from hence I went to Ballyhagan, which was a a large and edifying
meeting, and so to Colerain, Ballynacre, the Grange, and Antrim, and had
meetings, which were mostly hard suffering times, and the comers to those
meetings, I was afraid were several of them but lifeless professors of
religion: I had the next meeting at Hilsborough, at which were many Friends,
and it tended to satisfaction; that same day I had a good meeting at Lisburn,
Belfast.
from thence I passed through Belfast to Newtown, where came some who behaved
rudely, and the meeting was not so well as could be desired; the next was
Ballenederry, which was very large, and the Lord's good presence being with us,
the hearts of the faithful for his many mercies had cause to give thanksgivings
and praises to his most worthy name; after this meeting I had a near parting
time at John Murrows, with many dear Friends, who came to take their leave of
me; from thence I went to Monallin and Lurgan, and had meetings, and to that at
the last place came many persons of great note, and behaved extraordinary
sober, and we were favored with a good meeting; the next was at Rafer-island,
to which also came some not of our society, who confessed to the truth of what
I had to declare among them, and parted with me in love. -- I went several
miles that afternoon, and lodged at Dundalk at an inn; the next day and part of
the night I traveled forty miles, some of the way in a great deal of pain, and
in a wet tired condition, to Edenderry where I was received at John Pim's, in a
loving, kind manner; I attended their meetings on the first day in the forenoon
and afternoon, which were large and I hope in the main, good meetings, the next
were at Rathangen, and Timahoe, which were comfortable; from thence I went to
Dublin, Dublin.
and lodged at my dear Friend Peter Judd's, and was in and about Dublin nine
days, and at several good living meetings among Friends in that city; and there
being a remnant of dear Friends in some part of that nation, I had comfort of
mind, in going to see and visit them in the love of God; and it being his
blessed will to cast my lot in that part of the world, I faithfully labored to
discharge my duty in his fear, both to Friends and other people, that had
freedom to come to our religious meetings, and several appeared to be reached
by the power of truth, who did not make profession among us.

ON the 29th of the fourth month: Embarks for England.
I embarked for England, accompanied by several Friends on board the vessel,
where we parted in tender love, and on the first day of the fifth month, I
landed at Whitehaven, altogether a stranger, Arrives at Whitehaven.
and no outward companion, which to me was lonely in a strange land; but the
Almighty was in his mercy and goodness near to me, to be my comforter, and I
had great cause to bow with a bended heart in deep thankfulness before him, for
his wonderful providence and many helps and deliverances: I enquired the way to
Daniel. Stephenson's, by whom I was lovingly received, and kindly entertained;
the next day being the first day of the week, At Whitehaven.
I was at two meetings with Friends at Whitehaven, which I have often
remembered. My way being laid out to visit Friends in Cumberland, I went
forward the 3d of the fifth month, on my way to Cockermouth, and in traveling
on the road my mind was much thoughtful, not knowing that I should meet with
any one to be a comfort to me, when not far from the town to which I was going,
I met with two Friends, at first sight I did not know either of them, but one
of them speaking to me, I found it to be Christopher Wilson, at which my heart
was much rejoiced, he being a Friend who had traveled among us, in the work of
the ministry in America, and I had seen in Philadelphia; the meeting to which I
intended, not being to be held till the next day, I turned back with him to his
house; where we had near conversation together in the love of truth; the next
day he accompanied me to the meeting appointed, which was a solid time; the day
following I went to Jzel, and had a meeting with the few Friends there, and
although small it was a solid meeting; after that, I was at Pardsaw-hall, which
was a good meeting, so to Broughton, and had comfort of mind among Friends
thereaway. I then returned to Pardsaw-hall again, and on the first day of the
week the meeting was very large, and the good presence of God attending the
same, made it an humbling comfortable season; the same day I was at a large
meeting, near Christopher Wilson's, which ended well; from thence was at
Keswick, though small a good meeting, so to Mosdale and had a large satisfactory
meeting, also at Colbeck, Bolton, and Wigton, some of which were large, and I
hope tended to edification and comfort; from thence I went to Allanby, and
Holm, and had large meetings, in which the power of truth prevailed in a good
degree, the next was at Kirkbride, in which I had hard service, and a close
testimony to the unconcerned in the way of truth, which I left to their
consideration; from thence I went to Jonathan Astell's, who and his wife were
choice ancient Friends, my stay at their house, and being with such dear
Friends, afforded me at that time renewed comfort of mind; for although the Lord
was gracious in some places powerfully to assist my poor spirit to discharge my
duty, yet at times I met with close sufferings and bemoanings, for the arising
of the Divine Spring of life, both in myself and others; I went to Carlisle
from thence, and so back to Moor-house meeting, then to Scotby, Kirklington,
and a meeting that John Irwen and his wife belonged to, who were both ancient
Friends, and I believe had been of service in the work of the ministry; and
although some of those meetings were trying times, and attended with hard labor,
I trust that I was clear in the sight of God in endeavoring to be faithful to
what I apprehended to be my duty.

Northumberland.
FROM Cumberland, I went into Northumberland, and the first meeting I was at,
was Cuthbert Wigham's, where was a considerable number of newly convinced
Friends, which was a comfortable and contrited meeting before the Lord; from
thence I went to West-Allandale, to a large meeting, which was powerfully
reached with the sense of the love of God; the next meeting was at Alston-moor,
which though not very large, I hope might tend to the benefit of some; then
Penrith, Terril, and Strickland meetings, some of which were to satisfaction,
and I met with a kind reception, and had near unity with many dear Friends in
diverse places.

FROM Strickland, I went to Kendal, in Westmoreland, Westmoreland.
to my dear Friend John Crowdson's, where I staid some days and rested as to
traveling; but attended pretty many meetings in Kendal, to which belonged many
worthy Friends, who were extraordinary kind and friendly, which I esteemed a
favor, yet at that time, I was in a very low situation of mind, much
overwhelmed with many inward sorrows, and conflicts of soul; but was intent to
do the best I could to get through what might fall to my lot at so great a
distance from my outward habitation, trusting in the Almighty hand of the Lord,
who alone know my distressed condition, and to whom I put forth my cries and
secret addresses for relief; dominion and everlasting praise be rendered to him
for evermore! in the course of what he was pleased to lay upon my mind to say
in meetings by way of testimony, he was also pleated to be gracious in
appearing to open my way in the cause I had at heart, which was the promotion
of welldoing, and the good of mankind here and hereafter; at this place
meetings were large, and I hope blessed with the notice of heaven; to this
meeting belonged Margaret Coupland, Kendal.
who had visited our parts, was an exemplary solid Friend, and retained the
lively sense of truth; while I was here, I received a letter from my kind
Friend Israel Pemberton the younger, giving me some account of my dear children
and Friends at home, which was very acceptable to me; this dear Friend's worthy
father being a bright pattern and elder in the church of Christ, given to
hospitality and good works, the near unity I had with him in spirit gave me
much comfort and satisfaction of mind, as he was brought frequently to my
remembrance in this journey. On account of my children, I had been often
concerned, and dropped many tears for their everlasting welfare, they being
very near to my life; Oh how I much desired that they might choose the Lord for
their portion, and the God of Jacob, his blessing for the lot of their
inheritance! then I trusted that he would be pleased to be a sure Friend to
them as they kept in his holy fear and council.

FROM Kendal I went to Grayrig, which was a solid tender broken meeting, also
to Preston Patrick, Windermere, and Hawkside, which meetings were to
satisfaction, and ended well; from thence to Hight meeting, in Lancashire,
which afforded some comfort to my mind, the next was at Swarth-moor-hall,
Lancashire.
where George Fox belonged in his time, which was a large and a good meeting,
from thence I went to Lancaster, and was at two meetings on the first day of
the week, which were large and comfortable, here lived Lydia Lancaster, and
Elizabeth Rawlinson, both worthy Friends who had visited America, and in one of
those meetings, they both appeared in a living testimony for the Lord in their
advanced age, and it did me good to perceive that they were alive in the root
of life; at this meeting was William Thomas, a ministering Friend from Tortola,
lately landed; I went that day home with William Backhouse, a Friend who had
visited America in the work of the ministry, he received me very kindly and
lovingly in his house; the next day I was at Yellan meeting, which was to
satisfaction; then to Bentham, which was a large meeting, and attended with the
solid power of truth, from thence to Dent, in which meeting the spring of life
was opened among us, to the comfort of the sincere in heart, to this meeting
belonged John Burton, who had visited our parts, a dear Friend I was glad to
see, having seen him in my native land; the next meetings were Brigflats, and
Ravenstondale, which I hope tended to edification; to the last belonged Alice
Alderson, a worthy instrument, who had traveled in America on the Lord's
errand, and was truly acceptable in her religious visit; from thence I went to
Grisedale, and was at a large living meeting, the next was at Counterset, which
was large and solid; from thence I went to Swale-dale, Ausgarth, Richmond, and
another meeting in my way to Raby, some of which meetings were satisfactory
solid seasons; at Raby, I met with several worthy Friends, who I found in
conversation to be true helpmates to me, particularly James Wilson and Joseph
Tailor; I had seen Joseph in Philadelphia, when on his religious visit to our
country, and it was a pleasure and comfort now to see him in his own
habitation; from this place, I went to Bishop-Auckland, Durham, Benfieldside,
Durham county.
and New Castle upon Tyne, which meetings were mostly hard laborious times to
my baptized spirit; then to Shields, Sunderland, Shotton, and Darlington, the
opportunities with Friends thereaway, being mostly comfortable; after these
meetings I went to Stockton, Gisborough, Yalton, and Castletown, where I had
meetings, some of which were to satisfaction; after this I went to that dear
ancient Friend, John Richardson's, he had been twice to America on religious
visits, and had taken much pains in his day and time, for the spreading and
promoting the gospel of peace and salvation in the earth, and although he was
ancient and feeble in body, he was fresh and green in the life of religion, and
my heart was refreshed, in the unity and fellowship of Divine life, in being in
his company; I lodged here, and the next day went to the meeting at
Kirby-moor-side, to which he belonged, which was a solid good meeting, from
hence to Ampwelford, Rilsdale, Thirsk and Kirby, some of which were weighty
solid meetings, and the humble in heart were contrited therein; then to the
(Quarterly Meeting at York, Yorkshire.
which held several days for worship and the discipline of the church, was very
large and attended by many solid Friends from their particular meetings, near
unity and gospel fellowship being in a good degree manifested, this opportunity
begat an agreeable acquaintance with many Friends whom I afterward found to be
very friendly and kind to me, as I went forward on my journey. From this city I
went to Thornton, Molton, Pickering, Withy, Stanton, Scarborough, and was at
meetings, several of them being large, and edifying; -- I was next at
Bridlington, to which meeting came a pretty many people, but it was a time of
hard labor, this meeting being declined from what it had been formerly,
according to the account I had of it, and the few Friends left, did not live in
that unity I could have been glad to have found among them; to this meeting
once belonged Margaret Langdale, who came to Philadelphia, and was afterward
the wife of our worthy Friend Samuel Preston, late of that city, her labors
among Friends in the work of the ministry were of great service in her time.

FROM Bridlington I came to Hornsey, and to two other places, and so to Hull,
having meetings, some of which were large, being attended both by Friends and
other people, and the Divine Presence of the Almighty being over all, they
ended to good satisfaction. From Hull I went to a meeting in my way to
Cave-holden, Pontifract, Rawcliff, and Thorn, to which meetings I traveled in
great affliction of body, and much conflict of spirit, on account of great
besetments that fell to my lot in the course of my travels, and the work and
warfare that I honestly labored in, having left all that was near and dear to
me as a creature, on account of the blessed truth; that had not the
All-powerful Aid helped me, to look to him in whom everlasting strength is, I
had fainted; but dominion and praise to him forever, his strength was made
perfect in my great weakness! and in those meetings I was enabled to bear a
testimony to his Almighty name, although out of meetings greatly beset; yet
keeping my confidence in God, he was pleased in his great mercy to cast up a
way for my help and deliverance!

FROM Thorn, I went to my dear Friend Joseph Atkinson's at Rawcliff, who and
his wife were as tender toward me as if I had been one of their own family;
after some stay with these my loving Friends, I got better in health, and the
motion of life and love increasing in my heart to visit the churches, I
proceeded, and went to Thorn meeting, which was an edifying good time; here I
met with my Friend John Fisher, who accompanied me to several places, having
before traveled mostly alone, both in England and Ireland, as to a constant
companion; -- we had two meetings in our way to William Payne's, where we had a
meeting, and at Hansworth-Woodhouse, to which last belonged John Haslam, a dear
Friend who had been very acceptable in his religious visit to Friends in
America, and had visited the churches to the great comfort of the faithful; his
agreeable company at his own house, renewed our fresh unity in pure and lasting
fellowship in the gospel of peace; from thence we went to Sheffield, where we
had two large good meetings; the next was Burton, which was large and a
comfortable time; the next meeting was at Wakefield, where came a pretty many
people, in which I was silent, as it so fell out at several places in meetings
appointed, which I have concluded, if rightly minded, might be a means to bring
people to hearken to the alone teacher in their own hearts, for it is there the
word of faith is to be obeyed; and although the dependence of the outward ear
sometimes may be upon the servants of Christ; yet they cannot speak aright, and
to the witness in the consciences of men, but as he is pleased by his spirit to
give them utterance; the design and tendency of all true gospel ministry, which
springs from the Divine Word of life, being to stir up the pure mind to adhere
to the holy teaching of Christ in their own souls.

THE next meeting was at Gildersham, which was a solid good opportunity, and
dearly united my spirit to some who attended the same; from hence I went to
Leeds, and was at two large meetings on the first day, and at a week day
meeting, some of which, I hope tended to promote true spiritual worship to God;
from hence we went to Waldale, Brighouse, and Rawden, and had meetings which
were large solid and comfortable; the next was at Bradford, to which came a
pretty many people, and it ended well; we lodged at Benjamin Bartlett's, where
we met with Edmund Peckover, Jane Hoskins, and May Drumond; my worthy Friend
Edmund, having left great sweetness in the minds of many in America, and on
mine in particular, it was a comfort to me to see him again.

FROM hence we went to Halifax, accompanied by William Longmier, a dear brother
and fellow helper in the gospel, who had been with us to several meetings
before, and was choice company, and did me much good; the meeting at Halifax
was large, and ended I hope to the honor of Truth: here I parted with my
companion, John Fisher, and went to five distant places, having meetings in my
way to Skipton, some of which were large, being attended both by Friends and
other people, and I believe to edification: I had a good time at the meeting at
Skipton, and with the scholars of my Friend David Hall at his school, having
near unity with his company, I lodged here one night, and went from thence to
Lowtherdale, where William and Mary Slater belonged, who were serviceable
Friends in the work of the ministry; this meeting was large and eminently
affected with the sense of Divine Life and Power; the next meetings were
Ayrton, Settle, and Newton, which were mostly solid and satisfactory; the next
was Narsedale, which was small, and I was fearful very cold professors of the
right way of worship in this I was silent; from thence I went to the Fiel,
Proud-Preston, Longridge, and Elmaridge, and had meetings, which though mostly
small were pretty satisfactory; the meetings following were Sowledale, Trowden,
Marsden, and Trodmarden, and at another place, which were generally large and
edifying. I went next to the meetings at Holdham, Manchester, Langtree, Aston,
Bickerstaff, and Liverpool, some of which were pretty large and solidly
comfortable; Lancashire.
from Liverpool I went to Pankith, Warrington, and Framby, which meetings were
large and uniting seasons to the honest hearted; at the last place I was much
relieved and set at liberty through the dominion of the Divine Power that
attended; from this place came Esther Clare to Pennsylvania, a Friend of the
ministry, a member of our meeting in Philadelphia, who was divinely endowed and
inspired with a knowledge in the things of God's kingdom, and was a helpful
instrument in the hand of the Lord to me in my young years: -- The next
meetings were Sutton, Newton, and John Downs in Cheshire, to solid comfort;
from thence I went to Chester, and to Rixham in Wales, which were hard small
meetings, and dull as to the life of religion; then returning into Cheshire,
Cheshire.
to Namptwich, and Middlewitch, had meetings which were comfortable seasons: I
then went to the house of a Friend belonging to Morley, where I rested some
days as to traveling; during my stay here I visited the sick, and some Friends
families, and Morley meeting which was large, and the good presence of the Lord
attending, made it a good meeting; from thence I went to Stockport, Maxfield,
and Leek, some of which meetings were large and to satisfaction; the last place
was in Staffordshire, in my way from Joshua Tofft's to Stafford I had a
meeting; Staffordshire.
as likewise in that town, which was small, and the life of truth appearing at
a low ebb among them, was cause of sorrow and suffering to my mind; the next
meeting was at Birmingham, which was pretty large, and I hope of service to
some who were there; -- from thence I went to Coventry, Warwickshire.
and lodged at my kinsman's John Newman, his wife being my wife's first cousin,
they were exemplary Friends truly kind and loving, and a comfort to me in
meeting with them at their own house; here I heard of the death of my dear aunt
Martha Chalkley, from a Friend living at this place, the account of which much
affected my spirit for the loss of so near a relation and dear Friend, whom I
much loved and esteemed, she being one who feared the Lord, and was serviceable
to Friends where she lived in her time.

AT Coventry I was at two large meetings, one of which was much crowded by
reason of a funeral, and both were solid opportunities with the people; from
hence I went tp Badgley, and another place some distance, and was at two solid
meetings; the next were at Warwick, and Eatington, from whence I went to
Shipton, in Worcestershire, and was at two large meetings to edification, from
thence to Longcompton, Radway, Worcestershire.
and Harborough, some of which meetings were large and solid; at the last place
I was told, that the people when they heard of the meeting intended, said they
would come to see the Outlandish man, and many came who behaved soberly, and
Divine Life prevailed that day among us to the comfort of my mind; from thence
I went forward to two meetings in my way to Worcester, at distant places; at
Worcester the meetings were large and solid, and though some professors appeared
to be gone out from the way of the self denying life, into much liberty and
extravagance, yet I believe it was a time of visitation to their souls; from
this city I went to Bewdley, Bromsgrove, Sturbridge, Dudley, and Colebrookdale,
at which places I had meetings, mostly pretty large, solid, and edifying; the
next place I went to was Shrewsbury, where, Shropshire.
in company with several Friends, I visited two dear Friends that were in
prison on account of tithes, and our hearts being tendered together, we had to
praise the Lord and were comforted although in such a place of outward
confinement; I was also at a meeting in the meeting house which though not large
was I hope well.

Wales.
FROM hence I went into Wales, with John Fowler, a solid young man, who though not
a public minister, came out of Warwickshire on purpose to accompany me; our
first meeting was at Dolobran in Montgomeryshire, which was small and poor;
then we came to Ellis Lewis's where we had a meeting with a few plain kind
Friends, and at Twinde, in Merrionethshire, where were only three Friends to
keep up the meeting; but it afforded much comfort to my mind, that I had an
opportunity to see them, with whom we had a solid time; the next meeting was at
John Goodwin's in the same County, a brave worthy man, who had been
instrumental to bring several to the knowledge of the truth thereaway, and
where is a large meeting, in which it gave me satisfaction in being among them;
from thence we went to Talcot, and so into Radnorshire in South Wales, where we
had two large good meetings, then to Pennybank in Carmarthenshire, and at
Thomas Price's we had a small solid meeting, and at Ann Evan's in
Cardiganshire, to which came many people, and the meeting was to satisfaction
and comfort; we then had a meeting in our way to Carmarthen, and there also,
which were small and but few faithful laborers, and the unsteadiness of some
made it a mournful time to me; from thence I came to Haverford-west, where the
Friends of Redstone met, which meeting was somewhat satisfactory. In my way
from my dear Friend John Lewis's to Swanzey, I had two distant meetings, one of
which was large and mostly people who did not profess with us, and I hope was
of good service, the life and power of the Divine Word bringing the minds of
the people into stillness, the meeting ended well. -- I was at two meetings at
Swanzey, the first small and silent, the other a large open time; from thence
we came to John Bevan's, where we had a small hard meeting, then at Pontypool,
where the meeting was pretty large and I hope ended well; we had also an
evening meeting at a Friends house, which was a comfortable time; and one at
Shirenewton, not very large, but a good meeting, this being the last in Wales;
having visited all the meetings in that country that could be called by our
name, as near as I remember, except Pedstown, and some of that meeting were at
Haverford-west; when I had got there, I had great cause to be humbly thankful
to my kind Lord and Master, for his Divine Help and merciful preservation through
much toilsome travel both of body and spirit.

FROM thence I went to Ross in Herefordshire, and on my way parted with my
companion John Fowler, his desire being to return home after this journey; at
Ross I had a comfortable meeting, and went forward to Hamler, Leominster, and
Bromyard, Herefordshire.
having meetings; the two first were solid good opportunities, and at
Leominster, it was large and some hopeful newly convinced Friends were there;
the other was almost lifeless as to a true zeal for Divine Worship, and but
little prospect of the growth of truth; from thence I came into Glocestershire,
Glocestershire.
and had meetings at Teuksbury, Cheltenham, Gloucester, Painswick, and
Nailsworth, some of which were hard suffering times, and I sincerely wish the
life of righteousness more abounded among the professors thereof; from thence I
came to Thornbury and to Ann Young's, and was at two good meetings, then to
Bristol, Bristol.
where I attended several large meetings, in which the kind hand of the Lord
was with us, and I found Friends there to be very loving, and left them in the
same; I also visited Kingsweston and Frenchay, which were large solid and
edifying meetings; from thence to Sadsbury, Tedbury, Cirencester, Addington,
and Camden, having meetings, and I trust was clear as to my duty among them;
the next meetings were Milton, Burford, Whitney, Oxfordshire.
Chalbury, Chippingnorton, Hooknorton, and Sedford, several of which were large
good opportunities; from thence I went forward to Southnewton, and Banbury, and
was at three meetings, one of which was silent, the other large good
opportunities; at Banbury I was favored with the company of my Friend Benjamin
Kidd, 1750.
who I had formerly seen in Philadelphia, when a lad, and was a comfort to me
when I was in a reverent search after the things of God's kingdom; the
friendship of this dear Friend at his house, was also now an encouragement to
me in the way of my religious Service.

FROM hence I went forward into several counties, and was at a number of
meetings in different places, which I hope were of profit to the people, and in
some places they were large; at two of them I had the company of my beloved
Friends Catharine Payton and Rachel Wilson, they being in their way to the
Yearly Meeting at London; Berkshire.
we went forward together to Reading, where I met with my dear worthy Friend
Samuel Hopwood, with whom when in Pennsylvania, I had traveled to some places,
and I believe was now glad of our meeting to see each other again; he was a
zealous and fervent labourer in the Lord's vineyard, who I believe had blessed
his labors to many souls; we had a meeting at Reading to sweet satisfaction;
from thence we all went to Maidenhead, and was at a meeting there, in which I
was silent; from this town we went to London together, London.
and on our way several Friends met us; our Friend John Hunt being one of them,
would have me to his house, and gave me a kind reception, where I made my home
for the most part during the times my lot was cast in that great city.

THE Yearly Meeting was large, and I hope edifying to many honest travelers in
Sion's way.

WHEN this meeting was over, I went for Scotland, finding my mind drawn forth
in much love to Friends in those parts, Scotland.
as I had after I first landed in England; but through some discouragement in
myself, omitted the opportunity of going there when I was in Cumberland, near
the borders of it, which caused me much more traveling to get to see Friends
thereaway; but in regard to peace of mind, which is to be valued above all the
world, I now gave up to perform this visit.

FROM London I went through several counties, having many meetings in
particular places appointed, I was also at three Yearly-Meetings in my journey,
as Colchester, Woodbridge, and Norwich, several of which were large and
satisfactory, as were also some of the appointed meetings, though small, and I
had near communion in spirit with some Friends as I passed through Essex,
Norfolk, Suffolk, and Lincolnshire, and in Yorkshire; I proceeded from York to
Darlington with my companion John Kendal, a solid young man of Colchester, who
had a savoury testimony for truth; we had a good meeting at Darlington, then
went forward to Durham, and Newcastle, at each of which towns we had meetings,
and Friends were kind in assisting to get us on our way to Alnwick, where we
had a small meeting, and lodged at John Doubliday's; we then proceeded to
Kelso, where we had two good solid meetings; then to Edinburgh, and had a
meeting to some satisfaction; after which we had but one little meeting, which
was in a Friend's house, until we got to Aberdeen, where we had two that wore
large, Scotland.
in which I hope the Lord's Power was in dominion to solid comfort; from thence
we went to Kinswells, Inverary, and Old Meldrom, and had meetings to some
degree of satisfaction; the last named place was the furthest meeting we had in
Scotland, which was pretty large: from thence we came to Kilmuck, and was
favored with a comfortable meeting and somewhat large; the next was at New
Aberdeen, also at Urie, at the seat of Robert Barclay, which were solid
opportunities; at Urie there came many people, Friends and others, who behaved
with solid attention, which made it a time of profit I hope to some; at this
place we met with our Friends David Barclay, his wife and two daughters from
London, who had come on a visit to their relations and Friends in those parts,
and when they sat out from home we came a pretty many miles on our way with
them; they were very kind and friendly, and by this acquaintance such a love
was begat in the hearts of those kind Friends, that when I came back to London
they had me several times to their house, and were truly respectful to me;
Scotland.
parting with them in Scotland, we went toward Glasgow, and had a small good
meeting some miles distant from thence, and in Glasgow we were at three
meetings, two of which were large, and in the main to solid satisfaction: After
we had visited all the meetings of Friends in these parts, as near as I
remember except one, some of the members of which were at the meeting at Urie,
we came on our way to England again, which was several days journey before we
got to Carlisle, and were obliged to lodge at several inns, which was not quite
agreeable; but when I got over the water which parts England and the other
land, England.
my heart was tendered and broken before the Lord, under a sense of pure peace
for the performance of this visit to that part of the world; I thought there
were a few solid Friends in places, and could rejoice to hear that there number
was increased; we went through Carlisle, Carlisle.
and lodged at our kind Friend Richard Wait's at Newtown, a little distance;
Kendal.
next day we sat out for Kendal, and got there that night, where we were
lovingly received, Lancashires
stayed some time for rest, and attended several large, solid, good meetings,
and visited diverse dear friends in the town; from hence proceeded to meetings
at the following places, viz. Crook, Preston, Lancaster and Manchester, which
were mostly to satisfaction; then went into Derbyshire, to Moniash, Derbyshire.
Matlock, Brick and Chesterfield, and several other places, some of which
meetings were large, and I hope of service through Divine Help, for the
promotion of truth; I parted with my dear Friend John Kendal, soon after I left
Manchester, he intending to return home, after our long journey through Scotland;
from this county I passed through Northamptonshire, Lincolnshire,
Leicestershire, having many meetings, several of which I hope were to the
satisfaction of the faithful; at a particular meeting not far from Leicester,
to which came a considerable number of Friends, some of them from several
distant meetings, it being the first day of the week, as we sat together in
silence before the Lord, there was a shock of an earthquake, which made a great
stir in the place, and the people who were met at another house for worship,
came away, as I was told, to our meeting, where we were preserved in great
stillness and little appearance of slavish fear, and I hope it was a singular
time of benefit to that assembly. -- From this county I went into Rutlandshire,
Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, and Hartfordshire, and was at a number of
meetings, some of which were favored with a sense of the Lord's blessed power
and presence; the next counties were Huntingdonshire and Cambridgeshire, in
which were several solid meetings, though that at Cambridge was small, and the
darkness of that dark place much depressed my spirit, which was attended with
deep suffering; -- I went from this county into the Isle-of-Ely, and visited
the meetings generally thereaway; in the performance of which I had some
comfort of mind; from hence I went into Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex and Hartford
counties, visiting meetings as they were laid out by Friends, there being in
several places some valuable solid Brethren, with whom I had near unity of
spirit, in that faith which stands not in the wisdom of man, but in the power
of God; from hence I came into Middlesex, and had meetings, also at Basingtoke,
Alton and Salisbury and several other places in Wiltshire, some of which were
comfortable seasons in the best sense; I then went into Somersetshire, and to
Bath and Froome, and some other places, and had meetings; then to Posset, and
was favored with a satisfactory meeting there, and the next day I was taken
ill at my friend James Player's, it being I thought pretty much the effect of a
cold, hard traveling and a close engagement of body and spirit I had passed
through from one place to another; this illness detained me some weeks, in
which time I was brought very weak in body, and at times low in spirit; but
through the kind mercy of God, having somewhat recovered (though still weak) I
sat out for the West of England, and went to Clareham, Glastonbury,
Bridgewater, and many other places, at which I had meetings, some being large
and mercifully favored with Divine Help, uniting love and power; after
visiting the meetings in the county of Somerset; I went into Devonshire and
Cornwall, having the company of my dearly beloved friend John Player, to whose
spirit I was nearly united in the love of truth, and was a great comfort and
help to me in my weak condition, at his uncle's. -- I would just remark that in
some of the counties in which I had been, some dear young people, who were
libertine in the show of pride and finery of the world, became sober, solid and
exemplary, and one young woman in particular was so reached, as I sat in a
Friend's house, though I had nothing by way of testimony in words to her
condition, yet the weight and exercise attending my mind at that time, so
reached her understanding, she became a plain solid Friend, and before I left
England, I heared her in the ministry at a meeting, and as I thought, to the
general satisfaction of Friends present; -- I was at Exeter meeting in
Devonshire, and had a weighty solid time among Friends there, Devonshire.
although I was much afflicted with the conversation of one professing the
truth, that pleaded for carnal defense, and asked what defense we had in the
province of Pennsylvania; I told him that Providence was our defense; yet he
continued to plead for carnal defense in such a manner, that gave me much pain
of mind, and I told him that I had no unity with his principles, and bore my
testimony against his unprofitable discourse. -- I went to several meetings in
my way to Kingsbridge, where I had a solid meeting; from thence took a number
of meetings; in my way to Austil in Cornwall, Cornwall.
some of which were to satisfaction, and I hope of some service to the right
minded; after a weighty good meeting at Austil, I came to Falmouth, and had a
meeting in which I hope I was clear as to my duty amongst them; then
accompanied by my dear Friend Samuel Hopwood, I went to Penzance, and many
other meetings in these counties; from this place, where we had I hope a
serviceable meeting, I returned, taking several meetings in my way to Bridport
in Dorsetshire; Dorsetshire.
we had two meetings in this town, the last of which was large, the people
being told of an Indian, as I had come from America, I believe it raised a
curiosity among them, for a large number came to the meeting, and as they came
in looked on me and one upon another, Dorsetshire.
but after a while behaved in a sober manner, and my dear Lord and Master
favored the opportunity I hope to the comfort of many, and when the meeting
ended the people departed with quietness and sobriety; for which I had cause to
be truly thankful, being much concerned how we should fare that day, so as not
to occasion any blame to the good cause I have sincerely labored to promote
from my youth, humbly desiring that my endeavors although weak, might tend to
advance the same.

AFTER having a pleasing time much to my comfort, with my loving kind Friend
Samuel Bownas, who had visited America in the work of the ministry twice, I
proceeded to several meetings in my way to Weymouth and Pool, where I also had
meetings, some of which were solid times; then taking several meetings in my
way to Southampton, I had there a small meeting; then passed over to Cowes on
the Isle-of-Wight, and after visiting Friends there, and being favored with
some solid meetings among them, 1751. Kent.
I returned to Southampton, and the next was a good meeting though small, at
Portsmouth; then a satisfactory large meeting at Chichester, and two in my way
to Lewis, where I was at a meeting to which belonged some loving Friends; from
thence I took a meeting in my way to Kent county, and was at several as I went
to Dover, some of which were satisfactory; though at Dover a hard time with the
Friends attending the meeting; from thence I went to Folkstone, and so forward
to Canterbury, and had a good meeting; as also another between this place and
London; London.
when I came to London, I went to my Friend John Hunt's, my usual lodging,
staid sometime in this city, and visited many meetings which were large, and I
had good cause to be thankful to God for his eminent power and presence, being
therein manifested to the souls of his people, that I hope several of those
meetings tended to the edification and comfort of the faithful among them;
believing that the Lord has a choice people in that great city, who fear his
great Almighty name, and they are near to my spirit in the covenant of love and
life.

AFTER I had thus visited London, I went to a considerable number of meetings
in places some distance from thence, some of which were large weighty solid
opportunities; my beloved Friend John Pemberton, whose company was acceptable,
being with me at several of them.

London.
HAVING gone through all the counties in England, and generally visited Friends
meetings therein, as also those in Wales and Scotland, I attended the
Yearly Meeting in London, which was large and much favored with the loving
kindness and blessed presence of the Almighty; many dear Friends being here
with whom I had near acquaintance, it was a comfort to my spirit that I could
see them and part with them in the unity and love of truth; a short time after
the conclusion of this meeting, accompanied by several loving Friends, I went
to Gravesend, in order to embark on board a vessel bound for New York, which
not being ready for sailing when we came there, our dear Friends left us, I
believe in true love, my spirit nearly and affectionately parting with them;
Edward Cathrall of Philadelphia, was passenger with me in this vessel,
Chevalier Dean being commander; we sat sail and came away as soon as we could
from Gravesend, and after a passage of about eleven weeks, landed at New York
on the 10th day of the seventh month, 1751 old style, and on the 13th of the
same month we got home to our habitations, Philadelphia.
being the day before our Yearly Meeting in this city. Which was through the
great preservation of the Almighty, who was, and is a God nigh at hand, who
supported and preserved me in great probations and conflicts of soul, beyond my
ability to set forth in words; but I think it my duty to say, Good is the Lord
and greatly worthy to be feared, praised, loved, honored, worshipped, and
obeyed! his goodness, mercy and grace have been eminent for my preservation and
salvation, that he would not suffer me to be confounded, although he was pleased
to permit great provings to befall me, both in my passage home and after I got
to my habitation, according to his All-wise purposes; yet underneath has been
his everlasting Arm of compassion and strength, which has wrought for my
deliverance, and enabled me to commit my soul, body, and spirit to his keeping.
-- My dear children and affectionate Friends, I believe were glad for my return
to them, and although I much desired to get to my native land and to see them
again, after an absence of more than three years; yet my expectation as to the
pleasure and comfort of that Divine Blessing in a manner I could have wished,
was much disappointed, which I have thought was in part occasioned through an
omission of duty, though I hope it was not wilful; it being to go on a visit to a
people of anothe language, and I omitted the opportunity of performing that
part of service, and had I gone on that errand, I might have got home as soon
as I now did, and my once expected satisfaction I might have enjoyed. -- A
vessel belonging to our city, the Captain a member of our society, whom I knew
and esteemed, was desirous of my taking passage with him from London, from
whence he did not sail until several weeks after us, and arrived at
Philadelphia, about the time I landed at New York, that had I proceeded on the
visit which was upon my mind, it was thought I might have performed it, and
have been ready to embark in this vessel; but a cowardice and dissidence of my
own abilities at times, and a fear of going too fast (I think I can honestly
say) more than wilful disobedience, have brought some of the greatest sorrows
upon me that I have met with in the world; but the mercies of God are great,
who ought to be served and adored, and is worthy of the deepest reverence that
can be ascribed to his All-Powerful Name!

AFTER a time of great anxiety he was pleased by his gracious Arm to deliver
me, and to put a new song into my mouth, even praises to him the Living God!
the light of his glorious Countenance afresh shining upon me, his blessed "Sun
of Righteousness" appeared with healing under his wings, and I was sat at
liberty again in a good degree to serve and praise him the Lord in the land of
the living.

His return from England; -- His visiting Meetings in Pennsylvania and
New Jersey; -- His fourth Journey to New England; -- His Visit through the
Southern Provinces to South Carolina, etc.

1751. Philadelphia.
I AGAIN took fresh encouragement to do my best endeavors both with respect to
temporal and spiritual things, and settled myself with my two children, and my
wife's mother, who lived in the same house with us; I kept to diligence in my
outward calling, wherein I was blessed of the Lord with all the needful things
of this life for me and mine, and through Divine Help, I was enabled to perform
my religious services at home and abroad, as I was obedient to the blessed
ability that God gives, at times visiting Friends in Pennsylvania and
New Jersey, with whom I had great nearness in the love of the Heavenly Father,
and many of us were renewedly united in that love which brought us near to
himself and made known unto to us the way that leads unto life and peace, as in
the beginning.

IN the year 1753, 1753.
having the unity of my dear Friends at home, my loving Friend Isaac Zane being
my companion, Long Island.
I went to Long Island, and visited all the meetings of Friends there, and some
places where meetings were not usually held, or not very often, at Jamaica, and
several other places, and found great openness among the people, and some very
large meetings, and I think I may say to the praise of the Lord, I was greatly
favored with his light, life, and blessed presence, which nearly effected my
heart with gospel fellowship to his children and people thereaway, and returned
in the possession of great satisfaction in my own bosom.

IN the year 1754, 1754.
I went in the unity of Friends, New England.
with my dear Friend Israel Pemberton as far as Boston in New England; and as
we went forward were at a comfortable meeting at New York; from whence we went
by water to Newport, Rhode Island, and arrived there the evening before the
Yearly Meeting, Rhode Island.
at which were our Friends Catharine Payton from England, and Mary Peasley from
Ireland; the gathering of people was great and much mixed, the love of God in
Christ was truly preached, and lovingly extended to them, and I hope it was a
good meeting to many; -- after it ended I went with my Friends Israel Pemberton
and Thomas Lightfoot to Boston, Boston.
and from thence I went as far as Lynn and Salem, and returning to Boston,
there again met my two loving Friends, and had a meeting which ended as well as
I expected, the people attending it and behaving soberly; we then sat off for
the Yearly Meeting at Nantucket, and went by water at Woods-hole, and stopped
at an island in our way, and being detained by contrary winds, did not reach
the meeting so soon as we desired; but got there before it was over, and met
again with our two women Friends, before mentioned, and there being many
Friends on this island, it was a comfort to me that I had an opportunity of
seeing them once more, and I esteem it a mercy from the Divine Being, Nantucket.
for it seemed as I thought a risk of our lives to venture as we did in a
little open boat a great distance from the land; but the intentions I believe
of all us were for one good purpose, that we might have a time at that meeting
with God's people, to serve him more than for any other consideration; it was a
large meeting, and in some degree comfortable and edifying; and when it was
ended, a pretty many of us, in company with the two European women Friends,
took passage and landed at Woods-hole, where we had an evening meeting, I
believe to solid advantage and comfort in some good degree. Thomas Lightfoot
concluded to go forward to accompany the women Friends in their visit to the
other parts of New England, and my Friend Israel Pemberton and myself returned
to Newport, where we were at several meetings, one was at the burial of the
wife of Samuel Holmes, and in the main were solid meetings; from thence we
proceeded homewards through Conecticut, Conecticut. New York. New Jersey.
and got to New York, Staten-island, and New Jersey, having a large comfortable
meeting some distance from Joseph Shotwell's; from whence we came pretty direct
home through the tender mercies of the Lord; this journey nearly united our
hearts to each other, and in his goodness he was pleased to afford some degree
of peace to my mind.

1755.
IN the year 1755, I visited most of the meetings in Bucks county, Bucks county.
some of which I had not been at for several years, and thought were much
increased as to the number of young people, and were large solid good meetings;
wherein I had great nearness of spirit with many tender hearted dear Friends,
and returned home with sweet peace in the performance of this visit; I also
attended several meetings in this province and New Jersey with my two worthy
Friends Nicholas Davis and Adam Mott from New England, which were large and I
believe serviceable to many, and I received some pleasure and deliverance to my
soul, after some distressing trials of my faith, and provings of hope toward
God, which I have received as an unspeakable favor from him, 1754.
that he was pleased to bring me out of a horrible pit and set my feet on a
rock, that I can thankfully say, None is so holy as the Lord, nor any rock like
our God that is in heaven for the help of his people, and in his excellency
above the skies. After a very acceptable visit to these parts, from those our
dear Friends, who returning homewards Nicholas Davis died by the way, and
although the loss I believe to be great to Friends where he belonged, and those
abroad, where his lot was cast on his Lord and Master's errand; yet it is
comfortably to be hoped, that he is at rest from his labors, and received the
reward of a faithful servant; Oh! the sweet savor of life, and eminent power
of the Divine Word that attended this man of God, whose sweet company, edifying
conversation and tender love to the little and lowly lambs of Christ; (though a
threshing instrument in the Lord's hand, against ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, that hold the truth in unrighteousness,) is not to be
forgotten by those left behind while in mutability, who have had the benefit of
his gospel labors and rightly esteem them. 1756.


Philadelphia.
I ALSO accompanied our dear Friend Catharine Payton, with several Friends of
our city, to visit the families of many of our fellow members, which service I
think it may be thankfully said the Lord owned, the states and conditions of
the people being suitably spoken to.

New Jersey.
IN the year 1756, I visited several meetings in New Jersey, as Mountholly,
Burlington, Old Springfield, Mansfield, Croswicks, Bordentown, and
Upper-Springfield, which were generally large, and livingly attended with solid
comfort; also with my dear companion Isaac Zane, I had several satisfactory
seasons in some families, where we went to visit several ancient Friends, also
at the houses where we lodged; after these opportunities we went for
Little-Egg-harbour, stopping at a saw-mill on the road, called Mount-Misery,
where they desired a meeting, and finding freedom in my mind, we had a tender
time with the people, though a desolate place. -- We had two meetings at
Little-Egg-harbour, New Jersey.
and I found my mind nearly united to some worthy Friends of that place; from
thence we passed over a great marsh and a river to Great-Egg-harbour, where we
attended a meeting at each meeting house, and it was cause of gladness to see
an increase of tender minded Friends thereaway; not having been there for many
years; there appeared a revival of love for truth and zeal for the same; since
my being last there they had built a meeting house, in which we had a powerful
satisfactory meeting; we crossed the river to Cape-May, and had a meeting at
the widow Townsend's, and one in the evening at her son's, and from thence we
came to Greenwich and Alloways creek, having a meeting at each place, where
came a pretty many people, and it was to some degree of comfort; after the last
meeting we reached home, though it was somewhat late in the night, and although
some part of this journey was attended with much riding and fervent labor in
the Lord's work, I had cause to be thankful that I was obedient, and that he
was pleased to enable me to perform my duty.

Pennsylvania.
ALSO in this year 1756, and in 1757 and 1758, I attended the Indian treaties,
some part of them with several dear Friends of our city, at Easton in
Northampton county, at the time of one of which, I went with my dear Friends
John Pemberton and Benjamin Hooton, as far as Fort-Allen, with an invitation
from the Indians assembled at Easton and the government of Pennsylvania, to
some Indians who discovered a backwardness or fear of attending the treaty; it
was thought some of them had been very mischeivous in the murders and bloodshed
and taking of captives, on the frontiers of our province; and a great concern
having fallen on the minds of a number of worthy Friends, principally in
Philadelphia, who freely contributed their money and time, for promoting the
restoration of peace with the natives, as I have apprehended, and believe they
have been the were instrumental in the Lord's hand to appease the revengful
nature of so barbarous and cruel an enemy, Northampton county.
the hearts of the Indians retaining a great love for the memory of our first
worthy proprietary William Penn, Indian treaty.
terming Friends his children, that I believe they were a great blessing in the
hand of God, to the government of this province for the restoration of peace
with such an enraged enemy, who had been permitted to be an heavy rod of
chastisement on this land; yet remarkable it was, that through the protection
of the Almighty, which was as the shadow of a mighty rock in a wearied land,
few called by our name were ill used during all this calamity.

THERE were three Indian men accompanied us as far as Fort-Allen, Moses Tatamy,
and two others; we traveled much in the night and through a great rain, stormy
and cold weather, to reach that place to which we came the next morning, and
the captain received us very civilly, and I thought did what he could to be of
service to us, and behaved very kindly and friendly to the Indians, which they
seemed to take well; at first fight the Indians appeared dreadful to behold, as
to anger and revenge in their countenances, with their painted warlike looks
and weapons, and were very shy; yet after some friendly conversation, and their
receiving a few small presents which we carried with us for some of their
Chiefs, Indian treaties.
they appeared in a quite different disposition before we parted; but could not
be prevailed with to come to the treaty, because of their word and the
engagement they had made among themselves, to depute Tedyuscung, their chief
man, to transact the business with the government on their behalf; in
confirmation of their continuing in this mind, they sent a string of Wampum by
Moses Tatamy; after a further time of free conversation they appeared still
more pleased, and as I thought out of love to us, sent two of their young men
to accompany us back, we parted with them in love, our endeavors appeared to
be well taken by them, and I hope were of service, although none of them but the
two young men came with us to Easton; we ventured our lives, and went through
hardships to perform this errand; but through the mercy and kindness of the
Lord we were preserved; for which my soul had cause to be thankful to his great
and good name. -- At the other two treaties, I underwent with several faithful
hearts, a deal of inward suffering and anxiety of spirit; a dark and dismal
cloud of opposition appearing to the good work of peace; but the minds of
Friends being kept so as to look unto the Lord Almighty, we had many
extraordinary good meetings in waiting and thinking on him, and his dear
beloved Son Christ Jesus, and at times in those meetings, the darkness would
pass away, and the true light would shine to the renewing the hope of the
humble; and the Lord, magnified be his name! prospered the endeavors of those
faithful laborers, who had at heart this desirable work of peace, and I
believe they will be heirs of that blessing, wherein Christ terms the peace
makers "Blessed," and calls them the "children of God."

IN the year 1757, 1757.
I met with a near trial in the death of my eldest daughter Abigail, who
departed this life the 23d day of the fifth month, in the 21st year year of her
age, which great change I hope to be her everlasting gain; some of her last
words were, Sweet Lord receive my soul, and went from this world in the bloom
of life, in acceptance I hope with God; my wife's mother having departed this
life on the 29th of the fifth month 1753, and I hope is at rest with the Lord;
this burial of my dear child, made the eighth out of my family, and after all
these many strippings and trials, I have found it good to trust in God, and do
my best endeavors. My dear daughter Sarah and myself were now all of my
family, and the Lord's blessings and mercies continuing to accompany us, with
the near unity and company at times of faithful loving Friends, would unite my
heart to the flock and family of Christ my dear Lord, and to those that are
within the walls of the salvation of God; and great has been the satisfaction
that I have received in communion with those that are of Jerusalem, for "Peace
is within her walls, and prosperity within her Palaces", and oh! the goodness
and kindness of a compassionate God in helping and defending me a poor
creature, and blessing the labor and travail of my soul in his righteous
cause, with the enjoyment of peace at times, beyond my ability to set forth,
Glory, honor, and praise to his great Name for evermore!

A WEIGHTY concern attending our Yearly Meeting in 1758, 1758. Pennsylvania.
for a further reformation from the practice of keeping slaves for term of
life, several Friends with myself, were appointed to visit those members of our
religious society, who held them in bondage, in order to advise for their
liberty, it being believed by the truly conscientious, to be a great iniquity
to keep them or their children, and children's children in perpetual captivity;
agreeable to this appointment, I went in company with my Friends John
Scarborough and John Woolman, to several such families in Chester county, to
whom I hope we faithfully discharged our duty; on our return from this visit we
were at a burial at Uwchland, and at the Monthly Meeting at Goshen, where we
met our Friend Joseph White, Chester county.
and to answer the appointment of our Yearly Meeting for settling the Western
Quarterly Meeting, at Londongrove, I went with the above named Friends to the
ministers meeting held for the first time at that place, which was on the
seventh day of the week; on the next day I was at New-Garden meeting, and on
the following day, being the second of the week, at that at Londongrove, held
for worship and the discipline of the church, which was very large, and I hope
favored in a good degree with the best wisdom, (our Friends Samuel Spavold,
and Mary Kirby from Old-England, were also at this Quarterly Meeting) we had
been the week before at the Quarterly Meeting at Concord, which I hope was of
service to many; -- after Londongrove meeting I returned homewards in company
with our Friends Joseph White, Israel Pemberton and several others as far as
Chester, where some of us parted with our Friend Joseph, he intending to embark
there in the service of truth, on board a vessel bound for England.

SHORTLY after this journey I went to Mountholly meeting, New Jersey.
and to the Quarterly Meeting at Croswicks, and joining company with my Friends
John Sykes and John Woolman, performed visits to many places where they had
slaves in bondage, and I hope in true love; after which, and a solid meeting at
Mansfield, I returned home with great peace in my own bosom.

HAVING in the year 1757, Philadelphia.
made some some progress in company with my Friend John Pemberton, in a
religious visit to the families of Friends in this city, both of such as were
in unity, and those who made some profession among us, we proceeded on and in
the year 1760 completed the visit to above five hundred families in the city,
the northern liberties, and over Schuylkill, which gave relief to my mind, that
we were enabled to accomplish so weighty an undertaking, which was kindly
received, and I believe by many in that love, wherewith the Lord by his council
and goodness accompanied us from place to place, 1760.
and I hope they were seasons of tender visitation to many souls; from the time
we began this visit I was mostly at home, only as I performed the journeys
beforementioned, and at some other times visited the neighboring meetings in
Pennsylvania and New Jersey, wherein I trust I was in a good degree clear in
the sight of the Lord; my heart being given up at times to his blessed
requirings; -- in a short time after this family visit, I went as far as Maiden
creek, in company with my Friend James Starr, and was at an evening meeting,
which was large and edifying, held in his father's house; from hence I went to
Reading, Exeter, the Forest, Jacob Thomas's, and New-Providence, and had large
meetings at several of these places, much to my own relief and comfort, and I
hope to the satisfaction of others, for I found Friends thereaway to be loving
and tender hearted, which nearly united my spirit to many of them, as sheep of
my Heavenly Father's fold, and I trust as they are faithful to Divine
Knowledge, that the Lord will prosper his work among them; my worthy Friend
Ellis Hugh, accompanied me to several of these meetings, and his gospel labors
were acceptable; after Providence meeting, I went to an evening meeting
belonging to Plymouth, and the next day came home.

IN a little time after I went with my Friend Joseph Marriot to a large general
and youth's meeting at Newtown in Bucks county, which held part of two days,
Bucks county.
where I met with a kind reception, and was favored in the Lord's love, to
enjoy his living presence among his children and people thereaway; then
returning home, it being our Quarterly Meeting, my dear Friend Samuel
Nottingham from Tortola was there, and at the youth's meeting the next day,
when the Lord's saving presence was made manifest among the young people, to
the rejoicing the upright in heart; -- the next meetings I was at out of town
were at a general meeting at Derby, Derby.
and at the burial of Robert Thomas at Abington, Abington.
and at the first day meeting at Byberry, which were large solid seasons,
wherein I found an openness among Friends in the love of the gospel; as also
where I visited the sick and the families of some Friends; I was also at a
first day meeting at Haddonfield, New Jersey.
at a large meeting at Chester at the burial of Robert French, a Friend in the
ministry who was much beloved and valued as a good Example among Friends where
he had lived, and I thought these meetings were owned with the best of help and
instruction in a a good degree, for the profit of the people; -- I was also at
a large-meeting at Plymouth in Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania.
on occasion of the burial of Joseph Waln, at which was also our Friend Jane
Crosfield from England, who bore a large and living testimony to truth, and in
which meeting gospel labor was bestowed with design for the everlasting
benefit of the the people, which I wish may turn to the good of their
never-dying souls; -- I visited Fair-Hill, and was at a large meeting at German
town, at the burial of Derick Johnson, and at the first day meeting at
Frankfort, in which meetings I found a degree of openness, to bear a testimony
to the way of truth, and I hope the spring of life was opened to the comfort of
some tenderhearted ones amongst them.

HAVING been under a weighty concern of mind in gospel love, His visit to
Maryland, Virginia, North and South Carolina.
for several years at times to visit the southern provinces on this continent,
I acquainted Friends at our monthly meeting with the exercise that lay upon me,
with which they having unity, were free to allow me their certificate, and on
the 19th of the twelfth month 1760, I left my outward habitation, and my
daughter Sarah to abide with my kind Friends Reuben and Margaret Hains during
my absence; Isaac Zane being my companion on this journey, we set forward
accompanied by many loving Friends several miles over Schuylkill, when we
parted in tender love, and went home with our Friend Robert Valentine that
night, and had a solid meeting the next day at his house in Downing's-town;
after which we went on and reached Lancaster, and the next day were at their
first day meeting, which though small, was attended with life and some degree of
near unity; Isaac Whitelock was so kind as to conduct us to Susquehanna, and
further to several meetings; it was with great difficulty through much ice that
we crossed over this river, from thence we got to Yorktown, and had the next
day a tender edifying meeting there, the day following we crossed a river
through which our horses were swam, and went to Newberry meeting in the
Redlands, which was a tender comfortable season; from thence we got on our way
to Warrington, Huntington, and Manalin, which were meetings I hope mostly to
solid advantage, and some of them pretty large; we came next to Pipe creek,
Bush creek, and Monokessy in the government of Maryland, Maryland.
where we had small meetings; the first was a solid season, the others though
attended with hard labor, I hope it was received in love; after the last
meeting, we went forward crossing the river Patowmac into Virginia; the next
meetings were Fairfax, Goose creek, Potts or the Gap, some of which were
largely favored with solid comfort and satisfaction, there appearing many dear
Friends with whom I had near unity in spirit; from the last place we traveled
till we got over Shanondore-river, and lodged at John Vestal's, where we had a
solid season in the family; a deep snow falling that night made it the more
difficult for us to get forward the next day to William Jolliff's beyond
Opeckan, Virginia.
which after a long cold ride we reached, and were received in love, and the
next day were at Hopwell meeting, being the first day of the week, and at their
Monthly Meeting the day following, both which were solid seasons; the next
meeting was at Maurice Rees's, in which there appeared to be a necessity for an
amendment in the way of truth; from thence we came to Back-creek, and the widow
Lupton's had two meetings, weighty to my spirit, and I hope to the edification
of others; I thought there was a number of valuable Friends in these parts; we
were also at Winchester, and had a large meeting of Friends and others, in the
Courthouse, after it was ended, several persons of note not professing with us
behaved in a very loving friendly manner; in going from thence I possessed
sweet peace in my own mind and went to Robert Hains's, where we rested one day,
Virginia.
and on first day was at the meeting at Crooked-run, to which came many people
who did not make religious profession with us, and behaved with solid
attention, and I hope it ended to the honor of truth; -- the next day we went
a great distance from Friends, passing over rivers, creeks, and ice, and over
mountains, and a deal of troublesome traveling, accompanied by Robert Hains
and Richard Ridgway, two hopeful young men, to whom my spirit was united in
tender love, we were hard set to get entertainment and lodging; late at night
some of us reached a small house, in which was a great family, who were gone to
bed; we were let into the house, which was an open cold place, the people were
as kind as we could expect, endeavoring to provide us with lodging, but it was
so cold I could not lay long, but got up and sat by the fire great part of the
night, and to secure our horses they were put in a little square penn, scant of
provender; the next morning, after some friendly conversation with the family,
we set forward, and came to John Douglass's, and the next day had a large
pretty good meeting at the said Friend's house; from thence we came to
Camp-creek, Fork-creek, and Jannito, and were at meetings, some of which were
large, and in a good degree attended with the spring of life and power; next
day after the last mentioned meeting we crossed James-river and another river
not far distant, and was at a meeting at Amelia the day following, in which I
had some comfort of mind, it was pretty large; from John Johnson's we traveled
a great distance to South-river, and being overtaken by the night were lost by
taking a wrong road, which occasioned us to travel many miles extraordinary,
and were hard set to find any house, but by hearing a horses's bell we took to
a little path, which brought us just to William Pane's, and by calling he came
to us, conducted to his house, and was kind to us; after feeding our horses,
guided us to Sarah Linche's, and by the time we got there, it was about half
past four o'clock in the morning; she was a tender loving Friend, who
entertained us kindly; we rested a few hours, and then went to their week day
meeting, which was small but solid; the next day we had a pretty large meeting
of Friends and others at the same place, in which tenderness of heart appeared
among them; the next day we went to Goose-creek, a long ride and a rough hilly
road, accompanied by several Friends, and were at a meeting there on the first
day of the week, I believe to some good service; that night we lodged at Peter
Holland's, laying down in one room like a flock of sheep in a fold, being
sixteen in number with the Friend's family; he was a kind hearted man, and did
what he could to accommodate us with house room and otherwise, which I believe
was to the satisfaction of our company, we had here a solid meeting; at the two
last meetings there were several tender lately convinced Friends; from thence
after near two days ride and passing over Stanton-river we came to Joseph
Collins's, had there a solid meeting and rested one day; after which we were at
Banister meeting, where came many people, and I hope it was a profitable season
to a remnant; we went from thence to Richard Kirby's and had a large meeting,
they appeared to be a tender seeking people, and much in the spirit of love; we
then came near the river Dan and lodged; crossed the ferry next day to James
Taylor's in North Carolina, North Carolina.
being many miles, and were overtaken by the night before we reached the house,
we lodged there two nights, and had a meeting at Eno, which was large and I
hope to edification, then we went home with Joseph Maddock and lodged, and next
had a meeting at the Hawfields, and the Spring, which though small I thought were
good meetings, and Friends glad to see us; from Thomas Lindlay's, where we
lodged, we went to the Monthly Meeting at Cane-creek, and were also at their
first day meeting, which were large, but times of suffering to my mind; from
thence we proceeded to Rocky-river, the Center, and Deep-river, some of which
meetings were large and I trust favored with the extending of God's love and
merciful visitation to the souls of the people; we also had a comfortable solid
time at Richard Beason's, whose wife had been a valuable servant to the church,
but was now grown old and feeble and much confined through infirmity of body;
North Carolina.
but I thought lively and sensible in the best things; we were likewise at the
Quarterly Meeting at New-Garden, at their ministers meeting, and that for
business of the church, also at their first day meeting; the two last were
large and weighty seasons, wherein the Divine Presence was witnessed to the
refreshment of the solid minded; -- we were next at a meeting at William
Coxe's, where were a pretty many Friends; it was attended with hard labor,
which I with may not be lost, for I trust it was honestly discharged among
them; we went forward to Solomon Coxe's and Cornelius Tyse's, and had a meeting
at each place, to the last of which belonged several newly convinced Friends
and tender people, with whom I had solid satisfaction; from hence we went to
Pee-Dee, accompanied by Jeremiah Picket, lodged one night in the woods on our
way there, and had a laborious meeting at this place, attended by a
considerable number of people I thought for this remote part of the world,
which had a humbling reach on some who were present I hope; we lodged at
William Hall's, and from thence went to the Water-Ree in South Carolina,
accompanied by William Hall, Francis Clark, South Carolina.
Jeremiah Picket, and Andrew Mormam, lodged at Samuel Wiley's, had a tender
broken meeting at the meeting house, much to satisfaction and a pretty good
time at the house of a Friend who was indisposed; also a solid time with a
number of Catawba Indians, and then returned to Pee-Dee; in going to and
returning from this place, we were two nights in the woods, but faired pretty
well, the weather being fair and having provisions for ourselves and horses,
and my mind nearly supported, I enjoyed peace in the journey; on our return to
Pee-Dee, we were at their first day meeting, visited same sick families, and
had a solid evening meeting at Francis Clark's, where we lodged, and the next
day sat forward for Cape-Fear, and in our way were one night in the woods, and
a great snow falling, the weather was disagreeble either to stand or to lay
down before our fire; next morning we sat forward and got to Richard Bradley's
at Cros-creek in Cape-Fear, where is a small town lately built; we had a
meeting in it, to which came a pretty many people, some of whom were Friends,
North Carolina.
and it was to some satisfactton; our next meeting was at the meeting house at
Dann's creek, which was a laborious time, and I wish it may have a good effect
on the minds of the people, for I trust they were faithfully warned both on
account of their slothfulness in the things of God, and the things of this
world; from hence we came to John Newberry's and lodged, the next day went
toward Upper-Fowling-creek, on Neuse-river, stopping in our way at Jonathan
Evans's, where we had a tender time in the family, which I believe was well
received, although he did not make profession with us; his wife was a valuable
Friend, and I understand had a gift in the ministry; he conducted us several
miles on the way and parted with us in love; after we left this man's house we
parted with Jeremiah Picket and Francis Clark, who had accompanied us four
hundred miles; at night we stopped at a house to enquire for entertainment, where
was a woman and several children, North Carolina.
she gave us liberty for house room, and there being no bed for us we by on the
floor, and it being cold and a snow falling, we were sometimes obliged to get
to the fireside to warm us; it was a trying time to my spirit; yet I thought we
were better off than when in the woods and snow a few nights before; we came
the next day to Thomas Coxe's, where we had a meeting, and the people warned to
prepare for their final change, mortality sounded aloud in these parts, and
several seemed to speak with a mournful voice, concerning the death both of man
and beast.

AFTER we crossed Rock-fish, Cape-Fear, and Neuse rivers, we were accompanied
by Richard Coxe to John Radcliff's, and having a pretty large satisfactory
meeting at Lower-Falling-creek, we came many miles accompanied by Moses
Ratcliff to James Ross's, a dear Friend not long convinced of the way of truth,
who did all he could to make us welcome, and we had here a uniting relieving
time in waiting upon God, and after a meeting of religious service at Henry
Horn's in Edgcomb on Tarr-river, North Carolina.
and a solid time in his family, the next day we rode many miles accompanied by
James Ross to Moses Hall's and lodged, in whose family I was much comforted and
united to such I believe that kept their places in the blessed truth; after an
open tender meeting at Rich-square, and a near parting with several Friends, we
came to John Cowpland's, where we had a meeting to solid advantage, and I hope
profit to the people; we then went to Thomas Cowpland's and lodged, and the
next day crossed a pretty large river, and after a long ride, through a dirty
tiresome road, we reached Thomas Newby's, who and his wife are worthy kind
Friends to the Lord's servants and particularly helpful to me in several
respects; on the first day of the week we were at a meeting at Wells, which was
large, and I thought solidly favored with the consolation of truth, and
several advices given forth in the love and fear of God, and humble contrition
of heart I hope was offered up before the Lord that day; the two next meetings
were Old-Neck, and Little-river, North Carolina.
both which were large, and in the openings of the gift of life I had to
discharge that trust which I apprehended was required of me, and found a choice
number of loving Friends hereaway, both old and young, with whom I had to
rejoice in our Heavenly Father's love; we lodged at Thomas Nicholson's and went
to the next meeting at Simon's-creek and New-begun-creek, which were large and
solidly edifying, the current of love and life running freely among the people,
to the watering the heritage of God; we were also at a Friend's named
Trueblood, where was a great gathering of people, and the word of life freely
preached among them, they were well behaved, and several parted from the
meeting in a sober friendly manner; the next meeting was over the river by
Old-Neck, when it was ended we returned, and were at the burial of a child of
Daniel Saint, and had a solid meeting at his house, from thence we came to
Joseph Newby's and lodged, and the next day, being the first of the week, we
were at Piney-woods meeting, which was very large and comfortably owned with
life and power; North Carolina.
from Thomas Newby's we went to a distant meeting, which was a hard suffering
time, we were also at the Monthly Meeting at Wells, which was very large and to
edification, being the last meeting I was at in North Carolina, after which I
parted with several Friends in much love, and I hope many of those
opportunities will be remembered by the living with my soul, and I wish it may
be with thankfulness to the Lord, that is worthy of all the praise, honor and
glory!

Virginia.
WE came next day into Virginia, and were at a meeting at Sommerton, which was
to some satisfaction; the next was at Lazarus Johnson's, from whence we went to
John Denson's and lodged, and the day following were at a meeting at
Black-creek, which was attended with solid instruction, a considerable number
of Friends belonging to the same; we then came to James Stanton's and Joseph
West's, and had meetings, to the last of which came a colonel of the county,
and a considerable number of people, Virginia.
and the good power of truth prevailed among us that day, which I hope was of
service; then passing over Notawa ferry we came to James Jordan's and lodged,
and from thence to the Western-branch Monthly Meeting, at which were many
people and an open time; the next meetings we went to were at Rasconeck, and
Chucatuck, which last I was informed had been one of the largest meetings in
Virginia, but is now reduced to two or three families, and things were at a low
ebb among them, the other somewhat open, and attended by several who did not
profess with Friends; from James Denson's we came over Nansemund-river to
Samuel Fitzrandal's and lodged, and on the seventh and first days of the week,
we were at the Spring Yearly Meeting at Nansemund, which I hope was in the main
well and somewhat large, considering the season, which was wet; we were at
Elizabeth Burleigh's one night, where we had a solid evening meeting; when the
Yearly meeting was over, we went home with Samuel Jordan, spent a little time
with him, then went with Thomas Newby to Joseph Scott's and lodged, Virginia.
and the next day were at a meeting at William Hollowell's, that gave me some
ease of mind, lodged at Jacob Cornwall's, and the next day were at Surry
meeting, which was large, and attended mostly by people not professing with us,
who behaved soberly, and I believe it was a profitable season and ended well;
the next was the Monthly Meeting at Black-water, that part for worship was
large, and the good presence and power of the Lord prevailed among us to the
uniting our hearts to each other, and I thought the meeting for business might
have been well, had not worldly matters been brought in among them; from
Hanslem Bayley's we went to Burleigh meeting, which was large and solid; from
thence we came to Gloucester Hunnicut's, and had a large meeting, mostly of people
who did not profess with Friends, which was owned with Divine Strength and
Power, wherein I had comfort of mind; from thence we came to Edward Stabler's
and lodged, and on the first day of the week had a very large meeting at
Petersburg, to which came a great number of people from the town and country,
Virginia.
and many Friends a considerable distance, and through the Lord's helping hand
his Great Name was praised, who is worthy for ever! the next large meeting was
at the burial of an ancient Friend near Wipanoak, it was held in an orchard,
was an awful solid time and of brokenness of heart among the people; the next
was at William Butler's at the marriage of his daughter, where were many
people, and the meeting was satisfactory in a good degree; from hence we
returned to Edward Stabler's and staid one night; after which we went forward
and crossed James-river accompanied by our kind Friend John Pleasants and his
wife, who took us to their house and gave us a kind welcome, and were the next
day at Curl's meeting, which was large though not many Friends, it was a
laborious time, things being low as to the growth of truth; after this meeting
we came to John Pleasant's, kinsman to the last mentioned John, and lodged one
night, who we had met with in North Carolina, and was a loving Friend and
brother to us, Virginia.
was with us at many meetings, and his company valuable and serviceable to me,
and my spirit was nearly united to him; from his house we went to
White-Oak-Swamp meeting, which was large and to good satisfaction; the next day
we were at Wyanoak meeting, where came a colonel and many people of note, both
Friends and others that behaved sober, and the meeting ended well; from thence
we went to Skimanone, and in our way crossed Chicahomony with John Pleasants,
who had been our companion in several places, and another Friend that were our
guides, and on the first day of the week were at a meeting at James Bates's
where came a large number of people not of our society, and many Friends from a
considerable distance, and I hope it was a time of profit and edification, for
which my soul had cause to be thankful to the Master of our assemblies; we had
also a solid tender time the same evening at Fleming Bates's, when things were
spoken to in the spring of life and power, and our hearts were united together
in gospel fellowship; the next day we came a great distance to Robert Ellison's
and lodged, 1761. Virginia.
and the day following were at Black-creek meeting, which was large and a
weighty laborious time, and although I had hard labor I possessed peace of mind;
the next meeting was at Chicahomony-Swamp, at which were many people not of our
persuasion, and it was a solid good opportunity; from thence we came to Joseph
Parson's, where we had a meeting in his barn, which I hope tended to some good
service, there being a pretty many people present; the next meeting was at
Cedar-creek, where came several that were reputed great men, and many people,
Friends and others; it was a solid time, which afforded sweet peace to my mind;
we went from thence to Micajah Terrell's, Samuel Hargrave's, and John Chegle's,
and were at their first day meeting at Caroline, which was very large, and
strength afforded to ease my burden that I had long borne toward this part of
the world, and was I hope an awakening time to some then present; after it
ended I parted affectionately with several dear Friends, it being the last
meeting in Virginia, only a solid season at a Friend's house where we lodged,
then went forward with Micajah Terrell for the Yearly Meeting at West-river in
Maryland.

Maryland.
WE crossed Rappahanock and Potowmack rivers, and another ferry, and got to the
Cliffts to William Harris's, who received us kindly, after along wearisome
ride; the next day we had a meeting at the Cliffts, at which were many people,
it was a solid time and I hope the witness in some was reached; we were also at
a meeting at Herring-creek, which was small and I was doubtful almost lifeless
as to the true zeal for Divine Worship, which gave me pain of heart among them;
the next day we came to Philip Thomas's at West-river, and remaining there,
attended the Yearly Meeting, which lasted several days; it was large and
greatly favored with the visitation of God's love, through Jesus Christ, to
the people, and was an uniting time to the faithful; when this meeting ended,
my companion Isaac Zane left me, in order to return home; I went to Joseph
Richardson's and dined, and then to visit my aunt Mary Henderson, my father's
sister, whom I had not seen for several years, and thought had been dead,
Maryland.
until a Friend informed me at the time of this Yearly Meeting of her being
living; I staid there one night, and although she did not profess with us, being
of the church of England so called, I believe was a religious woman, and of
good repute; she was glad to see me, I thought had a respect for Friends, and
parted with me in a kind tender manner, and not long after departed this life.

I WENT to a meeting a few miles from thence, which was solid, and from it home
with Gerrard Hopkins, and the next day with several Friends to Indian-spring
meeting, which was to good satisfaction, lodged at Richard Snowdon's, and was
next at Sandy-spring meeting, whore came Friends from several distant places,
and it was a solid time; from James Brooks's I went home with Henry Pierpoint,
and was the next day at Elkridge, which was a large meeting, and faithful
labor in gospel love bestowed among them, which I wish may have the desired
effect, lodged at Joseph Pierpoint's, and was the next day at Patapsco meeting,
Maryland.
which I hope was in the main well; then went with Samuel Hopkins to his house,
and the next day to Gunpowder meeting, where the living fountain was I thought
in some measure unsealed to edification and comfort; I also went to the meeting
at the Little-falls, at which were many people, and the good power of truth
prevailed among us I hope to solid satisfaction; lodged that night at Henry
Wilson's, and the next day was at Bush-river meeting, many Friends being there,
it was a time of comfort to my mind; went home with James Rigby and his wife,
staid one night, and next day attended a large meeting at Deer-creek, which was
an awful heart-tendering season, wherein the truly living, with my soul, had
cause to ascribe thanksgivings and humble praise to the Lord our God, who is
worthy with his beloved son Christ Jesus, the only head of the true church,
both now and forever more, Amen! Pennsylvania West-Nottingham.
-- then passing over Susquehanna ferry, the next day being the first of the
week, I went to West-Nottingham meeting, which was somewhat large and solid,
Pennsylvania.
and got to William Jackson's and staid the night, and the day following, being
the 25th of the fifth month, 1761, through the kindness and wonderful
providence of the Almighty, that had been merciful and good in preserving and
helping me through this trying journey, I arrived at my own habitation,
Philadelphia.
and found my daughter and things well as to my own concerns, and a kind
reception with my dear Friends, who I was glad to see once more, and enjoyed a
share of peace to my own soul; may all praise, honor, and glory be given to
him the great and awful Majesty in Heaven!

BEING favored with health I was enabled to perform my outward employment with
diligence, 1762.
and at sometimes visited the meetings of Friends in Pennsylvania and
New Jersey, where in several places we were owned with our Heavenly Father's
love, to comfort and edification; and a religious concern reviving in my mind,
that I had felt for a considerable time, to visit Friends on the Eastern shore
of Maryland, 1763.
and the three lower counties in the territories of this province, having the
unity of my dear brethren at home, I sat out on the 3d day of the first month,
1763, being the first day of the week, and came to Chester, accompanied by
several dear Friends of our city, and was at a meeting there, which was a
comfortable tender season of gospel love, and the same evening had a large
laborious meeting at Wilmington, Wilmington.
in which I hope I was clear as to my duty among them; the next day accompanied
by Thomas Shipley (who was my companion in this journey) came to Lewis
Clothier's and lodged, and I thought our being there was of some service,
Eastern shore of Maryland.
from this Friends we went to Sassafras meeting, where came a number of people,
with whom I hope the power of truth had a tender reach on the hearts of
several, we were next at Cecil meeting, in which the spring of life was I
thought opened to solid comfort among us; we had the next day a meeting at
Chester meeting house, attended with hard labor, and one in the evening at
James Claypool's in Chester-town, which was solid; from thence we came to Queen
Ann's, Maryland.
and had a large satisfactory meeting, in which I had some relief of mind, and
I thought was a time of tender visitation to the people; we then went to Isaac
Turner's and lodged, having in the evening a comfortable sitting in the family,
they were kind and friendly; from thence to Tuckaho, where we had a blessed
meeting, and on the following first day of the week were at Tredhaven, which
meeting was solid and edifying; from hence we went to Joseph Bartlet's, where
was a large exemplary family and no slaves, and had a good solid sitting; the
next day had a large open meeting at the Bayside, mostly of people not of our
persuasion, which I hope ended well; after lodging at John Kemp's, we came the
next day to Francis Neal's, and the day following attended a large meeting at
Little-Choptank, both of Friends and others, to some satisfaction; the next day
we crossed Choptank river, and were at Marshy-creek meeting, which was a trying
time, both on account of the coldness of the weather and a suffering cold house
to sit in; we lodged that night at William Edmundson's, Lower counties of
Pennsylvania.
and the next day sat off for Lewis-town, accompanied by Benjamin Berry, and
after a long ride got to Samuel Rowland's, who received us kindly, and was
helpful in getting a large meeting for us in the courthouse in the town; in
which I trust they were faithfully warned and advised in the love of the
gospel, and in visiting that place I enjoyed satisfaction; -- from thence we
went to Cold-Spring, which meeting was attended by many people, and I thought
some revivings of life therein; the next meeting was called the Three-runs,
which was an awful heart-tendering season, and many people at it; we were next
at Mother-kiln's where came Friends from several parts, and diverse other
people, and it was a solid time; the day following we were at Little-creek
meeting, which was a comfortable season, the following meetings were at
Duck-creek, and George's-creek, and attended with hard labor; but I hope of
service to stir up the pure mind in some; from my kind Friend Jacob Janey's, I
came with several toward Okesshan, and on our way stopped at a house where were
several in family, Chester county.
with whom we had a solid opportunity, which I believe gave satisfaction to
them as it did to us; on our way there parting with my companion Thomas
Shipley, I came near Okesshan and lodged, and was the next day at a meeting
there, which was a suffering time to my spirit; then went to the
Quarterly Meeting at Londongrove, where were Hannah Harris and Elizabeth
Wilkinson, two worthy Friends from Old-England; the meeting was very large and
I hope of service; from thence took diverse meetings in Chester-county, some of
which were large and attended with relieving help, in which I enjoyed much
comfort and unity among Friends, as I visited the several particular meetings,
which were Kennet, Center, Birmingham, the Forks of Brandywine, West and East
Caln, Nantmil, Pikeland, Uwchland, Goshen, Newtown, Middletown, and Providence;
to the last of which came (my son-in-law) Benedict Dorsey, with whom I came
home to my habitation, Philadelphia.
in the enjoyment of a share of peace; having visited the afflicted, and
several Friend's families, and I trust faithfully labored, traveling through
cold and hardships and sometimes deep probations of spirit; but have had
reverend cause to be humbly thankful to my blessed Lord and Master, who greatly
helped I hope to his own praise, to whom be it ascribed for ever more!

1764.
ON the 7th day of the fourth month, 1764, Bucks county, Pennsylvania.
with the unity of my Friends at home, I went toward Buckingham, was the next
day at that meeting, with Israel and John Pemberton and Joshua Emlen, which was
large and to some satisfaction; after this meeting, Joshua Emlen being my
companion, we proceeded to Kingwood in New Jersey, New Jersey.
guided by Samuel Eastburn, lodged at Robert Large's, and the next day had a
large meeting at this place to edification and comfort; from thence to Richard
Lundy's, and after a stay of two nights, were at a meeting in his house, where
was a number of tender hearted youth and others, in which the Lord was pleased
to favor us with his blessed presence to satisfaction; the said Friend
informed us that he had seventy children and grand children, some of whom were
valuable Friends; this place was called the Great-Meadows; the next meeting was
near Pawlings-kiln, in which a remnant was broken and contrited before the
Lord, and I hope it was a time of Divine visitation to those who were present;
from thence we went near the head of the waters at the Drowned Lands (so
called) lodged at Elijah Pollard's, and next day being the first of the week,
had a large meeting at his house, where came a mixture of people as to
religious profession, and the Lord was graciously pleased to appear among us,
and I understood that some acknowledged to the truth, for which my soul had
cause to be thankful, it being a low time to my mind before the sitting of this
meeting; we came from thence and lodged at Richard Gardner's, where we had a
meeting the next day, at which there was a sergeant of the army, who, after the
meeting, was in company with us many miles on our way toward North-river, and
confessed to the principle of Truth as professed by us, and I thought that if
he would resign his office as to outward war, and be faithful to knowledge, he
might make a soldier for Christ; I found his spirit near to mine in many things
relating to Truth, and parted with him in love; we lodged that night at an inn,
and the next day crossed North-river ferry called Fish-kiln, and came to Joshua
Sherman's, at whose house we had a solid tender meeting the next day, of many
people, New York government.
Friends and others; then came to Oblong, lodged at Benjamin Ferriss's, and the
next day were at that Monthly Meeting, which although the day was very stormy,
was attended by a number of Friends, and I thought with unity and satisfaction;
the next day we came to John Howeg's and had a pretty good opportunity with
many people; the day following had a long ride to Salisbury in Conecticut,
Conecticut.
lodged at Joshua Whitt's, and on the first day of the week were at a meeting
in that place, where came a number of professors (but few of our society) among
whom we had an open comfortable meeting; from hence we proceeded the next day
toward a place called the Nine-Partners, New York government.
stopping on the way at a Friend's house to dine, had a solid time in the
family, and the day following were at a meeting at the Nine-Partners, which was
large, and Truth reigned in a good degree among us, I hope to the praise of the
Master of our assemblies; the next we passed over Wapping-creek, had a meeting
at a Friend's house, where came many people, and it was a heart-tendering time;
the next place where we had two meetings, was Swego, the first of which was
small, but a comfortable time; the other was large, and I thought the word of
life prevailed in a good degree among us, for which a remnant had cause to be
united in praise and thanksgiving to the Author of Life and Power; from thence
we went toward Oblong, and the next day visited our two ancient Friends John
Howeg and wife, where came several of their neighbors and sat down with us,
and the Divine Presence appeared among us in a powerful manner in a little mean
cottage, wherein my spirit was refreshed before the Lord, and had a kind
reception with those present; we were next at Oblong meeting, at which was a
large number of people, who were faithfully warned and advised to keep in the
fear of God, and Truth seemed to have a reach on the hearts of some; from
thence we went to Dobson Wheeler's at New Milford in Conecticut, Conecticut.
and the day following were at a large meeting in the meeting house, where was
a marriage, and a laborious time to my spirit among the people, but I hope of
some service, their behavior being in the main as well as might be expected,
being mostly of other professions; we returned to Oblong, and were at the week
day meeting, which was a time of poverty and suffering in spirit in some
degree; we staid their Quarterly Meeting of ministers and that for business,
also their first day meeting, the last of which was very large, and in a good
degree owned with the best of help, I hope to the glory of God, and was a time
of loving parting with a number of dear Friends living thereaway; we went home
with Samuel Field, and had a meeting at a place called Peach-pond, which was
pretty large and solid; and although a great part of this journey thus far was
mountainous, the roads stony, and wearisome and trying to body and spirit, yet
through the Lord's loving kindness and tender mercy, I at times enjoyed peace
of mind; being enabled to perform in this hard travel what I apprehended to be
required of me by him who is worthy of praise and thanksgiving for evermore!
New York government.
the two next meetings were Amawack and Shapaquah, which were large, and I hope
well in the main; from thence we came toward a place called the Purchase,
lodged at a Friend's house, and in the night was a time of rain, lightning, and
thunder, by which, some distance from this place, as we were told, a poor black
slave was killed, concerning whom two brothers had been disputing their right
of property, and one of them had said that he would cut him in two but he would
have his half of him; but through the permission of Divine Providence his time
was shortened, and they must resign their claim to him; the next day we
attended the meeting at the Purchase, which was large, also visited a family in
affliction, both which were solid seasons; lodged that evening at Edward
Burling's, and had a solid sitting in that Friend's hopeful family of young
people; our next meeting was at Mamarineck, then at West-Chester, where came
Samuel Emlen jun. John Haydock, and Haydock Bowne from New York to see us,
their company afforded much comfort to my spirit; this meeting being attended
with life and near unity, made it a comfortable edifying season; we had the
company of Matthew Franklin and William Mott at most of the meetings to this
place from Oblong, two examplary Friends, and serviceable in the ministry;
Long Island.
from hence we passed over White-stone ferry to Long Island with several
Friends, and Matthew Franklin took my companion and me to his house, where we
had a kind reception; the next meeting we were at was Flushing, and they were
warned against the ways of unrighteousness, and the well-minded among them I
hope encouraged; the next day we visited several Friends in affliction, one of
whom was Clement Willis, a pious tender woman, at Bethpage, Long Island.
who seemed almost helpless as to bodily strength, and told us she had been in
that condition thirty-one years, her frame of mind was heavenly, and appeared
to be well contented in the will of Divine Providence; the day following we
attended Bethpage meeting, which was large and solid, we were also at Setacket,
and had a large good meeting; from thence we went to Samuel Willis's and
lodged; the meetings following were at Matinicock, Oyster-bay, and Jerico,
which were large and solid seasons; from Jerico we went to William Lime's and
lodged, and on the first day of the week was at Westbury meeting, which was
very large, and attended with hard close labor, but I hope in the gift of life
and power that God gives; we came that evening to Benjamin Duesenbury's, and
were the next day at a meeting at Jacob Mott's, which was large and an awful
season; we then went to the widow Pearsal's, who was an ancient Friend, and a
family I had long been acquainted with, whom I had reason to remember in near
fellowship in the church; Long Island.
after a meeting the next day at Cow-neck, we went home with Matthew Franklin,
and attended the Yearly Meeting at Flushing, which was very large, and I trust
in a good degree owned with the presence of God; Joshua Emlen left me before
the conclusion of this meeting, in order to return home, on account of his son
being to embark soon for England; when the meeting ended I went with several
Friends to Richard Hallett's, and the next day crossed the Narrows to
Staten-island, New Jersey.
and thence with Joseph Shotwell to his home, and after having meetings at
Rahway, Woodbridge, and Plainfield, to some satisfaction, accompanied by him
and his wife over Amboy ferry, we went to Nathan Tilton's, and from thence to
Shrewsbury, where I attended two large meetings, which I hope were in the main
well; after the last I went home with James Tucker, my father's cousin, and
staid one night, and the next day himself and son, and Joseph Wardel conducted
me to Squan, where we had a large meeting, which was an open solid tender
season, somewhat relieving to my spirit; lodged at Thomas Tilton's, who the
next day accompanied me to Amos Middleton's, in or near Burlington county, and
the day after, through the good providence of God, my alone helper through
Christ in the way of true obedience to his blessed will, Philadelphia.
I got home to my outward habitation, being the 7th day of the sixth month,
1764.

ON the 3d day of the second month, 1766.
1766, Pennsylvania.
after our (Quarterly Meeting in Philadelphia, I sat out from home with several
Friends toward Haverford, lodged that night at George Smith's, and was the
next day at a large meeting at Haverford, to satisfaction, Chester county.
and then proceeded to the meetings at Newtown, Radnor, and Goshen, which were
large; and attended with life and the Lord's good Presence and near unity with
Friends; afterward I attended the Quarterly Meeting of ministers at Concord,
in which my mind was deeply engaged for the maintaining of gospel love and
unity, and real fellowship among ministers and Elders, and the Lord was pleased
to give me an open door, that I believe the labor was well received; Chester
county. Pennsylvania.
and on the first day of the week, I went to Birmingham meeting, which was
large, and they were faithfully warned in the fear of God; the next day I
attended the Quarterly Meeting for the affairs of the church at Concord, which
was very large, and owned with the best of favor; after this meeting I
attended meetings at Kennet, Wilmington, Center, and Chichester, some of which
were very large, and the Lord's heart-tendering power and presence much
favored most of those opportunities, and Friends were affectionate and kind;
after the last meeting I went home with Benjamin Sharpless and wife, and lodged
at his house, and the next night at Nathan Yarnal's, with whose hopeful family
in the way of truth, I had comfort of mind; the day following being the first
of the week, was at Middletown meeting, which was large, Friends coming from
several distant places, and through Divine favor, it appeared to be a solemn
time, dined at Thomas Minshall's, and had I hope a profitable sitting with a
number of dear young people and others, and was the next day at Providence
meeting, which was owned with the virtue of life and power in waiting upon God;
from thence I went to William Fell's, where lived his aged father Thomas Fell,
who had been blind several years, and lately again received his sight, whom I
thought to be a living Friend in the Truth, and I hope in favor with the Lord;
the next day I was at a large meeting at Springfield, in which I trust they
were faithfully warned and advised in gospel love, I lodged that night at
Jonathan Maris's, came the next day to the Valley, and the day following had a
meeting there, to which several Friends came from distant places, and it was a
time of comfort to my mind, Philadelphia county.
then went home with Israel Jacobs, crossed the river Schuylkill at
Richardson's ford, and attended a meeting the next day at New-Providence, where
came many people, it was a time of deep and close labor, but I hope tended to
edification; then went to John Jones's and lodged, and was at Gwyned (or
North Wales) meeting on the first day of the week, which was large, Bucks
county.
and an open comfortable season, I then went to John Child's and staid two
nights, and from thence to a large meeting at Plumsted, in which they were
warned in the Lord's fear, and it appeared to be a time of profit to a solid
remnant; after this I went to the Quarterly Meeting at Wright's-town in Bucks
county, of ministers and for the discipline, the last of which was large, and
each owned with near unity among Friends, and gospel labor extended I hope to
good purpose, Mordecai Yarnal and John Pemberton being also at this meeting;
the next meeting was at Makefield, which was large, and comfortably owned with
life and power in the Lord's strength, and was a solemn awful season; went to
see a sick Friend, where many Friends met, it was an opportunity of much
tenderness and brokenness of heart, wherein I had relief and satisfaction;
lodged that night at Mahlon Kirkbride's, New Jersey.
and the next day crossed the river Delaware near Trenton with some other
Friends, although a very rough passage, we were mercifully preserved, for which
my heart has been thankful to the Lord, New Jersey.
lodged that night at William Morris's, and on the first day of the week was at
Trenton meeting, where assembled a pretty many people, Friends and others, and
although it was a hard suffering time to my spirit, wherein I was deeply baptized
in that place, I had some comfort in the company of some Friends thereaway; I
came from thence and lodged at Marmaduke Watson's, and the next night at John
Syke's, and the day following had a meeting in Bordentown, to satisfaction in a
good degree; then went to Samuel Satterthwait's, and had a meeting the next day
at Mansfield, at which considering the short notice, and it being a wet day,
there were many people, and we had a solid season together; from thence went to
Benjamin Field's, and the day following attended the Monthly Meeting at
Croswicks, which was large, and an open edifying season in the meeting for
worship; then to Peter Harvey's, and the next day went to a meeting at
Old-Springfield, which was large, and several things ran through me in the
spring of life to aged and youth, as advice in near love to the cause of Truth,
and for the welfare of God's people; New Jersey.
the day following I had a meeting at Mansfield-neck, where came many people,
and it was a time of good satisfaction; the next day was at a large meeting at
New-Springfield, which was attended with close labor, and faithful warning
extended to the people, then went to Joseph Lamb's, where I was some what
detained by a storm of snow, when it moderated I got forward, with my beloved
Friend William Jones, to Little-Egg-harbour, to our kind Friend John Ridgway's,
and the day following with him visited several families of Friend's, and went
to see Christian Osborn, an ancient Friend reckoned to be upwards of ninety
years of age, who was mother and grandmother to many that were valuable in the
way of Truth, we had a tender time in the family, I hope to some profit and
edification; the day after, I attended the Monthly Meeting at
Little-Egg-harbour, which was in a good degree owned with Divine favor, and
the life of the gospel power, and many people were present; being prevented by
stormy weather some days from crossing the river to Great-Egg-harbour, till the
first day of the week, New Jersey.
I then came with diverse Friends to the Upper-meeting on that river, which was
large for that place, and tended to edification and comfort; after which went
home with Japhet Leeds, and he accompanied me that evening to Joseph Mapes's,
where we lodged, and the next day were at a meeting near his house; from thence
proceeded to Cape-May, in company with some Friends, lodged at Isaac
Townsend's, and was the next day at a large meeting for that place, at the
Lower meeting house, to some degree of satisfaction, in which I labored to
turn the minds of the people to Christ our free and infallible teacher, and
there appeared a tenderhearted few among them; I then went forward to Cohansy,
and had a meeting somewhat large, and a laborious time at Greenwich, which
being in gospel love, I trust tended to edification; I then came to Joseph
Gibson's, and had a solid sitting in the family, his wife being much afflicted
with a cancer, by which it was said she had lost one of her eyes, and almost
the sight of the other, but was in a patient frame of mind; then went to James
Daniel's, New Jersey.
and the next day to Salem to the burial of the wife of John Mason, on which
occasion we were favored with an awful solemn meeting, went home with Samuel
Nicholson, and the next day had a solid sitting with an afflicted family in our
way to Lower-Alloways-creek meeting, which was very large, wherein I gave up to
spend and be spent in fervent love and gospel labor, and hope it was a blessed
season to a number there present; from thence I came with several Friends to
Benjamin Thompson's at the Glass-works, and the day following we had a large
meeting at Upper-Alloways-creek, much to the satisfaction of some present, in
which having cleared my spirit, I came away relieved in my mind; then went to
Zacheus Dun's, and was at a large meeting the next day at Pilesgrove, which I
trust was a time of profit to Friends and others, after this meeting went to
Solomon Lippincot's, and the next day attended a large meeting at
Upper-Greenwich, which was a time of hard labor, after which I came home,
being on the 26th day of the third month, 1766; the Lord alone being worthy of
all praise, Philadelphia.
glory and honor for evermore! some of the meetings in this journey were (I
thought) the largest in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, that I had seen before in
visiting those parts, a great number of young people coming up on the stage of
life, who I wish may be an army for Christ.

IN the same year and the sixth month, New Jersey.
I visited Evesham, Chester, and Rancocas meetings in the Jerseys, most of them
being large, and attended with near unity with such as were I hope
honest-hearted toward God; in the same month, a weighty concern attended
Friends at our monthly meeting, Philadelphia.
on account of a company of stage players, that came to the city in order to
erect a theater to exhibit their pernicious diversions, to prevent which, and
declare our testimony against their proceedings in a thing of so bad a tendency
for corrupting the minds of the people, leading them from the fear of the Lord
into vanity; Friends agreed to address our Governor, John Penn, requesting him
to interpose with his authority, to prevent the same, who being then at
Shrewsbury, and Friends desirous to forward their address with a view to the
good of our city and people; saw fit to appoint Mordecai Yarnal, John
Pemberton, Joshua Emlen and myself, to go to Shrewsbury, and present it to him,
it being about seventy miles from Philadelphia; we accordingly proceeded, and
discharged our message; but the Governor we found had given liberty and his
promise to the players, so that we had no prospect of obtaining redress from
him; yet I trust that Friends and we were clear in thus discharging our duty to
God and man in this respect; I returned home on the 2d of the month following,
and enjoyed a degree of peace, having some solid sittings in some Friends
families on our return, and an opportunity of seeing some whom I valued in the
truth.

Philadelphia.
AFTER these two journies this year, I kept much at home, and in obedience to
the Lord, and in love to the inhabitants of this city, labored in sincerity
for their welfare. -- In 1767 I attended the Yearly Meeting at Salem, which was
very large, Salem in New Jersey.
and much favored with a visitation of gospel love and power, to the rejoicing
the hearts of the faithful among Friends; on my way to this meeting, I took the
week day meeting at Woodbury-creek, and on my return the youth's meeting at
Pilesgrove, which was large, and both of them tending to solid satisfaction; --
I had also some comfortable meetings in some families.

AFTER this journey I was at several meetings in this province and New Jersey,
some of which were large and I hope beneficial to the well-minded, one of them
was at the burial of William Paxson, at Neshamany in Bucks county, which was an
awful solemn time, and a great gathering of people; after these opportunities I
staid much in the city, sincerely laboring for the prosperity of Truth in our
own meeting, with the faithful belonging to the same, until I found a draft on
my mind to visit some meetings in the Jerseys, and the particular families of
Friends belonging to Chester meeting, 1768.
a branch of Evesham Monthly Meeting, which I performed in the twelfth month,
1768, New Jersey.
in much love, faithfully laboring both in the families where I went with my
cousin John Lippincot and wife, Edmund Hollinshead, and John Roberts, also in
the several public meetings, which were large, and chiefly in Burlington
county, being eight in number, besides one with the Indians at Edgepelick (or
Brotherton) where Divine Strength was afforded to proclaim the council and will
of God through Christ, as I apprehended, and in the performance of this labor
of love, I enjoyed great comfort of mind, and near unity with Friends, my
visits to whose families were generally opportunities of kind reception, and
such openness and brokenness of heart in many places, that it bespoke a day of
visitation of God's love to their souls, and I wish it may be as bread cast on
the waters, that may be found after many days. Having performed this labor of
love, I visited several meetings in this province and New Jersey, and attended
the burials of some valuable Friends at distant places, some of which
opportunities were much to my satisfaction and solid comfort, as were the
beneficial and profitable seasons at home, wherein I had to enjoy at times the
Lord's living presence in the best of strength, and Divine liberty that is in
the gospel, with my dear Friends of our own meeting.

AFTER this I found drawings in my mind of love toward Friends at Long Island
and thereaway, 1769.
and having the concurrence and unity or my dear Friends at our
Monthly Meeting, in the eighth month, 1769, I went forward, some Friends
accompanying me; the first night I lodged at Robert Collison's, Bucks county.
and the next day attended the Quarterly Meeting at the Falls in Bucks county,
where was Rachel Wilson from England, and a very large meeting, and I hope a
time of profit to many; I was also at their youth's meeting the next day, which
was comfortably attended with the love of God, and with near unity with
Friends; after meeting dined at Mahlon Kirkbride's, then rode through Delaware
ford, and reached that day Samuel Worth's, and the next Joseph Shotwell's,
New Jersey.
and the day following being the first of the week, was at two meetings at
Rahway, with our Friend Samuel Emlen jun. to some degree of satisfaction, then
went with him and several other Friends to New York, New York.
and engaged with him in visiting the families of Friends in that city, which
we performed to about forty families, attended their Monthly Meeting to some
degree of comfort, and had several open times in places, wherein I hope the
Lord's precious seed was watered through his blessed presence; my mind was much
relieved of a burden that had lain upon me, and having met with a kind
reception among Friends there, I went from thence to Westbury on Long Island,
Long Island.
where we had a large meeting on the first day of the week, which was favored
with Divine help, living comfort and near unity with Friends, where came my
kind companion Joshua Cresson, who I had left at Rahway when on our way to
New York; after this meeting visited some Friends families, and the next day
were at a burial, and the day following at the youth's meeting in the same
place, Long Island.
from whence we went to Matinicock, and Oyster-bay, where were two large
meetings to good satisfaction, and on our way to John Willis's, we called with
several Friends to see Clement Willis, who as I have already mentioned, had
been confined through infirmity of body between thirty and forty years, and
could not walk or stand alone, as I apprehend, most of that time; we were owned
together in waiting upon the Lord by his living presence, and the dear
afflicted Friend expressed, that she did not know that she ever had a more
satisfactory time, and I hope it was a season of profit to several of us then
present; on the first day following we were again at Westbury meeting, which
was large, and I hope they were faithfully warned in gospel love, to the
satisfaction of Friends; from Long Island we crossed over the Sound into
Conecticut, Conecticut.
to a place called Middlesex, in company with Matthew Franklin, John Wells,
John Cock, Thomas Symonds and some others, distance about twenty miles by
water, where was a small meeting under the name of Friends, a pretty many
people came there, Conecticut.
who behaved soberly, and we were comforted together, an openness appearing to
receive the testimony of Truth; the next day we had a solid time with a Friend
who was weak in body, and in the family, that seemed glad of the opportunity,
receiving us kindly, and some who did not make profession with us were
extraordinary so, and used us with much civility, and were helpful in assisting
us to get to return to Long Island, Long Island.
after our arrival there, we visited the following meetings, viz. Bethpage,
Westbury, Jacob Mott's, the Monthly Meeting at Westbury, also had a large
meeting at Jerusalem, in which places I trust the Lord owned the labor of love
bestowed among the people, there being I thought great openness in the hearts
of Friends and others not professing with us; after these opportunities and
having visited upwards of fifty particular families belonging to Westbury
meeting, we parted with Friends in tender love, and came with our kind Friends
and fellow-helpers Matthew Franklin and John Willis to Cow-neck, and had there
a large and I hope a good meeting; Long Island.
after which we went to our Friend Phebe Dodge's, who had crossed the seas to
England in the service of Truth; we here met our Friends Samuel Willis and
wife, and several of their hopeful children, and it being a time of comfort, I
was glad of our being together in that nearness of spirit, wherein consists the
best fellowship; the next day we visited several Friends with Matthew Franklin,
on our way to his house, some of whom were confined through weakness of body,
and I hope our calling to see them, gave them some encouragement of mind,
through the Lord's tender mercy extended toward us; our next meetings were at
Flushing and Newtown, in which I hope I was clear as to religious labor among
them; after the last meeting I came away with several Friends and my companion,
peaceful in mind, to New York, and the day and part of the night following got
as far as Princetown in New Jersey, and the next day reached home, Philadelphia.
where I again found a kind reception from my beloved Friends, and the best of
peace attending my mind; the Lord alone being worthy of all the praise for
evermore!

Philadelphia.
AFTER my return home, deep and weighty labor fell to my lot in our meetings,
as at many other times among Friends in this city; I also visited several who
were weak in body, and some who were in deep affliction; and in the eleventh
month this year, I attended Frankfort, Fair-hill, and Providence meetings,
appointed by our worthy Friend Rachel Wilson, which were very large, and owned
with a gospel visitation to the people; after the last meeting our said dear
Friend went to Chester, and the same day embarked on board a ship bound for
London, in order to return home with the wellwishes and prayers, I believe of a
number, for her preservation and safe arrival; her faithful labors and
diligent travels having given great satisfaction to many Friends and other
people in America; Chester county Pennsylvania.
from Chester in company with Joshua Cresson, I came that night to George
Miller's, and the next day went to Goshen Monthly Meeting, which was a time of
good satisfaction to my mind, and I believe to others; Chester county.
from hence we went on our way toward Concord Quarterly Meeting, which we
attended, and it was large and relieving to my mind, finding nearness of spirit
among Friends; also visited Birmingham meeting on the first day, and the
general (or youth's) meeting at Chester, and had several solid opportunities in
places in the families of Friends, that both those meetings and the family
visits, were I believe to edification and comfort; Friends being kind and
loving, I returned home with a degree of peace in my own mind.

IN the same month I went with my Friend Israel Pemberton to the first day
meeting at Bybury, Bucks county.
at which was Joseph White, who in his public testimony was led to be
remarkably particular, as to the state of the meeting that day, which I believe
was wished by many that it might have its desired proper service; the next day
I came with my Friend Israel to the Monthly Meeting at Abington, through a
great deal of rain, the meeting was small but something satisfactory; on the
seventh day of the week following, I went into the Jerseys, New Jersey.
stopped that evening at Aquila Jones's, and had a sitting in the family, where
was a number of slaves, in which opportunity I found liberty to advise and
caution all present in much love and good will, and I believe it was kindly
received; the next day I was at the meeting at Newtown in Gloucester county, at
which were many people, and to some good degree of satisfaction; having for a
number of years had a desire at times for the growth of Truth in that place, I
was made to rejoice of late, that Friends had agreed for sometime past to hold
a meeting there once a month, the house being good, and many people living no
great distance, and although the meeting had been dropped for several years, I
trust as it is again revived, that if it be continued, the Lord through his
tender and merciful visitation, may be pleased to place his name among them.

1770.
IN the course of my religious labors and travels, a number have been reached
unto by conviction, and several convinced of the blessed truth, as I have
understood, some of whom remained serviceable among Friends, which I just
mention as the Lord's blessing upon his own work, who is worthy of all the
praise, glory, and honor for ever! -- I know I have endeavored to serve him
in fear and trembling, and frequently have been bowed under a sense of my great
unworthiness; but great has been his mercy and power, extended toward me a
poor tribulated sufferer in spirit, for the blessed seed's sake; magnified be
his eminent name! he has hitherto been my rock, fortress, and deliverer, and
through his great kindness, I have a fixed hope in my mind of his salvation,
through Christ Jesus my dear redeemer, whose glorious name let it be signified
and adored for evermore!

TWO EPISTLES, Wrote after his return from his Journey to North Carolina.
EPISTLE I. To Friends at their Monthly Meeting at Perquimons in North Carolina.
Philadelphia, Tenth Month 2d, 1761. DEAR FRIENDS;
IN a measure of the same love that attended my mind when present in body among
you, I take this freedom now to salute you in spirit, wishing the health and
prosperity of the precious truth in every particular branch thereof; we as a
people profess it to lead us into all truth, which is the greatest profession
in the world, and is the most sure and safe for all the truly living and acting
members of the mystical body and church of Christ, to be guided by the wisdom
and nature of it in all things, to the glory of God.

AND dear Friends, keep in the peaceable wisdom and love of God, for God is
love, and Christ has commanded us to love one another, as also one of his
servant's advises to love as brethren; let nothing break the unity that is in
the true faith and peaceable spirit of Christ our holy head; but dear brethren;
be of one mind in his righteous cause, in a particular manner in maintaining
decency and good order in his church, that his church may be built and
supported by living stones, and his vineyard kept clean and thriving with
living branches, such that may bring forth much good fruit to the praise of
God! -- My spirit according to my measure is often with such among you, that
have the weight of the Lord's work on your shoulders, and I have many times
been comforted in remembering the refreshing and edifying seasons of the power
and presence of Christ that we have enjoyed together, in that ability he was
pleased to afford unto us, when it was my lot to be in your parts; and I
thought myself to be in a good degree clear as to my religious duty, only with
respect to the meeting for business, it gave me some pain of mind, that there
was no distinction made between such that were of our own family (Friends in
unity) and those of other persuasions, by allowing them the same privilege with
Friends, in siting in those meetings, to see and observe the remarks on your
own proper business, and they having no proper right as members in the society,
it must needs weaken the testimony, and the right labor of faithful Friends,
and expose the management of such meetings to the vain and libertine
conversation of the world, and so cause the way of Truth to be evily spoken of,
as also give great pain and exercise to the sincere-hearted.

IT is in much love and tenderness, that I have thus expressed myself in this
respect, and to ease the weight that has been on my mind, from a thought of
that unusual custom, not allowed among Friends in other places where the
authority of Truth takes place; I wish it may be reformed among you so as to
have it otherwise, which I believe will be more to the advantage of the church
among yourselves, and greater satisfaction to the Lord's servants that may come
to visit you in gospel love; it had been better for me, I have thought, had I
embraced the opportunity to have eased my spirit when we were together, but a
backwardness prevented which I had rather had not happened; but if this is
received in the same love that it is intended, I hope it may answer the same
good design.

I DO not in the least desire by what I have mentioned, that any disrespect be
shown to those of other religious denominations, or to prevent their coming to
our meetings for worship, or any christian office of love in any suitable way
and manner, so that it be consistent with our holy profession, but with respect
to what I have hinted, I have thought it an imposition and disorderly in such
to expect any such privilege, and I wish that Elders may exert their authority,
such that the Holy Ghost may make overseers, and that they may be preserved, so
as to look well to themselves, and to the flock of Christ, and that the same
powerful faith that has been the foundation of the righteous in all ages, may
be their strength and support, so as to rule well, and to be worthy of double
honor, they laboring and enduring in the spirit of love and meekness, to do
the Lord's work with pure hearts and clean hands, seeking that honor that
comes from God only, that he may be pleased to fulfill his gracious promise, to
honor those that honor him, that by their being good examples to the flock,
the youth and all that go under our name, may follow them as they follow
Christ, and my heart is tenderly affected before the Lord on account of the
rising youth, who are coming upon the stage of life, and are reached I believe,
many of them, by the same good shepherd's voice that visited many of us, by the
powerful call of grace and faith to salvation, that they may daily partake of
heavenly bread, and nourishment to their souls, so as to grow strong in the
Lord, and in the power of his might, and they kept faithful to Divine Knowledge
and the blessed yoke of Jesus Christ, so as to live in the fear of God, and
prosper in those things that are consistent with Truth's testimony, obedience
to parents, true moderation, plainness of speech and apparel, and out of the
vain conversation of the ungodly; for the ways of the ungodly shall perish. --
And let all the tribulated and faithful followers of the Lamb, be encouraged to
keep your heavenly places in Christ, for he has told us, that Greater is he
that is in you, than they that are in the world, and let none be weary in
welldoing, for in due time we shall reap if we faint not.

IN true love I salute you, and wish that grace, mercy, and peace may increase
and be multiplied among you;

Being a real lover of Sion's Prosperity, DANIEL STANTON.

EPISTLE II. To Friends at their Quarterly Meeting at New-Garden in
North Carolina.
Philadelphia, Ninth Month 21st, 1767. DEAR FRIENDS;
IN true and brotherly love, I take this opportunity to salute you, having been
desirous according to my measure, that the Lord's glorious work and truth may
prosper in your parts, and prevail to the glory and honor of his most
excellent name and praise, that has planted a number of families, not many
years since in that wilderness, with a design I trust, that he might have a
fruitful field or garden, yielding pleasant fruits, and be a sweet savor to
him.

And dear Friends;

LET the awful sense of the great care and tender mercy, and good Providence of
God toward his flock and family be thankfully remembered, so as to walk worthy
of his grace and goodness toward you; and let the love of God in Christ
prevail in your hearts, and brotherly love one toward another in the unity of
the spirit, which is the bond of peace; that there may be no hurting or
destroying in all the Lord's holy mountain; but a care that you may be
preserved in the faith and fellowship of the saints in light, that you may be
as lights and way-marks to others, ruling well in your places and stations in
the church of Christ, in the meekness and patience, humility and charity, as
becomes the followers of the Lamb, looking to him, the true guide of his flock,
to be led in and out that you may find pasture, and the best wisdom to direct
your steps in the way of peace, and establish your goings in righteousness;
that you may be a peculiar people zealous of good works, having a regard to
truth's honor, and true moderation in all things, living in the cross of
Christ, more than to mind temporal things or the profits of this world, that
God's righteous seed may grow and thrive in all your minds, to the bringing
forth plentifully such fruits that best please him; and as you are willing to
be one with the pure seed, and to suffer with it, I hope you will enjoy the
blessed promise of reigning with the same in the Lord's time, and that all
hurtful things that are like briars and thorns, which would choke or hurt this
precious seed, or sow discord among brethren, may be watched and guarded
against, so as not to allow of hardness of heart, prejudice, or illwill one
against another, the nature of which is contrary to the heavenly peace and
sweet fellowship of Christ's kingdom, that consists of peace and joy in the
Holy Ghost; -- and as I wish for the aged to keep their ranks in righteousness,
so I desire for the youth and rising generation, that they may come up in the
footsteps of the flock of Christ's companions, and adhere unto the true
monitor and just witness of Truth in their own breasts, living near to Christ,
the Way, the Truth, and the Life, that they may be a people to God's praise,
minding his early and tender visitations to their souls, and the good advice
and care of their Godly parents and best Friends, and flee from youthful lusts
and wantonness, wherein many go in the way to destruction, and occasion great
pain and affliction, sometimes to themselves and nearest Friends when it is too
late.

MY prayers are for their lasting welfare and for you all; and wish that
brotherly love may rule and abound among you, it being good and pleasant for
brethren to dwell together in unity; it is like the precious ointment upon the
head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard, that went down to the
skirts of his garments. -- As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended
upon the mountains of Sion, for there the Lord commanded the blessing, even
life for evermore! Psalm. cxxxiii.

In the love unfeigned, I conclude, and am Your real Friend, DANIEL STANTON.

There being no other written Memorial of our Friend BENJAMIN TROTTER, between
whom and DANIEL STANTON, a long uninterrupted friendship subsisted; it is
thought the subjoining the following here, may be acceptable to Friends in
general.
The TESTIMONY of the MONTHLY MEETING of FRIENDS in Philadelphia, concerning
our beloved Friend and Brother, BENJAMIN TROTTER, who was born in this City, in
the ninth Month of the Year, 1699.
HE was one whom the Lord early visited, and reached unto by the reproofs of
his Divine Light and Grace, for those youthful vanities and corrupt
conversation, which by nature he was prone to and pursued, to the grief of his
pious mother, who was religiously concerned to restrain him, but as he became
obedient to the renewed visitations of the heavenly call, denying himself of
those things he was reproved for, he not only learned to cease from doing evil,
but to live in the practice of doing well; and continuing faithful, became an
example of plainness and self-denial, for which he suffered much scoffing and
mocking of those who had been his companions in folly; yet he neither fainted
nor was turned aside by the reproaches of the ungodly, which thus fell to his
lot, for his plain testimony against their evil conduct.

IN the twenty-sixth year of his age, he appeared in the work of the ministry,
and labored therein in much plainness and Godly sincerity, adorning the
doctrine he preached, by a humble circumspect life and conversation, being
exemplary in his diligence and industry to labor honestly for a livelihood,
though often in much bodily infirmity and weakness, desiring, as he sometimes
expressed, that he might owe no man any thing but love. His inoffensive
openness and affability, drawing many of different denominations to converse
with him, he had some seasonable opportunities of admonishing and rebuking the
evil doer and evil speaker, which he did, in the plainness of an upright zeal
for the promotion of piety and virtue, tempered with true brotherly kindness
and charity; respecting not the person of the proud nor of the rich, because of
his riches, but with Christian freedom, declaring the truth to his neighbor,
and was thus in private as well as public, a preacher of righteousness.

IN his public ministry he was zealous against errors both in principle and
practice, and constantly concerned to press the nessity of obedience to the
Principle of Divine Grace; Tit. ii. 11.
a manifestation of which is given to every man; knowing, from his own
experience, that it brings salvation to all them that obey and follow it is
teachings and was frequently enabled with energy and power to bear testimony to
the outward coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, his miraculous birth, his holy
example in his life and precepts, and his death and sufferings at Jerusalem, by
which he has obtained eternal redemption for us. Heb. ix. 12 and 14.


IN his public testimony a little before his last sickness, he expressed his
apprehensions, that his time among us would be short, and fervently exhorted to
watchfulness and care, to keep our lamps trimmed, and our lights burning, and
urged the necessity of being prepared to meet the bridegroom, as not knowing at
what hour he will come.

HE traveled several times, and visited most of the meetings of Friends in
this province and New Jersey, and some in the adjacent provinces, but was not
much from home; being upwards of forty years a diligent attender of our
religious meetings in this city, zealously concerned for the maintaining our
Christian discipline in meekness and true charity, careful in the exercise of
that part of pure religion, visiting the widow and fatherless in their
afflictions, and often qualified to administer relief and consolation to their
dejected minds.

AFFLICTIONS of diverse kinds, and some very deep and exercising, fell to his
lot through the course of his life, which he was enabled to bear with exemplary
patience and resignation, and particularly through his last illness, in which,
for upwards of six weeks, he underwent great difficulty and pain, being
afflicted with the asthma and dropsy, so that he suffered much, yet was never
heard to utter a murmur or complaint, but frequently expressed his
thankfulness, that he had not more pain, and often engaged in prayer, that he
might be preserved in patience to the end, which was graciously granted him; so
that he was capable of speaking to the comfort and edification of those who
visited him; and from the fervent love of the brethren, which evidently
appeared through his life, and most conspicuously during his last illness, and
even in the hour of his death, we have a well-grounded assurance that he is
passed unto life, and has received the reward of the Righteous.

HIS body was attended by a great number of Friends and others, his
fellow-citizens of diverse religious denominations, to our Meeting House in
High Street, on the 24th of the third month, 1768, and after a solemn Meeting,
in which several living testimonies were borne, was interred in our burial
ground in this city.

Signed on Behalf, and by appointment of our Monthly Meeting, held in
Philadelphia, by Adjournment, the 4th Day of the Eighth Month, 1769. JAMES
PEMBERTON, Clk.

ERRATA.
In the Testimony,
Page xiii line 15, for as read was. xv line 8, for least read lest.
In the Journal,
Page 19 line 24, for gifs read gifts. 56 line 26, for their read their. 96
line 19, for anothe read another. 101 line 6, for all us read all of us. 106
line 24 and 25, dele the were.

