ESSAY ON COMETS.

AN ESSAY ON COMETS, In TWO PARTS.

PART I. CONTAINING an Attempt to explain the Phenomenon of the TAILS of
COMETS, and to account for their perpetual Opposition to the SUN, upon
philosophical Principles.

PART II. POINTING out some important Ends for which these TAILS were probably
designed: Wherein it is shown, that, in Consequence of these curious
Appendages, COMETS may be inhabited WORLDS, and even comfortable Habitations;
notwithstanding the vast Excentricities of their Orbits.

The Whole interspersed with Observations and Reflections on the SUN and
primary PLANETS.

By ANDREW OLIVER, JUN. ESQUIRE.

In human Works, though labored on with Pain,
A thousand Movements scarce one Purpose gain;
In God's, one single can it is End produce;
Yet serves to second too some other Use.
POPE'S ESSAY ON MAN. SALEM, NEW ENGLAND: Printed and sold by SAMUEL HALL, near
the Exchange. MDCCLXXII.

TO JOHN WINTHROP, LL.D. HOLLISIAN PROFESSOR Of the MATHEMATICS, and NATURAL
PHILOSOPHY, AND FELLOW of the CORPORATION, of HARVARD-COLLEGE: MEMBER of the
AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY Of PHILADELPHIA; AND FELLOW of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

The following ESSAY, AS an Acknowledgment of the Obligations which result from
an Initiation, under his Instruction, in the Study of those Sciences which more
immediately belong to his Province: In Reliance upon his Patronage of a
Treatise, which owes its Publication to his Candor and Approbation: And, with
all due Deference to his superior Judgment; is gratefully inscribed, by

His Obliged Friend, And Most Humble Servant, The AUTHOR.

PREFACE.
THE design of the following Essay was, partly to eradicate some absurd notions
which have been handed down from the darkest periods of antiquity, and which
are still entertained by some, upon the appearance of a Comet; and to remove
the apprehensions which may have been excited in the minds of others, even by
the writings of some great men among the moderns: And partly to offer to those
who indulge themselves in more abstruse researches after the operations of
natural causes, a few hints, the prosecution of which may enlarge the field of
philosophical speculation, and open to all a new source for adoration of the
wisdom and beneficence of that Being, who has made nothing in vain, and has
disposed the various parts of the Universe by weight and measure. It may
therefore be presumed, that, if the Author is so happy as to be understood by
the generality of his readers (which he has aimed at throughout the whole) the
gentlemen of science will pardon those minute discussions, which they may judge
unnecessary, and that they will weigh with impartiality the arguments which may
be offered for their consideration, overlook any immaterial inaccuracies, which
may have arisen through inadvertency, and point out and refute with candor any
mistakes which he may have fallen into.

IT is now well known to astronomers that the motions of Comets are regulated
by the universal law of gravitation, and that they regard the Sun as the common
center of all their motions, equally with the Planets, although they are more
numerous, and apparently distinct in species from them. The Planets, since the
discovery of the Satellites or Moons which attend some of them, are generally,
and with the highest reason supposed to be inhabited Worlds like the Earth. --
Whereas it has been thought even by some of the greatest modern astronomers,
that the extremes of heat and cold to which Comets are alternately exposed in
the different parts of their orbits, are irreconcilable with the notion of
their being fit habitations for any material race of beings whatever. They are
to this day regarded by the bulk of mankind, either as portentous meteors,
exhibited only to threaten war, famine or pestilence to the inhabitants of the
Earth; or as fiery globes which move through the Heavens at random, and might
fortuitously come across the Earth in its way, to it is no small detriment, if
not to the destruction of its inhabitants; or lastly as penal worlds, ordained
to a perpetual chaotic state, whose inhabitants are condemned to be frozen and
burned alternately, at their aphelia and perihelia; agreeable to Milton's idea
of the punishment of apostate spirits; speaking of whom he says, "They -- feel
by turns the bitter change
Of fierce extremes, extremes by change more fierce,
From beds of raging fire to starve in ice
Their soft ethereal warmth, and there to pine
Immovable, infix'd, and frozen round
Periods of time, thence hurried back to fire."
PARADISE LOST, Book II.

THE first of these opinions was exploded long ago by Seneca; who, instead of
regarding Comets as transient meteors, on the contrary ranks them with "the
eternal works of Nature." The second directly contradicts the idea of a divine
superintendency, and falls of course, in the minds of those who entertain any
just apprehension of the providential care of the great Author and Governor of
the Universe. And as to the last, with what color of reason can we suppose
that the Creator would provide upwards of fifty Worlds (for so many different
Comets and more there certainly are) solely for the punishment of the
incorrigible inhabitants of five or six Planets only? On the contrary does it
not redound more to his honor, to consider these bodies as so many inhabited
Worlds, provided with every necessary for the comfortable subsistence of
innumerable inhabitants, rational and irrational, like the Earth? Or as Doctor
Young (speaking of the CREATOR and his works) beautifully expresses himself;
"Darts not HIS Glory a still brighter Ray,
The less is left to Chaos and the Realms
Of hideous Night? --
NIGHT THOUGHTS, Night 9.

THE reader will find (in the introduction) that the consideration of the
subject, in this light, was first started by Hugh Williamson, M. D. of
Philadelphia, in a treatise that was published in one of the weekly papers;
which, as it contained some new thoughts, the pursuit of which (it was judged)
would tend to the improvement of natural philosophy, first induced the Author
to undertake the following Essay, upon a subject indeed which, till then, he
had but little attended to: He therefore hopes that, if any observations or
reflections shall turn up, in the course of it, which may merit the attention
of his readers, and may have escaped the notice of others, they may in some
measure atone for the many defects; of which he is apprehensive, and which are
submitted to those who have made greater proficiency in natural knowledge, than
he pretends to, to rectify.

DIVERSE of the Author's friends, who are gentlemen of speculation and learning,
perused the Essay in manuscript, upon whose approbation of it, and at whose
request, he was induced to consent to its publication: But when the unexpected
number of subscribers, and their respectable characters in general, came to his
knowledge, his diffidence of its title to their fovourable reception was
naturally increased, which would have excited in his mind a proportionable
reluctance to its appearance abroad, lest their expectations should be
disappointed, had he not been fully persuaded, that the greatest candor was
naturally to be expected from those who are the best judges of the subject;
especially, as the treatise contains nothing more than an attempt to discover
some philosophical truths, the knowledge of which may tend to promote the cause
of Science, and thereby may possibly be of some service to mankind.

IT was with pleasure He found that Doctor Gowin Knight, F. R. S. had attempted
to account for the phenomenon of the tails of Comets from the same principle
which he has endeavored to establish in the following pages, viz. a mutual
repellency, subsisting between the atmospheres of the heavenly bodies: As the
Doctor, when he wrote his treatise, was engaged in the general solution of all
the phenomenon in Nature, by the help of two universal principles, viz.
Attraction and Repulsion, he but slightly touched upon the particular
phenomenon, now under consideration; accordingly what he says upon the subject
is very short, being included within the compass of a single corollary, which
arises out of a long chain of deductions from the supposed properties of an
imaginary repellent fluid, uniformly distributed throughout the infinity of
space; the existence of which, however probable, has never been proved: When
the author wrote that part of the Essay which is confined particularly to this
subject, Doctor Knight's solution was entirely out of his mind, if he had ever
seen it before. He therefore took a different course to establish the
principle, deducing it from the known properties of air, a real fluid, the
existence of which we are certain of, from the immediate testimony of our
senses, as we are of its properties from innumerable experiments. This element
differs essentially from the Doctor's universal fluid, which indeed he supposes
to consist of particles mutually repellent, like those of air, but so
inconceivably rare, that a quantity of it sufficient to fill the whole space
occupied by the solar System, might not weigh one single grain (Knight's Essay,
page 15): Air on the contrary, is a heavy fluid, the pressure of which, merely
from its gravity, is capable of giving great pain to those who may attempt to
sustain its weight, in pneumatical experiments.

HOWEVER, it does not follow, that if air, considered as a fluid sui generis,
is sufficient immediately to account for the phenomenon before us, we should
therefore exclude the agency of another, upon whose existence and properties
(if proved) the properties of air itself may possibly depend. By supposing such
an universal repellent fluid, Doctor Knight has very curiously accounted for
many of the phenomenon of Nature, which are so common as to be but little
attended to; such as fluidity, elasticity, magnetism, etc. And, whether the
mutual repellency of the particles of air does (as he supposes) or does not
depend upon the presence of the same fluid, the conclusion will equally follow
that, The aerial atmospheres of the heavenly bodies are mutually repellent.

THE reader is desired to make the following corrections, the necessity and
propriety of which were not discovered in season to save him this trouble, viz.

In Page 22, Line 4, for, by the incumbent weight of the whole atmosphere, to
read, by the weight of the whole incumbent atmosphere. In Page 38, Line 7, from
the bottom, for, all fluids which tend, etc, to read, every fluid the several
parts of which tend, etc. In Page 45, Line 8, from the bottom, for, atmosphere,
to read, atmospheres. In Page 78, Line 3, for, decrease of its atmosphere, to
read, decrease of the density of its atmosphere. In Page 80, Line 17, to read,
whereby the presence of the Sun by day; and in Line 19 of the same Page, after
the word Comet, to insert these words, viz. than when it is in the remote parts
of its orbit.

INTRODUCTION TO THE ESSAY.
IN the month of September, 1769, during the appearance of a remarkable Comet,
Doctor Hugh Williamson of Philadelphia favored the public with a treatise on
the subject of the following Essay, which was read before, and published by
order of the Philosophical Society in that city. This piece contained some
curious hints, well deserving the attention of the friends of science:
Particularly, that Comets, as well as the Planets, may be habitable Worlds;
that the comfortable state the inhabitants of the various globes of the solar
system enjoy, may not depend merely upon their several distances from the Sun;
and, that although the rays of the Sun may be absolutely necessary to the very
existence of planetary heat, yet the temperature of that heat may depend upon
the densities of the atmospheres surrounding the several globes; whereby the
Comets, even in their aphelia, may be rendered comfortable habitations, by
means of the vast atmospheres which attend them, and which, when they might
become detrimental to their inhabitants, as when they are in the neighborhood
of the Sun, are, by the momentum of the Sun's rays, or by some other cause,
thrown off to immense distances behind them.

THE perusal of this treatise occasioned the following attempt to establish the
doctrine of the habitability of Comets, advanced therein by Doctor Williamson.

We differ indeed in our hypotheses to account for the phenomenon of their
tails; but whichsoever may be the true one, all his conclusions, relative to
the densities of their atmospheres in the various parts of their orbits, may
equally follow.

THE Doctor's hypothesis, which is the same with Kepler's, supposes the
atmosphere of a Comet, by the velocity and consequent momentum of the Sun's
rays, to be propelled through immense spaces behind its body, whereby the tail
is formed, which is rendered visible by reflecting those rays.

THIS, it must be confessed, seems to be as natural and easy a solution as any
one hitherto offered; and might be embraced as such, had any one experiment
ever been produced to prove the rays of light endued with any such power, even
upon the most minute corpuscles, or the most rarefied vapor, Sir Isaac Newton
passes it by with little more than a bare mention, (Princip. under Prop. XLI.
Book III.) which, as it is so plausible, is difficult to account for;
especially as he fills pages to refute others, that are almost self-evidently
absurd. This hypothesis, however, has never been confirmed by any one
experiment, although an age has elapsed since Kepler's time, during which
experimental philosophy has been at its zenith. Therefore, as Mr. Professor
Winthrop, in his lectures on Comets, observes, much stress should not be laid
upon it, as we know of no parallel instance in nature to support it. The
hypothesis contained in this Essay is founded upon a mutual repellency, which
is supposed to subsist between the several atmospheres of the heavenly bodies;
which is deduced from the repellency of the particles of air, of which the
atmosphere of the earth, and those which surround the other globes, are
composed. That our atmosphere consists of particles thus repellent, is certain
from the whole system of pneumaticks, as no one experiment, in that useful,
instructive and entertaining branch of natural philosophy, can be performed,
which does not depend upon this property of AIR. That the Sun and Planets have
similar atmospheres, will appear in the following pages.

SIR Isaac, after having refuted several hypotheses, which had been raised by
others, to account for the ascent of Comets tails from the Sun, at length
rather hints at, than substitutes one of his own; as he asserts nothing
positively, but only offers a query for the consideration of his readers.
Therefore it is hoped that nothing here advanced will be considered as a vain,
rash attempt to confute that illustrious author. The ascent of smoke in a
chimney (says he) is owing to the impulse of the air with which it is
entangled. The air, rarefied by heat, ascends because its specific gravity is
diminished, and in its ascent carries along with it the smoke with which it is
engaged (Princip. ubi supra). To which he adds the following query: And why may
not the tail of a Comet rise from the Sun after the same manner? Previous to an
answer to this query, let us consider more particularly the causes of the
ascent of vapors in our atmosphere. It is indeed beyond doubt, that to the
cause above assigned, by Sir Isaac Newton, is in a great measure owing the rise
of smoke from common fire; from which, if enkindled in the open air, it will
curl up in broad volumes, spreading as it rises; but if confined in a chimney,
the rarefied air having but one way to expand itself, viz. through the funnel,
the more condensed air in the room below driving it upwards, together with the
smoke engaged with it, it ascends in a strait course, with a greater velocity,
and apparently to a greater height than when unconfined.

BUT this is not the sole, nor yet the principal cause of the ascent of vapors
in general, but rather an accidental one, which increases their velocity when
already on the wing. For, really, the causa sine qua non of their ascent, in a
quiescent atmosphere, is the difference of the specific gravities of those
vapors, and the air they float in How they are generated, and detached from the
surfaces of bodies, is a proper subject for an enquiry by itself, but foreign
here.
; the former, being generally lightest, continue rising till they arrive at
that region of the atmosphere in which the densities of both are equal. --
There they gather and form into clouds; there they remain suspended, or are
driven by winds in directions parallel to the surface of the Earth, until some
casual rarefaction of the air, the meeting of contrary winds, or of electrified
clouds differently charged, cause them, either to condense imperceptibly, and
fall in dews or gentle rains, or to rush more violently together, and
precipitate in showers, according to the nature of the cause by which they are
actuated. The smoke of a chimney is for the most part lighter than the
circumambient air it ascends through, otherwise it would descend again as soon
as it could disengage itself from that column of air which carried it up; in
consequence of which, life would be very uncomfortable in large, populous
cities; for, at times, the air with us is so rarefied that the smoke does in
fact thus descend, and hover just above the surface of the Earth, to the no
small annoyance of the eyes and lungs of those who breathe in such an impure
medium. Were it necessary, experiments in pneumaticks might be recited, which
prove that air, near the surface of the Earth, is in general denser or heavier
than the smoke and other vapors which float therein; which are here omitted, as
it is presumed the fact will not be disputed.

NOW, if the tail of a Comet rises from its head, or rather from the Sun, in
the same manner as smoke does from fire with us, and from a similar cause, the
ethereal medium, through which it ascends, must be nearly of the same density
with the vapors of the tail; otherwise the latter could not float in, nor get
so entangled with it as to be carried up thereby through distant regions of the
Heavens; but that the tails may ascend to such amazing heights, as some of them
do, we must necessarily suppose their specific gravities much less than that of
the ether itself.

WHAT then becomes of the free celestial spaces? in which Sir Isaac says, --
not only the solid bodies of the Planets and Comets, but also the extremely
rare vapors of Comets tails, maintain their rapid motions with great freedom --
without resistance. (Ibid.) Soon after he adds, -- the tails -- retaining their
own proper motion (i. e. the motion they had in common with their heads) and in
the mean time gravitating toward the Sun, must be revolved in ellipses round
the Sun in like manner as the heads are, and by that motion always accompany
their heads. Now, although the ether may be supposed so extremely rare, as
that the solid globes may revolve through it for many ages, without any sensible
impediment, or, as Sir Isaac says, "above ten thousand years;" yet, as the
tails must, upon this hypothesis, be nearly of the same specific gravity with
that ether, how can they maintain their rapid motions through it without
resistance, and revolve in ellipses round the Sun together with their heads?
That this is utterly impossible, appears from the reasoning of Sir Isaac
himself, throughout the whole of his VII Section Principia Book II. entitled,
Concerning the motion of fluids, and the resistance made to projected Bodies:
According to which reasoning the projectile motions of these vapors would be
very soon destroyed, and the Comet in its regress from the Sun would
necessarily leave them behind as they rose from the head, in consequence of the
resistance of this ethereal medium: Therefore, whenever the Comet became
visible, after the perihelion, it would have a tail as before, but reversed,
appearing, like a lucid beam, to stream away from the head toward the Sun,
till it were confounded with the twilight. But this is contrary to all
observations; for the projection of a Comet's tail, after its perihelion as
well as before, is both really and apparently from the Sun, excepting a small
deviation toward the parts from whence the Comet last came: Which deviation is
by no means owing to the resistance of any medium it passes through, but is
perfectly consistent with its several parts retaining the motion they had in
common with their head when they began to ascend, and revolving freely in
ellipses round the Sun together with their head. For, the remote parts of the
tail making a larger sweep through the Heavens than their head, while the
latter takes a shorter turn round the Sun at its perihelion, must necessarily
be longer in describing the same angular motions round the Sun than the globe
itself; consequently must be deflected from the direct opposition to the Sun,
and the whole tail be incurvated toward the perihelion position lately passed;
and this upon the supposition that both head and tail move freely through a
perfect vacuum. This incurvation of the tail lessens as the Comet recedes from
the Sun, 'till at length it recovers its opposition as at first. Now, as these
phenomenon agree perfectly with the motion of a Comet's tail through spaces
void of resistance, they are utterly inconsistent with the supposition of its
moving through a medium of equal or greater density than itself, or in any
other resisting medium whatever; for according to this celebrated author
(Princip. Sect. VII. Book II. Prop. XXXVIII. Cor. 4.) if the head or solid
globe of the Comet moved in a fluid of the same density with itself, it would
lose half its motion before it could describe the length of two of its
diameters, consequently it would soon lose the whole. The vapors of the tail
rising (upon his hypothesis) in a medium of nearly the same density with
themselves, would in like manner, from the resistance of that medium, lose all
the projectile motion they derived from the head, full as soon as the head
would lose its own motion in the former case.

SIR Isaac concludes said VII Section with the following words, The resistance
in every fluid is as the motion excited by the projectile in the fluid; and
cannot be less in the most subtle ether, in proportion to the density of that
ether, than it is in air, water, and quicksilver, in proportion to the
densities of those fluids.

UPON the whole, then, it necessarily follows, that the ethereal spaces
through which the extremely rare vapors of a Comet's tail revolve freely with
its head in ellipses round the Sun, must be perfect vacuums as to all the
purposes of resistance; and consequently, that the rays of light themselves in
no wise impede the freedom of their motion, even when in the neighborhood of
the Sun.

ALL that is desired of the reader is, that he will peruse the following sheets
with candor, and not pronounce sentence until he has fairly weighed the
evidence produced in support of the several propositions therein contained;
upon the strength, or through the deficiency of which, they must stand or fall.

ESSAY ON COMETS. PART I.
A COMET consists of two parts which fall under our observation, viz. a solid,
spherical, opaque body, which, like the planets, shines by reflecting the light
of the Sun, and no way differs in appearance from a planetary globe; this is by
astronomers called the nucleus: Also a very extensive atmosphere; which, from
the form it usually exhibits to us, is called the tail, and commonly exhibits a
faint beam of light, which diverges as it recedes from the head, and often
apparently extends through distant constellations, when it nearly resembles those
momentary corruscations which shoot upwards from the horizon toward the
zenith, during the appearance of an aurora borealis, or northern light. This
tail increases in length as the Comet approaches the Sun, et vice versa; and
its direction is always nearly in opposition to the Sun. Sometimes indeed the
cometic atmosphere assumes a different form, surrounding the nucleus equally on
every side like a thin cloud or mist, or, as some have fancied, like a bush of
hair; whence the Comet has been denominated crinite or hairy. The latter is the
usual appearance of a Comet when first discovered in its descent toward the
Sun, provided the Sun and Comet be in opposite hemispheres; and may take place
in some other situations, agreeable to the rules of optics, even when to
spectators in other parts of our System, the Comet may exhibit a tail of an
enormous length.

IT has been sufficiently demonstrated by Sir Isaac Newton, Dr. Halley, and
others, that these bodies are, in common with the other globes of the solar
system, subject to the law of mutual gravitation, and that they regard the Sun
as their common center of gravity, and consequently move round him in
conic-sections, carrying their atmospheres or tails along with them. Their
orbits differ widely from circles on the one hand; on the other, since the
discovery of the Newtonian method of computing their trajectories from
observations, they have never been found to deviate into hyperbolas; and though
their observed places, in the small parts of their orbits in which they are
visible to us, agree with their computed places, upon the supposition that they
move in parabolas; yet, as the periodical revolutions of some of them have been
ascertained by their regular returns after certain intervals, it is agreed by
astronomers, that their paths are truly elliptical, though very excentric; such
ellipses, near the extremities of their transverse axes, differing but
insensibly from parabolas. All that is attempted in this Essay, is, 1. To
account for the phenomenon of the tails of Comets, upon philosophical
principles: And then, 2. To point out some ends to which they seem adapted, and
for which they are probably designed.


SIR Isaac Newton has sufficiently proved that these tails consist of a fluid
matter, extremely rare, emitted from their heads upon their approach to the
Sun, which is rendered visible by reflecting his rays Princip. Book III. under
Prop. XLI.
: But what cause there may be existing in nature, capable of projecting the
cometic atmospheres through such immense spaces, is a question which still
remains to be solved, no satisfactory account having hitherto been offered to
the public. In order therefore, to a rational solution of this curious
phenomenon, the tail of a Comet, the following propositions, observations,
etc. are submitted to the candid perusal of the reader: First premising, that
when a subject, under consideration, is in its nature purely physical, it is to
be presumed that strict, mathematical demonstration will not be expected.

WE shall now endeavor to prove the following propositions.

FIRST, THAT the primary Planets, the Comets, and the Sun, are all surrounded
with atmospheres.

SECONDLY, THAT these atmospheres consist of the same fluid with the atmosphere
of the earth, viz. Air.

THIRDLY, THAT they are mutually repellent to each other; as the globes they
surround are in a state of mutual attraction or gravitation.

1. AS the proof of the existence of the atmospheres of the Sun, Planets and
Comets depends upon a variety of astronomical observations, it is necessary to
be particular as to each of them.

AND, 1. That the Earth we inhabit (which is a Planet vastly inferior, both in
bulk and situation, to some others) has one, we have the best evidence
possible, viz. the testimony of our senses; besides, we all know, that the air,
which every where surrounds the Earth, is essential to the breath of life.

2. THAT Mars has an atmosphere, and that very extensive, has been demonstrated
from the occultation of a fixed Star by that Planet See Smith's Optics, Vol.
II, Page 430.
; as the Star vanished at a distance from, or without ever arriving at a
visible contact with his limb; as was observed by Cassini, October 1st, 1662.
The like was observed after the same occultation, by M. Roemer, at Rome, the
Star not being visible after the transit till at a distance from his limb.

3. JUPITER's belts are in a fluctuating state, as they frequently vary their
form, size, and situation; Idem, Page 43^.
which cannot be accounted for, unless we suppose them to be clouds and
exhalations, floating in an atmosphere which surrounds his globe. Sir Isaac
Newton says these belts "are formed in the clouds of that Planet." Princip.
Book III. Lemma Prop. XXXIX.


4. SOME belt-like appearances were discovered in Saturn by Mr. Hadley through
his five-foot reflecter, and by Mr. Pound through Hugenius's glass, though they
appeared very faint, as he is so remote S. Opt. Page 441.
; which belts are probably in the same fluctuating state as those of Jupiter,
and arise from similar causes.

5. THAT Venus has an atmosphere may also be inferred from the variable spots
which have been observed upon the face of that Planet, Idem, Page 421.
which are probably of the same kind with the belts of Jupiter, or the clouds
which float in our own atmosphere, and, consequently, have a similar one to
sustain them Were these belts, spots, etc. really adhering to, and parts of
their respective globes, they would always appear invariably the same, in the
same situations, as those of the Moon do; in which no atmosphere has yet been
discovered.
. But for proof of its existence we need go no further back than the late
transit of Venus over the Sun's disc, anno 1769; when the atmosphere itself was
visible, and that in different situations, to observers in distant parts. See
Transactions of the American Philosophical Society of Philadelphia, Page 42.
Also Observations by Mr. Benjamin West at Providence, N. E. Page 16.


6. MERCURY is too near the Sun to favor us with such observations; but if we
suppose his globe inhabited, he doubtless stands as much in need of an
atmosphere as any other Planet, and has as important purposes to be served
thereby.

7. THAT the Comets are surrounded with atmospheres is already taken for
granted, because self-evident. Sir I. Newton, from various observations,
concludes that their diameters are, one with another, at least equal to ten
diameters of their nuclei or solid globes. See Princip. Book III. Prop. XLI.


8. THAT the Sun has an atmosphere, and that proportioned to his amazing
magnitude, is rendered highly probable by the macular appearances, or spots
frequently discovered upon his disc: Which, as they often suddenly break out,
and as suddenly disappear, and sometimes vary their shapes, even when under the
eye of the observer; can be no other than huge clouds of smoke, or other
vapors floating in such atmosphere; huge indeed! as they frequently exceed the
whole superficies of the Earth. Mr. Derham, who was peculiarly assiduous in
observing them, has assigned a cause, to which their phenomenon accurately
agree. He supposes them to be immense volumes of smoke, belched forth by
volcanoes or fiery eruptions, which are frequently breaking out upon his
surface See Jones's Abridgment of Philosoph. Trans. Vol. IV. Page 238.
These spots, when large, sometimes continue during a whole revolution of the
Sun round his axis, or about twenty-five days; and it is from the regular
returns of such spots to the same part of his disc again that this revolution
has been determined. But such clouds, were they not supported by an atmosphere,
would tumble down again upon the Sun presently after the explosions which
raised them were over, as we see vapors emitted in an exhausted receiver, for
want of air to sustain them, sink down to the bottom of the receiver.

II. WE shall now endeavor to prove that the planetary, cometary, and solar
atmospheres, consist of the same elementary fluid with the atmosphere of the
Earth, viz. AIR.

AIR is a fluid, which when pure is transparent, and in the highest degree
elastic, being indefinitely compressible and dilatable; which qualities are
truly characteristic of it, as we know of no other fluid to which they belong.

IT may be necessary to observe here, that upon our globe, which (as already
observed) is itself a Planet, the presence of air is necessary, both to the
preservation of animal life, and to the existance of flame: For in a glass
receiver, small animals die, and candles go out, immediately upon the air being
exhausted; upon air also seems to depend the explosive power of enkindled
vapors; for gunpowder itself, one of the most powerful agents hitherto
invented by the art of man, if fired by an hot Iron in vacuo, will consume
away, but never flash, nor explode; and it is generally agreed by those who are
acquainted with experimental philosophy, that this vivifying, inflammating
quality of air, depends upon its elasticity, or the active, contrifugal power
of its particles, to be considered under the next general head. This being
premised, we proceed to prove, First, THAT the atmospheres of the several
globes of the System consist of transparent fluids: The truth of which will be
sufficiently evident, if we consider the several phenomenon by which they were
discovered.

IT has already been shown that Mars is surrounded with a very extensive
atmosphere; which, had it not been transparent, must have escaped the notice of
astronomers during the time of the occultation of the star before mentioned;
for were it opaque, it would, by reflecting the Sun's rays, as well as by its
want of transparency, have hid the Planet itself, and by the observers have
been confounded with it In like manner, as Sir I. Newton concludes, (Prin. B.
III. Lemma IV.) that the Earth, if it was viewed from the Planets, would
without all doubt shine by the light of its Clouds.
; in which case the moments of the occultation of the star, and of its visible
contact with the limb of the Planet, would have been the same; whereas the
disappearance of the star before any such contact could take place, is a
demonstration of the refraction of its rays in a transparent medium, with which
the Planet is surrounded.

THE changes which are observable in those fluctuating collections of
heterogeneous matter, of which the belts and spots in the other Planets, and
the Sun consist, for the same reason, could never have been discovered, were
they not sustained in transparent fluids above the surfaces of their respective
globes.

THE transparency of the cometic atmospheres in undeniable, as their nuclei are
frequently seen through them, although they occupy spaces equal to many diameters
of the Earth; and the smallest stars are visible through the tails which
proceed from, and are only expansions of them; in which tails we have ocular
demonstration of a most surprising dilatability; from whence their
recompressibility and elasticity may be justly inferred.

Secondly, ALTHOUGH there are no observations in the records of astronomy which
prove this elasticity in the planetary atmospheres; yet, as the Planets are
with the highest reason supposed to be inhabited Worlds, the presumption is at
least very strong, if short of a demonstration, that their atmospheres are
designed to answer purposes every way similar to those which are effected by
the atmosphere of the Earth, and that they are endued with all those
properties, which are, with us, necessary to the preservation of animal Life,
consequently that they are elastic, as well as transparent, and altogether like
our air.

THE atmosphere of the Sun is, by his excessive luster, hid from our view; but
if we consider him as an immense flaming globe, kindled up to warm and
enlighten the whole system, we may well suppose that he has a large share of
that fluid, without which (as before observed) scarcely any flame can subsist
with us for a moment. Some Authors indeed are of opinion, and not without
reason, that the Sun is not a body of fire, as commonly supposed; Doctor Knight
in particular, in his curious treatise of attraction and repulsion, as two
universal principles, by which he endeavors to solve all the phenomenon in
nature, seems to be of opinion, that the inhabitants of the Sun (if inhabited)
are in as much danger of suffering from cold, as from excessive heat See said
treatise, Page 58; in which are these remarkable Words: Speaking of the Sun and
fixed Sars, he says, Their Globes are no longer frightful Gulphs of Fire, but
inhabitable Worlds: Those Philosophers who thought them too hot for the
Habitation of Salamanders, and those sublimer Genii, who thought them to be
Hells, will now perhaps be in Pain, lest the Inhabitants should freeze with
Cold. -- However, Doctor Knight concludes from his own principles, that the Sun
has an immense aerial atmosphere condensed round him; for in the preceding Page
57, he says, The vast Weight of the Sun's Atmosphere must make the Density of
the Air so great near the Sun's Surface, that what would create a Sound scarce
audible with us, would there produce a very loud Noise.
. But of whatever substance the body of the Sun may consist, Mr. Derham has, by
his observations, put it beyond all reasonable doubt, that the maculae and
faculae, or the darker and brighter spots observable at times upon the Sun's
disc, are really ^^ing to the bursting of volcanoes; the faculae being only the
appearance of the flames, after the dense smoke attending the explosions is
dissipated, or removed to a distance from them See Jones's Abridgment of Phil.
Trans. before cited.
. Now there is no reason to doubt but that, upon our globe, air is as necessary
to the flames of Aetna and the eruptions of Vesuvius, as to the smaller blaze
of a candle, or to the explosion of gunpowder; may we not then rationally
conclude, that it is equally necessary to those astonishing volcanoes in the
Sun?

IT is now proved, as far as the proposition is in the nature of it capable of
proof, that the celestial bodies are surrounded with atmospheres, and that
these atmospheres consist of transparent elastic fluids, like the air
surrounding this Earth. It remains that we prove.

III. THAT the atmospheres of the Sun, Planets, and Comets are mutually
repellent to each other; as the solid globes they surround are in a state of
mutual attraction or gravitation.

IT must here be observed; that in reasoning upon gravitation, the great Author
of the present philosophical system of the Heavens argues downward from the
greater to the lesser, from Worlds to Atoms; thus, finding by mathematical
deductions, compared with astronomical observations, that all the globes of the
solar System, Sun, Planets and Comets gravitate, or have a mutual tendency
toward each other, and that this reciprocal attraction is proportional to the
quantities of solid matter they respectively contain; he very justly concludes,
that every single particle in any one of their solid masses both attracts, and
is attracted by, every other particle of matter, contained in every globe
throughout the solar System. (...).


BUT as the Heavens exhibit no phenomenon from which we can, directly and with
equal certainty, infer the existance and universal extent of the contrary
principle of repulsion, as subsisting between the atmospheres of the heavenly
bodies; we are here obliged to use a contrary method, and to reason upward from
the powers and properties which, by their effects, we discover to belong to
those parcels of air upon which we can make experiments; to the effects, which
the same powers and properties would naturally produce, in those vast
collections of air, which constitute the atmospheres of the several globes; and
if by tracing the necessary operations of these powers, step by step, we can at
length arrive at any of the grand phenomenon of nature, we may with the highest
reason conclude, that these phenomenon are the effects of those powers.

WE shall therefore endeavor to prove from authors of the best credit, or from
experiments which any one may try at his leisure,

1. THAT there is a mutual repellency subsisting between the particles of air,
whereby they continually endeavor to recede from each other; in consequence of
which, that fluid is indefinitely dilatable from the centrifugal activity of
its particles, as well as compressible by any foreign power.

THE honorable Robert Boil, Esquire found by experiments, that air might be so
raresied as to occupy 13769 times the space it fills when in its natural state
near the surface of the Earth (...) Abridgment of Boil, Vol. I. Page 551.
; other experiments prove, that it may be so condensed, as to be contained in
(...) part of the same space (...) Philosophical Grammar, Page, ^^^.
therefore multiplying 13769 by 60, it appears, that the cubic space it is
capable of filling, under different circumstances, may be as 826140 to 1. But
the cube root of 826140 is 94 nearly; therefore the central distances of the
particles from each other, as discoverable by actual experiment, may be as one
to ninety-four, and that from their centritugal activity.

MOREOVER, Sir I. Newton from experiments concludes this repulsive power to be
so great, as that a cubic inch of air, condensed as it is with us, if removed
one semidiameter of the Earth above its surface, where it would be free from
the pressure of an incumbent atmosphere, would so expand itself by virtue of
this power, as to fill the whole sphere of Saturn's orbit; nay he adds, "and
far beyond it" Princip. Book III. under Prop. XLI.


2. THIS mutual repellency of the particles of air is greatly increased by
heat. For if a bladder not more than half filled with air, be tied up tight,
and laid before the fire, the additional expansive power, which the air
contained therein acquires from the heat, will swell the bladder to its utmost
extent, and will at length burst it with an explosion.

3. THE particles of air, although mutually repellent amongst themselves, are
with regard to other matter, in the common state of gravitation or attraction.
This is evident from their being condensed in the form of atmospheres round the
solid globes of the System, and attending them through all their revolutions.

4. THE mutual repellency of the particles of air is indefinitely greater, in
proportion to the quantities of repelling matter, than the mutual attraction,
subsisting betwixt the solid particles of attracting matter.

THE truth of this proposition will appear, at least highly probable, if we
consider that the quantity of matter contained in our air near the surface of
the Earth, and which gravitates in common with other matter toward its center,
is so small, though condensed by the incumbent weight of the whole atmosphere,
that one quart of it weighs no more than eight grains, as appears from
experiments; yet so great is the repulsive power of its particles, that a small
quantity of it, condensed by art in the barrel of an air-gun, of the size and
bore of a common fowling-piece, is sufficient, when permitted suddenly to
expand itself through the tube, to discharge a musket ball, in the same manner
as fired gunpowder, the noise excepted, and with the like fatal effects.

WE shall now proceed to prove the following proposition, viz. If two
corpuscles of matter be in a state of mutual repulsion at any given distance,
as A. B, Fig. 1. where they repel each other with a given force, say=1. and
this repulsion decreases, either as the distances Ac, Ad, Ae, Af, etc. or as
the squares, cubes, or any higher powers of those distances, increase, the
extent of that repulsion is indefinite.

FOR suppose A and B to be two such particles repelling each other at the
distance A B with a force=1. continue the line A B indefinitely through the
equidistant points c, d, e, etc. let the particle A be fixed, B movable: Let us
suppose this power to decrease, 1st, simply, as the distances increase; then,
if we suppose the particle B to move successively through c, d, e, etc. this
power, at those several distances, will be as follows, viz. at c=, at d=, at
e=, etc. in infinite. 2. If it decrease as the squares increase, it is at c=, at
d=1/9, at e=1/16, etc. in inf. 3. If as the cubes, it is at -- c=, at d=1/27,
at e=1/64, etc, in inf. 4. If as the biquadrates, it is at c=1/16, at d=1/81,
at c=1/256;, etc. in inf.
etc. onwards indefinitely.

NOW whatever the distance assigned between the two particles may be, and
whatever may be the index of the power which expresses the ratio of the
decrease of their repulsive force, this force will in every case be expressible
by a fraction whose numerator is 1, and its denominator equal to the given
distance, involved according to the index of the given power, as is evident
from inspection of the foregoing fractions as they stand. It can never,
therefore, become equal to nothing, until the denominator of the fraction
becomes infinite, which never can be at any assignable distance, however great;
therefore, the extent of this mutual repulsion is indefinite. Q.E.D.

IN mathematical reasoning, the smallest quantities are not to be disregarded,
unless supposed smaller than any assignable, as in fluxions, etc.; for, as all
the huge masses of the solar System, are composed of particles of matter
inconceivably small, so their mechanical effects upon each other are
proportional to the numbers of such component particles they respectively
contain; and though the mutual effects of two single particles, at any given
distance, might be indefinitely small, yet we may easily conceive, that, when
indefinite numbers of such particles are consolidated into one mass, and exert
their influence from a common center, that that influence may be as extensive
as the solar System, and perhaps as the material universe. Thus the Sun, by the
united attractive force of his constituent particles, regulates the motions of
the Comets, even at their aphelia, where their distances from him confound the
human imagination; amounting in some of the to many thousands of millions of
miles; yet, at those amazing distances from the Sun, they are by his influence
retained in their proper orbits, without any deviation, till at length they are
brought back to him again, many of them after excursions of some hundreds, and
possibly some of them after thousands of years; in effecting which every
particle of matter in the Sun, however small, bears a part.

ON the other hand, the atmospheres of the heavenly bodies consist of particles
mutually repellent; not consolidated indeed, as that would be incompatible with
the nature of the fluid composed of them, but each, in consequence of the
mutual attraction between its constituent particles and the globe it surrounds,
condensed into a fluid mass.

IN this case also, though the mutual repellency between two single particles
might at a given distance be indefinitely small, yet the influence of two such
masses upon each other, when thus condensed, may be as extensive as in the
former case of attraction. The united repulsive force of the particles in each,
would in like manner exert itself as from their common center.

LET us, for illustration of the subject, suppose this repellent power between
the particles A and B, Fig. 1, to decrease as the squares of the distances
increase, then at a distance equal to 100000000 A B, or, in other words,
suppose the particles A and B removed one hundred millions of times further
asunder than represented in the figure, the repulsive force would then be equal
to 1/10000000000000000, or to one ten-thousand-million-millionth part of what
it is at the simple distance A B; which, though small indeed, is yet something,
for the same distance remaining, viz. 100000000 A B, if ten thousands of
millions of millions of such particles of equal bulk and repellency were
condensed round the point A as a center, then the repulsive force between the
mass at A and the particle B would be equal to that between the two single
particles A and B, at the distance A B; once more, suppose the same distance,
viz. 100000000 A B to remain, and the particle B to have the same number of
repellent particles condensed round it, as we have already supposed, to be
condensed round A; then the repulsive power subsisting between the two masses
would be ten thousands of millions of millions of times greater than between
the two particles A and B, at the distance A B.

WE have seen that air consists of particles thus repellent; nor can we
discover any bounds to that repellency by any experiments we can make; and if
to other experiments we add Sir Isaac Newton's reasoning from some of his own,
we must conclude them indefinitely so, and consequently that their repulsive
force decreases regularly according to some certain ratio of the increase of
their distances, viz. either as the distances simply, or as their squares,
cubes, or some other powers thereof.

IT seems most agreeable to mathematical reasoning, to suppose, that all
powers, whether attractive or repellent, which act in right lines, to, or from
the centers of the attracting or repelling bodies, are proportioned to the
inverse ratio of the squares of the distances of their centers. For, if we
consider these powers as represented by lines, or rays, converging from every
point of the visible concave of the Heavens to a given point as a center in
case of attraction, and diverging equally from said center in case of
repulsion; and suppose a corpuscle of matter to be placed in any part of that
space, the number of such rays, intercepted by, and falling upon said
corpuscle, whether they were converging or diverging, would be in that ratio,
viz. inversely as the squares of the distances of said corpuscle from such
central point. The truth of this assertion is capable of the most simple
mathematical demonstration; which may be here omitted, as it has been already
sufficiently demonstrated by others: Upon it indeed depends the truth of Sir I.
Newton's position, viz. that the density of the Sun's rays is reciprocally as
the squares of the distances from the Sun; from whence he deduces the
proportions of light and heat, enjoyed by the several Planets of the System.

IF we conceive such supposed rays to move with a uniform velocity, and to be
attended with any momemtum whatever, whereby, when converging, they impel the
corpuscle to, or repel it, when diverging, from said central point; as the
whole momentum would be proportional to the number of the intercepted rays, the
tendency of the corpuscle to, or from the center, that is, its attraction or
repulsion would also be in the aforesaid ratio. That the attraction of
gravitation is regulated by this law, astronomical observations sufficiently
demonstrate.

BUT Sir I. Newton concludes from experiments, to which all theoretic opinions
must ever give way, that the mutual repellency between the particles of air is
reciprocally as their distances only, or "nearly so." Newt. Princip. Book II.
Prop. XXIII.


IF this be the case, the physical effects of two particles, and consequently
of two fluid masses composed of such particles, upon each other, must be yet
vastly greater than if it were reciprocally as the squares of the distances, as
we before supposed, as will evidently appear upon inspection of the following
scheme; in which the first series represents the distances, increasing in
arithmetical progression; the second, the repellent force, decreasing as the
distances increase only; the third, the same force considered as decreasing
according to the increase of the squares of the distances; thus: A B
Distances 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Inverse ratio of did. 1 1/7; -- of the squares of
did. 1 1/9 1/16 1/25 1/16 1/49 1/64 etc

HERE it is evident that at the distance 3 A B, if the repellency decreased
only as the distances increase, that that force would be equal to but if it
decreased as the squares of the distances increase, it would at the same
distance be equal only to 1/9; at the distance 5 A B, in the former case, it
would be, in the latter 1/25 if at the distance 8 A B, in the former it would
be 1/8, in the latter 1/64, etc. But 3 is the square-root of 9 or 1/3 of 1/9,
1/5 of 1/25, and 1/8 of 1/64, etc.

IT therefore follows, that if this repellent force does actually decrease
simply as the distances increase, the quantity of it at any given distance is
greater, in the direct ratio of that distance, than if it decreased in the
ratio of the squares of the distances; consequently, the sensible effects of
two such fluid masses, condensed, as we have already supposed, round the
particles A and B, would be proportionably more extensive.

NOW, what are the atmospheres of the Sun, Planets and Comets, but vast
collections of these repellent particles of air, condensed round their
respective globes, by the mutual gravitation subsisting between them, in like
manner as we have already supposed them to be condensed round the corpuscles A
and B (Fig. 1.)? But if, according to Sir l. Newton, so small a quantity as a
cubic inch of our air, if left to itself at the height only of one semidiameter
of the Earth, might exert this force, so as to full the whole sphere of Saturn's
orbit; it demonstrably follows, that the atmospheres aforesaid, which consist
of huge masses of the same fluid, may extend their influences as far at least;
and though the condensation of each round its own globe, by virtue of their
mutual gravitation, would prevent the scattering of its component particles,
and confounding itself with the atmospheres of the neighboring Planets (as
would undoubtedly be the case, however great their distances might be, did the
cause of that condensation cease) yet it is by no means impossible, nor yet
improbable, that under some circumstances, the physical effects of two such
atmospheres upon each other may become very apparent: For if we suppose two
equal Planets with their atmospheres (as A and B Fig. 2) to pass near to each
other, these atmospheres being fluid, and that in the highest conceivable
degree of fluidity, would give way to the least degree of external force, and
in consequence of their mutual repulsion would recede from each other; but the
attractions of their respective globes would prevent their leaving them wholly,
while each would so far retire, as to be depressed in the parts next the other,
and to swell out in the opposite parts, changing their spherical figures to two
oblong spheroids as at C and D (Fig 2.) But this is said upon the supposition
that both the globes and their atmospheres are equal, each to the other
respectively. Whereas, if we suppose the body A to be an immense globe like the
Sun, having an atmosphere proportionably large, The solar atmosphere is dense
enough at the height of seven or eight thousand miles, or 1-137th part of the
Sun's diameter above his surface, to sustain those huge clouds of smoke which
appear to us like spots upon his disc. See Mr. Professor Winthrop's Cogitata de
Cometis, Page 25. If therefore the atmosphere of the Sun consists of air, as we
have endeavored to prove it does, and the solar clouds and vapors are similar
to our own, and, like them, require a certain density of air to sustain them in
equilibrio, it follows, that the density of the air in the Sun's atmosphere is
as great at the height of 7000 miles above his surface, as that of our own air,
at the height of but 3 or 4 miles above the surface of the Earth; a height
which our clouds, probably, never exceed. How vast then must be the extent of
the Sun's whole atmosphere!
and consequently containing many thousands, and perhaps some millions of times
the quantity of this repellent fluid contained in the atmosphere of B; which we
may now consider as a Comet, of equal magnitude with the Earth, but surrounded,
like other Planets of the same species, with an atmosphere of great extent,
when compared with the magnitude of the globe itself; and if we suppose also
the visible effects of the mutual repellency of these atmospheres to be
reciprocally as the quantities of the repellent fluid contained in them, the
atmosphere of the Comet might be prodigiously lengthened when in the
neighborhood of the Sun, and repelled to great distances behind the nucleus,
while at the same time, the natural spherical form of the Sun's atmosphere
would not be sensibly disturbed by that of the Comet. This reasoning may be
illustrated by considering the effects of the contrary principle of mutual
attraction or gravitation subsisting between the globes themselves, which
effects are subjects, both of mathematical computation, and of astronomical
observation: For it is very certain that Comets perform their revolutions round
the Sun, in consequence of this mutual gravitation, in orbits very excentric,
and nearly parabolical; whereas it is probable, that the joint efforts of all
the Comets which ever appeared, would scarcely disturb the repose of the Sun in
the center of the System.

A Comet, in its descent through the planetary orbs, approaches the Sun with an
accelerating velocity, until it arrives at its perihelion; entering deeper and
deeper within the spheres, both of the repulsion of the Sun's atmosphere, and
of the activity of his rays; in consequence whereof the cometic atmosphere is
continually rarefying during this descent, both from the expansion it
undergoes, by means of that repulsion, and from the increasing heat, which it
acquires, as it approaches the Sun, which heat, as already observed,
contributes greatly to the repellency of the particles of the aerial fluid. By
the concurrence of these causes, if admitted, a tail must necessarily be
formed, the length of which would depend, partly upon the quantity of air
contained in the cometic atmosphere, and partly upon its proximity to that of
the Sun, and consequently would increase until the Comet arrived at its
perihelion, or rather, from the continuance of the causes, until a few days
after, which is most agreeable to observation. When a Comet is at this stage of
its revolution, if it pass near the Sun, the tail usually extends from its head
through vast regions of space, exhibiting a curious spectacle to distant Worlds.

IF a cometic atmosphere consisted of an unelastic fluid, and were thus
repelled by the atmosphere of the Sun. it would put on the form of a very
oblong spheroid, both ends of which would be terminated by a regular
curvilinear surface as at A and a (Fig. 3); but as it is an elastic fluid,
whose constituent particles are, amongst themselves, mutually repellent, as
soon as ever the attraction of the nucleus, which before condensed them
spherically round itself, is diminished in any part of that atmosphere, by this
opposite repulsion, the particles in that part become more and more at liberty
to exert their own inherent repellency, which they would at length do
quaquaversum, were it not that the repellent power of the Sun's whole
atmosphere, so far predominates over their own mutual repellency, as constantly
to keep them in a direction nearly opposite to the Sun's center; but as this is
not sufficient totally to prevent a lateral dilatation, the tail grows broader
and broader, as it extends from the nucleus, while the longitudinal expansion
is rather increased than impeded thereby, until the whole train, in a fair view
of it, wears nearly the form of a parabolic curve; the several parts of which
are less and less distinct, as they are further distant from the head, until at
length, spectators shall, at the same time, differ ten or twenty degrees in
their estimation of its apparent length, according to the different acuteness
of their sight. Sir I. Newton in his Princip. says, the Comet of 1680, in the
month of December, emitted a notable tail, extending to the length of 40, 50,
60 or 70 and upwards: The disjunctive (or) intimates an uncertainty, of at
least 30 degrees, in its apparent length.
(See Fig. 4. B b.)

AFTER the perihelion, as the Comet recedes from the Sun, the mutual repulsion
of the two atmospheres gradually decreases, while the mutual gravitation of the
Comet and its own atmosphere proportionably gets the better of it, until at
length the exiled atoms are drawn home, and that perhaps without the loss of a
single one; unless the tail should happen to sweep the sphere of some Planet in
its way; in which case, if the atmosphere of the Planet were large, the mutual
repellency of the two would rather occasion a bifurcation of the cometic
atmosphere than a union or confusion of them; but were that of the Planet very
small, and did we suppose that in consequence thereof, that of the Comet might
leave a small portion of its tail behind; still no detriment to us could
reasonably be expected or feared, upon that account, considering the amazing
rarity of the Comet's Tail. The cometic atmosphere being gradually re-condensed
round its nucleus as before, would provide it with a suitable garment for
winter quarters in the remote parts of its orbit; agreeable to the ingenious
hypothesis of Doctor Williamson.

THE thickness of a Comet's tail, or the diameter of a section made
perpendicularly through it, is amazingly great toward its extremity; the
apparent breadth of the tail of the Comet of 1680, where its distance from the
Earth was equal to the distance of the Earth from the Sun, was equal to above
three apparent diameters of the Sun The Author remembers to have met with this
Observation somewhere, but cannot at present recollect where. But it was not
far from the truth, if applied to the Comet of 1769.
; consequently the real thickness of that part of the tail was about three
millions of miles, or between three and four hundred diameters of the Earth,
yet, says Sir I. Newton, the smallest Stars were visible through it without any
diminution of their luster. How inconceivably rare then must it have been!
Perhaps for some thousands, not to say millions of miles, reckoned from its
extremity toward its head, it might not have contained more air than a well
blown bladder does with us: And that this is not only possible, but even
probable, appears from Sir I. Newton's computation of the expansion which a
cubic inch of our air is capable of, already repeatedly referred to.

SO much for the third general proposition, which the reader will receive or
reject, according to the weight of the evidence offered in support of it. It is
however hoped that candor will be exercised, and that the whole will not be
exploded, merely, for want of accuracy in the method, or of perspicuity in
handling a subject so difficult of access.

A short digression here may not be amiss, in order to prevent the
uncomfortable impressions, which the appearance of a Comet is apt to make upon
the minds of some, and which were greatly increased during the appearance of
the Comet of 1769, by an injudicious publication in one of the southern
newspapers, wherein it was insinuated, that if that Comet should pass between
the Earth and the Sun, the Earth would pass through the tail of the Comet; the
consequence of which, the writer supposed, might be fatal even to the World
itself. But from the foregoing observations it is evident, that such
apprehensions were groundless. The ingenious and learned Mr. Whiston has indeed
endeavored to prove, in order to support his Theory, that a Comet passing near
the Earth in its descent toward the Sun, occasioned the universal deluge, by
leaving behind it a sufficient quantity of vapors from its atmosphere and tail,
(in which he supposed the Earth to be inveloped,) when condensed into rain, to
drown the World. He further supposed that a Comet, in its ascent from the Sun,
might be sufficiently heated to cause a general Conflagration, should it find
the Earth in the same situation. In consequence of which the fears of many are
usually alarmed, at the appearance of a Comet, by the apprehension of some
grand catastrophe. But if the tails of Comets are so extremely rare, as we find
they must necessarily be, and as every one must be convinced they are, who ever
saw the Stars shining through them; how can we conceive that the Earth in
passing through one of them, could carry off oceans sufficient to submerge "all
the high hills under the whole Heaven"? to effect which, many of our oceans
would, doubtless, be necessary. On the contrary, it seems probable, from the
foregoing considerations, that the tails of all the Comets which ever appeared,
could not, jointly, furnish water sufficient for one ocean only. -- If so, the
near approach of a Comet must be found utterly insufficient to account for the
superior waters of the deluge, or the forty days rain mentioned by Moses;
whatever disorders might otherwise be occasioned in both globes, by their
mutual gravitation, in such vicinity. And had the Earth passed directly through
the midst of the tail of the Comet of 1769, or of any other, it is not in the
least probable, unless the Comet had come near enough to injure us upon other
accounts, that the Earth could have carried off with it, or that the Comet
would have imparted to us, vapors sufficient, even for a common thunder-shower.
But this is submitted to the reader; who, perhaps, upon the perusal of the
second part of this essay, may be of opinion, that a Comet, in its ascent from
the Sun, is no more calculated to set the World on fire, than to drown it in
its descent. But to return to our subject.

HERE a material objection may naturally arise, viz, why should the Comets
appear with tails, and those, generally, of enormous lengths, while the
Planets, which have atmospheres as well as the Comets, are always seen without
them, even when at equal distances from the Sun?

TO this it may be answered; that the atmospheres of the Planets are so small,
in proportion to the globes they surround, compared with those of Comets, that
whatever may be the cause of the tails of the latter; if the same cause act
upon their several atmospheres, proportionably to the spaces they respectively
occupy, the tails of Comets may appear of astonishing lengths, while those of
the Planets shall be totally insensible. In other words; the Planets in similar
situations shall have no tails at all.

THE Earth, as has been repeatedly observed, is a Planet, with which, as it is
the place of our abode, we are well acquainted: The height of its atmosphere is
generally computed at about fifty miles; beyond which, its density is not
sufficient to reflect the rays of the Sun in the crepusculum or twilight: The
diameter of the Earth is about 8000 miles, the diameter then of the Earth and
atmosphere together is about 8100 miles; from whence it appears by computation,
that the space occupied by the atmosphere alone is to the space occupied by the
Earth alone, as 1 to 26 nearly.

THE diameter of the atmosphere of a Comet, as before observed, is, at a
medium, equal to ten times the diameter of its nucleus; and, spheres being as
the cubes of their diameters, the magnitude of a Comet and its atmosphere
together is equal to one thousand times the magnitude of the Comet alone;
consequently, the space occupied by the atmosphere, is to the space occupied by
the nucleus as 999 to 1.

LET us suppose a Comet of equal bigness with the Earth, having an atmosphere
as above described, to be so situated, as that the Sun, the Earth and the
Comet, may be in the Angles of an equilateral triangle: Let us suppose also the
visible effect of the repelling power of the Sun's atmosphere upon those of the
Earth and the Comet, to be in proportion to the spaces they respectively
occupy: The magnitudes of these atmospheres being one to the other as 999 to
1/26, that is as 25974 to 1; when a spectator upon the Earth might see the tail
of the Comet extend through an arch in the Heavens of 60; had the atmosphere of
the Earth a tail, arising from the same cause, in proportion to the space it
occupied, to a spectator upon the Comet it would subtend an angle of no more
than 0 0 8 81 or 60 divided by 25974, an angle which the best instruments could
never discover in an object so dubiously defined: In other words, when the
Comet would have a tail 60 in length, a Planet at the same distance from the
Sun would have none at all.

THE atmospheres of the inferior Planets are probably less in proportion, and
those of the superior, larger than that of the Earth. But this subject may more
properly be introduced in the second part of this Essay.

The principle of repulsion by which we have endeavored to account for the
tails of Comets, and their opposition to the Sun, may receive further
confirmation by considering some of the phenomenon which the atmosphere of a
Comet would exhibit in the neigh-bourhood of the Sun, were the Sun divested of
his atmosphere, or were his atmosphere deprived of its repellent principle: We
shall therefore endeavor to prove the following proposition, viz.

WERE the Sun without an atmosphere, or some other appendage in its nature
repellent to the atmosphere of Comets, and the ethereal spaces void of
resistance; instead of one tail, and that always turned from the Sun, every
Comet would have two; the direction of one being toward, the other from the
Sun, of which the former would be the most considerable, and both would
increase as the Comet approached the Sun, from the increasing gravitation
toward him.

FOR though a Comet's atmosphere in its natural state surrounds the nucleus in
a spherical form, (a form that all fluids which tend to a common center of
gravity must put on) yet if we suppose this atmosphere to be affected by its
gravitation toward the Sun, and to consist of an unelastic fluid, like water;
those parts of this fluid which were nearest to, and most remote from the Sun,
would have their gravitation toward the center of the Comet lessened by the
Sun's attraction, and thereby, from a spherical form the whole would be changed
to an oblong spheroid. This is in fact the case with our ocean, which is
changed from a sphere to a spheroid by the gravitation of the Moon; the axis of
which spheroid, revolving round (...) of the Earth in consequence of the
diurnal motion, causes the flux and reflux of our sea. But the atmosphere of a
Comet is indefinitely elastic, and thence capable of an unlimited expansion;
therefore; in proportion as it is in any part elevated above the superficies of
the sphere it occupies when in its natural quiescent state, such parts are
proportionably at liberty to expand themselves, by virtue of the mutual
repulsion of their component particles, which are now in great measure freed
from that constraint which before condensed them; See Page 31.
which would change both ends of the spheroidal figure, to forms similar to the
tails which commonly attend the Comets, being broader as they become rarer
toward their extremities, on one side and the other: But the tail next the Sun
would be the most considerable, the effects of his attraction on that side
being greatest; and, should the Comet approach near enough to the Sun, a
continued aerial stream would be formed from one globe to the other, whereby
the Sun, by his superior attractive power, would by degrees rob the Comet of
its atmosphere, condensing the same round his own globe, without leaving the
Comet a sufficiency for the purposes of life and vegetation in its solitary
retreat without the planetary spheres. But as the Sun has an atmosphere,
repellent to the atmospheres of the other heavenly bodies, these inconveniences
are thereby prevented, and every globe of the system retains its own,
unimpaired, through every stage of its revolution.

THAT the projection of the tail of a Comet from its nucleus, and its perpetual
opposition to the Sun, do arise from the mutual repellency of the atmospheres
of Sun and Comet, as we have endeavored to prove in the foregoing pages; may
be confirmed and illustrated, if not demonstrated by electrical experiments.

THE electric fluid is an element, as distinct from all others which we are
acquainted with, as air is from water; and if there be any such thing existing
in nature, as pure elementary fire, this claims that character, in preference
to all others. For fire, in its common: form, is so far from being a pure
element, of itself, that the presence of air is necessary to its very being.
Whereas the electric fire, in many experiments, acts with greater freedom in
vacuo, than in the open air. But, different as this wonderful substance is from
all others, we find, that some of its properties greatly resemble those of air,
already treated of: And, if the following propositions, which are introduced to
prove that resemblance, can be cofirmed by experiments; and it be allowed, that
similar causes, naturally, produce similar effects; it is presumed, that the
solutions of the cometic phenomenon, offered in this essay, when composed with
those experiments, will be found not inadequate to the phenomenon.

Prop. 1. THERE is a mutual attraction, subsisting betwixt the electric fluid
and common matter; in consequence of which, the former is capable of, and
liable to a condensation round the latter; in the same manner as air, by common
gravitation, is condensed round the heavenly bodies, in the form of atmospheres.

THE truth of this proposition has been abundantly proved by Doctor: Franklin,
and other writers upon this subject: Indeed, the success of all our electrical
experiments depends upon this property: We may add further, that all the
phenomenon which have ever been observed, in which that element is concerned,
from the attraction of small hairs, dust, etc. in consequence of the attrition
of amber, to the most severe blaze and irresistible force of lightning; depend
in a great measure, upon the same property.

Prop. 2. AIR, as we have seen, is a fluid, the particles of which mutually
repel each other: So, also, is the electric element.

THE truth of this proposition is demonstrated by the following

EXPERIMENT. I.
SUSPEND a plate of metal, by wire, from the prime-conductor generally used in
these experiments, and electrify it. On another plate, placed under the former,
at the distance of three or four inches, put a small quantity of dry sand,
meal, bran, flour, or even the most impalpable powder; the particles upon the
lower plate, being attracted by, and themselves attracting the electric
atmosphere, condensed round the under surface of the upper plate, a beautiful
shower will ensue: These particles will ascend to the upper plate; each, by
virtue of the aforesaid attraction, will receive, and condense round itself, in
the form of an atmosphere, a quantity of this fluid proportional to its
capacity; be immediately repelled from it, and descend toward the lower plate:
But these corpuscles descend, diverging from each other, many of them falling
wide of the plate, upon the table beneath, to return no more: Which divergency,
not only indicates, but is the necessary consequence of, the mutual repellency
of the electric atmospheres, now condensed round them. Those that recover the
lower plate, having discharged their fire, re-ascend together with those that
were left behind at first; with them receive a new charge, and return
diverging, as before. This operation continues, until most of the particles are
scattered on the table below, few being left between the two plates. Now, as
the quantity of the fluid condensed round each corpuscle is, probably,
proportional to the superficies of the corpuscle; See Doctor Franklin's printed
letters page 55. 15. wherein he asserts, that "The form of the electrical
atmosphere is that of the body it surrounds." -- This he proves by experiments,
and from this principle has given a probable solution of the operation of
points, at a distance from the electrified bodies.
and as this experiment will succeed with an impalpable powder, if perfectly
dry, we may conclude, that the smallest conceivable portions of the electric
matter, when once severed, are mutually repellent; from whence we may infer the
repellency of its constituent particles themselves.

THIS property is also largely treated of by Doctor Franklin, See Franklin's
letters page 37. 5. where he says, Every particle of matter electrified, is
repelled by every other particle, equally electrified. Thus the stream of a
fountain, naturally dense and continual, when electrified, will separate and
spread in the form of a brush, every drop endeavoring to recede from every
other drop. But on taking out the electrical fire, they close again. To which
may be added, that, if a small tin cup, filled with water, having a spout just
big enough to let out the water by distinct drops, be electrified, the water
will issue from the mouth of the spout in a diverging mist, so long as the cup
remains charged, but as soon as discharged again, will fall in distinct drops
as before.
and is as necessary to most electrical experiments, as the former is to all;
and, doubtless, contributes one half to the amazing rapidity of lightning, to
which nothing, short of that of the rays of light, can be compared.

Prop. 3. When two small spherical bodies have electrical atmospheres,
condensed round them; those atmospheres are mutually repellent: As we have
endeavored to prove, from the known mutual repellency of the particles of air,
that the atmospheres of the heavenly bodies are, amongst themselves.

THIS proposition naturally results from the last, and is, in some measure,
involved in it; but, as the experiments now to be produced in support of it,
may show us in what manner the electric atmospheres act upon, and affect each
other, it deserves a more particular consideration. For, as these atmospheres
are invisible, in themselves, and are discoverable, only by their effects, it
is necessary to charge them with some substances which reflect the rays of
light, in order to render them proper subjects of observation. -- But the dust,
powders, etc. used in the preceding experiment, will not answer that purpose,
as they fly off, instanly, upon their receiving, and condensing round
themselves a certain portion of the fluid: Instead of which, if fine limber
threads are run through the balls, in various directions, and their ends cut
off at equal lengths, these threads, as they cannot escape, show, by their
several directions, the tendencies of the electric atmospheres of the bodies
they adhere to.

THIS being premised, we proceed to the following

EXPERIMENT. II.
LET a pellet of cork or pith, thus prepared, be suspended, and electrified;
the threads will diverge, equally, every way, from its center as at A Fig. 6.
the electric atmosphere being equally condensed, upon every part of it, and
equirepellent from its center outward. But if two such balls be suspended and
electrified, and caused to approach each other, the threads of each, which
happen to be next to the other, instead of standing out every way from the
center, as before, will be incurvated toward the line of opposition, as at B
and C; whereby the reciprocal repulsion of their atmospheres is rendered
visible, as the directions of the threads show the tendencies of those
atmospheres respectively; from which it appears, that they recede from each
other, as far as the mutual attraction subsisting between each atmosphere and
its own ball, (which at first occasioned a condensation of the former round the
latter,) will permit. But that the atmospheres do not wholly fly off, in
consequence of this repulsion, is evident, as the threads continue in the same
directions, until one, or both be discharged.

Query. DOES not this experiment abundantly confirm and illustrate the
reasoning in page 29, relative to the passage of two Planets, or Comets,
attended with large aerial atmospheres, by each other; whose mutual effects are
represented at C and D Fig. 3?

WE shall adduce one experiment more, before we close this subject, which may
prove as entertaining to him who will be at the trouble of making it, as it is
demonstrative of the principle under consideration.

EXPERIMENT III.
PROVIDE a wooden sphere, of four or five inches in diameter (call it A); let
it be gilt, as the metal will better condense the electric fluid upon its
surface; also a small pellet, of cork, or pith of elder (which call B), strung,
as in the last experiment, with a few threads, of three or four inches in
length: Suppose A to represent the Sun, B, a Comet; fix A on the wire of an
electric bottle, and suspend B by a silken thread from a point, directly over
the center of A, so as that, when neither of them is electrified, B may rest
against A, a little below the level of its center; and charge both ball and
pellet. The mutual repellency of their electric atmosphere is so great, as that
that of B is thrown off as far from A, as the mutual attraction between the
pellet and its atmosphere will permit; which attraction is at the same time so
strong, as that, rather than suffer a separation, the pellet flies off with its
atmosphere, to a certain distance from A, where its natural gravitation to the
Earth is just balanced by the repellent force of the two atmospheres: There B
remains at rest, while its atmosphere retires as much farther as possible from
A, without quitting it wholly; instead of which it undergoes a longitudinal
dilatation, in opposition to the center of A, as the atmospheres of Comets do,
with regard to the Sun: This is evident from the directions of the threads,
which, observed in a side view, bear a near resemblance to the tails of Comets.
When the pellet is in this situation, blow it gently with a bellows, in a
direction perpendicular to the line connecting the centers; this will give it a
projectile motion, which will be regulated by its common gravitation; and as
the center of A is directly under the point from which B is suspended, the
latter will be carried round the former, as the center of its motion. Thus will
this little Comet perform many revolutions round its electric Sun, and in every
one, and through every part of each, the tail of threads will constantly
maintain its opposition to it, as the tails of Comets do to the Sun in the
Heavens.

THIS experiment was very agreeably repeated with an artificial Comet,
consisting of a small, gilt cork ball, with a tail of leaf-gold, about two
inches and an half in length; when, during the whole time of the experiment, in
which it performed, at least, twenty revolutions, the tail, as nearly as the
eye could judge, was constantly projected in the line of the opposition of the
centers of the two balls; the thread, by which the smaller one was suspended,
either twisting, or untwisting, the same way, during the whole time. When thus
in motion, if we raised the globe, the tail was depressed; when it was lowered,
the tail was elevated; maintaining its opposition, in every situation.

BUT now, from these experiments, some may, perhaps, be inclined to think, that
the electric fluid is the sole cause of the phenomenon of the tails of Comets:
That the Sun, as it is the grand source of light and heat, throughout our
system, may be the fountain, from which this element, also, is somehow derived
to its several globes: That Comets, for wise ends, unknown to us, have a larger
share of this fluid than the Planets; and that, when they approach the Sun's
electrical atmosphere, their own are thereby repelled, as in the foregoing
experiments; and appear as lucid, diverging beams, like those which, in the
dark, we see streaming from electrified points.

THIS hypothesis might indeed solve the phenomenon of the cometic tails,
provided the electric atmospheres or bodies, charged with that fluid, were
visible in any of our experiments, even when made in the dark: But as that is
never the case, unless the fluid be in motion; and as the proof of the
existence of such atmospheres, when at rest, depends solely upon their effects
upon other substances, the hypothesis cannot be admitted. Were this indeed the
true and sole cause of the phenomenon, a Planet, near which a Comet might
happen to pass, would be in a situation, truly hazardous; for it is evident
that the Planets (upon that supposition) are not accommodated with such vast
electric atmospheres as attend the Comets; consequently, have not the same
proportion of that fluid condensed round them, but far short of it: --
Therefore, whenever the electric tail of a Comet passed near a Planet, it would
be attracted by it, be drawn aside, from its opposition to the Sun, toward it,
and upon it discharge the surplussage of its fire, that both might have equal,
or proportional shares; which discharge, if we consider the snap of a small
spark between two cork pellets, and enlarge the idea, proportionably, to that
instantaneous cataract of fire which would necessarily take place between two
Worlds in similar situations, we may well imagine would give an explosion,
which nothing could equal, short of the final voice of an archangel; and, if it
were not sufficient to rouse the ashes of the dead, might reduce the living to
their primitive dust. But such a catastrophe, we have not the least reason to
dread, from the neighborhood of a Comet, unless we can suppose, that infinite
wisdom and goodness would create one world, merely for the destruction of
another; as we cannot conceive of any other ends, to which such huge electrical
atmospheres could be adapted. Indeed the discharge would be equally fatal to
both worlds; as it is certain from electrical experiments, that the effects of
a stroke of lightning are the same, whether the flash proceeds from the cloud
to the Earth, or is discharged from the Earth into the cloud, both of which
have happened during the same thunder-gust; as appears from observations made
by Mr. Kinnersly and Doctor Franklin, Franklin's Letter, page 116 and 12^
communicated to the Royal Society. But to put this matter beyond all
reasonable doubt, we may further observe, that if the phenomenon of Comet's
tails arose from the same cause, which renders the electric stream visible,
when proceeding from a steel point, these tails would shine by their own light,
as the electric fluid does, when in motion; whereas, an apparent obscuration or
defect, in one of those tails, has been observed, which evidently arose from
the shadow of its nucleus, which occasioned a partial eclipse of the tail, by
intercepting the Sun's rays Here iii Cometographia Lib. XII. Page 898, quoted
by Mr. Professor Winthrop in his 2d Lecture on Comets.
Consequently, the tail, as well as the head, shines with a borrowed light, and
both are visible, only by reflecting the rays of the Sun.

AS the consideration of the properties of the electric element was introduced,
merely, to illustrate the several propositions, and the conclusions resulting
from them, contained in the foregoing pages; it was thought proper to add thus
much upon that subject, in order to prevent the framing an hypothesis from
those properties, which, instead of removing the fears of the timorous, upon
the appearance of a Comet, (which was one design of this essay,) would
naturally tend to increase their apprehensions. Whereas, upon the principles we
have endeavored to establish, the tails of Comets appear to be nothing more
than air, immensely expanded and rarefied; through which the Earth might pass,
with the utmost safety to its inhabitants. And, instead of these bodies being
heralds, sent forth to denounce the wrath of Heaven, in which light they have
been considered by the ignorant and superstitious, of all ages; or the
immediate executioners of divine vengeance, as others have apprehended; we
shall endeavor to prove, in the following pages, that Comets deserve to be
considered in a more respectable light; and that their tails, however awful and
portentous they have been esteemed by some; may be designed for, and are wisely
adapted to, the truly god-like purposes, of rendering habitable a vast variety
of Worlds; and of affording a comfortable subsistence to innumerable species of
beings, by which they are, probably, inhabited.

ESSAY ON COMETS. PART II.
AS ancient geographers imagined the polar and equatorial regions, or the
frigid and torrid zones of the earth, were uninhabitable, in consequence of the
extremes of heat and cold, to which those climates are exposed: So, modern
astronomers have passed a similar judgment upon the superior and inferior
Planets, especially on Saturn and Mercury; concluding, that our water would
always boil upon the latter, and be frozen upon the former; and that merely in
consequence of their different distances from the Sun See Newt. Princip. Book
III. Prop. VIII. Cor. 4.
. Whence it has been naturally concluded, that the textures of their various
fluids, and of their inhabitants, to whose uses these fluids are adapted, are
very different from what they are found to be upon our Earth: And, considering
the near approaches of most Comets to, and the vast elongations of all their
orbits from the Sun, it has been generally supposed, that no material race of
beings could subsist under such amazing vicissitudes of heat and cold, as those
bodies must, from their different situations, necessarily be exposed to;
consequently that they are uninhabited.

BUT the conclusiveness of this reasoning depends upon the truth of the
following Proposition; advanced indeed by Sir Isaac Newton; but not supported
by experiments, which were, with him, the criterion veritatis; viz. that, The
heat of the Sun is as the density of his rays, that is reciprocally as the
squares of the distances from the Sun. Princip. under Prop. XLI. Book III.


HERE, we are again reduced to the disagreeable necessity, of dissenting from
the opinion of the greatest GENIUS that ever dignified human reason; which,
considering the justly celebrated fame of that illustrious author, may be
stigmatized as ignorance or vanity: But it is hoped that the reader will wave
that imputation, if he shall judge, upon the whole, that Sir Isaac himself
would have altered his opinion, upon the evidence which we shall produce in
support of the contrary position: We may, however, lay down this as a maxim,
that, in the prosecution of any science, the progress of the mind must
necessarily be retarded, in proportion to the implicit assent we give to the
decisions of any man, however great. We shall therefore, without further
apology, endeavor to prove that the heat of the Sun, as perceived by us, and
as discoverable by its effects upon other substances exposed to his rays, does
not depend upon the density of those rays only, though they are necessary to
the very existence of that heat; but, equally upon the concurrent operation of
another cause, which we shall presently consider; from whence it will follow,
that these causes, wherever they co-exist, whether upon the Earth, or upon the
heavenly bodies, will naturally produce similar effects.

IN the mean time, before we engage in the discussion of planetary heat, as
depending upon the several distances of the Planets from the Sun; it may throw
some light upon this subject if we consider the portion of that heat which
falls to our own share, and the distribution of it throughout the various
climates of the Earth.

THE surface of the Earth has, by geographers, been divided into five zones,
viz. one torrid, including all the regions between the tropics, upon every part
of which the Sun shines perpendicularly twice every year: Two frigid, which are
situated between the polar-circles and the poles, and endure the rigors of
perpetual winter, as the former is always basking in a summer Sun: And two
temperate, which experience the vicissitudes of winter and summer, and, in some
parts of them, in their extremes; these are situated between the frigid and
torrid zones, in both hemispheres. In the first of these, the seasons are much
more uniform than in the others, the days and nights being nearly of equal
lengths, the year round; and although the heat may, for a constancy, be greater
therein than in any other climate, yet it is not liable to such great and
sudden changes as are experienced in the temperate zones; for, during a whole
annual revolution of the earth, the difference of the degrees of heat,
experienced in the torrid zone, as determined by the thermometer, are not so
great as those which, sometimes, happen in the temperate zones, within the
compass of a few hours One morning, in the winter of 1768, the mercury in
Farenheit's thermometer was 5 below 0; by 11 o'clock the same day it had risen
to 30, and the next day to above 60; the difference being 65 in little more
than 24 hours. Again, May 30, 1764, when the general election for the choice of
counselors, for this province, was held at Concord, (a town about 20 miles
west from Boston) the weather was (for the season) extremely hot; but on the
morning of the 1st June following, a severe frost cut off all the indian corn,
beans and other tender annual vegetables, in that and the towns adjacent, for
miles round. And on one Sunday morning, in the winter of 1759-60, a transition
was made, instantaneously, from severe cold to summer heat; to the great
surprise of every one, and to the no small terror of many. The buildings
suddenly smoked to such a degree, that, in some of the worshipping assemblies
at Boston, the people suspected that the neighboring houses were on fire; and
there was scarcely a person, who did not recoil from the heat, at the church
doors, at the close of the service.
: Much more do they fall short of the extremes which are endured in the latter,
in the opposite seasons of the year. One summer's afternoon in the year 1760,
the thermometer, being exposed to the open air, in the shade, the Mercury stood
at 102. At another time, viz. in the winter of 1766-67, the Sun being an hour
high in the morning, it was at 9 below 0. These were probably, as great
extremes as have been observed in this climate, the difference being 111 by the
thermometer.
But what is above asserted of the torrid zone is to be understood only of the
low, inhabited and cultivated countries, the mountainous regions with which
those climates abound being excepted, for reasons which will hereafter appear.

THE axes of the several Planets whose diurnal rotations have been discovered
are inclined, more or less, to the planes of their respective orbits;
consequently, their superficies are divisible into zones and climates,
corresponding with those of the Earth: And it is, at least, highly probable,
that the various climates of each globe, during its periodical revolution round
the Sun, experience as great vicissitudes of heat and cold as those of the
Earth: Nor is it unlikely that, in the equatorial regions of the different
Planets, there may be at the same time as great varieties in the degrees of
heat they respectively enjoy, as there are in the temperate zones of the earth
in the different seasons of the year; but supposing all this, the inequalities
in the distribution of heat to the several Planets and their various climates
would vanish, when compared with those extremes which they would necessarily be
exposed to, at their several distances from the Sun, upon the supposition that
the Sun's heat were as the density of his rays; for were that really the case,
the heat of Summer upon Mercury would be about seven times as great as upon the
Earth, and above twice as hot as boiling water with us. On the other hand our
summer heat would be above ninety times greater than that of Saturn, the
difference being more than seven times as great as that between our summer heat
and the heat of red hot iron Sir I. Newton concludes from experiments that
boiling water is three times, and red hot iron about twelves times hotter than
our summer heat. Princip. Prop. XLI. Book III.
: For it is undoubtedly certain, that the density of the Sun's rays is
reciprocally as the squares of the distances from the Sun; from whence the
above conclusions must necessarily follow, if the heat be proportional to that
density.

IT is certainly then a question well deserving a philosophical enquiry;
whether there be not some medium provided in nature, which, being distributed
in different proportions to the several Planets, may so attemper the heat of
the Sun to their respective distances from him, as that the inhabitants of all
may be equally happy in the enjoyment of it; and that one globe may receive as
much benefit, and be exposed to as little injury, from that heat, as any other
throughout the system. This indeed seems to be an object so worthy of the
attention and providence of the great PARENT of the universe, that a
philosophic mind would naturally embrace such an hypothesis, had it, but, the
most slender evidence to support it. This medium, we shall find, is actually
provided in the element of air, which is, in various proportion, condensed
round, and constitutes the atmospheres of the Earth and the heavenly bodies.

AS air is an element, to which we, and probably the inhabitants of the other
Planets, are more indebted than is generally imagined; a short dissertation
upon some of the advantages which accrue to us, and probably to them, from its
presence, may be acceptable to the reader.

AIR is a grand medium in nature, through which an all-bountiful providence
conveys to us many of the conveniences, comforts, and delights of life. Upon
Air depends the ascent of vapors, and their condensation into clouds, whence
they descend in dews and grateful showers, to refresh and fructify the Earth.
-- Upon Air we depend for the twilight, which affords us an agreeable gradation
of shades from day to night; without which we should instantaneously plunge
from the light of the Sun to midnight darkness; and again emerge from total
darkness to the full luster of day; which would be unsufferable to our organs
of sight, upon their present constructure. Air is also the vehicle of sounds,
whether articulate or inarticulate; consequently without it, we should not only
be deprived of the artless melody of the woods, and of the raptures which
accompany the masterly execution of musical composition; but, which is of
infinitely greater importance to us; there could be no language, no
communication of ideas, but by dumb signs; no liberal arts nor sciences in the
world. Therefore if we could subsist without this element, all mankind would be
like the unhappy few among us who are said to be born deaf and dumb.

IT has already been shown from experiments, that Air is necessary both to the
support of animal life, and to the subsistence of flame: And how far the very
being of fire, in any shape, and even of heat itself, may depend upon it, the
reader may judge from the following experiments and observations of Mr. Boil,
related in Shaw's Abridgement of his Works.

"COALS," says Mr. Boil, being put glowing into a receiver, in three minutes
after beginning to pump, the fire totally disappeared. -- Other coals being
suspended, in the open air, at the same time, continued burning 'till a great
part was reduced to ashes Shaw's Boil, page 419.
. Lighted match was found more difficult to put out by exhausting the air than
kindled charcoal, nevertheless in about seven minutes the fire was
extinguished, beyond the possibility of recovery by re-admitting fresh air.
Here we see that air is necessary to the subsistence, not only of flame, but of
fire that emits no flame at all. To these we may add an easy experiment, which
any person may try at his leisure, without the assistance of a pneumatic
engine, viz. A composition may be made of alum and flour, which being well
mixed together, reduced to a cinder in a crucible, pulverized, and otherwise
prepared by a second heat, in a phial secured from the free communication of
the external air, acquires an igneous quality, which, if the phial be kept
stopped, it will retain unimpaired, even for many years; nor will it show any
appearance of fire more than any other matter confined in the same manner; but
if at any time a few grains of it be let out upon any combustible substance in
the open air, it will by the fresh air be instantly changed into fire, and
kindle the substance upon which it falls. This powder is commonly called the
black phosphorus. From a small quantity of it the experiment may be repeated
with success for years together, provided care be taken, whenever the phial is
opened to let out any of the powder, to stop it again immediately, to prevent
the too free access of the external Air. Here we have a substance which has all
the qualities of fire inherent in it, and retains them for a long time, and yet
can never exhibit them but upon the admission of fresh Air. But to return to
Mr. Boil: In page 603 he concludes from experiments, which he had been making
in condensed Air, that the consumption of matter by fire is greater in
proportion to the quantity of Air contained in the (same) receiver; or rather
in a still greater proportion, as he found by some subsequent experiments.
Therefore, as the consumption of matter by (...) without flame, must be
proportional to the intensity of the heat which consumes it, we may conclude
from this last observation, that the intensity of the heat in any enkindled
substance, is nearly proportional to the density of the surrounding Air, and
depends in a great measure upon it. In page 604 Mr. Boil concludes from other
experiments, that fire is more easily kindled in Air much compressed, than in
common Air. Now it is certain that, the more intense the heat, the quicker the
same combustibles are kindled by it; thus bodies, exposed to the foci of
different burning-glasses, will take fire sooner from some than from others,
according as the powers of those glasses to condense the Sun's rays in their
foci (caeteris paribus) are greater, by which condensation the heat is
proportionably increased: But as in these experiments, made in condensed Air,
Mr. Boil kindled his fire with the rays of the Sun, thus collected in the
focus of a burning-glass, and found, as above, that the same glass would more
easily kindle substances, in compressed Air, than in common Air, it follows,
that, the density of the Sun's rays remaining the same, the heat with which
they were accompanied was increased by increasing the density of the Air; in
like manner as it the density of the Air had remained the same, and the density
of the rays had been increased, by using glasses of stronger powers: To which
may be added that Mr. Boil always found it extremely difficult, and sometimes
impossible to kindle any substance whatever in an exhausted receiver, either by
the rays of the Sun, or even by red-hot iron in contact with gunpowder itself.
The conclusion is obvious to every capacity.

HAVING thus exhibited to the reader an imperfect sketch of the principal uses
to which our Air is subservient; wherein among other things, we have seen the
necessity of its presence and cooperation in the production of heat by the
rays of the Sun, in common experiments: We shall now in further prosecution of
the subject, proceed to prove that the heat of the Sun, as enjoyed by the
inhabitants of the Earth in general, depends, not only upon the density of the
Sun's rays, but, equally, upon the density of the surrounding atmosphere. This
we shall prove from the testimonies of travelers of the most undoubted
reputations who crossed the seas, and undertook the most dangerous and
fatiguing journies which, perhaps, have ever been performed by man, with no
other view than to promote the cause of science; particularly Don George Juan
and Don Antonio de Ulloa, and their attendants who were sent by the Courts of
France and Spain to South-America, to measure a degree of the meridian under
the Equator: In the execution of which commission, they were obliged to take
their stations, and make their observations upon some of the highest mountains
upon the Earth, viz. the Andes in the neighborhood of Quito, under the
Equinoctial.

IT is well known that the tops of high mountains are at all seasons very cold,
and are, for the most part, covered with snow the year round. But those
abovementioned, exhibit a scene truly curious; for from their summits to the
plains below, inclusively, may be found at the same time, all the varieties of
heat and cold, which are to be met within every climate of the Earth, at all
seasons of the year (...).


ONE observation made by Don de Ulloa upon the spot, is very remarkable, and
much to the present point: He says, the region of continual congelation began
upon the several mountains at the same height above the level of the Sea, as
determined by equal heights of the mercury in the Barometer. But Sir Isaac
Newton asserts, and deduces the certainty of it from "actual experiments," that
as to our own air, the density of it (i. e. at any height) is as the weight of
the whole incumbent air, that is, (says he) as the height of the mercury in the
barometer. See Princip. Book II. Prop. XXII. Schol.
It therefore follows, that the region of "continual congelation," or perpetual
frost commenced upon all those mountains, where the air was of the same
density. Above that certain height, the density of the air lessened, and the
cold increased accordingly in severity, till the tops of the mountains
presented all the horrors of winter, which are to be found in the polar
regions. Whereas below that height, as the density of the air increased, from
the increase of the incumbent pressure, the heat of the Sun also increased;
till the inhabitants of the plains below suffered all the inconveniences of
the torrid zone.

NOW, the density of the Sun's rays being the same in the several cases, and
the tops of the mountains being above the common region of the clouds, and
consequently enjoying the presence of the Sun much more than the plains below;
it follows, that although the rays of the Sun may be the sine qua non, without
which the inhabitants of the Earth would enjoy no heat at all, yet, the degree
or quantum of their heat depends upon the density and cooperation of the
aerial medium through which those rays are transmitted to them.

AS the proportionality of the Sun's heat to the density of his rays, is a
point, upon which, as proved or disproved, many curious questions in natural
philosophy may turn, every argument which tends to determine that point will
doubtless be acceptable to the reader; and if he should be already satisfied in
his own mind, from the foregoing observations, that the heat of the Sun is not
as the density of his rays simply, yet it is hoped that he will patiently
attend to one argument more, which is drawn from Sir Isaac Newton's own
principles, and naturally results from his computation of the amazing,
inconceivable degree of heat, which must have been acquired by the Comet of
1680, at its perihelion, upon that supposition; which, though it has never been
controverted, but generally allowed to be just, and quoted accordingly, must,
if true, have occasioned the exhibition of some phenomenon, which could not
have escaped the notice of the many curious astronomers of that day. According
to this great author's calculation, this Comet, by its near approach to the Sun
at its perihelion, "acquired a degree of heat two thousand times greater than
the heat of red-hot iron Princip. Book III. under Prop. XLI.
"; but from previous experiments he concludes, that the heat of red-hot iron is
but twelve times greater than that which dry earth acquires when exposed to the
summer's Sun: With what an amazing luster then must the Comet have glowed,
merely from the heat it acquired during its proximity to the Sun! Therefore at
its first appearance after the perihelion, it must have shone, not with a
borrowed or reflected light, as it did before it arrived at that stage, but by
its own newly acquired luster, far exceeding (perhaps) the brightest Star in
the Heavens; for if iron heated but twelve times more than dry earth exposed to
a summer's Sun, becomes red-hot, and from that heat emits a splendour,
independent of the Sun's rays, we may defy the human imagination to conceive of
that splendour, when yet increased two thousand fold, and exhibited by a globe
of equal dimensions with the Earth. Furthermore, Sir Isaac computes that a
globe of red-hot iron equal to the Earth, or the Comet, supposed of equal
bigness, would scarcely cool in fifty thousand years; therefore the Comet,
being two thousand times hotter, if it were a globe of iron, would require
50000 multiplied by 2000, or one hundred millions of years to cool in. But if
we suppose the Comet to cool a hundred times faster than an iron globe of the
same magnitude, equally heated; it could not lose all its heat under a million
years This is the duration of heat generally assigned to this Comet, after its
perihelion. But why a globe of earth should cool an hundred times faster than a
globe of iron, as here supposed, no where appears, nor should the supposition
be admitted, unless we suppose at the same time, that a globe of iron is on
hundred times denser than a planetary globe; if then.
; nay, at the end of five hundred thousand years it would still be a thousand
times hotter, and consequently brighter than red-hot iron. But as the period of
this Comet is supposed to be short of six hundred years, [several appearances
of Comets in past ages being supposed to be different visits from the same
Comet, after intervals of five hundred and seventy five years;] if at every
perihelion it acquired a degree of heat which it could not lose under a million
years, and had short of six hundred years to discharge itself of the heat
acquired at each revolution, how astonishing upon these principles must be the
accumulations of its heat during those several revolutions! so great! that one
would imagine, that for ages after its perihelion it would be visible merely
from its own luster; and that when, from its distance, its diameter would
become insensible, it would still be seen as a lucid point, twinkling among the
Stars: Yet so far was this from being the case, that in three months from its
perihelion, viz. from 8th December to 9th March it totally disappeared, though
the Earth was in a situation to view it for a considerable time after: Sir
Isaac Newton says on the ninth and tenth of February to the naked eye the head
appeared no more.

THIS Comet, at least its tail, was discovered by Mr. Flamstead two days after
its perihelion, viz. on the 10th December; from which time till its total
disappearance, it was constantly observed by astronomers; but none of their
observations take notice of any extraordinary brightness it exhibited, more
than is usual in the appearance of other Comets. Sir Isaac indeed observes,
that in the month of December, just after it had been heated by the Sun, it did
emit a much longer tail, and more splendid than in the month of November
before, when it had not yet arrived at its perihelion. But this he asserts of
the tail only, for soon after he adds, the head of this Comet at equal
distances from the Sun and from the Earth, appeared darker after its perihelion
than it did before: It is true he accounts for it by supposing the nucleus to
be environed by a denser and blacker smoke than before. But this is difficult
to reconcile with what he says a page or two back, when speaking of the same
Comet, viz. by so fierce a heat, vapors and exhalations, and every volatik
matter must have been immediately consumed and dissipated If at the perihelion
distance of this Comet from the Sun, viz. about 160,000 miles, or 1-6th of the
Sun's diameter above his surface (according to Sir I. Newton), the Sun's heat
is so fierce, as that all kinds of vapors and exhalations must be immediately
consumed and dissipated thereby, how is it possible for those clouds, (for such
they undoubtedly are, see page 18) which appear, more or less, every day, like
spots upon the Sun's disk, and float in his atmosphere, at the height of but 7
or 8000 miles above his surface (see note* page 29) to remain undissipated for
above twenty days together, as some of them most certainly do (see page 14)? Or
rather, does not the continuance of those clouds, for so long a time, amount to
a demonstration, upon Sir Isaac's own principles, that no such heat exists,
even within the denser regions of the Sun's atmosphere.
. May we not add, and the whole solid mass calcined or vitrified? Therefore, if
that dullness in its appearance, after the perihelion, was owing to clouds and
vapors, it is evident, from that great author's own reasoning, that the Comet
could not have been exposed to so great an intensity of heat, in that vicinity
to the Sun; since all such heterogeneous exhalations must have been consumed
and dissipated thereby, as fast as they arose from the head; if indeed any
volatile or evaporable matter, or any degree of moisture whatever could have
remained in the head after such an inconceivable ignition. Finally, had the
Comet ever acquired so great an intensity of heat, it is probable the
inhabitants of the Earth would never have lost sight of it to the end of time;
much less would it have totally disappeared in three months after its
perihelion. If the fixed Stars be supposed equal in magnitude to the Sun, and
the Comet abovementioned, equal to the Earth; the period of the Comet to be
575 years, and its body be supposed sufficiently luminous to render it visible
in all parts of its orbit; it appears from Mr. Bradley's determination of the
parallax of the fixed Stars, after a long series of observations (see Smith's
Optics, Vol. II. page 449 and onwards), that the apparent diameter of the
nucleus of this Comet, must he much greater than that of the Stars of the first
magnitude, even when most remote from the Sun and from the Earth.


SIR I. Newton, in making his computation of the heat sustained by this Comet,
first took it for granted, "that the heat of the Sun is as the density of his
rays," (as we have seen before): In the next place, he considered the density
of these rays with us, at the mean distance of the Earth from the Sun, as a
fixed and certain standard, with which the density of the rays at every other
distance might be compared: Then, after exposing dry earth to the summer Sun,
he compared the heat contracted thereby, with that of boiling water and red-hot
iron, and found by experiments the proportional degrees of heat in them to be
nearly as 1, 3, and 12 respectively: In the last place he considered the heat
acquired by the dry earth aforesaid, as the standard of our summer heat, and
annexed it to the mean density of the Sun's rays with us: And upon this
foundation he seems to have constructed his general scale of heat for the solar
system. But it is presumed that the reader is by this time satisfied, that the
main proposition upon which that great author's reasoning was founded must fail
for want of support, however just his conclusions drawn from it may be: For we
now find regions of eternal frost under the equinoctial itself, the rigors of
which are scarcely exceeded in the polar regions; and this, at the height of
but two or three perpendicular miles above the common surface of the Earth, and
where but few clouds interpose to hide the beams of the Sun. If therefore we
suppose ourselves carried up forty or fifty miles higher, or to the very top of
the atmosphere, we may well shudder at the idea of such a situation, even if
exposed to the unclouded rays of a perpendicular Sun.

WE are now naturally led to consider some extensive purposes which the great
Author of Nature probably had in view, when he formed the atmospheres of, and
annexed them to, the several Planets and Comets of our System. We have seen
from indisputable authority, that the density of the Sun's rays alone does not
produce a competency of heat, for the comfortable subsistence of the
inhabitants of the Earth, even in its hottest climates, but, that a certain
density of air is equally necessary, for these rays to operate upon, and to
cooperate with them, in promoting the various purposes of life and vegetation.
This air we are abundantly furnished with from the atmosphere which surrounds
us, the density of which at every height, is proportional to the pressure of
the incumbent fluid. We may conclude from analogy that the atmospheres of the
other Planets, and of the Comets, are designed for, and adapted to the same
purposes for which the atmosphere of the Earth was originally provided: And if
we suppose the general stock of heat, which falls to the share of any Planet,
to be in a ratio compounded of the density of the Sun's rays and the density of
the air upon the surface of the Planet, it is easy to conceive, that these
globes may be severally furnished with such atmospheres, as may render them
comfortable habitations, whatever their distances from the Sun may be. That the
heat of the Sun is actually thus dispensed to the Planets necessarily follows
from the experiments and observations contained in the foregoing pages, upon
the supposition that they are surrounded with aerial atmospheres, suited to
their several distances from the Sun; that they have such atmospheres is
already proved, and the Creator, has, doubtless wisely proportioned their
respective quantities and densities according to those distances.

THE tails of Comets are nothing more than expansions of their atmospheres,
whose lengths depend upon their nearness to the Sun (as before observed) and
decrease as they recede from the Sun, becoming invisible to us (generally)
before their heads disappear: Therefore we have the highest reason to conclude
that when these globes are in the most remote parts of their orbits, or at
their aphelia, their tails wholly subside, and their atmospheres resume
spherical forms, like those of the Earth and of the other Planets, surrounding
their nuclei at equal altitudes in every part; the Sun's atmosphere being too
remote to have any sensible effect upon them by its repellency. The air must of
consequence be prodigiously dense near the surfaces of their globes, being
compressed by the weight of such a vast incumbent fluid; whereby the Sun's
rays, though weaker, or less dense than with us in the ratio of the squares of
the distances, may, upon our principles, be rendered as active with them, and
as productive of such degrees of heat as are necessary for the purposes of
animal and vegetable life, as with us, or any other Planet of the System.

BUT, (as was observed by Doctor Williamson,) should these atmospheres continue
of the same density, through all parts of their orbits, the degrees of heat
which their inhabitants must undergo at their perihelia would be unsufferable:
To prevent which, the great Author of Nature has made sufficient provision; for
as they approach the Sun, they are by the repulsion of his atmosphere (or some
other cause equivalent to such supposed repulsion) gradually eased of that
encumbrance, the cometic atmosphere being gradually rarefied and driven behind
its body through vast spaces of the Heavens; what remains from time to time
being more and more rarefied by the increasing action of the Sun's rays upon
it, and repelled as rarefied; till at length, if they come near enough to the
Sun, the inhabitants may have little more than pure ether to breathe in. Thus
the Comet of 1769, (than which but few have gone nearer to the Sun) before it
arrived at its perihelion, although it projected a most astonishing tail, yet
the remaining atmosphere was dense enough to hide the nucleus it surrounded;
the Comet, when viewed through the best telescopes, presenting only a dubiously
defined luminous appearance: But when it made its re-appearance in the evening
about the latter end of October, its atmosphere had undergone so great a degree
or rarefaction in passing its perihelion, that it was sufficiently pellucid to
discover the nucleus, which appeared plainly and distinctly through it.

MAY we not then conclude, even with certainty, that as a Comet is perpetually
varying its distance from the Sun, so the density of its atmosphere is
continually changing through the various stages of its revolution; and thence,
that its inhabitants may at all times enjoy as much benefit, and receive as
little injury, from the Sun's rays, as the inhabitants of any other Planet in
the solar System?

AS the primary Planets revolve in orbits nearly circular, they have no
occasion for such vast atmospheres as are necessary for the Comets in the
remote regions of the Heavens to which they retire; but are surrounded with
such, as infinite wisdom saw best suited to their several distances from the
Sun; such as might have no redundancies to be thrown off in tails at one time
more than another; the nearly equal distances of each from the Sun, in the
several parts of its orbit, requiring nearly an equal density of atmosphere at
all times.

FROM the premises we may conclude, that the atmospheres of the inferior
Planets are smaller, and those of the superior ones larger in some proportion,
than that of the Earth, in order that their densities near their respective
superficies, may be so proportioned to their several distances from the Sun, as
that they may equally share the benefit of his rays. For want of proper
astronomical observations, to determine this point with regard to the other
Planets, we can pronounce with certainty only concerning Mars: As that Planet
is further distant from the Sun than the Earth, his atmosphere, for the reasons
above assigned, ought to be larger than our own; accordingly it appears (from
the observations referred to in Part I. Note* Page 12) that the height of his
atmosphere above his surface is at least equal to two thirds of his diameter;
which is much greater than that of the Earth, though it falls vastly short of
those of the Comets. Observations of future occultations of fixed Stars by
Jupiter, Saturn and the other Planets, made with better instruments, may
possibly determine this point with regard to them also.

SEVERAL objections may be raised against the principles advanced in this
Essay, to all which we hope to give satisfactory answers. As

1. IT may be objected, that, as the light of the Sun is confessedly
proportional to the density of his rays, that is inversely as the squares of
the distances from the Sun, the inconveniences arising therefrom to the
inhabitants of the Comets, at their perihelia and aphelia, might be nearly as
great as those which would arise from the Sun's heat were it distributed in the
same proportion; or at least, if it did not render the Comets uninhabitable,
would make the conditions of their inhabitants, at times very uncomfortable.
For example, were the light of the Sun adapted to their various purposes, at
their mean distances, at their aphelia, they might not enjoy a sufficiency; and
on the contrary at their perihelia, the splendour would be unsufferable.

THIS objection, it is presumed will vanish upon a careful attention to the
structure of the eyes of terrestrial animals, whose pupils contract or dilate
involuntarily, according as the density of the rays which pass through them and
fall upon their retinas is greater or less, whereby more or fewer of those rays
are admitted, as may be requisite for distinct, inoffensive vision: Thus most
persons can see to read by candle light near as well as by day light, whereas
the quantities of light reflected from objects in the two cases scarely bear
any proportion one to the other. But the aperture of the pupil is much greater
in the former than in the latter, and more rays in proportion are consequently
admitted. Moreover, there are some animals with us which retire to their holes
and caves at the approach of day, whose purposes are as well answered by the
glimmering light of the Stars, as those of others are by the presence of the
Sun; there are yet others which can behold the Sun in his meridian splendour,
without offense. Now if we only suppose that the inhabitants of Comets in
general have, in the original formation of their optic organs, the power of
contracting and dilating their pupils, according to the strength or weakness of
the light which is transmitted through them, we may easily conceive, that the
rays of the Sun might be no more offensive to them at one time than at another;
for at their aphelia their pupils might be dilated to their utmost extent; on
the other hand, at their perihelia, they might be contracted to physical
points, if the splendour of the Sun so required, whereby a proportionally
smaller quantity would be admitted.

THE light of the Sun which the Cometarians enjoy at their aphelia is indeed
much greater than we should be apt to imagine; for let us consider the Comet of
1680, whose period is the longest and its aphelion distance the greatest of any
one known, being (according to Dr. Halley) to the mean distance of the Earth
from the Sun nearly as 138 to 1; but from the reasoning of Doctor Smith, in his
optics it appears, that the proportion of our day light to moon light with a
full moon, is nearly as 90000 to 1; Smith's Optics, Vol. 1. Page 29.
and the light of the Sun upon the Comet at its last mentioned stage is to his
light with us but as about 1 to 19000, therefore if we divide 90000 by 19000 we
shall find that Moonlight with us is to Sun-light upon the Comet, nearly as 1
to 4, and consequently that the light of the Sun enjoyed by the inhabitants of
that Comet at its aphelion is nearly five times as great as the light of our
full Moon. But it is still much greater upon account of the largeness and
density of the atmosphere; for it is certain, that our day light, which is
equally diffused upon all terrestrial objects, and renders them visible;
depends upon the reflection of the Sun's rays, from the atmosphere, together
with the heterogeneous corpuscles floating in it; without which all such
objects would be as obscure as at midnight, even with the Sun shining in full
splendour above the horizon; excepting those upon which the direct rays of the
Sun might fall, or such as might be faintly illumiminated by the reflection of
those rays from neighboring objects: The Heavens would appear perfectly black,
and the smallest Stars would appear, at noonday, which is prevented, only, by
the illumination of the atmosphere. The beautiful azure, which we observe in
the Sky, after the atmosphere is purged of its vapors, by a storm or
thunder-gust, arises from the appearance of this black Sky, through the air,
which is now become more transparent, than when charged with a heterogeneous
collection of opaque corpuscles.

THE atmospheres of Comets, being much larger and denser than that of the
Earth, reflect a much greater proportion of the Sun's rays; their hemispheres
next the Sun must therefore be more illuminated, and their day light increased,
in the same proportion; although the light arising from the direct rays of the
Sun would be considerably weakened thereby.

THIS reasoning may be illustrated by calling to mind the effects of two great
ecliples of the Sun, one of which happened on the 5th or 6th day of August,
1766; the other on the 19th day of January, 1768; which effects, most persons
among us, whose attention was turned that way, may recollect; during the former
the air was very clear, and the sky clothed in a fine blue, excepting, here
and there, where a few summer clouds were scattered: In the midst of this
eclipse the air was darkened to such a degree, that, although the Sun shone
unclouded, a sickly gloom seemed to spread over the face of nature. In the
latter, (though a much greater eclipse) the air was full of vapors, the
reflection of the Sun's rays from which was so copious, as to render it
offensive to the eyes to look at the Heavens, before the eclipse began, and in
the middle of it, the darkness occasioned thereby would scarcely have been
noticed, had not the eclipse been known beforehand.

THE inhabitants of Comets enjoy another advantage from their great
atmospheres, which is peculiar to them alone; for, in the hemisphere turned
from the Sun, they can have no dark nights like those of the Planets; but, in
consequence of the reflection of the Sun's rays from those atmospheres, must be
favored with perpetual twilight if not day light; for a cometic atmosphere is
enlightened by the Sun by night as well as by day, excepting only a column,
which is nearly cylindrical at the aphelion, whose base is a great circle of
the Comet, and whose altitude is equal to the height of the atmosphere; which,
(considering the great extent of the latter,) bears but a small proportion to
the whole atmospheric hemisphere; this column includes that part of the
atmosphere which is eclipsed by the shadow of the globe itself, and, if the
diameter of the atmosphere is equal to ten diameters of the globe See Page 14.
, does not contain ^^th part of the whole visisible hemisphere; and is still
less upon account of the refraction of the Sun's rays, which shortens and
contracts the cone of the shadow. Whence it is probable that the darkest nights
of the Cometarians, at their aphelia, are much lighter than our brightest
moonlight nights. But this is submitted to the judgment of the reader.

2. IT may further be objected; that if the atmospheres of Comets undergo such
amazing, rarefactions and condensations, as they necessarily must, from the
alternate projections and retractions of their tails, it is difficult to
conceive that they can at all times be fit for the respiration of their
supposed inhabitants.

THIS objection might, perhaps, have remained unanswerable, had it not been for
the genius of that truly great philosopher Doctor Edmund Halley; who, if he was
not the original inventor of the diving-bell, yet, by a sagacity peculiar to
himself, improved it to a degree of perfection, which might, before, have
rather been wished for, than expected. See Jones's Abridgment of Philos. Trans.
Vol. IV. Page 188, and onward.
In this bell persons may be let down with safety to the bottom of the sea; but
the included air differs in density at every depth below the surface of the
water. At the depth of thirty-two or thirty-three feet, as the air may
occasionally change, or less, in proportion as salt water is heavier than
fresh, the density of the air within the bell is double the density of the
external air; at double that depth the density is triple; at three times,
fourfold, and so on. Now if the bell be let down without proper precaution, the
too sudden condensation of the air within, would give the adventurers extreme
pain, as they sometimes found by experience; and should the bell sink suddenly
to the bottom of the sea, the consequence might be fatal to them; for the same
reason that a square case-bottle, filled only with common air above the surface
of the water, and corked tight, if it were let down with the diverse in the
bell, would from the increasing pressure of the condensing air without it, be
crushed inwards, and broken in pieces, in the same manner as if the air in the
bottle had been exhausted by an Air-Pump above the surface of the water; which
effect would be prevented by the smallest hole in the cork, provided the bell
were let down leisurely, so that the air as it condensed without, might
gradually insinuate itself through the hole into the bottle: On the contrary
were the bottle corked at the bottom of the sea, and the bell drawn up from the
depth of nine or ten fathoms; before the bell could arrive at the surface of
the water, the bottle would burst outward, from the expansive force of the
condensed air within it; which might also be prevented by a similar precaution.
And it is doubtless from the latter cause that some persons who have ascended
to the tops of high mountains, have been seized with reachings, vomitings and
other inconveniences related by travelers; the external air of the atmosphere
at such heights being too rare to counteract by its pressure, the expansive
force of the denser air which is interspersed throughout the various vessels
and organs of animal bodies.

BUT Doctor Halley testifies from his own experience, that if the diving-bell
be let down (or drawn up) gradually, about twelve feet at a time with an
interval of but a few minutes between, no inconvenience would follow; as the
several organs of the body would by degrees be inured to the density of the
air, as it increased or decreased at the several depths. The Doctor tells us,
that he himself was hours together at the bottom of the sea in nine or ten
fathoms of water; and felt himself as well as if he had been all the time on
board the ship: But the density of the air he then breathed, must have been
more than three times as great as that of the air above the surface of the
water: In other words, he then breathed in air, compressed by the weight of
between three and four of our atmospheres instead of one, and of ten or a dozen
such as Don de Ulloa breathed in, when upon the tops of the mountains of Quito,
without any inconvenience. Therefore, if time sufficient be allowed for the
air, included in the several vessels of the human body, gradually to contract,
expand or otherwise accommodate itself, to the increasing or decreasing density
of the exterior air; no bad consequences or even inconveniences are to be
apprehended, although the difference of density be exceeding great.

BUT by the gradual and regular approach of any Comet to, or recess from its
perihelion, (at and near which its velocity is greatest and the consequent
changes in its atmosphere are most sudden of all) the increase or decrease of
its atmosphere, is much more regular, uniform, and insensible to its
inhabitants, than any increase or decrease of the density of the air can be in
the diving bell by Doctor Halley's method; for by the latter, a degree of
rarefaction, or condensation, is effected in a few minutes, which might not
take place in the cometary atmospheres under some days.

PERHAPS enough has been already said to remove every material objection; but
if any difficulties yet remain, in the mind of the reader, on account of the
vast changes which the several climates in each, and the atmospheres of all
Comets must necessarily undergo, in the various parts of their orbits: the
following additional observations are submitted to his consideration; which may
tend to lessen those difficulties, if they do not wholly remove them, viz.

AS a Comet approaches its perihelion, that hemisphere of its atmosphere which
is next to the Sun, being more immediately exposed to his rays, will feel the
effects of his neighborhood sooner than the opposite hemisphere, and
consequently will be warmed, rarefied, and thrown off behind the Comet by the
repulsion of the Sun's atmosphere, sooner than the other; the colder and denser
parts of the fluid will of course continually flow in from the other side of
the Comet to supply its place, in order to preserve, as near as may be, an
equilibrium; in consequence of which there will be a constant succession of the
cooler air from thence; whereby the inhabitants on the hemisphere next the Sun
may be continually refreshed with gales of wind during that vicinity, which
would increase till the Comet arrived at its perihelion, when their velocity
would be greatest of all; but even then they would not (from this cause) blow
in sudden violent gusts like our hurricanes, but steadily, unless disturbed by
causes from within the Comet's atmosphere; besides, as the velocity of the
current increased, the density of the fluid would lessen from the increasing
rarefaction, whereby its momentum might continue nearly the same; for this
momentum would be in a ratio compounded of the velocity of the fluid and its
density together; and as the violence of our high winds, and their consequent
effects depend, not upon the velocity, merely, but upon the momentum of the
current, this brisk circulation of the cometic air may, (however great we
suppose its velocity) be rather grateful than injurious to the Cometarians: And
how unfit soever the air in such a rarefied state might be for their use, if
stagnant, yet, when thus put in motion, it may be rendered sufficiently active
to answer all the purposes of respiration. This reasoning is confirmed by daily
experience: For it is not an uncommon thing for people of tender frames to
faint in a close hot and rarefied air; and as the fan is generally near at
hand, it is as common for the bystanders to apply it to their faces, which, by
giving a brisk motion to the air, without any alteration of its density,
generally revives them, in a short time, even when no other remedy is at hand.
-- This brisk motion of the air would also remove or prevent the disagreeable
sensations of heat which the cometary inhabitants might otherwise suffer from
an exposure to the Sun's rays at their perihelia: For, if a person sit with his
face uncovered before the scorching blaze of a common fire, the motion of the
air excited by a common fan, even without hiding the blaze from the face, is
sufficient, not only to make the situation comfortable, but to change the
painful sensation to an agreeable coolness: As any one will find upon trial.

IF we suppose that every Comet has a diurnal rotation round an axis of its
own, the inhabitants may enjoy grateful vicissitudes, from the alternate
absence and presence of the Sun; and if we further suppose this diurnal motion
to be performed contrary to its apparent heliocentric motion; the returns of
day and night would be quickened as it approached the Sun, from the increase of
its angular velocity round that globe, whereby the presence of the Sun, in that
neighborhood, would be of shorter duration, upon any one part of the Comet,
and his heat might be rendered still less irksome to the inhabitants, on that
account. It is true, no discovery has been made of any such diurnal motion, but
as all the primary Planets, so far as our observations can reach, are
discovered to have such motions, we may well be allowed to suppose that the
Comets are not without them; especially now we are endeavoring to prove their
habitability, to which this motion is perhaps as necessary as to the
habitability of the primary Planets. These rotations have been already
discovered and determined in Venus, the Earth, Mars and Jupiter. Saturn, though
a vast globe in itself, is so remote, and Mercury is so near the Sun, and so
very small, that this motion has never been discovered in either, by our best
instruments, but is justly inferred by analogy; which method of reasoning will
equally extend to the Comets of the System. The diurnal motions of the Planets
indeed are performed nearly in the same directions with their annual, both
motions in all, as far as they have been discovered, being direct, or from West
to East, whereas the diurnal motions of Comets, according to the foregoing
supposition, are performed contrary to this rule: But this is no objection
against the hypothesis; for Planets and Comets differ as widely, in almost
every other particular; the annual motions of the former (as now observed,) are
all direct, and are apparently confined within the limits of the zodiac, the
latter move indifferently in all directions through the Heavens; the periodical
revolutions of the former are made in orbits nearly circular, those of the
latter are prodigiously excentric, and nearly parabolical; all which seem
wisely to be ordered, that a multitude of Worlds may exist at the same time,
and be enlightened, warmed, and rendered prolific, by the rays of the same Sun,
without interfering in their motions, or disturbing the harmony of the System.

TO illustrate the reasoning in pages 78, 79. Fig. 5 is added; in which let S
represent the Sun; to which Comets in general, though perhaps equal in
magnitude to our Earth, are, without a figure, but as drops of the bucket. In
the figure the speck at X and the dots round it, upon the surface of the Sun S,
will give a pretty just idea of the comparative magnitudes of the Sun and
Comet, and of their atmospheres; the dots at X representing the Comet's
atmosphere, A A A, etc. the atmosphere of the Sun.
Let C represent a Comet with its atmosphere and tail, the dark curve line c k
d g h on one side, and c i a e f on the other, may serve to give an idea of the
motion of a parcel of the cometary air from its more condensed state behind the
Comet at c, through its various stages of rarefaction and repulsion; as that
part of the atmosphere next the Sun, viz. that in or near the line S b which
connects the centers of the Sun and the Comet, is rarefied, the denser air from
behind at c must necessarily flow in to preserve as near as possible an
equilibrium, and continue so to do as long as the rarefaction continues to
increase. The air next the Sun being thus rarefied, that at c would take a turn
round the nucleus through k and i, but before these separate parcels came to d
or a the rarefaction would so increase, that they would begin to ascend, and as
they ascended, at a and d they would repel each other; they would still keep
rising by their increasing rarefaction, through S b as through a tunnel, and
increase in their mutual repellency as they receded from the center of the
Comet, till at length at l and m the repellency of the Sun's atmosphere would
compel them to retire through g h or e f whence they would proceed to the
extremity of the tail, the remaining parcels of air in the same cometic
hemisphere would take a similar course (as represented by the faint strokes in
the figure) whether their distances from the Comet's surface were greater or
less, till at length the rarefaction of the Comet's atmosphere would become as
great, as the repulsive power of the Sun's atmosphere could effect, or the
Comet's vicinity to the Sun, require. -- We shall offer one observation more,
for the consideration of the reader before we close the subject, viz.

WHEN the air of our atmosphere appears by the thermometer to be extremely
cold, it does not affect the senses so disagreeably, if the atmosphere be in a
calm stagnant state, as at other times, when the mercury is ten or even twenty
degrees higher, (and consequently the weather warmer) with a brisk wind, as has
been frequently observed by those who attend to their thermometers. Now when a
Comet is at its greatest distance from the Sun, its atmosphere, being uniformly
condensed round its globe, might settle into a dead calm, for any disturbances
it could receive from without: For whatever influences baneful or salutary, the
heavenly bodies may reciprocally communicate while in the neighborhood of each
other, the Comets in their aphelia, are removed to such inconceivable distances
from all the other globes of the System, that their mutual effects, physically
considered must vanish. And in so calm an atmosphere, of so great a density,
illuminated by the Sun's rays, the inhabitants of the Comets may, even when
most remote from the Sun, be as warm, or at least as comfortable as the
inhabitants of the Earth, or of any other Planet.

THIS subject cannot be better closed than in the words of Doctor Williamson,
viz. See Transactions of the American Philosophical Society of Philadelphia --
Appendix page 30.


ONE of the primary ideas we form of the supreme Being is, that he is the
source of life, intelligence and happiness, and delights to communicate them;
the Earth we tread, the water we drink, and the very air in which we breathe,
swarm with living creatures, all fitted to their several habitations. -- Are we
to suppose that this little globe is the only animated part of the creation,
while the Comets, many of which are larger worlds, and run a nobler course, are
an idle chaos, formed for the sole purpose of being frozen and burnt in turns?
-- We cannot admit the thought; the Comets are doubtless inhabited.



APPENDIX.
IF we suppose all the solid globes of the solar System to be annihilated,
their atmmospheres remaining; the power of gravity, which had theretofore
condensed them round their respective orbs, ceasing, they would immediately
expand themselves quaquaversum, in consequence of the mutual repellency of
their particles, till the whole space in which the bodies of the System had
revolved, was equally filled with the fluid, and when its density became equal
in every part, the whole world be at rest.

SO, vice versa, if we suppose such a fluid, to have been the first material
substance in the order of creation, equally diffused, in that rarefied state,
throughout the mundane space; next after it, the several masses of the Sun,
Planets and Comets, nearly about the same time with each other: This fluid,
though its particles are in a state of (...) repulsion, yet as they are in the
common state of gravitation to the other bodies of the System, would be
attracted by the several globes, every particle moving toward that globe,
which should have the balance of attraction in its favor.

Mercury's atmosphere, by reason of its neighborhood to the Sun, and the
smallness of his globe would be least of all and very inconsiderable: For
suppose a right line A B. A -- D -- B drawn from the center of the Sun to the
center of Mercury, to be so divided in D, that the part next the Sun may be to
the part next Mercury in the sub-duplicate ratio of the quantity of matter in
the Sun to the quantity of matter in Mercury; every particle between D and B
would descend to, and be condensed round the Sun, and those only between D and
A to Mercury; and it appears by computation that DB: DA:: 3693: 1 nearly, and
in all oblique directions the particles, whose distances from the Sun and
Mercury were proportionably greater or smaller, would descend to, and condense
round one or the other; unless drawn aside by some other Planet: What is here
said of Mercury, is equally applicable to the other Planets; and as the
attraction of the Sun is vastly greater than the united attractions of all the
Planets together; so, in every part of the System, where the attractive power
of the Sun might be greater than that of any neighboring Planet; the fluid
occupying that part of the space, would descend and join the Sun's atmosphere;
while the rest would be continually condensing round the Planets, till at
length the several globes would be accommodated with their proper atmospheres;
when the Heavens would be left a perfect vacuum for the various bodies to
revolve in, without the least resistance.

IF the Comets be supposed to have been created and projected in their several
orbits, at their aphelia, or at their greatest distances from the Sun, it may
be easy upon this hypothesis to account for their having atmospheres so much
exceeding those of the Planets in their dimensions, for providence has so
ordered it, that the angles of the inclinations of their orbits to the eclyptic
and to each other are generally very great, and their motions are directed to
all parts of the Heavens indiscriminately, whereby their distances from the
Planets and from each other at their aphelia, are great beyond human
conception; consequently they were at liberty to share amongst themselves,
without any molestation from the Planets, all that part of the fluid, which
filled the vast spaces of the System, without the planetary regions; therefore
if the hypothesis be granted, they must necessarily have such atmospheres, as,
in fact, we find they have, and which, in their descent through the planetary
spheres, are, by the (supposed) repulsion of the Sun's atmosphere, driven to
such astonishing distances behind them, as occasion may require. Those whose
aphelion distances were greatest, being more solitary, would condense round
them the greatest atmospheres, and such, their greater distances from the Sun
would require, upon the foregoing principles, to make them comfortable
habitations. As the lengths of their tails would probably, at equal distances
from the Sun, be proportional to the quantities of this repellent matter
contained in their atmospheres respectively, it may not be impossible to form a
rational conjecture of their real aphelion distances, by observing the apparent
lengths of their tails, when at equal distances from the Sun, in their descent,
and thence computing their real lengths, and comparing those whose aphelion
distances are unknown with those which are already determined; and as nearly as
we can by this method come at their greatest distances from the Sun, so nearly
may we (by comparing their computed trajectories, with those distances,)
determine their mean distances and periodic revolutions. But this is humbly
submitted to better judges, and is designed only as a hint for future inquiries.

FINIS.

