AN APPEAL TO THE PUBLIC FOR RELIGIOUS LIBERTY, Against the Oppressions of the
present Day.

Brethren, ye have been called unto Liberty; only use not Liberty for an
occasion to the Flesh, but by love serve one another. GAL. V. 13. BOSTON:
Printed by JOHN BOIL in Marlborough-Street, MDCCLXXIII.

AN APPEAL TO THE PUBLIC, etc.
INTRODUCTION.
INASMUCH as there appears to us a real need of such an appeal, we would
previously offer a few thoughts concerning the general nature of liberty and
government, and then show wherein it appears to us, that our religious rights
are encroached upon in this land.

It is supposed by multitudes, that in submitting to government we give up some
part of our liberty, because they imagine that there is something in their
nature incompatible with each other. But the word of truth plainly shows, that
man first lost his freedom by breaking over the rules of government; and that
those who now speak great swelling words about liberty, while they despise
government, are themselves servants of corruption. What a dangerous error, yea,
what a root of all evil then must it be, for men to imagine that there is any
thing in the nature of true government that interferes with true and full
liberty! A grand cause of this evil is, ignorance of what we are, and where we
are; for did we view things in their true light, it would appear to be as
absurd and dangerous, for us to aspire after any thing beyond our capacity, or
out of the rule of our duty, as it would for the frog to swell till he bursts
himself in trying to get as big as the ox, or for a beast or fowl to dive into
the fishes element till they drown themselves. Godliness with contentment is
great gain: But they that will take a contrary course fall into temptation, and
a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which DROWN men in
destruction and perdition. 1 Timothy 6. 6, 9.

The true liberty of man is, to know, obey and enjoy his Creator, and to do all
the good unto, and enjoy all the happiness with and in his fellow creatures
that he is capable of; in order to which the law of love was written in his
heart, which carries in it is nature union and benevolence to Being in general,
and to each being in particular, according to it is nature and excellency, and
to it is relation and connection to and with the supreme Being, and ourselves.
Each rational soul, as he is a part of the whole system of rational beings, so
it was and is, both his duty and his liberty to regard the good of the whole in
all his actions. To love ourselves, and truly to seek our own welfare, is both
our liberty and our indispensible duty; but the conceit that man could advance
either his honor or happiness, by disobedience instead of obedience, was first
injected by the father of lies, and all such conceits ever since are as false
as he is.

Before man imagined that submission to government, and acting strictly by rule
was confinement, and that breaking over those bounds would enlarge his
knowledge and happiness, how clear were his ideas! (even so as to give proper
names to every creature) and how great was his honor and pleasure! But no
sooner did he transgress, than instead of enjoying the boldness of innocence,
and the liberties of paradise, he sneaks away to hide himself; and instead of
clear and just ideas, he adopted that master of all absurdities (which his
children follow to this day) of thinking to hide from OMNICIENCY, and of trying
to deceive HIM who knows every thing! Instead of good and happiness, he felt
evil, guilt and misery; and in the room of concord was wrangling, both against
his Creator and his fellow creature, even so that she who was before loved as
his own flesh, he now accuses to the great Judge. By which it appears, that the
notion of man's gaining any dignity or liberty by refusing an entire submission
to government, was so delusive, that instead of it is advancing him to be as
Gods, it sunk him down into a way of acting like the beasts and like the devil!
the beasts are actuated by their senses and inclinations, and the devil pursues
his designs by deceit and violence. With malicious reflections upon God, and
flattering pretenses to man, he drew him down to gratify his eyes and his taste
with forbidden fruit: and he had no sooner revolted from the authority of
heaven, than the beauty and order of his family was broken; he turns accuser
against the wife of his bosom, his first son murders the next, and then lies to
his Maker to conceal it; and that lying murderer's posterity were the first who
broke over the order of marriage which God had instituted; and things proceeded
from bad to worse, till all flesh had corrupted his way, and the earth was
filled with violence, so that they could no longer be borne with, but by a just
vengeance were all swept away, only one family.

Yet all this did not remove the dreadful distemper from man's nature, for the
great Ruler of the universe directly after the flood, gave this as one reason
why he would not bring such another while the earth remains, namely, For the
imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth; (...) and 6* 13, 15, and 8.
21.
so that if he was to drown them as often as they deserved it, one deluge must
follow another continually. Observe well where the distemper lies; evil
imaginations have usurped the place of reason and a well informed judgment, and
hold them in such bondage, that instead of being governed by those noble
faculties, they are put to the horrid drugery of seeking out inventions, for
the gratification of fleshly lusts, which war against the soul; and to guard
against having these worst of all enemies detected and subdued. Enemies which
are so far from being God's creatures, that strictly speaking, they have no
being at all in themselves, only are the privation of his creatures well-being;
therefore sin with it is offspring death, will, as to those who are saved, be
swallowed up in victory. Sin is an enemy both to God and man, which was
begotten by satan, and was conceived and brought forth by man; for lust when it
is conceived brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished brings forth
death. Eccl. 7. 29. 1 Pet. 2. 11. Jam. 1. 14, 15.


Now how often have we been told, that he is not a freeman but a slave, whose
person and goods are not at his own but another disposal? And to have
foreigners come and riot at our expense and in the fruit of our labors, has
often been represented to be worse than death. And should the higher powers
appear to deal with temporal oppressors according to their deserts, it would
seem strange indeed, if those who have suffered intolerably by them, should
employ all their art and power to conceal them, and so to prevent their being
brought to justice! But how is our world filled with such madness concerning
spiritual tyrants! How far have pride and infidelity, covetousness and luxury,
yea deceit and cruelty, those foriegners which came from hell, carried their
influence, and spread their baneful mischiefs in our world! Yet who is willing
to own that he has been deceived and enslaved by them? Who is willing honestly
to bring them forth to justice! All acknowledge that these enemies are among
us, and many complain aloud of the mischiefs that they do; yet even those who
lift their heads so high as to laugh at the atonement of Jesus, and the
powerful influences of the Spirit, and slight public and private devotion, are
at the same time very unwilling to own that they harbor pride, infidelity, or
any other of those dreadful tyrants. And nothing but the divine law refered to
above, brought home with convincing light and power, can make them truly
sensible of the soul-slavery that they are in: and it is only the power of the
gospel that can set them free from sin, so as to become the servants of
righteousness: can deliver them from these enemies, so as to serve God in
holiness all their days. And those who do not thus know the truth, and have not
been made free thereby, Romans 6. 18. Luke 1. 74, 75. John 8. 32.
yet have never been able in any country to subsist long without some sort of
government; neither could any of them ever make out to establish any proper
government without calling in the help of the Deity. However absurd their
notions have been, yet they have found human sight and power to be so short and
weak, and able to do so little toward watching over the conduct, and guarding
the rights of individuals, that they have been forced to appeal to heaven by
oaths, and to invoke assistance from thence to avenge the cause of the injured
upon the guilty. Hence it is so far from being necessary for any man to give up
any part of his real liberty in order to submit to government, that all nations
have found it necessary to submit to some government in order to enjoy any
liberty and security at all.

We are not insensible that the general notion of liberty, is for each one to
act or conduct as he pleases; but that government obliges us to act toward
others by law and rule, which in the imagination of many, interferes with such
liberty; though when we come to the light of truth, what can possibly prevent
it is being the highest pleasure, for every rational person, to love God with
all his heart, and his neighbor as himself, but corruption and delusion?
which, as was before noted, are foreigners and not originally belonging to men.
Therefore the divine argument to prove, that those who promise liberty while
they despise government are servants of corruption is this; For of whom a MAN
is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage. 2 Pet. 2. 18, 19. He is so
far from being free to act the man, that he is a bond slave to the worst of
tyrants. And not a little of this tyranny is carried on by such an abuse of
language, as to call it liberty, for men to yield themselves up, to be so
foolish, disobedient and deceived, as to serve diverse lusts and pleasures. Tit.
3. 3.

Having offered these few thoughts upon the general nature of government and
liberty, it is needful to observe, that God has appointed two kinds of
government in the world, which are distinct in their nature, and ought never to
be confounded together; one of which is called civil, the other ecclesiastical
government. And though we shall not attempt a full explanation of them, yet some
essential points of difference between them are necessary to be mentioned, in
order truly to open our grievances.

SECTION I.
Some essential points of difference between civil and ecclesiastical
government.

1. The forming of the constitution, and appointment of the particular orders
and offices of civil government is left to human discretion, and our submission
thereto is required under the name of their being, the ordinances of men for
the Lord's sake. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Whereas in ecclesiastical affairs we are
most solemnly warned not to be subject to ordinances, after the doctrines and
commandments of men. Col. 2. 20, 22. And it is evident that He who is the only
worthy object of worship, has always claimed it as his sole prerogative, to
determine by express laws, what his worship shall be, who shall minister in it,
and how they shall be supported. How express were his appointments concerning
these things by Moses? And so wise and good a ruler as Solomon, was not
entrusted with any legislative power upon either of these articles, but had the
exact dimensions of the temple, the pattern and weight of every vessel, with
the treasuries of the dedicate things, and the courses of the Priests and
Levites, all given to him in writing by the Spirit, through the hand of his
father David. 1 Chronicles. 28. 11 -- 19. And so strict were God's faithful servants
about these matters, that Daniel who in a high office in the Persian court,
behaved so well that his most envious and crafty foes, could find no occasion
against him, nor fault in him concerning the kingdom, till they fell upon the
device of moving the king to make a decree about worship, that should interfere
with Daniel's obedience to his God; yet when that was done, he would not pay so
much regard to it as to shut his windows. Dan. 6. 4 -- 11. And when the Son of
God, who is the great Lawgiver and King of his church, came and blotted out
the handwriting of the typical ordinances, and established a better covenant,
or constitution of his church, upon better promises, we are assured that he was
faithful in all his house, and counted worthy of more glory than Moses. What
vacancy has he then left for faliable men to supply, by making new laws to
regulate and support his worship? especially if we consider,

2. That as the putting any men into civil office is of men, of the people of
the world; so officers have truly no more authority than the people give them:
And how came the people of the world by any ecclesiastical power? They arm the
magistrate with the sword, that he may be a minister of God to them for good,
and might execute wrath upon evil doers; and for this cause they pay them
tribute: upon which the apostle proceeds to name those divine commandments
which are comprehended in love to our neighbor, and which work no ill to him.
Surely the inspired writer had not forgotten the first and great command of
love to God; but as this chapter treats the most fully of the nature and end of
civil government of any one in the new testament, does it not clearly show that
the crimes which fall within the magistrates jurisdiction to punish, are only
such as work ill to our neighbor? Romans 13. 1 -- 10. While church government
respects our behavior toward God as well as man.

3. All acts of executive power in the civil state, are to be performed in the
name of the king or state they belong to; while all our religious acts are to
be done in the name of the Lord Jesus; and so are to be performed heartily as
to the Lord, and not unto men. And it is but (...) service, and vain worship,
if our fear toward him is taught by the precepts of men. Col. 3. 17, 23. Isa.
2^ 13. Mat. 15. 9. It is often pleaded, that magistrates ought to do their duty
in religious as well as civil affairs. That is readily granted; but what is
their duty therein? Surely it is to bow to the name of Jesus, and to serve him
with holy reverence; and if they do the contrary they may expect to perish from
the way. Phil 2. 10. Psa. 2. 10 -- 12. But where is the officer that will dare
to come in the name of the Lord to demand, and forcibly to take, a tax which
was imposed by the civil state! And can any man in the light of truth, maintain
his character as a minister of Christ, if he is not contented with all that
Christ's name and influence will procure for him, but will have recourse to the
kings of the earth, to force money from the people to support them under the
name of an ambassador of the God of heaven! Does not such conduct look more
like the way of those who made merchandise of slaves and souls of men, than it
does like the servants who were content to be as their Master, who said, He
that hears you hears me; and he that despises you despises me? Rev. 18.
9, 13. Luke 10. 3 -- 16.

4. In all civil governments some are appointed to judge for others, and have
power to compel others to submit to their judgment: but our Lord has most
plainly forbidden us, either to assume or submit to any such thing in religion.
Mat. 23. 1 -- 9. Luke 22. 25 -- 27. He declares, that the cause of his coming
into the world, was to bear witness unto the truth; and says he, Every one that
is of the truth hears my voice. This is the nature of his Kingdom, which he
say* (...) not of this world: and gives that as the reason why his servants
should not fight, or defend him with the sword. John. 18. 36, 37. And it
appears to us that the true difference and exact limits between ecclesiastical
and civil government is this, That the church is armed with light and truth, to
pull down the strong holds of iniquity, and to gain souls to Christ, and into
his church, to be governed by his rules therein; and again to exclude such from
their communion, who will not be so governed; while the state is armed with the
sword to guard the peace, and the civil rights of all persons and societies,
and to punish those who violate the same. And where these two kinds of
government, and the weapons which belong to them, are well distinguished, and
improved according to the true nature and end of their institution, the effects
are happy, and they do not at all interfere with each other: but where they
have been confounded together, no tongue nor pen can fully describe the
mischiefs that have ensued; of which the Holy Ghost gave early and plain
warnings. He gave notice to the church, that the main of those antichristian
confusions and abominations, would be drawn by philosophy and deceit, from the
handwriting of ordinances that Christ has blotted out. And to avoid the same,
directs the saints to walk in Christ Jesus as they received him, rooted and
built up in him, and stablished in the faith as they have been taught; viewing
that they are complete in him, which is the HEAD over ALL PRINCIPALITY and
POWER. Therefore he charges them not to be beguiled into a voluntary humility,
by such fleshly minds as do not hold this Head, but would subject them to
ordinances after the doctrines and commandments of men. Col. 2.

Now it is well known that this glorious Head made no use of secular force in
the first sitting up of the gospel church, when it might seem to be pecularly
needful if ever; and it is also very evident, that ever since men came into the
way of using force in such affairs, their main arguments to support it have
been drawn from the old Jewish constitution and ordinances. And what work has
it made about the head as well as members of the church?

First they moved Constantine, a secular prince, to draw his sword against
heretics; but as all earthly states are changeable, the same sword that
Constantine drew against heretics, Julion turned against the orthodox. However,
as the high priest's sentence in the Jewish state, divided matters both for
prince and people, the same deceitful pilosophy that had gone so far, never
left plotting till they had set up an ecclesiastical head over kingdoms as well
as churches, who with Peter's keys was to open and shut, bind and loose, both
in spiritual and temporal affairs. But after many generations had groaned under
this hellish tyranny, a time came when England renounced that head, and set up
the king as their head in ecclesiastical as well as civil concernments; and
though the free use of the scriptures which was then introduced, by a divine
blessing, produced a great reformation, yet still the high places were not
taken away, and the lord bishops made such work in them, as drove our fathers
from thence into America. The first colony that came to this part of it carried
the reformation so far, as not to make use of the civil power to save the
people to support religious ministers (for which they have had many a lash from
the tongues and pens of those who were fond of that way) but the second colony,
who had not taken up the cross so as to separate from the national church
before they came away, now determined to pick out all that they thought was of
universal and moral equity in Moses's laws, and so to frame a christian
commonwealth here. Massachusetts history, vol. 3. p. 161.
And as the Jews were ordered not to set up any rulers over them who were not
their brethren; so this colony resolved to have no rulers nor voters for
rulers, but brethren in their churches. And as the Jews were required to
inflict corporal punishments, even unto death, upon non-conformers to their
worship, this commonwealth did the like to such as refused to conform to their
way; and they strove very hard to have the church govern the world, till they
lost their charter; since which they have yielded to have the world govern the
church, as we shall proceed to show.

SECTION II.
A brief view of how civil and ecclesiastical affairs are blended together
among us, to the depriving of many of God's people of that liberty of
conscience which he has given them.

We are not insensible than an open appearance against any part of the conduct
of men in power, is commonly attended with difficulty and danger; and could we
have found any way wherein with clearness we could have avoided the present
attempt, we would gladly have taken it. But our blessed Lord and only Redeemer,
has commanded us, to stand fast in the liberty wherewith he has made us free;
and things appear so to us at present that we cannot see how we can fully obey
this command, without refusing any active compliance with some laws about
religious affairs that are laid upon us. And as those who are interested
against us, often accuse us of complaining unreasonably, we are brought under a
necessity of laying open particular facts which otherwise we would gladly have
concealed: and all must be sensible that there is a vast difference between
exposing the faults, either of individuals or communities, when the cause of
truth and equity would suffer without it, and the doing of it without any such
occasion. We view it to be our incumbent duty, to render unto to Caesar the
things that are his, but that it is of as much importance not to render unto
him any thing that belongs only to God, who is to be obeyed rather than man.
And as it is evident to us, that God always claimed it as his sole prerogative
to determine by his own laws, what his worship shall be, who shall minister in
it, and how they shall be supported; so it is evident that their prerogative
has been, and still is, encroached upon in our land. For,

1. Our legislature claim a power to compel every town and parish within their
jurisdiction, to set up and maintain a pedobaptist worship among them; although
it is well known, that infant baptism is never expressed in the Bible, only is
upheld by men's reasonings, that are chiefly drawn from Abraham's covenant
which the Holy Ghost calls, The covenant of circumcision, Acts 7. 8. And as
circumcision was one of the handwriting of ordinances which Christ has blotted
out, where did any state ever get any right to compel their subjects to set up
a worship upon that covenant?

2. Our ascended Lord gives gifts unto men in a sovereign way as seems good
unto him, and he requires Every man, as he has received the gift, even so to
minister the same; and he reproved his apostles when they forbid one who was
improving his gift, because he followed not them. 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. Luke 9. 49.
But the Massachusetts legislature, while they claim a power to compel each
parish to settle a minister, have also determined that he must be one, who has
either an accademical degree, or a testimonial in his favor from a majority of
the ministers in the county where the parish lies. So that let Christ give a
man ever so great gifts, yet hereby these ministers derive a noble power from
the state, to forbid the improvement of the same, if he follows not their
schemes. It has been the custom of minister's who are settled in this way, for
these thirty years past, to apply the gainsaying of Core to those who have
dissented from them; as if they were as certainly in the right way, as Moses
and Aaron were. And 16 ministers in the county of Windham, in a public letter
to their people in 1744, style theirs, The instituted churches; and those who
had withdrawn from them, uninstituted worship; and then they go on to assert,
that Deuteronomy. 13, prove that the people, May not go after it, any more than --
after a false god. p. 42. 43.
And if the apostles assumed too much in this respect to themselves, even when
their Lord was with them, can it be any breach of charity to conclude that
ministers are not out of danger of doing the like now? especially if we
consider how interest operates in the affair! For,

3. Though the Lord has ordained that they which preach the gospel shall live
of the gospel; or by the free communications to them, which his gospel will
produce. 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. Gal. 6. 6. 7. Yet the ministers of our land have
chosen to live by the law; and as a reason therefore, one of their most noted
writers, instead of producing any truth of God, recites the tradition of a man,
who said, Ministers of the gospel would have a poor time of it, if they must
rely on a free contribution of the people for their maintenance And he says,
The laws of the province having had the royal approbation to ratify them, they
are the king's laws. By these laws it is enacted, that there shall be a public
worship of God in every plantation; that the person elected by the majority of
the inhabitants to be so, shall be looked upon as the minister of the place;
that the salary for him, which they shall agree upon, shall be levied by a rate
upon all the inhabitants. In consequence of this, the minister thus chosen by
the people, is (not only Christ's but also) in reality, the king's minister;
and the salary raised for him, is raised in the king's name, and is the king's
allowance unto him. Dr. Cotton Mather's Ratio Disciplinae; or faithful account
of the discipline professed and practiced in the churches of New England, 1726.
p. 20.


Now who can hear Christ declare, that his kingdom is, NOT OF THIS WORLD, and
yet believe that this blending of church and state together can be pleasing to
him? For though their laws call them "orthodox ministers," yet the grand test
of their orthodoxy, is the major vote of the people, be they saints or sinners,
believers or unbelievers. This appears plain in the foregoing quotation; and
another of their learned writers lately says, It is the congregation in it is
parocal congregational capacity, that the law considers; and this as such does
not enough partake of an ecclesiastical nature to be subject to ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. Dr. Styles on the christian union. p. 85.


Hence their ministers and churches must become subject to the court, and to
the majority of the parish in order to have their salary raised in the king's
name: But how are either of them in the mean time subject to the authority of
Christ in his church? How can any man reconcile such proceedings to the
following commands of our Master which is in heaven? Mat. 23. 9, 10. What
matter of grief and lamentation is it, that men otherwise so knowing and justly
esteemed, should by the traditions of men be carried into such a crooked way as
this is! for though there is a show of equity in allowing every society to
choose it is own minister; yet let them be ever so unanimous for one who is of a
different mode from the court, their choice is not allowed. Indeed as to
doctrine ministers who preach differently, yea directly contrary to each other,
about Christ and his salvation, yet are supported by these laws which at the
same time limit the people to one circumstantial mode.

It is true the learned author just now quoted says, If the most of the
inhabitants in a plantation are episcopalians, they will have a minister of
their own persuasion; and the dissenters, in the place, if there be any, must
pay their proportion of the tax for the support of this legal minister.
According to this rule, whoever gets the upper hand may tax the rest to their
worship; but when will men learn the madness of such conduct!

Sir Henry Vane, who was governor of the Massachusetts in 1636, but whom
governor Winthrop obliged the next year to leave the colony, he at a time when
he had great influence in the British parliament wrote to governor Winthrop
thus:

The exercise and troubles which God is pleased to lay upon these kingdoms and
the inhabitants in them, teaches us patience and forbearance one with aother in
some measure, though there be difference in our opinions, which makes me hope
that, from the experience here, it may also be derived to yourselves, least
while the congregational way amongst you is in freedom, and is backed with
power, it teaches it is oppugners here to extirpate it and root it out, from its
OWN PRINCIPLES and PRACTICE.

Sir, I am your affectionate friend, and servant in Christ, H. Vane.
June 10. 1645. Massachusetts histroy, vol. ^. p. ^^7.


But then his next words show that they did not intend ever to have such a case
here; for he says, In a few of the towns, a few of the people, in hope of being
released from the tax for the legal minister, sometimes profess themselves
episcopalians. But when they plead this for their exemption, their neighbors
tell them, They know in their conscience they do not as they would be done
unto. And if a governor go by his arbitrary power, to supersede the execution
of the law, and require the justices and constables to leave the episcopalians
out of the tax, they wonder he is not aware, that he is all this while,
forbidding that the king should have his dues paid unto him; and forbidding the
king's ministers to receive what the king has given him. Ratio Disciplinae, p.
20, 21.


How essentially and how greatly does this constitution differ, and from the
institutions established in God's word, both in their nature and effects?

1. In their nature. Here you find that every religious minister in that
constitution, is called the king's minister, because he is settled by direction
of the king's laws, and the tax for such a minister's support is raised in the
king's name, and is called the king's dues: whereas no man in the Jewish church
might approach to minister at the holy altar, but such as were called of God,
as was Aaron: and the means of their support, were such things as God required
his people to offer and consecrate to Him; and when they withheld the same, he
says, ye have robbed ME, even this whole nation; and it is represented as his
peculiar work to reward obedience, and to punish disobedience in such affairs.
Exodus 23, 15, 16. Deuteronomy. 16. 16, 17. and chap. 26. Mal. 3. 7 -- 12. Hag. 1. 6 --
11. and 2. 17 -- 19. Luke 12. 21.
It is evident from sacred record, that good men in every station, used their
influence by word and example to stir up their fellow servants to do their duty
toward God in these respects; and good rulers, in conjunction with
church officers, took care to have what was offered to him secured and
distributed according to God's commandments. 1 Chronicles. 29. 2 Chronicles. 31. Nehem.
13. 10 -- 13.
But what is there in all this that can give the least countenance to the late
method, of men's making laws to determine who shall be Christ's ministers, and
to raise money for them in their own name! Christ said to the Jews, I am come
in my Father's name, and ye receive me not; if another shall come in his own
name, him ye will receive. How can ye believe, which receive honor one of
another, and seek not the honor that comes from GOD ONLY? John 5. 43, 44.

Even a heathen monarch, when he was moved to make a decree in favor of God's
minister's and worship at Jerusalem, it was to restrain their enemies from
injuring or interrupting of them, and to order that a portion of the king's
goods should be given unto the elders of the Jews for the building of the house
of God, and for the burnt-offerings of the God of heaven. Ezra. 6. 6 -- 9.
Nothing appears of his levying any new tax for worship, only that he gave the
articles there specified out of his own goods; yet some professed christians
have imposed new taxes upon people on purpose to compel them to support their
way of worship, and have blended it with other rates, and then called it all a
civil tax. But as the act itself is deceitful so it is likely that the worship
supported by such means is hypocrisy. For,

2. The effects of the constitution of our country are such, that as it makes
the majority of the people the test of orthodoxy, so it emboldens them to usurp
God's judgment seat, and (according to Dr. Mather's own account, which we have
often seen verified) they daringly give out their sentence, That for a few to
profess a persuasion different from the majority, it must be from bad motives;
and that, they know in their conscience that they do not act by the universal
law of equity, if they plead to be exempted from paying the money which the
majority demand of them! And though in our CHARTER the king grants to all
protestants equal liberty of conscience: yet for above thirty years after it
was received, the congregationalists made no laws to favor the consciences of
any men, in this affair of taxes, but their own sect; and it is here called
arbitrary power, and even a forbidding that the king should have his dues, if a
governor showed so much regard to the Charter, as to oppose their extorting
money from people of the king's denomination, for their congregational
ministers. And perhaps the learned author now referred to, never delivered a
plainer truth, than when he said, The reforming churches flying from Rome,
carried some of them more, some of them less, all of them something of Rome
with them, especially in that spirit of imposition and persecution which too
much cleaved to them.

These evils cleaved so close to the first fathers of the Massachusetts, as to
move them to imprison, whip and banish men, only for denying infant baptism,
and refusing to join in worship that was supported by violent methods: yet they
were so much blinded as to declare. That there was this vast difference between
these proceedings and the coercive measures which were taken against themselves
in England, viz. We compel men to "God's institutions;" they in England
compelled to "men's inventions." And they asserted that the baptists were guilty
of manifest contestations against the order and government of our churches,
established (we know) by God's law. Massachusetts history, vol. 3. p. 404, 406.
Though they professed at the same time that, It is not lawful to censure any,
no not for error in fundemental points of doctrine or worship, till the
conscience of the offender, be first convinced (out of the word of God) of the
dangerous error of his way, and then if he still persist, it is not out of
conscience, but against his conscience (as the apostle says, Tit. 3. 11.) and
so he is not persecuted for cause of conscience, but punished for sinning
against his conscience. Mr. John Cotton's piece which he called, The bloody
tenet washed. Printed 1647, p. 126. Mr. Roger Williams in his reply, observes
that Tit. 3. 11, and other texts which speak of church discipline, are
perverted to support state-oppression and violence. p. 131.
In reply to which Mr. Williams says, The truth is, the carnal sword is
commonly the judge of the conviction or obstinacy of all supposed heretics.
Hence the faithful witnesses of Christ, Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, had not a
word to say in the disputations at Oxford: Hence the non-conformists were cried
out as obstinate men, abundantly convinced by the writings of Whitgift and
others: and so in the conference before king James at Hampton court, etc.
Williams's reply to Cotton, 1652. p. 192.


But says he, Every lawful mgaistrate, whether succeeding or elected, is not
only the minister of God, but the minister or servant of the people also (what
people or nation soever they be all the world over) and that minister or
magistrate goes beyond his commission, who intermeddles with that which cannot
be given him in the commission from the people. Page 96.
If the civil magistrate must keep the church pure, then all the people of the
cities, nations and kingdoms of the world must do the same much more, for
primarily and fundementally they are the civil magistrate. Now the world says
John lies in-wickedness, and consequently according to it is disposition
endures not the light of Christ, nor his golden candlestick the true church,
nor easily chooses a true christian to be her officer or magistrate. The
practicing civil force upon the consciences of men, is so far from preserving
religion pure, that is a mighty bulwark or barricado, to keep out all true
religion, yea and all godly magistrates for ever coming into the world. Page
112.


How weighty are these arguments against confounding church and state together?
yet this author's appearing against such confusion, was the chief cause for
which he was banished out of the Massachusetts colony. And though few if any
will now venture openly to justify those proceedings, and many will exclaim
against them at a high rate; yet a fair examination may plainly show, that
those fathers had more appearance of a warrant for doing as they did, than
their children now have, for the actings which we complain of. For those
fathers were persuaded, that the judicial laws of Moses which required Israel
to punish blasphemers, and apostates to idolatry with death, were of moral
force, and binding upon all princes and states; Bloody tenet washed, p. 55.
especially on such as these plantations were. Massachusetts history, vol. 3.
p. 161.
And how much more countenance did this give for the use of force to make men
conform to what they believed to be the right way, than men can now have for
compelling any to support a way which at the same time they are allowed to
dissent from? For the Jews also were required to pull down houses, and to have
persons away out of their camps or cities, if the priests pronounced them
unclean; and they were not permitted to set up any king over them who was not a
brother in their church. Did not these things afford arguments much more
plausible, for their attempt to compel the world to submit to the church, than
any can have for the modern way, of trying to subject the church in her
religious affairs to rulers, and the major vote of inhabitants, a great part of
whom are not brethren in any church at all! Though the state of Israel was
obliged thus to inflict death or banishment upon non-conformers to their
worship, yet we have not been able to find, that they were ever allowed to use
any force to collect the priests or prophets maintenance. So far from it, that
those who made any such attempts were sons of Beliel, and persons that abhorred
judgment, and perverted ALL EQUITY. 1 Samuel 2. 12 -- 16. Mic. 3. 5, 9.

Many try to vindicate their way by that promise, that kings shall become
nursing fathers, and queens nursing mothers to God's people. But as the
character carries in it is very nature, an impartial care and tenderness for all
their children; we appeal to every conscience, whether it does not condemn the
way of setting up one party to the injury of another. Our Lord tells us
plainly, that few find the narrow way, while many go in the broad way; yet the
scheme we complain of, has given the many such power over the few, that if the
few are fully convinced that the teacher set up by the many, is one that
causes people to err, and is so far from bringing the pure gospel doctrine,
that they should break the divine command, and become partakers of his evil
deeds; if they did not cease to hear him, or to receive him into their houses
as a gospel minister; Prove. 19 ^7 ^ John 10* 11*
yet only for refusing to put into such a minister's mouth, the many are
prepared with such instruments of war against them, as to seize their goods, or
cast their bodies into prison, where they may starve and die, for all what that
constitution has provided for them. In cases of common debts the law has
provided several ways of relief, as it has not in the case before us; for here
the assessors plead, that they are obliged to tax all according to law, and the
collector has the same plea for gathering of it, and the minister says, I
agreed with the society for such a sum, and it is not my business to release
any. So that we have had instances of serious christians, who must have died in
prison for ministers rates, if christianity and humanity had not moved people
to provide them that relief, which neither those ministers nor the law that
upholds them have done.

Another argument which these ministers often mention, is the apostolic
direction to us, to pray for all that are in authority, that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. But do they pray and act
according to that direction? One while they cry up the great advantages of
having religion established by law; and some have caused near as loud a clamor
about it as the craftsmen did at Ephesus; but when it comes to be calmly
represented, that, Religion is a voluntary obedience unto God, which therefore
force cannot promote; how soon do they shift the scene, and tell us, that
religious liberty is fully allowed to us, only the state have in their wisdom
thought fit to tax all the inhabitants, to support an order of men for the good
of civil society. A little while ago it was for religion, and many have
declared, that without it we should soon have no religion left among us: but
now it is to maintain civility. Though by the way, it is well known, that no men
in the land, have done more to promote uncivil treatment of dissenters from
themselves, than some of these pretended ministers of civility have done. In
1644 the court at Boston passed an act to punish men with banishment, if they
opposed infant baptism, or departed from any of their congregations when it was
going to be administered. Mr. Clark's narrative, p. 35.
And after they had acted upon this law, one of their chief magistrates
observed, that such methods tended to make hypocrites. To which a noted
minister replied, That if it did so, yet such were better than profane persons,
because said he, Hypocrites give God part of his due, the outward man, but the
profane person gives God neither outward nor inward man. Massachusetts
history, vol. 3. p. 405.
By which it seems that in that day, they were zealous to have the outward man
if no more given to God; but now that conduct is condemned as persecution, by
their children, who profess to allow us full liberty of conscience, because
they do not hinder our giving our inward man to God, only claim a power to
seize our outward man to get money for themselves. And though many of us have
expended ten or twenty times as much, in setting up and supporting that worship
which we believe to be right, as it would have cost us to have continued in the
fashionable way, yet we are often accused of being coveteous, for dissenting
from that way, and refusing to pay more money out of our little incomes, to
uphold men from whom we receive no benefit, but rather abuse. How far is this
from leading a peaceable life, either of godliness or honesty!

SECTION III.
A brief account of what the baptists have suffered under this constitution,
and of their reasons for refusing any active compliance with it.

Many are ready to say, the baptists are exempted from ministerial taxes,
therefore why do they complain? Answer, We would be far from forgetting or
undervaluing of our privileges: but are willing thankfully to acknowledge, that
our honored rulers do protect our societies, so as not to allow them to be
interrupted in their worship; and as the taking cognizance of marriage belongs
to them, we take it as a favor that they grant our ministers power to
administer it, so that we may have marriage solemnized among ourselves. Many
other liberties we also enjoy under the government that is set over us, for
which we desire to be thankful, both to the Author, and to the instruments of
them. Yet if our opponents could once put themselves into our place, we doubt
not but they would think it was high time, to seek for more full liberty than
we have hitherto enjoyed, a short view of but a little part of what we have met
with, my be sufficient to evince this.

Our charter, as before observed, gives us equal religious liberty with other
christians: yet the pedobaptists being the greatest party, they soon made a
perpetual law lo support their own way, but did nothing of that nature to
exempt our denomination from it, for 36 years; and since that time, what they
have done in that respect has only been by temporary acts, which have been so
often changed, that many times their own officers have hardly known what the
law was, that was in force; and as an exact conformity to the letter of their
laws is much insisted upon in their executive courts, while those acts have
never been enforced with penalties upon their own people, they have often
broken them, and we have had but little chance to get them punished for so
doing. For in all their acts till the last, they have imposed a name upon us,
that signifies re-baptizers, which we cannot understandingly own. In many acts
the words, "belonging thereto," were inserted so ambigously, as to leave it
disputable, whether a being church members, or only a belonging to the
congregation or worshipping assembly were intended; and in the case of
Haverhill, where their certificate was otherways complete, and the case had
been determined in the baptists favor, in that which both parties had agreed
should be the final trial; yet another hearing was obtained, in which the want
of them ambiguous words in the certificate, was made the main plea by which an
action was turned against us, of near three hundred dollars. All their latter
acts have required a list or lists of our societies, to be given in annually by
a certain day, signed by three principal members, and the minister if there be
any; and because one of our churches of above 50 members (and which is now a
church in good credit) happened one year to have such a difficulty with their
minister, as prevented the giving in of said list, they were taxed to
pedobaptist ministers; and though some of the society were advised to apply to
their county court for relief, yet instead of obtaining any, the court took
away 20 dollars more from them. Another church gave in their list by the
direction of a noted lawyer, yet they were all taxed to the pedobaptist
worship, and one of the principal members of the baptist church, which the law
directed to sign the list, was strained upon; and both the inferior and
superior court turned the case against him, because he was a party concerned.

Here note, the inhabitants of our mother country are not more of a party
concerned, in imposing taxes upon us without our consent, than they have been
in this land who have made and executed laws, to tax us to uphold their
worship. This party influence has appeared in a much larger number of instances
than we are willing to trouble the public with at this time; but one instance
more will set our case in such a striking light, that we must ask for a very
serious attention to it; we mean that of Ashfield, formerly called Hunts-town
in the county of Hampshire. One of the conditions on which that plantation was
granted by our legislature, was their settling a learned orthodox minister, and
building a meeting house. Now in the year 1761, full two thirds of the
inhabitants called and settled a minister, who they believed was taught of God
and truly orthodox. But not being of the same mode with the court (for they
were baptists) other people were prompted on, before this society could get up
a meeting house, to settle another minister, and to tax the first minister with
all his people to support their way. This burden the baptists bore for a number
of years, till in 1768, they presented a petition to our general court for
relief; who ordered that they should serve the town and proprietors of Ashfield
with a copy of the petition, that they might show cause, if any they had, at
the next session of the court why it should not be granted, and that a further
collection of taxes from the petitioners should be suspended in the mean time.
Yet in the same session of the court, a law was made which cut the baptists in
that place, off from any exemption from ministerial taxes at all. In
consequence of which several hundred acres of their lands were sold at public
auction, for but a small part of their real value; of which ten acres belonged
to the baptist minister. And after five or six journies of above an hundred
miles to seek relief, and long waiting without success, their messenger was at
last plainly told, by a number of our representatives, That they had a right to
make that law, and to keep the baptists under it as long as they saw fit.
Hereupon notice was given in some Boston papers, of a design among our churches
of joining to seek redress from another quarter.

Accordingly at an association or general meeting of our churches at
Bellingham, in September, 1770, these things were considered, and it was
unanimously agreed upon to apply to his Majesty for help, if it could not
speedily be obtained here, and a committee and agents were chosen for that
purpose. When news hereof was spread, our committee were urged by leading men
both in church and state, to apply again to our general court; which therefore
they did in October following. In the mean time a piece dated from Cambridge,
where the court was then sitting, was published in all the Boston newspapers,
wherein it was represented that, All possible care had been taken to prevent
our suffering the least disadvantage from our religious sentiments; and we were
challenged to show the contrary if we could.

Upon this the pious and learned Mr. John Davis, who from Pennsylvania had not
long before been ordained pastor of the second baptist church in Boston, and
who was clerk of our committee, called them together to consider of this
matter. And though they were far from desiring to enter into a news-paper
controversy, yet they advised him to make some reply to that challenge: He did
so; and on Dec. 27, published a brief and plain view of the case of Ashfield:
but instead of any fair and manly treatment upon it, he in the Evening-Post o^
Jan. 7, 1771, was not only insulted with the names of, A little upstart
gentleman; enthusiastical biggot; and, this stripling high-fliar; but had it
also insinuated that he was employed by the enemies of America to defame and
blacken the colonies, and this town in particular. And they had the impudence
to pretend to the world, that all this was wrote by a CATHOLIC BAPTIST. And
they inflamed the populace so against Mr. Davis, that his most judicious
friends were afraid of his being mobbed. But can it be in the power of others
to blacken any people so much, as by this treatment of a worthy stranger (now
at rest) they have blackened themselves! Instead of honestly coming to the
light (which our Lord gives as the criterion to know him that does truth, John
3. 21.) how do they hover in the works of darkness.

The first article in our committee's petition to the legislature, being for
Ashfield, they were ordered to notify the proprietors thereof: They did so; and
in the spring session of the assembly, they came with a long address against
us, in which they begin, with saying more generally of the baptists in that
part of the province, The proprietors conceive it to be a duty they owe to God
and their country, not to be dispensed with, to lay open the characters, and
real springs of action of some of these people. Then they go on to say, The
rule the petitioners have set up, and on which alone they seem to ground their
claim of exemption, is falsely applied, and therefore all arguments bottomed on
it must be inconclusive. Natural rights, Here note, the plea of our petition
was for what we are Entitled to as men, as christians, and subjects of a free
government. -- Some of the laws of this province, we think deprive us of a
CHARTER privilege. These are what we grounded all our claims upon; yet they
insinuate that our claim was in this affair to be, restored to a state of
nature; like those who are under no civil government at all. Notwithstanding we
expressly speak of our being subjects of a free government, and pleaded
charter-privileges. Remember what is said of those who Turn aside to their
crooked ways!
as the respondents humbly conceive, are in this province wholly superceded in
this case by civil obligation, and in matters of taxation individuals cannot
with the least propriety plead them. Having thus denied us any claim from
natural rights, they resume what they call an indispensible duty, viz. an
attempt to lay before our honored legislature the baptists' character, and the
springs of their actions; and after a number of mean reflections without any
proof at all, they sum up the springs of the actions of most of them to be
Pride, vanity, prejudice, impurity and uncharitableness. Very dreadful indeed
if it could be proved! but that is referred to a hereafter, and they say, At
present we shall content ourselves with assuring your excellency and honors,
that the foregoing account is not exaggerated.

From this they proceed to observe, that as it belongs to rulers to protect and
support all regular religious societies of protestants, so they say, Whenever
any religion or profession wears an ill aspect to the state, it is become a
proper object of attention to the legislature. -- And this is the religion of
the people whom we have been describing. How much does this resemble the
language of him who said, It is not for the king's profit to suffer them! Ester
3. 8.
or theirs who cried, If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend!
John 19. 12.


After thus representing that the religion of the baptists that way, wears an
ill aspect to the state, they go on to speak of the conditions upon which
Ashfield was granted; and then try to prove that Mr. Ebenezer Smith, pastor of
the baptist church there, is not a minister in law, because he has neither an
accademical degree, nor a testimonial in his favor from the majority of the
ministers of that county. And to give an idea of the smallness of his ability
for teaching, they say, Taking occasion in one of his discourses upon that
passage of scripture, in which mention is made of the thick bosses of God's
buckler; instead of buckler, he gave his hearers the word butler. Being
interrogated by one occasionally present as to his meaning, he explained
himself so as clearly showed, he meant to connect the other part of the
sentence with the word butler, in the commonly received sense of the word.

The clearest light we have gained in the matter is this. After Mr. Smith had
been preaching in a neighboring town some years ago, a minister who was
present asked him what a butler was? he readily replied, Pharoah's cup bearer.
After a little more talk, said minister The minister who thus treated Mr. Smith
is nearly related to a ruler who has had a principal hand in all their troubles
at Ashfield, and likely they were confederates in forming this address against
them. And it is generally believed that it was the same minister who published
a piece against the baptists of Ashfield, in the Boston News-Letter of Feb. 7,
1771; to which Mr. Smith returned an Answer in the same paper of March 21,
following; wherein, from public records and other ways, he detected said writer
in a number of gross violations of truth.
asserted, That Mr. Smith used the word butler instead of buckler in his
sermon. He did not remember that he had; but if he did so, how injurious is the
above representation? is it not the evil which we read of in Isa. 29. 20, 21?
Having made this reflection upon Mr. Smith, they say, He has none of the
qualifications of a minister according to the laws of Christ, or of this
province, unless those of simplicity and orthodoxy. We wish his accusers were
so well qualified. 2 Cor. 1. 12. and 4. 2.

In April, 1771, the address we have made a few remarks upon was referred to a
commit of both houses of our general court, who reported that, Your commit
find, that in the sale of those lands there was no unfairness, but every thing
was quite fair, quite neighbourly, and quite legal. Twenty acres of said land
with a good orchard upon it, a man bid off in April, 1770, for 35 shillings,
which he sued for the next August, and laid his damages at eight pounds; but
upon trial the court found that the sale was Not legal, and therefore turned
the case against him. With what face then, said Mr. Davis, could the writer of
that report say as he does!
And as to our plea for exemption from ministerial taxes they say, There is an
essential difference between persons being taxed where they are not
represented, therefore against their wills, and being taxed when represented.
So they advised the court to dismiss our petition as unreasonable; and though
the honorable house of representatives did not accept that advice, but voted to
repeal the Ashfield law; yet the council refused to concur with them therein;
so that if his gracious Majesty in council had not disannuled said law for us,
our brethren of Ashfield must, for ought that appeared to the contrary, have
been entirely stripped of the inheritances, which they had purchased, and
subdued at the peril of their lives, because of the sword of the wilderness.

It may be remembered that the pedobaptist proprietors of Ashfield, represented
that the baptists there were not worthy of the protection of our legislature.
The following narrative may help to explain what they meant by it. The news of
what our king had done for them, arrived and was published in Boston the latter
end of October, 1771, at which their oppressors discovered great uneasiness;
and on the 8th of November came two officers with numerous attendants, to the
house of Mr. Smith, father of the baptist minister in Ashfield, (and very much
of a father to that society) with a warrant from the chief judge of that
county, to seize his person, and to search his house and shop for bad money:
and it was said they had a like warrant for the minister, but he happened to be
then absent on a journey. His father was made a prisoner before he was out of
his bed in the morning, and though he promised the use of his keys, and desired
that no lock might be broken, yet while he was at prayer with his family, for
which he obtained leave of one officer, the other broke open his shop, and did
considerable damage there; and after searching both that and his house as much
as they pleased, they carried him before the aforesaid judge and others; where
it plainly appeared that the complaint was entered against Mr. Smith from a
report, that he had put off a counterfeit dollar; which report was then proved
to be a false one. Yet the old gentleman was not released, but was kept a
prisoner through a cold night, in circumstances that greatly injured his
health, and next day was bro't on further examination, when even his frequent
retirement for secret devotion, which he had practiced for above forty years,
was catched hold of to raise a suspicion of his being guilty: and he was bound
over with two sureties to the next superior court in that county. Hereupon the
following men who had been called as witnesses against him, gave him their
testimony in writing, declaring that they were ready to make oath to it, in the
following terms, viz.

Ashfield, Nov. 11, 1771.
We the subscribers, who have been summoned to prove an indictment against
Chileab Smith, of his coining and putting off bad money do testify and say,
That we did not, nor cannot understandingly attest to one tittle of the
indictment, nor of any circumstance tending to prove the same. And we never saw
nor heard any thing in him that gave the least ground to mistrust, that he kept
a shop of secrecy, or did any thing there that he was afraid should be known;
and do believe the reports to the contrary are entirely false. As neither did
we in our judgments hear any of the said indictment in any measure proved by
any of the rest of the evidences; as witness our hands,

Ebenezer Sprague, Nathaniel Harvey, Jonathan Sprague, Nathan Chapin, Moses
Smith, 2d. Chileab Smith, jun. Nehemiah Sprague.



Also Leonard Pike, to whom the report was that Mr. Smith had put off a bad
dollar, gave from under his hand that said report had no truth in it. These are
eight of the ten witnesses that were summoned against Mr. Smith; and though much
pains was taken to procure evidence against him at the superior court, yet he
was entirely acquitted; and the law was open for him to come back for damages,
for a malicious prosecution; but they had contrived to have the complaint
against him entered by a bankrupt, so that no recompense might be obtained by
him. Are these the goodly fruits of having a particular mode of worship
established by law, and their ministers supported by force!

Though we are often accused of complaining without reason, yet no longer ago
than the 26th of last January, three men of good credit, belonging to a
numerous and regular baptist society in Chelmsford, were seized for ministerial
rates (notwithstanding they had given in a list according to law) and though
one of them was above four score years old, another very infirm in body, while
the third had no man at home, able to take care of the out-door affairs of his
numerous family, yet they, in that cold season, were all carried prisoners to
Concord goal.

These accounts we have received from good authority, and have taken great
pains to have them stated as exactly and truly as possible; and if any can
point out the least mistake in what has been now related, we shall be glad to
correct it. At the same time we are far from charging all the evils we complain
of, upon the whole congregational denomination without distinction; for we
believe there were many among them in various stations, who are sorely grieved
at these oppressions. We are willing also to make all the allowance that is
reasonable, for the influence of old customs, education and other prejudices,
in those who have injured their neighbors in these affairs; but is it not high
time now to awake, and seek for a more thorough reformation! We agree with the
committee of our honored legislature in saying, There is an essential
difference between persons being taxed where they are represented, and being
taxed where they are not so; therefore the whole matter very much turns upon
this point, viz. Whether our civil legislature are in truth our representatives
in religious affairs, or not? As God has always claimed it as his prerogative,
to appoint who shall be his ministers, and how they shall be supported, so
under the gospel, the peoples communications to Christ's ministers and members,
are called sacrifices with which God is well-pleased. Phil. 4. 18. Heb. 13, 16
-- 18. And what government on earth ever had, or ever can have any power to
make or execute any laws to appoint and enforce sacrifices to God!

In civil states the power of the whole collective body is vested in a few
hands, that they may with better advantage defend themselves against injuries
from abroad, and correct abuses at home, for which end a few have a right to
judge for the whole society; but in religion each one has an equal right to
judge for himself; for we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he
has done (not what any earthly representative has done for him) 2 Cor. 5. 10
And we freely confess that we can find no more warrant from divine truth, for
any people on earth to constitute any men their representatives, to make laws,
to impose religious taxes, than they have to appoint Peter or the Virgin Mary
to represent them before the throne above. We are therefore brought to a stop
about paying so much regard to such laws, as to give in annual certificates to
the other denomination, as we have formerly done.

1. Because the very nature of such a practice implies an acknowledgment, that
the civil power has a right to set one religious sect up above another, else
why need we give certificates to them any more than they to us? It is a tacit
allowance that they have a right to make laws about such things, which we
believe in our consciences they have not. For,

2. By the foregoing address to our legislature, and their committees report
thereon, it is evident, that they claim a right to tax us from civil
obligation, as being the representatives of the people. But how came a civil
community by any ecclesiastical power? how came the kingdoms of this world to
have a right to govern in Christ's kingdom which is not of this world!

3. That constitution not only emboldens people to judge the liberty of other
men's consciences, and has carried them so far as to tell our general assembly,
that they conceived it to be a duty they owed to God and their country, not to
be dispensed with, to lay before them the springs of their neighbors actions;
How are men deluded to think they do God service, when they violate his word! 1
Cor. 4. 5. Would not the same principle carry them to kill Christ's disciples
under the same pretense? John 16* 2.
but it also requires something of the same nature from us. Their laws require
us annually to certify to them, what our belief is concerning the conscience of
every person that assembles with us, as the condition of their being exempted
from taxes to other's worship. And only because our brethren in Bellingham,
left that clause about the conscience out of their certificates last year, a
number of their society who live at Mendon were lately taxed, and suffered the
spoiling of their goods to uphold pedobaptist worship.

4. The scheme we oppose evidently tends to destroy the purity and life of
religion; for the inspired apostle assures us, that the church is espoused as a
chaste virgin to Christ, and is obliged to be subject to him in every thing, as
a true wife is to her husband. Now the most chaste domestic obedience, does not
at all interfere with any lawful subjection to civil authority; but for a woman
to admit the highest ruler in a nation into her husband's place, would be
adultery or whoredom; and how often are men's inventions about worship so called
in the sacred oracles? Psalm 106. 39. We delight not in hard names, but every
vice ought to be called by it is proper name; and the custom in this adulterous
age of calling those, natural children, which God calls children of whoredom,
has doubtless had a pernicious effect upon many to embolden them to go on in
their filthy ways. God charged his ancient church with playing the harlot,
because she said, I will go after my lovers, that gave me my bread and my
water; -- For she did not know that I GAVE HER CORN, etc. Hosea 2. 5, 8. By
which it appears, that to fix our dependence upon any other beside the divine
Being, and to pursue any method beside his directions, to obtain the
necessaries and comforts of life, is whoredom; and does not the chief sin of
the mother of harlots lie in her fixing this dependence upon the kings of the
earth? Rev. 18. 3 -- 13.
And does it not greatly concern us all, earnestly to search out and put away
such evils, as we would desire to escape the awful judgments that such
wickedness has brought on other nations! Especially if we consider that not
only the purity, but also the very life and being of religion among us is
concerned therein; for it is evident that Christ has given as plain laws to
determine what the duty of people is to his ministers, as he has the duty of
ministers to his people; and most certainly he is as able to enforce the one as
the other. The common plea of our opponents is, that people will not do their
duty if rulers do not enforce it; but does not the whole book of God clearly
show, that ministers as often fail of doing their duty as the people do? And
where is the care of rulers to punish ministers for their unfaithfulness? They
often talk about equality in these affairs, but where does it appear! As Christ
is THE HEAD of all principality and power; so the not holding the Head, from
which all the body by joints and bands having NOURISHMENT MINISTERED, and KNIT
TOGETHER, increases with the increase OF GOD, but bringing in an earthly power
between Christ and his people, has been the grand source of antichristian
abominations, and of settling men down in a form of godliness, while they deny
the power thereof. Has not this earthly scheme prevailed so far in our land, as
to cause many ministers, instead of taking heed to the ministry received from
the Lord; and instead of watching for souls as those who must give an account,
Col. ^ 17 Heb. 13. 17.
rather to act as if they were not accountable to any higher power, than that
of the men who support them? -- and on the other hand, how do many people
behave as if they were more afraid of the collector's warrant, and of an
earthly prison, than of Him who sends his ministers to preach his gospel, and
says, He that receives whomsoever I send, receives me; but declares, That it
shall be more tolerable in the day of judgment for Sodom, than for those who
receive them not? Joh. 13. 20. Luke 10. 10.12
Yea, as if they were more afraid of an earthly power than of our great King
and Judge, who can this night require the soul of him that lays up treasure
for himself, and is not rich toward God; and will sentence all either to
heaven or hell, according as they have treated Him well or ill, in his
ministers and members. Luke 12. 20, 21. Mat. 25. 31, etc.


5. The custom which they want us to countenance, is very hurtful to civil
society: for by the law of Christ every man, is not only allowed, but also
required, to judge for himself, concerning the circumstantials as well as the
essentials, of religion, and to act according to the full persuasion of his own
mind; and he contracts guilt to his soul if he does the contrary. Romans 14. 5,
23. What a temptation then does it lay for men to contract such guilt, when
temporal advantages are annexed to one persuasion, and disadvantages laid upon
another? i. e. in plain terms, how does it tend to hypocrisy and lying? than
which, what can be worse to human society! Not only so, but coercive measures
about religion also tend to provoke to emulation, wrath and contention, and who
can describe all the mischiefs of this nature, that such measures have produced
in our land! But where each person, and each society, are equally protected
from being injured by others, all enjoying equal liberty, to attend and support
the worship which they believe is right, having no more striving for mastery or
superiority than little children (which we must all come to, or not enter into
the kingdom of heaven) how happy are it is effects in civil society? In the town
of Boston they enjoy something of these blessings, and why may not the country
have the same liberty? The ministers who have had the chief hand in stirring up
rulers to treat us as they have done, yet have sometimes been forced to commend
the liberty we plead for. When they wanted to get footing in the town of
Providence, they wrote to governor Jencks and other rulers there, in the
following words, viz.

Honorable gentlemen,
How pleasing to almighty God and our glorious Redeemer, and how conducible to
the the public tranquillity and safety, an hearty union and good affection of
all pious protestants whatsoever particular denomination on account of some
differences in opinion would be, by the divine blessing, yourselves as well as
we, are not insensible: and with what peace and love societies of different
modes of worship have generally entertained one another in your government, we
cannot think of of it without admiration: and we suppose under God, it is owing
to the choice liberty granted to protestants of all persuasions in the royal
charter graciously given you; and to the wise and prudent conduct of gentlemen
that have been improved as governors and justices in your colony. And after
more of this nature, they close with saying, We hope and pray, that ancient
matters (that had acrimony unhappily in them) may be buried in oblivion; and
that grace and peace and holiness and glory may dwell in every part of
New England; and that the several provinces and colonies in it, may love one
another with a pure heart fervently. -- We take leave to subscribe ourselves,
your friends and servants,

Peter Thatcher, John Danforth, Joseph Belcher, The first of these was minister
in Boston, the second in Dorchester, and the third in Dedham.


Dated Oct. 27. 1721. Committee of the Association.

The town of Providence wrote them an answer the next February, in which they
say, We take notice how you praise the love and peace that dissenters of all
ranks entertain one another with in this government. -- We answer, this
happiness principally consists in their not allowing societies any superiority
one over another; but each society support their own ministry of their own free
will, and not by constraint or force upon any man's person or estate. But the
contrary that takes any man's estate by force to maintain their own or any
other ministry, it serves for nothing but to provoke to wrath, envy and strife,
and this wisdom comes not from above, but is earthly, sensual and devilish. --
And since you wrote this letter, the constable of Attle-borough has been taking
away the estates of our dear friends, and pious dissenters to maintain their
minister; the like has been done in the town of Mendon. Is this the way of
peace? Is this the fruit of your love? Why do you hug the iniquity of Eli's
sons, and walk in the steps of the false prophets, to bite with the teeth, and
cry peace; but no longer than men put into your mouths than you prepare war
against them. -- Since you admire our love and peace, we pray you to use the
same methods, and write after our copy: and for the future never let us hear of
your pillaging conscientious dissenters to maintain your ministers. You desire
that all former injury done by you may be buried in oblivion. We say, far be it
from us to revenge ourselves; or to deal to you as you have dealt to us, but
rather say, Father forgive them, they know not what they do. But if you mean
that we should not speak of former actions, done hurtfully to any man's person,
we say, God never called for that, nor suffered it to be hid, as witness Cain,
Joab and Judas, are kept on record to deter other men from doing the like.
These extracts were carefully taken from an ancient printed copy of those
letters.


Here the public may take notice, how desirous pedobaptists ministers are to
have odious things on their side buried out of sight, but how contrary has
their practice ever been toward us? Even to this day they can hardly preach a
sermon, or write a pamphlet for infant baptism, without having something to say
about the mad men o^ Munster, who they tell us rebelled against their civil
rulers: Whereas in truth we never had the least concern with them, any more
than our opponents have with the Pope or Turk. Indeed they often assert, that
those mad men were the first that ever renounced infant baptism; but there is
proof enough from their own historians, that this story which they have so
often told from their pulpits, is as absolute a falsehood as ever was uttered by
man. And though one learned and pious president of Cambridge college, was
brought to embrace our sentiments, and to bear his testimony in the pulpit
there, against the administration of baptism to any infant whatsoever; for
which he suffered considerable abuse with much of a christian temper: Mr. Henry
Dunster. Vide Mitchel's (...) p. 67, ^^.
While his successor, another very learned and godly man, (who therefore must
have been well acquainted with the original) held that baptism ought ONLY to be
by dipping or plunging the whole body under water: Mr. Charles Chauncy. See an
account of Plymouth church, added to Mr. Robbins's Ordination-Sermon, 17^^.
yet these and other honorable examples in our favor have been passed over, and
every scandalous thing that could be picked up, has been spread, to prejudice
people's minds against our profession in general. And let it be remembered, that
when pedobaptist ministers wanted to be favored in Providence, they declared,
that they could not think of the peace and love which societies of different
modes of worship have generally entertained one another with in that government
without admiration; and they experienced so much of this from the baptists in
Providence, that when some others made a difficulty about admitting Mr. Josiah
Cotton (the first minister of the pedobaptists there) as an inhabitant in the
town, Col. Nicholas Powers (a leading member of the baptist church) became his
bondsman to the town: therefore we hope that our honorable rulers and others,
will be cautious about giving credit to stories of a contrary nature, when they
are told to procure or to justify the use of force in supporting ministers;
especially since ministers refuse to share in the reproach of such proceedings.
For a minister who has exerted himself very much of late, to support the cause
of those called standing churches, yet says, It is wholly out of rule, and
quite injurious, to charge the churches or their ministers with sending men to
goal for rates, -- for these proceedings are evidently the acts of the civil
state, done for it is OWN utility. The doings of the civil authority, and of
that ALONE. Mr. Joseph Fish's late piece called, The Examiner examined. p. 56,
59. -- A reply thereto, in which that constitution is more distinctly opened,
may be had at Mr. (...) in Union-street, Boston.
Where are the rulers that will stand alone in that practice, without either
ministers or truth to support them!

CONCLUSION.
And now our dear countrymen, we beseech you seriously to consider of these
things. The great importance of a general union through this country, in order
to the preservation of our liberties, has often been pleaded for with
propriety; but how can such a union be expected so long as that dearest of all
rights, equal liberty of conscience is not allowed? Yea, how can any reasonably
expect that HE who has the hearts of kings in his hand, will turn the heart of
our earthly sovereign to hear the pleas for liberty, of those who will not hear
the cries of their fellow subjects, under their oppressions? Has it not been
plainly proved, that so far as any man gratifies his own inclinations, without
regard to the universal law of equity, so far he is in bondage? so that it is
impossible for any one to tyranize over others, without thereby becoming a
miserable slave himself: a slave to raging lusts, and a slave to guilty fears
of what will be the consequence. We are told that the father of Cyrus, though a
heathen, Had often taught him to consider, that the prudence of men is very
short, and their views very limited; that they cannot penetrate into futurity;
and that many times what they think must needs turn to their advantage proves
their ruin; whereas the Gods being eternal, know all things, future as well as
past, and inspire those that love them to undertake what is most expedient for
them; which is a favor and protection they owe to no man, and grant only to
those that invoke and consult them. And we are told by the same author, Rollin
in his ancient history
of another wise heathen, who said, It Is observable, that those that fear the
Deity most, are least afraid of man. And shall not christians awake to a most
hearty reverence of HIM who has said, (and will ever make good his word) With
what measure ye meet, it shall be measured to you again.

Suffer us a little to expostulate with our fathers and brethren, who inhabit
the land to which our ancestors fled for religious liberty. You have lately
been accused with being disorderly and rebellious, by men in power, who profess
a great regard for order and the public good; and why don't you believe them,
and rest easy under their administrations? You tell us you cannot, because you
are taxed where you are not represented; and is it not really so with us? You
do not deny the right of the British parliament to impose taxes within her own
realm; only complain that she extends her taxing power beyond her proper
limits; and have we not as good right to say you do the same thing? and so that
wherein you judge others you condemn your selves? Can three thousand miles
possibly fix such limits to taxing power, as the difference between civil and
sacred matters has already done? One is only a distance of space, the other is
so great a difference in the nature of things, as there is between sacrifices
to God, and the ordinances of men. This we trust has been fully proved.

If we ask why have you not been easy and thankful since the parliament has
taken off so many of the taxes that they had laid upon us? you answer that they
still claim a power to tax us, when, and as much as they please; and is not
that the very difficulty before us? In the year 1747, our legislature passed an
act to free the baptists in general from ministerial taxes for ten years: yet
because they increased considerably, when that time was about half expired,
they broke in upon the liberty they had granted, and made a new act, wherein no
baptist church nor minister was allowed to have any such exemption. till they
had first obtained certificates from three other churches. By which the late
Mr. John Procter observed (in a remonstrance that he drew, and which was
presented to our court) that they had as far as in them lay, disfranchised,
unchurched and usurped an illegal power over all the religious societies of the
people in said act called anabaptists throughout this province: -- For where is
it possible for the poor anabaptists to find the first three authenticated
ministers and churches to authenticate the first three! So we have now related
a case, in which a number of our brethren were put to new cost for copies to
notify others, with hope of relief to themselves, and yet in the same session
of court, they had a worse burden laid upon them than before; and their
repeated cries, and then the petition of our united churches, were all rejected.

A very great greivance which our country has justly complained of is, that by
some late proceedings a man's house or locks cannot secure either his person or
his property, from oppressive officers. Pray then consider what our brethren
have suffered at Ashfield.

Many think it hard to be frowned upon only for pleading for their rights, and
laying open particular acts of encroachment thereon; but what frowns have we
met with for no other crime? and as the present contest between Great Britain
and America, is not so much about the greatness of the taxes already laid, as
about a submission to their taxing power; so (though what we have already
suffered is far from being a trifle, yet) our greatest difficulty at present
concerns the submitting to a taxing power in ecclesiastical affairs. It is
supposed by many that we are exempted from such taxes, but they are greatly
mistaken, for all know that paper is a money article, and writing upon it is
labor, and this tax we must pay every year, as a token of submission to their
power, or else they will lay a heavier tax upon us. And we have one difficulty
in submitting to this power, which our countrymen have not in the other case:
that is, our case affects the conscience, as their's does not: and equal
liberty of conscience is one essential article in our CHARTER, which
constitutes this government, and describes the extent of our rulers authority,
and what are the rights and liberties of the people. And in the confession of
faith which our rulers and their ministers have published to the world, they
say, God alone is Lord of the conscience, and has left it free from the
doctrines and commandments of men, which are, in any thing contrary to his
word; or not contained in it; so that to believe such doctrines, or to obey
such commands, out of conscience, is to betray true liberty of conscience; and
the requiring of an implicit faith, and an absolute blind obedience, is to
destroy liberty of conscience and reason also.

And a most famous historian of their's, after mentioning some former
violations of that liberty, says, The great noise that has been made in the
world about the persecution made in New England, I will now stop with only
transcribing the words uttered in the sermon to the first great and general
assembly of the Massachusetts Bay, after the two colonies of Massachusetts and
Plymouth were by Royal Charter united. (from 2 Chronicles. 12. 12.)

Things will go well, when magistrates are great promoters of the thing that
good is, and what the Lord requires of them. I do not mean that it would be
well for the civil magistrate, with civil penalty to compel men to this or that
way of worship, which they are conscientiously indisposed unto. He is most
properly the officer of human society, and a christian by nonconformity to
this or that imposed way of worship, does not break the terms on which he is to
enjoy the benefits of human society. A man has a right unto his life, his
estate, his liberty, and his family, although he should not come up unto these
and those blessed institutions of our Lord. -- Violences may bring the
erroneous to be hypocrites, but they will never bring them to be believers; no,
they naturally prejudice men's minds against the cause, which is therein
pretended for, as being a weak, a wrong, an evil cause. Magnalia, B. 7. p. 28,
29.


These things were then delivered and were received with the thanks of the
house of representatives, and ten years after were spread by the historian
through the nation, with the express design of stoping any further complaints
about New-England's persecutions. But if the constitution of this government,
gives the magistrate no other authority than what belongs to civil society, we
desire to know how he ever came to impose any particular way of worship, upon
any town or precinct whatsoever? And if a man has a right to his estate, his
liberty and his family, notwithstanding his nonconformity to the magistrates
way of worship, by what authority has any man had his goods spoiled, his land
sold, or his person imprisoned, and thereby deprived of the enjoyment both of
his liberty and his family, for no crime at all against the peace or welfare of
the state, but only because he refused to conform to, or to support an imposed
way of worship, or an imposed minister. Many pretend that without a tax to
support ministers, the public would suffer for want of due encouragment of
useful learning. But human learning is surely as needful for physicians and
lawyers as for spiritual teachers; and dare any deny that the affairs of law
and physic fall more directly under the notice of the state than divinity
does? why then do our legislature leave every man, and woman too, at liberty to
choose their own lawyer and physician, and not oblige them either to employ or
pay any other, though the majority may prefer them? Can any better reason be
rendered for this difference in conduct than this, viz. It has been found to be
an easier matter to impose upon people about their souls, than about their
bodies or their temporal estates!


In a celebrated oration for liberty, published last spring in Boston, a maxim
was recited which carries it is own evidence with it, which is this, NO MAN CAN
GIVE THAT WHICH IS ANOTHER'S. Yet have not our legislature from time to time,
made acts to empower the major part of the inhabitants in towns and precincts,
to give away their neighbors estates to what ministers they please! And can we
submit to such doctrines and commandments of men, and not betray true liberty
of conscience! Every person is or ought to be, benefited by civil government,
and therefore they owe rulers honor and a tribute on that account; but the like
cannot be truly said of an imposed minister; for as the gospel ministry is an
ordinance of God and not of man, so the obligation that any person or people
are under to obey and support any man as a minister of Christ, arises from the
consideration of his appearing to them to resemble his Master in doctrine and
conversation, and from the benefit which people receive under their
ministrations. Heb. 12. 7, 17. Phil. 4. 9, 10. 1 Cor. 9. 11. Gal. 6. 6. 1 Timothy
5. 17. 18.
From whence the law of equity makes the free communications of our carnal
things to Christ's ministers, to be a matter that as really concerns the
exercise of a good conscience toward God, as prayer and praise do; for they are
both called sacrifices to him in the same chapter. Heb. 13. 15, 16.

Thus we have laid before the public a brief view of our sentiments concerning
liberty of conscience, and a little sketch of our sufferings on that account.
If any can show us that we have made any mistakes, either about principles or
facts, we would lie open to conviction: But we hope none will violate the
forecited article of faith so much, as to require us to yield a blind obedience
to them, or to expect that spoiling of goods or imprisonment can move us to
betray the cause of true liberty.

A late writer in the Boston papers, has taken much pains to prove, that some
other colonies have imposed upon people in such affairs worse than New England
has; and to prove it he informs us, that an act for ministers maintenance, was
passed in New York near eighty years ago, which succeeding rulers have turned
to support a denomination that had very few representatives in court when the
act was made, while the denomination who made it, have been denied any benefit
from it. If so, how loud is the call to every man that is a friend to liberty,
and who regards the good of posterity, to rise and exert all his influence, to
demolish the engine which has done so much mischief in all ages! We are far
from trying to represent the fathers of New England as the worst of the
colonists; We believe the contrary. But our veneration for their memory, is so
far from reconciling us to, that it fills us with greater detestation of, that
mystery of iniquity, which carried them into such acts of imposition and
persecution as have left a great blemish upon their character. And since these
are tedious things to dwell upon, we shall close with this remark.

The Massachusetts ministers, in their letter to governor Jencks and other
baptists in Providence, said, We hope and pray that ancient matters that had
acrimony unhappily in them may be buried in oblivion. Now we are told that
acrimony signifies that quality in one body whereby it corrodes, eats up or
destroys another, This eating destroying quality is truly unhappy: but how can
it be buried before it is dead? The worst of criminals are to be executed
before they are buried. Therefore let this cruel man-eater be fairly executed,
and we are ready to join heart and hand to bury him, and not to have a bone of
him left for contention in all the land. If it be so hard to our opponents to
hear of these matters, what has it been to those who have felt their eating and
destroying influence for these hundred and forty years? And how can any person
lift up his head before God or man, and say he hopes to have these things
buried, if he at the same time holds fast, and tries hard to keep alive the
procuring cause of them!

The foregoing appeal, having been examined and approved by many of his
brethren, is presented to the public, by their humble servant,

ISAAC BACKUS.

POSTSCRIPT.
SINCE the above was written, I have received direct accounts, that at Montague
(whose case is mentioned p. 32.) they continue from time to time, to make
distress upon the principal members of the baptist church there, whom the law
directs to sign their certificates, while they let the rest of the society
alone. Also that William White a regular member of the baptist church in
Ashfield, who lives in Chesterfield, and has had his standing in said church
certified according to law; yet had a cow taken from him on August 25, 1773,
and sold the 30th, for the pedobaptist ministers rate; and that in both of
these places, the civil charges of the town, and the ministers salary are all
blended in one tax (contrary as I am informed to the law of our province) so
that our brethren who would readily pay their civil tax, yet cannot do it,
without paying the ministers also. Now the grand pretense that is made for the
use of the secular arm to support ministers is, that thereby equality is
established among the people; but what religion, equality or equity can there
be in the above proceedings!

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 9. line 12. read man. P. 12. l. 28. r. him. P. 14. l. 30. r. Julian. l.
32. r. decided. P. 15. l. 17. r. force. P. 17. l. 9. r. this. P. 21. l. 19.
dele and. P. 26. l. 1. dele the. l. 14. r. it is. P. 31. l. 19. r. to. P. 42.
l. 19. r. a^e. P. 44. l. 23. the word lately should be after and. P. 48. l. 14.
r. of. l. 20. dele of. P. 50. l. 5. r. you to us. Less mistakes are left to the
reader's candor.

BOOKS Published by Isaac Backus, Pastor of a Church in Middleborough.
1. A DISCOURSE on an internal call to preach the gospel. 2. A discourse from
Gal. 4. 31. There is added to the second edition, an answer to Mr. Frothingham
on baptism. 3. A Sermon on spiritual ignorance. 4. A Letter to Mr. Lord. 5. A
Sermon on the duty of family prayer. 6. A discourse entitled, True faith will
produce good works. 7. An examination of Mr. Fish's nine sermons. 8. Gospel
comforts under heavy tidings. 9. A plea for liberty of conscience. 10. A
vindication of sovereign grace. 11. A letter concerning religious taxes. 12. A
reply to Mr. Holly on baptism. 13. An Ordination Sermon. 14. A reply to Mr.
Fish.
The most of these may be had single at Mr. Phillip Freeman's in Union-Street,
Boston, and a few setts of the whole bound in two volumes.


