BRIEF CONSIDERATIONS ON SLAVERY AND THE EXPEDIENCY OF ITS ABOLITION. WITH SOME
HINTS on the MEANS whereby it may be gradually effected. Recommended to the
serious Attention of ALL, and especially of those entrusted with the Powers of
LEGISLATION.

But yet, admit the Sire his Right foregoes,
Can he his Childrens separate Claim dispose?
Whatever the Parent gave; whatever he give;
They who have Right to Life, have Right to live;
And Spite of Man's Consent, or Man's Decree,
A Right to Life, is Right to Liberty.
Anon: Epistle to Lord CORNBURY. BURLINGTON: Printed and Sold by ISAAC COLLINS,
M.DCC.LXXIII.

BRIEF CONSIDERATIONS ON SLAVERY, etc.
THE religious and moral Obligations we are under in a private capacity, to do
our utmost to promote the true interests of mankind, increase with our powers
and opportunities of action. Hence arises the importance of that trust, which
the wisdom of government has reposed in legislatures; in discharging which,
having the will, they have also the power of promoting those interests in the
most effectual manner. The object therefore, which I now take the liberty of
recommending to their attention, has an indisputable claim to it; not only from
its importance as relating to the community, but from a consideration which
must give it great additional weight with every generous mind -- the incapacity
of those on whose behalf it is solicited, to plead their own cause. It is the
case of the enslaved Africans -- a case which though familiarized to us by
custom, is yet in all its parts so replete with affecting circumstances, that
perhaps it has not its parallel in the history of any period of time; and
attended with the particular aggravation, of being acted under a government,
remarkable above all others for the excellence of its constitution, and the
equity of its laws. How it has happened that a nation, which has so eminently
distinguished itself in asserting the common rights of mankind, and which has
so often generously interposed its power for the relief of its oppressed
neighbors, should tolerate so grievous an infringement of liberty in its own
dominions, is difficult to comprehend. But my intention is not to expatiate on
the inconsistency of these generous exertions of its power, with the toleration
of the African slave trade. I hope it may be attributed to the multiplicity and
weight of other engagements, which have so much engrossed the attention of
government, that the iniquitous nature of this traffic has not been adverted
to; for certainly an acquaintance with it, could only be necessary for its
suppression. But without a further investigation of the cause, it is more to my
present purpose, to confine myself to such considerations, as being duly
attended to, may assist the cure of this malignant disorder in the body
politic. With this view, I shall briefly consider its inconsistency with the
divine, as well as the social law; its impolicy and evil tendency; and then
endeavor to point out the most probable means by which the evil may be
remedied.

IT cannot be denied that Slavery was allowed to the Israelites by the Mosaic
law, under certain circumstances and restrictions; yet it differed from this of
the Africans in several important particulars. Their bondmen and bondwomen
enjoyed many privileges; and in the year of Jubilee, liberty was proclaimed
unto all the inhabitants of the land. On the contrary, a large part of our poor
African slaves, have no ground to expect the most distant admission to liberty,
for either themselves, or their latest posterity. But even though we may
conceive Slavery to be reconcilable to the precepts given under that
dispensation; yet to every unprejudiced mind, it must appear totally repugnant
to the spirit and design of the gospel, the import of which was announced to
the world, in a manner awfully expressive of its superior excellence,
proclaiming Glory to GOD in the highest; peace on earth; and good will to men.
These glorious purposes, our blessed Savior, when personally among men,
inculcated by his example and doctrines; and, to give these greater efficacy,
finally sealed them with his blood. Various were the precepts he delivered, but
those relating to our social duties, are all comprised in that excellent
command, Therefore whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so
to them; for this is the law and the prophets. Mat. 7.12. St. Paul's opinion of
those concerned in the practice now under consideration, appears by his
enumerating them among a number of atrocious offenders for whom the law was
made, viz. Murderers of fathers; murderers of mothers; manslayers;
whoremongers; them that defile themselves with mankind; menstealers, etc.

THAT it is also an offense against the social law, cannot be contradicted; for
this law is founded on the necessity of mutual security, and a reciprocation of
benefits; and by the light of our natural reason, we cannot find a rule better
adapted to promote these ends, than that I have quoted from the vii. of
Matthew; to which both Christians and Pagans have joined in giving the
distinguishing appellation of the golden rule. The celebrated Montesquieu and
many others who have made the rights of mankind their particular study, assert
that men universally have an inherent title to Liberty; and the author I have
named, with no less strength than vivacity of reasoning, has refuted those
ridiculous arguments, which interested men have been obliged to adduce, in
support of a pretended opinion, that the color or unpolished manners of the
Africans, can operate against their claim to this first of temporal enjoyments.

IN these northern provinces there are not very many, who are immediately
concerned in the trade to Africa for Slaves; nor is the number of these
oppressed people very considerable, when compared with that of many other
colonies. Hence some, though admitting the injustice of the slave trade in
general, may yet be unwilling to view it as a matter sufficiently important for
the extraordinary interposition of a legislature; being perhaps insensibly
biased by interest, the prevalence of custom, or the example of less
enlightened times; thus lessening the force of those objections which calm
reflection had suggested. I would submit to the consideration of such, the
complicated distress these poor creatures suffer, in being forceably torn from
that portion of happiness, which the allwise Creator allotted to them in their
native state; to sustain for life, a bondage which, in our southern colonies
and islands, is more cruel and oppressive than the most of us in the northern
colonies have had an opportunity of forming any idea of. Add to this, the
bloody wars occasioned by this infernal trade -- the great proportion of them
who die on the passage to, and in what is called the seasoning in America; and
can we then hesitate a moment, in determining on the expediency of contributing
whatever lies in our power to discourage it. It is true some of our
forefathers, and some of the present generation, may have been, and yet are in
the practice of buying and selling slaves. The reasons against it, but a few
years ago, were not so well understood as they now are. The opportunities of
information are become more frequent; and the usage of them in general among
us, has been less likely to excite an inquiry into the nature of the trade, and
our title to their services. The practice of ages cannot sanctify error; but
the progress of reformation has, in all, been gradual. I doubt not there are
now many men in England, whose integrity we should revere, but who, for want of
proper information or attention to the subject, do yet admit the right of the
British parliament to tax the colonies; but we are not, for that reason obliged
to admit it. Having thus briefly considered the slave trade as contradictory to
the divine and social law, it is needless to urge the impropriety of any, and
especially a free people being in anywise concerned in it. I shall therefore
proceed to consider the particular inconveniences attending it, with respect to
the community.

THAT the trade is attended with many inconveniences of an evil and impolitic
tendency, has been lately clearly set forth by several writers. It will be
sufficient for me to enumerate a few of them. Every thing that debases the
mind, unfits it for society; and this is a distinguishing characteristick of
Slavery, which naturally suppresses every generous expansion of the mind.
Montesquieu, in his spirit of laws says, That nothing more assimilates a man
to a beast, than living among freemen, himself a slave: such people as these
are the natural enemies of society; and their number must always be dangerous.
Therefore the having slaves in our families or neighborhood, must have a
pernicious effect on the principles and morals of our young people and
servants. May we not fear that religion and morality, industry and public
spirit, have nearly declined in proportion as it has been encouraged? -- The
riches of a free state consists in the number of members, who enjoying its
privileges and blessings, are thereby interested in its preservation and
advancement. Every slave among us occupies the room of a free person, and not
only lessens the riches of the state by diminishing the number of its friends,
but adds one to that of its internal enemies; for such every one must be
accounted, who can derive no hope from its prosperity, and may possibly be
benefited by its ruin. Admitting this, what danger must attend our southern
colonies, in some of which, the proportion of slaves to freemen is greater than
as twelve to one?
While on the other hand, every servant on the expiration of a limited
servitude, setting out with the animating hope of acquiring an independence in
the community, and of enjoying the blessings of life, and the protection of the
laws, heartily unites in promoting the prosperity of his country; and, as that
hope is answered with success, becomes more and more deeply interested in its
safety: the beneficial effects of this on our lands and produce, are very
extensive, and too obvious to need a recital. -- In the present contest between
GreatBritain and her colonies, it seems particularly necessary on our parts to
convince her, that our opposition to her claims is not merely from selfish
motives -- not only made because they happen to affect our particular
interests; but from a disinterested generous love to liberty, founded on
principle -- on public virtue, and a conviction that it is the unalienable
right of man. But how can she believe this, when, so loudly complaining of her
attacks on our political liberty, all the colonies tolerate, and many of them
greatly encourage this violent invasion of natural liberty; subjecting the
Africans not only to the deprivation of all property, but even to the most
abject state of perpetual personal slavery? If we suppose the divine blessing
is necessary to ensure us success in asserting our rights; of how much
consequence is it, that we should practice the part enjoined by the divine
command, Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them?
If power only must determine our right, how little have we to expect? On the
other hand, were we armed with conscious innocence, and supported by the
justice of our cause; what have we to fear? With what confidence might we urge
our claims? But as a late writer on this subject observes, If we need the help
of the negroes; so does Great Britain need our help to pay off their national
debt. If we desire to grow rich, and rest at ease by their toils and labors;
so does Great Britain desire the same at our expense. So that while we persist
in this practice of enslaving the Africans, our mouths ought to be entirely
shut, as to any duties and taxes which Great Britain may see cause to lay upon
us. Otherwise I see not, but that out of our own mouths, or by our own
practice, we may be justly condemned.

HAVING given my sentiments on a trade and practice, which, to use the words of
the author of An essay in vindication of the continental colonies of America,
Policy rejects; justice condemns; and piety dissuades; I shall, from the same
respectable author, add, Shall Americans persist in a conduct which cannot be
justified; or persevere in oppression, from which their hearts must recoil? If
the barbarous Africans shall continue to enslave each other; let the demon
slavery remain among them, that their crime may include its punishment. Let not
Christians, by administering to their wickedness, confess their religion to be
a useless refinement, their profession vain, and themselves as inhuman as the
savages they detest.

I CANNOT believe there are any in the christian faith, who have attentively,
and dispassionately considered the subject, but will adopt the opinion, that
Slavery, in any case, cannot be justified -- that, as it is conducted in the
African trade, it is a most cruel, tyrannical and violent invasion of the
sacred rights of mankind; and highly offensive to Almighty God -- that it is
impolitick in its nature -- that the practice of buying and selling slaves
among ourselves is an evident encouragement of the trade; and that the
encouragement of it, by any means, is inconsistent with our civil and religious
interests. If we thus believe, it is certainly our indispensable duty in every
station, public or private, to exert ourselves for its suppression, whatever
difficulties may be apprehended to attend its final accomplishment. The
prejudices of custom are strong -- those imbibed from interest, yet stronger.
But in such a cause, we may be assured the blessing of Omnipotence will attend
our endeavors, and in due time crown them with success; not within our own
limits only; but our example will most probably have a happy influence on the
conduct of others more remote. It lies in our power, in some measure, to atone
for the wrongs our ancestors or ourselves have inadvertently imposed on these
oppressed people in time past.

IS not then the first and most important step, absolutely to prohibit any
future importations into these colonies. If by royal instructions, our
governors are prevented the exercise of their own judgments; provincial
addresses to the crown, would be likely to remove the difficulty. The sense of
the people, conveyed by their representatives to the royal ear, on so
interesting a subject, must prevail, with a prince whose virtues have endeared
him to his people, although it should be opposed by men, comparatively few in
number; whose avarice may continue to render them insensible to the common
feelings of humanity, and whose GOD is gain. If we cannot obtain a total
prohibition of the importation, we shall certainly be indulged in obtaining it
for the colonies which petition for it. Even should we fail here, the conscious
satisfaction of having done our duty, will be a reward sufficient for the
labor.

WITH respect to the slaves already among us, the case is more difficult, and
will consequently occasion a diversity of sentiments on the proper means of
effecting their enlargement. The first question is, What does justice require?
This being determined, the honest mind will endeavor to practice it. There are
many of this character, who, in pursuing the inquiry, have inclined to an
opinion, that some of these unhappy people are unfit for liberty; and that
their manumission would be attended with ruin to themselves. Such a state of
depravity is not impossible, and nothing so likely to occasion it, as a long
continuance in the situation they have been in. I wish there may not be many
instances of this kind. Where it happens to be the case, and the possessor,
after carefully divesting himself of any sinister bias, can justify a detention
on this motive, I shall not controvert his right to exercise his judgment.
There are also many, who not being yet sufficiently acquainted with the
subject, to see the iniquity of the practice, do not apprehend the necessity of
releasing their slaves. As these would be inclined to oppose, and those I have
before mentioned, for other reasons, may be rather averse to a general and
indiscriminate manumission; we may perhaps infer the expediency of postponing
that desirable work to a period more favorable to our wishes. In reformations
of all kinds, where conviction precedes conversion, the effect is most
permanent. But no objections occur to me, to the framing such laws, as will
leave people at liberty to emancipate their slaves under certain restrictions.

AS the laws stand at present in several of our northern governments, the act
of manumission is clogged with difficulties that almost amount to a
prohibition. An amendment is therefore necessary; and may be effected with
advantage to the community. We may suppose all the laws alluded to, are
intended to secure the public from being chargeable with any expense, in case
the manumised slave should by age, sickness, or other disability, become
incapable of supporting himself: and a provision of this nature seems highly
reasonable in certain cases. If, for instance, a slave is become aged and
infirm in my service, it is unreasonable I should have it in my power, by
manumission to deny him a support from my estate, to which perhaps his labor
had contributed. But if, on the other hand, I have received no other benefit
from his labor, than what was a proper compensation for the instruction I have
given him, and the public afterward receives that benefit, it is then as
reasonable, that the public should be chargeable with any expense, occasioned
by such disability. This seems to be the general principle on which our laws
relating to paupers are formed; and I see no inconvenience in adopting it in
the case now under consideration.

ADMITTING then, that if a slave is set at liberty at the age of twenty-one
years, the public afterward receives all the benefit of his labor, it will
follow that I may set him free at that age, clear of any charge or encumbrance
on my estate. If I detain him longer, and then give him his liberty, the same
reasoning supposes, that if the public is afterward liable to support him, in
case of disability, I must pay the public a certain sum of money
proportionable to the time of such detention exceeding twenty-one years. No
general rule can be exactly adapted to all cases. But I believe a law formed on
these principles, would not only greatly tend to the relief of individuals, but
remove some objections, to which I apprehend the present laws of several
provinces are liable; particularly those which permit manumission on the
master's entering security for the payment of a certain sum, in case the slave
should be disabled from maintaining himself. Now as this depends on a distant
contingency, an alteration in the circumstances of the master and his sureties,
(if any are required) may effectually disable him or them from making good
their engagements. Whereas in the mode I propose, the money due on every
manumission which requires it, being paid to a proper officer, remains secure
with the public. And if the slave on whose account it was paid, should never
want any assistance, the fund allotted for the purpose will be so much the
richer; which is a considerable advantage in its favor.

SOME may think it necessary that no manumission should legally operate in all
circumstances, beyond a certain age. The difficulty which would generally occur
in determining the age of a negro, might be removed by enabling a magistrate to
convene three or five men, who, or a majority of them, after hearing such
evidence as could be adduced, and judging from appearances, should declare
their judgment of his or her age. These, with many other particular
considerations, will doubtless be properly attended to, whenever a matter of
this consequence, comes under the immediate notice of a legislature. Some
difficulty may attend ascertaining with precision the sums which will be
necessary to pay, at the respective ages of manumission, to secure the public
from any unjust burden. It is a matter that requires judgment, and a particular
kind of calculation with which I am but little acquainted. But as it may
further explain what I have suggested; I will venture a few more hints on the
subject.

I understand that on emancipating a slave in Pennsylvania, the law requires
security should be entered for 30l. without any regard to age, or any other
circumstances; and that if the person so emancipated, should afterward require
assistance, any expense exceeding that sum, is paid by the township to which he
or she may belong. Although this mode is liable to some exceptions, for reasons
before given, I have never heard of any burden, arising therefrom, occasioning
any uneasiness among the people of that province. Hence we may infer that the
sum of 30l. has been generally found sufficient for the purpose. By the Breslau
bills of mortality, it is found that the chances are equal, that a man of fifty
years of age will live seventeen years. Let us consider what inconveniences
might arise, if 20l. was paid on the manumission of a slave of that age, who
afterward lived seventeen years, in the first ten of which, we will suppose he
could support himself by his labor; and that in the remaining seven he
required assistance, the expense whereof amounted to 30l. which, as
beforementioned, experience has found to be sufficient. Now 20l. put to
interest (or applied to the other uses of the fund, which is the same thing)
for ten years, at six per centum per annum, amounts to 32l. which leaves a
balance in favor of the public of 2l. besides the interest still arising on
the decreasing principle, after the first ten years, and the benefit of his
labor; which would further increase that balance. If this calculation is just,
(and if it is erroneous, I think the error is in favor of the public) it will
be a public advantage to permit manumission on these terms; and if it takes
place at forty, a much less sum will answer the purpose; and so in a decreasing
proportion to the age of twenty-one years, when, as has been before shown,
nothing can be justly expected. Now we find that if, on the manumission of a
slave between the years of twenty-one and fifty, fourteen shillings is paid to
the public for every year his or her age exceeds twentyone, it will bear a
very near proportion to 20l. paid on a manumission at fifty, as above stated. I
may be mistaken in the method I have taken to determine the sufficiency of that
sum; but I am so confident that the community would feel no inconvenience from
adopting it, that, had I a sufficient estate to authorize the proposal, I
should not fear deriving a considerable advantage from undertaking to support
all the negroes so manumitted, who required assistance, with the moneys so
paid; exclusive of the benefit accruing to the community from their labor, in
which I should be only interested as an individual.

THUS I have stated, and proposed a method for settling the account, as it
stands, on a manumission, with the public. There are many who, cheerfully
complying with these terms, would also remember that in some cases, there is
another account depending between them and their slaves: and any encouragement
or assistance they may suppose it their duty to give them in consideration of
past services, will still lessen the risque of their ever becoming chargeable
to the public.

TO conclude -- the object I have proposed, has an undoubted claim to the most
serious consideration of people of all ranks, and of every denomination; for
justice is confessedly alike obligatory on all. If to relieve the person of a
single debtor from a temporary imprisonment, has repeatedly been admitted as a
sufficient call for the interposition of a legislature -- what is not due to
the prosecution of the means of preventing the miseries inseparably attendant
on, and the cruelties and deplorable sufferings too often annexed to, a state
of perpetual slavery; in which many thousands of our fellow creatures are, and
may be unjustly detained? Let us reconcile our practice to our avowed
principles. Let not our professions of an inviolable attachment to liberty, of
late so frequently echoed from one end of the continent to the other, be
contradicted by a practice as unjust as it is impolitick. Doctor Young is very
severe where he says "The world's all title page, there is no contents." Let our
conduct show our title to an exception. Let us therefore immediately consider,
and adopt the most prudent measures for relieving those oppressed people; and
of enemies make them friends and useful members of society, by confering on
them such privileges as will interest them in the general welfare.

BEING sensible of my deficiency, I should have been pleased, had the few hints
I have presumed to obtrude on the public, employed a pen more equal to the
importance of my subject. Conscious, however, of my motive in giving them, I
flatter myself they will meet from the candid, the reception which is due to a
good intention. As a wellwisher to the religious and civil interests of my
country, I am willing to contribute my mite toward the removal of an evil,
which I believe to be dangerous to both: and if any thoughts I have meant to
express, have the least tendency to effect it; I shall be indifferent whatever
opinion is formed of the dress they appear in.


