AN ORATION DELIVERED March 5th, 1772.

AN ORATION DELIVERED March 5th, 1772. AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE
TOWN OF BOSTON; TO COMMEMORATE THE BLOODY TRAGEDY OF THE FIFTH OF March, 1770.

BY Dr. JOSEPH WARREN.

Quis talia fando,
Myrmidonum, Delopumve, aut duri miles Ulyssei,
Temperet a lacrymis.
VIRGIL. BOSTON: Printed by EDES and GILL, by Order of the Town of BOSTON. 1772.

At a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of BOSTON,
only qualified and legally assembled in Faneuil-Hall, and from thence adjourned
to the Old South Meeting House, on Thursday the 5th Day of March, Anno Domini,
1772.
Voted Unanimously,

THAT the Moderator Richard Dana, Esquire the Honorable John Hancock, Esquire Mr.
Samuel Adams, Joseph Jackson, Esquire Mr. Henderson Inches, Mr. David Jeffries, and
Mr. William Molineux, be and hereby are appointed a Committee to return the
Thanks of this Town to Joseph Warren, Esquire for the Oration just now delivered by
him at their Request, in Commemoration of the horrid Massacre perpetrated on
the Evening of the 5th of March, 1770, by a Party of Soldiers of the XXIXth
Regiment; and to desire a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest, William Cooper, Town Clerk.

GENTLEMEN,
THE generous Candor of my Fellow-Citizens prevails on me to give a Copy of
what was Yesterday delivered, for the Press.

I am, Gentlemen, with much Respect, Your most humble Servant, JOSEPH WARREN.
March 6, 1772.
AN ORATION.
WHEN we turn over the historic page, and trace the rise and fall of states and
empires; the mighty revolutions which have so often varied the face of the
world strike our minds with solemn surprise, and we are naturally led to
endeavor to search out the causes of such astonishing changes.

THAT Man is formed for social life, is an observation which upon our first
enquiry presents itself immediately to our view, and our reason approves that
wise and generous principle which actuated the first founders of civil
government; an institution which has its origin in the weakness of
individuals, and has for its end, the strength and security of all: And so
long as the means of effecting this important end, are thoroughly known and
religiously attended to, Government is one of the richest Blessings to mankind,
and ought to be held in the highest veneration.

IN young and new-formed communities, the grand design of this institution is
most generally understood, and most strictly regarded; the motives which urged
to the social compact cannot be at once forgotten, and that equality which is
remembered to have subsisted so lately among them, prevents those who are
clothed with authority from attempting to invade the freedom of their
Brethren; or if such an attempt is made, it prevents the community from
suffering the offender to go unpunished: Every member feels it to be his
interest, and knows it to be his duty, to preserve inviolate the constitution
on which the public safety depends Omnes ordines ad conservamdam rempublicam,
mente, voluntate, studio, virtute, (...) consentiunt. Cicero.
, and is equally ready to assist the Magistrate in the execution of the laws,
and the subject in defense of his right; and so long as this noble attachment
to a constitution, founded on free and benevolent principles exists in full
vigor in any state, that state must be flourishing and happy.

IT was this noble attachment to a free constitution, which raised ancient Rome
from the smallest beginnings to that bright summit of happiness and glory to
which she arrived; and it was the loss of this which plunged her from that
summit into the black gulf of infamy and slavery. It was this attachment which
inspired her senators with wisdom; it was this which glowed in the breasts of
her heroes; it was this which guarded her liberties, and extended her
dominions, gave peace at home and commanded respect abroad: And when this
decayed, her magistrates lost their reverence for justice and the laws, and
degenerated into tyrants and oppressors -- her senators forgetful of their
dignity, and seduced by base corruption, betrayed their country -- her soldiers
regardless of their relation to the community, and urged only by the hopes of
plunder and rapine, unfeelingly committed the most flagrant enormities; and
hired to the trade of death, with relentless fury they perpetrated the most
cruel murders, whereby the streets of imperial Rome were drenched with her
noblest blood -- Thus this empress of the world lost her dominions abroad, and
her inhabitants dissolute in their manners, at length became contented slaves;
and she stands to this day, the scorn and derision of nations, and a monument
of this eternal truth, that PUBLIC HAPPINESS DEPENDS ON A VIRTUOUS AND UNSHAKEN
ATTACHMENT TO A FREE CONSTITUTION.

IT was this attachment to a constitution, founded on free and benevolent
principles, which inspired the first settlers of this country: -- They saw with
grief the daring outrages committed on the free constitution of their native
land -- they knew that nothing but a civil war could at that time restore it is
pristine purity. So hard was it to resolve to embrue their hands in the blood
of their brethren, that they chose rather to quit their fair possessions and
seek another habitation in a distant clime -- When they came to this new world,
which they fairly purchased of the Indian natives, the only rightful
proprietors, they cultivated the then barren soil by their incessant labor, and
defended their dear-bought possessions with the fortitude of the christian, and
the bravery of the hero.

AFTER various struggles, which during the tyrannic reigns of the house of
STUART, were constantly kept up between right and wrong, between liberty and
slavery, the connection between Great Britain and this Colony was settled in
the reign of King William and Queen Mary by a compact, the conditions of which
were expressed in a Charter; by which all the liberties and immunities of
BRITISH SUBJECTS were confirmed to this Province, as fully and as absolutely as
they possibly could be by any human instrument which can be devised. And it is
undeniably true, that the greatest and most important right of a British
subject is, that he shall be governed by no laws but those to which he either
in person or by his representative has given his consent: And this I will
venture to assert, is the grand basis of British freedom; it is interwoven with
the constitution; and whenever this is lost, the constitution must be destroyed.

THE British constitution (of which ours is a copy) is a happy compound of the
three forms (under some of which all governments may be ranged) viz. Monarchy,
Aristocracy, and Democracy: Of these three the British Legislature is composed,
and without the consent of each branch, nothing can carry with it the force of
a law: In most cases, either the aristocratic or the democratic branch may
propose a law, and submit it to the deliberation of the other two; but, when a
law is to be passed for raising a tax, that law can originate only in the
democratic branch, which is the House of Commons in Britain, and the House of
Representatives here -- The reason is obvious: They, and their constituents are
to pay much the largest part of it, but as the aristrocratic branch, which in
Britain, is the House of Lords, and in this province, the Council, are also to
pay some part, THEIR consent is necessary; and as the monarchic branch, which
in Britain is the King, and with us, either the King in person, or the Governor
whom he shall be pleased to appoint to act in his stead, is supposed to have a
just sense of his own interest, which is that of all the subjects in general,
HIS consent is also necessary, and when the consent of these three branches is
obtained, the taxation is most certainly legal.

LET us now allow ourselves a few moments to examine the late acts of the
British parliament for taxing America -- Let us with candor judge whether they
are constitutionally binding upon us: -- If they are, IN THE NAME OF JUSTICE
let us submit to them, without one murmuring word.

FIRST, I would ask whether the members of the British House of Commons are the
Democracy of this Province? if they are, they are either the people of this
province, or are elected by the people of this province, to represent them, and
have therefore a constitutional right to originate a Bill for taxing them: It
is most certain they are neither; and therefore nothing done by them can be
said to be done by the democratic branch of our constitution. I would next ask,
whether the Lords who compose the aristocratic branch of the British
legislature, are Peers of America? I never heard it was (even in these
extraordinary times) so much as pretended, and if they are not, certainly no
act of theirs can be said to be the act of the aristocratic branch of our
constitution. The power of the monarchic branch we with pleasure acknowledge,
resides in the King, who may act either in person or by his representative; and
I freely confess that I can see no reason why a PROCLAMATION for raising money
in America issued by the King's sole authority, would not be equally consistent
with our constitution, and therefore equally binding upon us with the late acts
of the British parliament for taxing us; for it is plain, that if there is any
validity in those acts, it must arise altogether from the monarchical branch of
the legislature: And I further think that it would be at least as equitable;
for I do not conceive it to be of the least importance to us by whom our
property is taken away, so long as it is taken without our consent; and I am
very much at a loss to know by what figure of rhetoric, the inhabitants of this
province can be called FREE SUBJECTS, when they are obliged to obey implicitly,
such laws as are made for them by men three thousand miles off, whom they know
not, and whom they never have empowered to act for them; or how they can be
said to have PROPERTY, when a body of men over whom they have not the least
control, and who are not in any way accountable to them, shall oblige them to
deliver up any part, or the whole of their substance, without even asking their
consent: And yet, whoever pretends that the late acts of the British parliament
for taxing America ought to be deemed binding upon us, must admit at once that
we are absolute SLAVES, and have no property of our own; or else that we may be
FREEMEN, and at the same time under a necessity of obeying the arbitrary
commands of those over whom we have no control or influence; and that we may
HAVE PROPERTY OF OUR OWN, which is entirely at the disposal of another. Such
gross absurdities, I believe will not be relished in this enlightened age: And
it can be no matter of wonder that the people quickly perceived, and seriously
complained of the inroads which these acts must unavoidably make upon their
Liberty, and of the hazard to which their whole property is by them exposed;
for, if they may be taxed without their consent even the smallest trifle, they
may also without their consent be deprived of every thing they possess,
although never so valuable, never so dear. Certainly it never entered the
hearts of our ancestors, that after so many dangers in this then desolate
wilderness, their hard-earned property should be at the disposal of the British
parliament; and as it was soon found that this taxation could not be supported
by reason and argument, it seemed necessary that one act of oppression should
be enforced by another, and therefore, contrary to our just rights as
possessing, or at least having a just title to possess, all the liberties and
IMMUNITIES of British subjects, a standing army was established among us in
time of peace; and evidently for the purpose of effecting that, which it was
one principal design of the founders of the constitution to prevent, (when they
declared a standing army in time of peace to be AGAINST LAW) namely, for the
enforcement of obedience to acts which upon fair examination appeared to be
unjust and unconstitutional.

THE ruinous consequences of standing armies to free communities may be seen in
the histories of SYRACUSE, ROME, and many other once flourishing STATES; some
of which have now scarce a name! Their baneful influence is most suddenly felt,
when they are placed in populous cities; for, by a corruption of morals, the
public happiness is immediately affected; and that this is one of the effects
of quartering troops in a populous city, is a truth, to which many a mourning
parent, many a lost, despairing child in this metropolis, must bear a very
melancholy testimony. -- Soldiers are also taught to consider arms as the only
arbiters by which every dispute is to be decided between contending states; --
they are instructed implicitly to obey their commanders, without enquiring into
the justice of the cause they are engaged to support: Hence it is, that they
are ever to be dreaded as the ready engines of tyranny and oppression. -- And
it is too observable that they are prone to introduce the same mode of decision
in the disputes of individuals, and from thence have often arisen great
animosities between them and the inhabitants, who whilst in a naked defenseless
state, are frequently insulted and abused by an armed soldiery. And this will
be more especially the case, when the troops are informed, that the intention
of their being stationed in any city, is to OVERAWE THE INHABITANTS. That, this
was the avowed design of stationing an armed force in this town, is
sufficiently known; and WE, my fellow-citizens have seen, WE have felt the
tragical effects! -- THE FATAL FIFTH OF MARCH 1770, CAN NEVER BE FORGOTTEN --
The horrors of THAT DREADFUL NIGHT are but too deeply impressed on our hearts
-- Language is too feeble to paint the emotions of our souls, when our streets
were stained with the BLOOD OF OUR BRETHREN, -- when our ears were wounded by
the groans of the dying, and our eyes were tormented with the sight of the
mangled bodies of the dead. -- When our alarmed imagination presented to our
view our houses wrapped in flames, -- our children subjected to the barbarous
caprice of the raging soldiery -- our beauteous virgins exposed to all the
insolence of unbridled passion, -- our virtuous wives endeared to us by every
tender tie, falling a sacrifice to (...) worse than brutal violence, and
perhaps like the famed LUCRETIA, distracted with anguish and despair, ending
their wretched lives by their own fair hands. -- When we beheld the authors of
our distress parading in our streets, or drawn up in regular battalia, as
though in a hostile city; our hearts beat to arms; we snatched our weapons,
almost resolved by one decisive stroke, to avenge the death of our SLAUGHTERED
BRETHREN, and to secure from future danger, all that we held most dear: But
propitious heaven forbad the bloody carnage, and saved the threatened victims of
our too keen resentment, not by their discipline, not by their regular array,
-- no, it was royal GEORGE's livery that proved their shield -- it was that
which turned the pointed engines of destruction from their breasts. I have the
strongest reason to believe that I have mentioned the only circumstance, which
saved the troops from destruction. It was then, and now is, the opinion of
those who were best acquainted with the state of affairs at that time, that had
thrice that number of troops, belonging to any power at open war with us, been
in this town in the same exposed condition, scarce a man would have lived to
have seen the morning light.
The thoughts of vengeance were soon buried in our inbred affection to
Great Britain, and calm reason dictated a method of removing the troops more
mild than an immediate recourse to the sword. With united efforts you urged the
immediate departure of the troops from the town -- you urged it, with a
resolution which ensured success -- you obtained your wishes, and the removal
of the troops was effected, without one drop of their blood being shed by the
inhabitants!

THE immediate actors in the tragedy of THAT NIGHT were surrendered to justice.
-- It is not mine to say how far they were guilty! they have been tried by the
country and ACQUITTED of murder! And they are not to be again arraigned at an
earthly bar: But, surely the men who have promiscuously scattered death amidst
the innocent inhabitants of a populous city, ought to see well to it, that they
be prepared to stand at the bar of an OMNISCIENT JUDGE! And all who contrived
or encouraged the stationing troops in this place, have reasons of eternal
importance, to reflect with deep contrition on their base designs, and humbly
to repent of their impious machinations.

THE infatuation which has seemed for a number of years to prevail in the
British councils with regard to us, is truly astonishing! What can be proposed
by the repeated attacks made upon our freedom, I really cannot surmise; even
leaving justice and humanity out of the question, I do not know one single
advantage which can arise to the British nation, from our being enslaved: -- I
know not of any gains, which can be wrung from us by oppression, which they may
not obtain from us by our own consent in the smooth channel of commerce: We
wish the wealth and prosperity of Britain; we contribute largely to both. --
Does what we contribute lose all its value, because it is done voluntarily? The
amazing increase of riches to Britain, the great rise of the value of her
lands, the flourishing state of her navy; are striking proofs of the advantages
derived to her, from her commerce with the Colonies; and it is our earnest
desire that she may still continue to enjoy the same emoluments, until her
streets are paved with AMERICAN GOLD; only, let us have the pleasure of calling
it our own, whilst it is in our hands; -- but this it seems is too great a
favor -- we are to be governed by the absolute commands of others, our property
is to be taken away without our consent -- if we complain, our complaints are
treated with contempt; if we assert our rights, that assertion is deemed
insolence; if we humbly offer to submit the matter to the impartial decision of
reason, the SWORD is judged the most proper argument to silence our murmurs! --
But, this cannot long be the case -- surely, the British nation will not suffer
the reputation of their justice, and their honor, to be thus sported away by a
capricious ministry; no, they will in a short time open their eyes to their
true interest: They nourish in their own breasts a noble love of Liberty, they
hold her dear, and they know that all who have once possessed her charms had
rather die than suffer her to be torn from their embraces -- They are also
sensible that Britain is so deeply interested in the prosperity of the
colonies, that she must eventually feel every wound given to their freedom;
they cannot be ignorant that more dependence may be placed on the affections of
a BROTHER, than on the forced services of a SLAVE -- They must approve your
efforts for the preservation of your rights; from a sympathy of soul they must
pray for your success: And I doubt not but they will ever long exert themselves
effectually to redress your grievances. Even in the dissolute reign of king
CHARLES II. when the house of Commons impeached the Earl of Clarendon of high
treason, the first article on which they founded their accusation was, that he
had designed a standing army to be raised, and to govern the kingdom thereby.
And the eighth article was, that he had introduced an arbitrary government into
his Majesty's plantations. -- A terrifying example, to those who are now
forging chains for this COUNTRY!

YOU have my friends and countrymen often frustrated the designs of your
enemies, by your unanimity and fortitude: It was your union and determined
spirit which expelled those troops, who polluted your streets with INNOCENT
BLOOD. -- You have appointed this anniversary as a standing memorial of the
BLOODY CONSEQUENCES OF PLACING AN ARMED FORCE IN A POPULOUS CITY, and of your
deliverance from the dangers which then seemed to hang over your heads; and I
am confident that you never will betray the least want of spirit when called
upon to guard your freedom. -- None but they who set a just value upon the
blessings of Liberty are worthy to enjoy her -- Your illustrious fathers were
her zealous votaries -- when the blasting frowns of tyranny drove her from
public view, they clasped her in their arms, they cherished her in their
generous bosoms, they brought her safe over the rough ocean, and fixed her seat
in this then dreary wilderness; they nursed her infant age with the most tender
care; for her sake, they patiently bore the severest hardships; for her
support, they underwent the most rugged toils: In her defense, they boldly
encountered the most alarming dangers; neither the ravenous beasts that ranged
the woods for prey; nor the more furious savages of the wilderness; could damp
their ardor! -- Whilst with one hand, they broke the stubborn glebe; with the
other, they grasped their weapons, ever ready to protect her from danger. -- No
sacrifice, not even their own blood, was esteemed too rich a libation for her
altar! God prospered their valor, they preserved her brillancy unsullied, they
enjoyed her whilst they lived, and dying, bequeathed the dear inheritance, to
your care. And as they left you this glorious legacy, they have undoubtedly
transmitted to you, some portion of their noble spirit, to inspire you with
virtue to merit her, and courage to preserve her; you surely cannot, with such
examples before your eyes, as every page of the history of this country
affords; At simul heroum lauds, et facta parentis
Jam legere, et quae sit poteris cognoscere virtus.
VIRG.
suffer your liberties to be ravished from you by lawless force, or cajoled
away by flattery and fraud.

THE voice of your Fathers blood cries to you from the ground; MY SONS, SCORN
TO BE SLAVES! In vain we met the frowns of tyrants -- In vain, we left our
native land -- In vain* we crossed the boisterous ocean, found a new world, and
prepared it for the happy residence of LIBERTY -- In vain, we toiled -- In
vain, we fought -- We bled in vain, if you, our offspring want valor to repel
the assaults of her invaders! -- Stain not the glory of your worthy ancestors,
but like them resolve, never to part with your birthright; be wise in your
deliberations, and determined in your exertions for the preservation of your
liberties. -- Follow not the dictates of passion, but enlist yourselves under
the sacred banner of reason: Use every method in your power to secure your
rights: At least prevent the curses of posterity from being heaped upon your
memories.

IF you with united zeal and fortitude oppose the torrent of oppression; if you
feel the true fire of patriotism burning in your breasts; if you from your
souls despise the most gaudy dress that slavery can wear; if you really prefer
the lonely cottage (whilst blessed with liberty) to gilded palaces surrounded
with the ensigns of slavery; you may have the fullest assurance that tyranny
with her whole accursed train will hide their hideous heads in confusion, shame
and despair -- If you perform your part, you must have the strongest
confidence, that THE SAME ALMIGHTY BEING who protected your pious and venerable
forefathers -- who enabled them to turn a barren wilderness into a fruitful
field, who so often made bare his arm for their salvation, will still be
mindful of you their offspring.

MAY THIS ALMIGHTY BEING graciously preside in all our councils. -- May he
direct us to such measures as he himself shall approve, and be pleased to
bless. -- May we ever be a people favored of GOD. -- May our land be a land of
Liberty, the seat of virtue, the asylum of the oppressed, a name and a praise
in the whole earth, until the last shock of time shall bury the empires of the
world in one common undistinguished ruin!

FINIS.

