BOSTON, APRIL 9, 1773. SIR,
THE Committee of Correspondence of this Town have received the following
Intelligence, communicated to them by a Person of Character in this Place. We
congratulate you upon the Acquisition of such respectable Aid as the ancient
and patriotic Province of Virginia, the earliest Resolvers against the
detestable Stamp Act, in Opposition to the unconstitutional Measures of the
present Administration. The Authenticity of this Advice you may depend upon, as
it was immediately received from one of the Honorable Gentlemen appointed to
communicate with the other Colonies.

We are, Your Friends and humble Servants, Signed by Direction of the Committee
for Correspondence in Boston,


To the Town Clerk of (...), to be immediately delivered to the Committee of
Correspondence for your Town, if such a Committee is chosen, otherwise to the
Gentlemen the Selectmen, to be communicated to the Town.

Extract of a Letter from a Gentleman of distinction in Virginia, to his Friend
in this Town, dated March 14th, 1773.
"I RECEIVED the papers The Votes and Proceedings of the Town of Boston, and
Newspapers, containing the Governor's Speeches, and the Answers of the two
Houses.
you sent me, and am much obliged to you for them, our assembly sitting a few
days after, they were of use to us. You will see by the enclosed Resolutions
the true sentiments of this colony, and that we are endeavoring to bring our
sister colonies into the strictest union with us, that we may RESENT IN ONE
BODY any steps that may be taken by administration to deprive ANY ONE OF US of
the least particle of our rights and liberties; we should have done more but we
could procure nothing but news-paper accounts of the proceedings in
RhodeIsland. I hope we shall not be thus kept in the dark for the future, and
that we shall have from the different Committees ^he earliest intelligence of
any motion that may be made by the TYRANTS in England to carry their INFERNAL
purposes of enslaving us into execution; I dare venture to assure you the
strictest attention will be given on our parts to these grand points."

In the House of Burgesses, in Virginia March, 1773.
"WHEREAS the minds of his Majesty's faithful subjects in this colony have been
much disturbed by various rumors and reports of proceedings tending to deprive
them of their ancient, legal and constitutional rights.

"And whereas the affairs of this colony are frequently connected with those of
Great Britain, as well as of the neighboring colonies, which tenders a
communication of sentiments necessary, in order therefore to remove the
uneasinesses and to quiet the minds of the people, as well as for the other
good purposes above mentioned.

"Be it resolved, That a standing committee of correspondence and inquiry be
appointed, to consist of eleven persons, viz. the honorable Payton Randoph,
Esquire Robert Carter Nicholas, Richard Bland, Richard Henry Lee, Benjamin
Harrison, Edmund Pendleton, Patrick Henry, Dudley Digges, Dabney Carr,
Archibald Carry, and Thomas Jefferson, Esqrs any six of whom to be a committee,
whose business it shall be to obtain the most early and authentic intelligence
of all such acts and resolutions of the British parliament or proceedings of
administration, as may relate to, or affect the British colonies in America,
and to keep up and maintain a correspondence and communication with our sister
^^^^^^s, respecting these important considerations, and the result of such
their proceedings from time to time to lay before this house.

" Resolved, That it be an instruction to the said committee, that they do,
without delay, inform themselves particularly of the principles and authority,
on which was constituted a court of inquiry, said to have been lately held in
RhodeIsland, with powers to transport persons accused of offenses committed in
America, to places beyond the seas to be tried.

" Resolved, That the Speaker of this House do transmit to the Speakers of the
different assemblies of the British colonies, on this continent, copies of the
said resolutions, and desire they will lay them before their respective
assemblies, and request them to appoint some person or persons of their
respective bodies, to communicate from time to time with the said committee.


