OBSERVATIONS relative to the MANUFACTURES of PAPER and PRINTED BOOKS in the
Province of PENNSYLVANIA.
Philadelphia, 26th January, 1773.
THAT the establishment of useful manufactures tends toward the enriching of
that country where they are instituted, is a truth, evidently demonstrated
among all industrious societies.

MANY trading nations have constructed paper to such advantage that it has
become a staple commodity; the exportation of which daily produces great
emoluments to their traders and manufacturers. -- The parliament of Ireland,
being intent upon establishing the paper manufactory in that kingdom, bestowed
as a free gift the sum of five hundred pounds to an Artist, to encourage him to
exert his utmost abilities in prosecuting the business of Paper-making toward
perfection.

THE success of the Paper Manufactory is so closely connected with the grand
Art of Printing, which elevateth and refineth the human mind, that every
encouragement extended to the advancement of the publication of New Books, are
strong and almost irresistible incitements to extensive improvements in the
manufacturing of Paper. -- The Legislators of Pennsylvania have it entirely in
their power, without having recourse to expensive gratuities, but merely by the
abrogation of one clause in an antiquated Act which preventeth the free sale of
Books by Auction in the city of Philadelphia, made in the youth of this
province, before the consumption of Books was ever suspected to amount to a
staple commodity in which thousands of pounds might be employed to the
advantage of the community in general, and also to the benefit of many
industrious individuals.

THOSE who have not had the opportunity of entering into the arcana of
Bookselling, are requested to lend their attention to the following state of
the trade. Suppose a bookseller in Philadelphia intends to print an edition
of CHAMBERS'S UNIVERSAL DICTIONARY of ARTS and SCIENCES, with the SUPPLEMENT,
in four volumes folio. -- To defray the very great expense of Paper, Printing,
and Binding, and to be enabled to afford this valuable work at a moderate price
to the purchasers, it is necessary that the bookseller should risk the cost of
printing three thousand copies. -- Although soon after they are printed, he may
discover that he has finished a larger number than he can find purchasers for.
-- After waiting two or three years for the expected purchasers, the bookseller
is convinced he was mistaken in the calculation of his customers, and then he
determines, according to the mode practiced in all other countries when an
edition has been over-printed, to sell them by Auction to those inhabitants
who choose to purchase in that way. These sales by Auction, although at an
under price, realizeth dead stock into live CASH, and will sooner enable him to
repair with ready money to the Paper Manufacturers, in order to make another
attempt upon some celebrated author, whose sublime works might diffuse
universal knowledge to every corner of the American continent; -- but this at
present a bookseller is not permitted to do in the city of Philadelphia. -- The
above example, by a variation of the number, may be applied to the printing of
all Books whatsoever. -- And this hinderance to the sale of Books by Auction in
this city, so long as it is continued, will operate as an embargo to prevent
the adventuring booksellers from the printing many useful and instructive
Books, which might both illuminate the minds, and illustrate the pockets of
many members of the community.

THE exhibition of these facts before the judicious, who know, that reading is
the only fund of pleasure which is inexhaustible, may perhaps be attended with
some salutary consequences. And as a farther investigation of this literary
inquiry in which the public are deeply interested, the Publisher takes the
liberty of producing a paper from the much esteemed Spectator, by the
celebrated Joseph Addison, who had no pecuniary motives to prompt him to
expatiate upon the grandeur and utility of the paper and printing manufactures.

-- Periturae parcite chartae.

Juv. Sat. I. V. 18. In Mercy spare us, when we do our best
To make as much waste Paper as the rest.
I HAVE often pleased myself with considering the two kinds of benefits which
accrue to the public from these my speculations, and which, were I to speak
after the manner of logicians, I would distinguish into the material and the
formal. By the latter I understand those advantages which my readers receive,
as their minds are either improved or delighted by these my daily labors; but
having already several times descanted on my endeavors in this light, I shall
at present wholly confine myself to the consideration of the former. By the
word material I mean those benefits which arise to the public from these my
speculations, as they consume a considerable quantity of our paper manufacture,
employ our artisans in printing, and find business for great numbers of
indigent persons.

OUR paper manufacture takes into it several mean materials which could be put
to no other use, and affords work for several hands in the collecting of them,
which are incapable of any other employment. Those poor retailers, whom we see
so busy in every street, deliver in their respective gleanings to the merchant.
The merchant carries them in loads to the paper-mill, where they pass through a
fresh set of hands, and give life to another trade. Those who have mills on
their estates, by this means considerably raise their rents, and the whole
nation is in a great measure supplied with a manufacture, for which formerly
she was obliged to her neighbors.

THE materials are no sooner wrought into paper, but they are distributed among
the presses, where they again set innumerable artists at work, and furnish
business to another mystery. From hence, accordingly as they are stained with
news or politics, they fly through the town in post men, post boys, daily
courants, reviews, medleys, and examiners Men, women, and children contend who
shall be the first bearers of them, and get their daily sustenance by spreading
them. In short, when I trace in my mind a bundle of rags to a quire of
spectators, I find so many hands employed in every step they take through their
whole progress, that while I am writing a spectator, I fancy myself providing
bread for a multitude.

IF I do not take care to obviate some of my witty readers, they will be apt to
tell me, that my paper, after it is thus printed and published, is still
beneficial to the public on several occasions. I must confess I have lighted
my pipe with my own works for this twelvemonth past: My landlady often sends
up her little daughter to desire some of my old spectators, and has frequently
told me, that the paper they are printed on is the best in the world to wrap
spice in. They likewise make a good foundation for a mutton pie, as I have more
than once experienced, and were very much sought for last Christmas by the
whole neighborhood.

IT is pleasant enough to consider the changes that a linea fragment undergoes,
by passing through the several hands abovementioned. The finest pieces of
holland, when worn to tatters, assume a new whiteness more beautiful than their
first, and often return in the shape of letters to their native country. A
lady's shift may be metamorphosed into billets-doux, and come into her
possession a second time. A beau may peruse his cravat after it is worn out,
with greater pleasure and advantage than ever he did in a glass. In a word, a
piece of cloth, after having officiated for some years as a towel or a napkin,
may by this means be raised from a dunghill, and become the most valuable piece
of furniture in a prince's cabinet.

THE politest nations of Europe have endeavored to vie with one another for
the reputation of the finest printing: Absolute governments, as well as
republics, have encouraged an art which seems to be the noblest and most
beneficial that ever was invented among the sons of men. The present king of
France, in his pursuits after glory, has particularly distinguished himself by
the promoting of this useful art, insomuch that several books have been printed
in the Louvre at his own expense, upon which he sets so great a value, that he
considers them as the noblest presents he can make to foreign princes and
ambassadors. If we look into the commonwealths of Holland and Venice, we shall
find that in this particular they have made themselves the envy of the greatest
monarchies. (...) and Aldus are more frequently mentioned than any pensioner of
the one or doge of the other.

THE several presses which are now in England, and the great encouragement
which has been given to learning for some years last past, has made our own
nation as glorious upon this account, as for its late triumphs and conquests.
The new edition which is given us of Caesar's commentaries, has already been
taken notice of in foreign Gazettes, and is a work that does honor to the
English press. It is no wonder that an edition should be very correct, which
has passed through the hands of one of the most accurate, learned, and judicious
writers this age has produced. The beauty of the paper, of the character, and
of the several (...) with which this noble work is illustrated, makes it the
finest book that I have ever seen; and is a true instance of the English
genius, which, though it does not come the first into any art, generally carries
it to greater heights than any other country in the world. I am particularly
glad that this author (...) from a British printing house in so great a
magnificence, as he is the (...) who has given us any tolerable account of our
country.

MY illiterate readers, if any such there are, will be surprised to hear me
talk of learning as the glory of a nation, and of printing as an art that gains
reputation to a people among whom it flourishes. When men's thoughts are taken
up with avarice and ambition, they cannot look upon any thing as great or
valuable, which does not bring with it an extraordinary power or interest to
the person who is concerned in it. But as I shall never sink this paper so far
as to engage with Goths and Vandals, I shall only regard such kind of reasoners
with that pity which is due to so deplorable a degree of stupidity and
ignorance.

The fourth Volume of Blackstone's Commentaries on the Laws of England will be
ready for the Subscribers some time in February.


