Mr. BELKNAP'S SERMON ON MILITARY DUTY.

A SERMON ON MILITARY DUTY, PREACHED At DOVER, NOVEMBER 10, 1772, Before His
EXCELLENCY JOHN WENTWORTH, Esquire LL.D. GOVERNOR of His Majesty's Province of
NEW HAMPSHIRE; At a Review of the Second Regiment of Foot in said Province.

By JEREMY BELKNAP, A. M.

Impius haec tam culta novalia miles habebit?
Barbarus has segetes?
VIRG. SALEM: Printed by S. and E. HALL, near the Exchange. MDCCLXXIII.

Province of New Hampshire. At a Meeting of the Commission-Officers of the
second Regiment of Militia of said province at Dover, on Wednesday the 11th of
November, 1772.
VOTED unanimously, That Lieut. Col. Otis Baker, Esquire wait on the Rev'd Mr.
Jeremy Belknap, and return him the thanks of said officers, for the Sermon
preached by him to said regiment yesterday, and request a copy thereof for the
press.

JOHN WENTWORTH, Col.

DOVER, November 25, 1772. GENTLEMEN,
YOUR kind reception of my Sermon encourages my hope of its usefulness to
promote the design in which you are engaged. With this view it is submitted to
the public eye, at your request, by

Gentlemen, Your obliged and obedient servant, JEREMY BELKNAP.
To the Hon. John Wentworth, Esquire and the other Gentlemen, commissioned officers
of the second regiment of foot.



A SERMON ON MILITARY DUTY.
JOHN, XVIII.36. IF my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants
fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but now is my kingdom not
from hence.


THE gospel of Jesus Christ breathes a spirit of the purest benevolence; and if
it were universally believed and obeyed, it would so renew the heart, soften
the temper and rectify the behavior of mankind, as to make this world an
habitation of peace and harmony. But, alas, how little influence has this
divine religion upon the hearts of men, even those among whom it is known and
professed! Instead of that mild and pacific disposition which the Prince of
Peace requires in all his subjects, do we not see boisterous and malignant
passions usurping the empire of the soul, violating the most sacred
obligations, trampling on reason and conscience, and setting at defiance the
vengeance of heaven? Instead of that love which should reign among creatures of
the same God, inhabitants of the same earth, do not hatred and revenge swell
their bosoms and operate to the destruction of all order and safety? -- or,
sometimes in a more silent, but not less destructive manner, do not subtilty
and deceit undermine the foundations of civil peace, and break those bonds of
union, on the strength of which the happiness of society depends? To restrain
the disordered passions, and render life and property more secure, government
and subordination have taken place, and the inhabitants of the world are by the
wisdom of the great providential Ruler formed into various nations and
kingdoms, which have each their distinct laws and rules, founded on reason and
experience; and the "powers that be" in these several political bodies are
ordained of God for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them
that do well: Romans xiii.1. 1 Pet. ii.14.
He has wisely delegated to the civil magistrate the power of vengeance which
belongs only to himself.

But even this wise and benevolent institution is not always sufficient to
secure the peace and welfare of society; for the same lusts which produce
jealousies, hatred and quarrels among individuals, do sometimes operate in a
larger sphere, and cause nation to rise up against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom. The heads and rulers of societies are men of like passions and
infirmities with their subjects; they are apt to be blinded by self-interest,
wedded to particular schemes of policy, inflamed with pride and vain glory,
misled by artful deceivers, and precipitated into measures which time and
reason will condemn: Innumerable are the seeds of jealousy and discord which
are sown by the grand enemy of mankind, who fails not to improve every
opportunity to raise heats and animosities, to stir up the depraved passions,
which are all in his service, ready to do his destructive work; and when public
disputes arise between any of the powers of the earth which cannot be quelled
by the voice of reason, nor sacrificed to the love of peace; when public
insults are committed, and the safety of the commonwealth threatened by hostile
invasion, where can the injured body appeal for a decision of the controversy,
but to the supreme Ruler of the world, who sits in the throne, judging right?
And how must this appeal be made? God does not interpose in a miraculous way to
rectify the disorders of states and kingdoms; but as he has implanted in men
the principle of self-preservation, and given them the means of defense, so he
allows them to repel injuries by violence, and take all prudent ways to guard
themselves against destruction; while he presides over the events of war,
keeping them sometimes long in suspense, and making each party instrumental of
punishing the other, often bringing about revolutions quite different from the
intention of the combatants, making the wrath of man to praise him and
accomplish the just and wise designs of his holy providence. See Isaiah x.5, 6,
7, 12, 13.


The necessity of self-defence in the kingdoms of this world is evident from
the very nature and design of society, which in this tumultuous and disordered
state of things cannot subsist without being sufficiently guarded against
external injuries. Has the all-wise and merciful Parent of the universe
furnished the brute and reptile creation with the necessary instruments of
defense? and does the instinct which he has implanted in them prompt them to
make use of these weapons for their own subsistence and security? and has he
not implanted in mankind a natural courage, a martial spirit, and given them
skill and power to provide themselves with all the necessary instruments of
defense? and can it be supposed that we must make no use of these gifts of
nature, even when providence points out the necessity? Do we guard our fields
from devouring beasts, our houses and our bodies from the injuries of the
weather? and shall we not have the privilege of defending our lives, our
liberties, our property, our families, our civil government from hostile
invaders? Must we tamely yield to every lawless usurper, and suffer tyrants to
sport with the lives and estates of mankind? Must all those laws, which the
wisdom and experience of ages have founded; must the sacred bonds of society,
the peace, the welfare, the happiness of mankind, be sacrificed to the
impetuous rage of a foreign conqueror? Forbid it, reason and conscience; forbid
it, ye heroic worthies of old, who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought
righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the
violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made
strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens. Heb.
xi.33, 34.


The meek and compassionate Redeemer of the world, who "came not to destroy
men's lives, but to save them," Luke ix.56.
though he commands his disciples to "live peaceably with all men," Romans xii.18.
"to be tenderhearted and forgiving even toward their bitterest personal
enemies," Matt. v.44.
yet does not expect that, considered as members of civil societies, they
should tamely submit to such injuries as tend to overthrow the peace and safety
of the kingdoms of this world in which they dwell.

What a striking proof of the lawfulness of self-defence has our blessed Lord
given us in that noble testimony which he bore to "the truth" when he stood
unjustly arraigned before Pilate's bar, explaining and vindicating his claim to
the kingdom of Israel. In answer to Pilate's demands, "whether he was King of
the Jews," and "what he had done," our Lord declares, My kingdom is not of this
world; if my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I
should not be delivered to the Jews; but now is my kingdom not from hence. By
this "good confession" Tim. xi.13.
he cleared himself of the charge of being an enemy to Caesar, and proved that
he had no design to set up as a rival to the Roman government, yet still
holding his claim to the title of King, and declaring the nature of his kingdom
to be entirely different from all the kingdoms of this world, which cannot
subsist without the means of self-defence. It is plain that Christ did not
allow his disciples to fight in his defense; for he had just before reproved
Peter for drawing his sword and smiting the High Priest's servant; John
xviii.10, 11.
and it is as plain from our Lord's own declaration, that if his kingdom had
been of this world he would have allowed them to fight for him.

In these remarkable words he distinguishes the kingdom, at the head of which
he was now placed, not only from all the kingdoms of this world in general, but
from the national church or kingdom of Israel in particular, and this he does
by taking away from his spiritual kingdom, that, without which no kingdom of
this world can subsist, the power of self-defence.

That Christ makes a distinction between his new kingdom, and the ancient
kingdom of Israel, appears from this clause, but now is my kingdom not from
hence; the word now implies that there was some alteration made in the nature
of his kingdom, or that what was before his kingdom did now cease to be so, and
give way to a more pure and spiritual dispensation. The reader may see this
point largely illustrated and confirmed in Mr. Glas's Testimony of the King of
Martyrs, chap. 2d and 3d.
The ancient church of Israel was the kingdom of God, a kingdom in which God
exercised a peculiar kind of government, being their Lord and Sovereign in a
sense distinct from that in which he is the providential Governor of the world:
and as we read of God's making himself visible at diverse times to some of that
favorite nation, with a particular view to the setting up and maintaining of a
temporal kingdom; so, we must understand these as well as all other appearances
of the Deity, which are represented as visible, to have been made by Him who is
the brightness of his glory and the express image of his person Heb. i.3.
; for no man has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him John i.18. See also John v.37.
; and as God dwelt in him, and manifested himself by him both before Exodus
xxiii.20 -- 23. compared with Joshua v.13 -- 15.
and after his incarnation, so they who had seen him might truly be said to
have seen God the Father. John xiv.9.
See Duddridge's Lectures, prop. cxxvi. and Appendix.
It was this Glorious Person who appeared to the Patriarch Abraham, and
discoursed with him concerning Sarah's conception and the destruction of Sodom
Genesis xviii.13 -- 33.
: It was He with whom Jacob wrestled, and of whom he truly said I have seen God
face to face Genesis xxxii.30.
: It was He whom Moses saw in the burning bush, who demanded such peculiar
homage, and who then first manifested himself by his name JEHOVAH Exodus iii.2
-- 14.
: It was He whom Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and the seventy Elders of
Israel, saw on the top of Mount Sinai, who is there called the God of Israel
Exodus xxiv.9 -- 11.
: It was He who stood before Joshua when leading "the Lord's host" into the
Land of promise, and assumed the title of their Captain Joshua v.13 -- 15.
: It was He whom Isaiah beheld sitting on his throne, high and lifted up, whose
train filled the temple Isaiah vi. compared with John xii.41.
: It was He who was, as Nathaniel saluted him, the Son of God and the King of
Israel. John. i.49.


The grand reason why this ancient kingdom of Israel was kept so distinct from
other kingdoms of the world, and governed by JEHOVAH in such a peculiar manner,
was, that it might be a figurative representation of the elect church or
spiritual kingdom of true believers, who are a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people 1 Peter ii.9.
, who are under the spiritual government of Jesus Christ; and therefore when
the time of his humiliation was expiring, and he was going to be exalted at the
right hand of the Father, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to
[his spiritual] Israel and remission of sins Acts v.31.
, he made a plain declaration, that the nature of his kingdom was changed; that
whereas it had subsisted under the form of a temporal kingdom, being confined
to one particular nation; now it was assuming a spiritual form, and going to be
manifested in its true nature and glory: Whereas before it had been not only
lawful but necessary that his kingdom should be defended by arms, like all
other kingdoms of this world; now it was appearing to be of such a nature as
not to be defended by temporal power and weapons: Whereas before, the seat of
his kingdom and the place of his royal residence had been the city of Jerusalem
and the temple which was built therein; now the seat of his kingdom and the
place of his residence was the heaven of heavens, where all sincere worshippers
were to meet by faith, round the throne of grace, and where the triumphant
company of the redeemed will finally celebrate the victory which their glorious
Lord has gained over all his enemies.

We are then to consider our Lord's words as holding forth to us these two
contrasted truths: That when God's kingdom subsisted under a temporal form, as
a kingdom of this world, it was both lawful and necessary that it should be
defended by the sword. But That that ancient constitution is now dissolved, and
the kingdom of God is a spiritual kingdom, not of this world, and therefore not
capable of being defended by the sword.

The reason why God's kingdom, under the former appearance of it, was to be
defended by the sword, was, that it was a kingdom of this world, containing a
mixture of civil and ecclesiastical polity, calculated as well for the temporal
prosperity as the spiritual improvement of the subjects: It was liable to be
invaded and destroyed by temporal enemies, as it was by Nebuchadnezzar, who
destroyed Jerusalem and the temple, and caused an interruption of seventy years
in the theocratical government: And it was also by God's permission finally
destroyed by the Roman army under Titus Vespasian, from which it has never
recovered.

As this was its state, and as it was liable to such calamities as other
kingdoms of this world are; so it was highly necessary that it should be
guarded and defended in the same manner as they are. Accordingly, we find the
nation of Israel combined together in a military form from the beginning of
their becoming a separate people, and the Lord who was their Sovereign bore the
style of "a Man of War," and "God of the armies of Israel:" They went up
"harnessed out of the land of Egypt," and kept themselves in a warlike posture,
under the conduct of their divine Leader, all the time of their march through
the wilderness, where they had to encounter diverse mighty nations who opposed
them: They were led in martial array into the Land of promise by their brave
and faithful Joshua, (whose character is one of the most noble and unspotted in
the Old Testament) and diverse of the Judges who succeeded him were heroes of
renown, and rendered the nation formidable against its enemies. Numerous are
the battles, sieges and victories recorded in the book of God from the days of
Moses to the death of Josiah; but among them all, the reign of David stands
distinguished as the time when God granted the greatest successes: He was "a
man after God's own heart," raised up to fulfill his purposes, to give his
people rest, by subduing all their enemies, and leaving the kingdom in peace to
his son Solomon; and herein he was a remarkable type of Jesus Christ, whom God
has anointed King on his holy hill of Zion, where he must reign till he has
subdued all enemies under his feet.

Many of the wars recorded in the Jewish history were undertaken at the express
command of the God of Israel: 1 Judges xx* 18, 23, 28. 2 Samuel v.23, 24.
In all cases of difficulty, direction was sought of him by the High Priest,
who presented the Urim and Thummim in his breast plate before the oracle, and
received the divine answer to the petition of the enquirer: Yea, the warlike
actions of the ancient worthies are said to have been performed "through
faith," and by the spirit of the Lord coming upon them Judges
iii.10.vi.34.ix.29, etc.
; from whence we conclude not barely that war was permitted, like poligamy and
divorce, but that it was lawful and necessary in the kingdom of Israel, which
was a kingdom of this world. God not only allowed, but commanded it in
particular cases, and he has no where forbidden it to the kingdoms of this
world, nor even to his own people as subjects of such kingdoms, nor indeed
could he have done it without destroying the very existence of political
bodies: If then it be God's will that government and order be kept up, and that
the kingdoms of this world should subsist as such, then it is his will that
they should use the means of self-defence when his providence points out the
necessity.

The mild and forgiving precepts of the gospel might as fairly be pleaded
against the execution of penal laws on malefactors, as against preserving the
peace of society by repelling foreign invaders, and destroying those who would
destroy the foundations of government and property; and it deserves to be
seriously considered, whether the suffering an enemy to invade our country and
destroy the lives of our friends and neighbors when it is in our power to
defend them, would not render us as guilty, in the sight of God, as if we
actually murdered them ourselves? What a solemn curse was denounced by "the
angel of the Lord" in the days of Deborah and Barak, against the inhabitants of
Mer^z, because they came not to the help of the Lord against the mighty Judges
v.23.
? And, no less awful was that curse delivered by the prophet Jeremy in the name
of the Lord, on a like occasion, Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
deceitfully, cursed be he that keeps back his sword from blood. Jer.
xlviii.10.


A mistaken conclusion has been drawn from the words of our text -- Because
Christ said that his kingdom is not of this world, and therefore that his
servants shall not fight, therefore those that fight are not his disciples nor
servants Barclay's Apology, prop. xv. 14.
. But, Christ does not say absolutely that his servants shall not fight --
"then would my servants fight," for what? that I should not be delivered to the
Jews. It is readily allowed that Christ here discountenances all attempts to
defend him and his kingdom by the sword -- but to say that it implies that his
servants shall not fight at all, and that those that fight are not his
servants, is more than can be proved. Whoever understands the nature of
Christ's kingdom must be sensible that an attempt to defend it by arms would be
equally rash and ridiculous, it being absolutely impossible to do it. Men may
defend what they call the kingdom of Christ, they may defend a form of
Christianity which has been interwoven with their civil government, and makes a
part of their constitution; such establishments may be defended, and may be
destroyed by the sword; and if every such establishment was actually destroyed
the kingdom of Christ would still subsist unhurt; for it is not in the power of
men nor devils to abolish that glorious constitution which is built on the
foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone. The seat of Christ's kingdom is the heaven of heavens, this
cannot even be attacked by the proudest assaults of temporal or spiritual
enemies; and if they should kill the bodies of the subjects of this kingdom,
which is the utmost they can do, their souls would be immediately received into
the heavenly Zion, and glorified with their exalted Head: Should all the forms
of Christianity now subsisting in the world be abolished; should Christians be
driven from the society of one another, and scattered singly through the earth,
Christ's spiritual kingdom would sustain no injury; while he is the head and
bridegroom of his church, neither tribulation nor distress, nor persecution,
nor famine, nor nakedness, nor peril, nor sword -- neither death, nor life, nor
angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate them
from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Romans viii.35, 38, 39.


It is in vain then to think of using the sword in defense of Christ's kingdom;
it is so spiritual and heavenly in its nature, that no weapon formed against it
shall prosper, nor can any weapon used in its defense be of the least avail: It
is able to subsist in the world not only without any help from the kingdoms of
the world, but even in defiance of all their art and strength, all their malice
and enmity against it. And as it receives no support from, so it does no injury
to them: It does not interfere with any of their natural rights and privileges:
It makes no alteration in their constitutions: It does not deprive the Prince
of the allegiance of his subjects, nor the subjects of the protection of their
Sovereign; but it leaves all matters relating to civil society and government
in the same state as it found them, only enforcing the natural duty of
subjection and obedience to the higher powers, from the noblest motives; and as
to the natural right which all the kingdoms of this world have to defend
themselves by the sword, Christ has never made the least alteration, but has
rather implicitly recognized and allowed it.

From what has been said I hope it appears sufficiently plain, that to defend
and maintain the peace of civil society against foreign invasion is not only
allowable, but is a necessary and important duty; and it may justly be
considered as a branch of that power which God has given the ruler for the
welfare of his subjects, for he bears not the sword in vain, but is the
minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath on him that does evil Romans xiii.4.
; if the evil doer be within the bounds of his jurisdiction the proceedings
against him must be according to the established laws of the land; but if a
foreigner should invade the rights and property of his subjects, and aim to
overthrow his government, the ruler, who is the natural guardian of his
people's rights, must have recourse to the Law of Arms, and in the use of those
means appeal to heaven for a decision of the controversy.

Having stated this matter as a point of duty, let us go a little further, and
see what may be done in a way of prudence, to maintain the peace and happiness
of human society. And I think it is a very clear consequence from what has been
said, that it is the part of a wise government to take such measures as shall
have the best tendency to prevent any encroachments being made on the natural
rights and property of the subject: If it is lawful to arm against an invading
foe, it is certainly prudent to keep that foe at a distance, and ourselves in
such a posture of defense as shall intimidate him and prevent his attacks;
then, if he is so hardy as to assault us we shall be the better able to repel
him, and if he perishes in his attempt he is really his own executioner. All
this may be done with a very good temper, and in the exercise of that
benevolence which we are to entertain toward an enemy, and which is never
inconsistent with our own security. If it be known that an house is well
guarded and defended, the probability is far greater that the owner will sleep
in peace, than if it was exposed to be robbed; the case is just the same with
regard to a nation or kingdom as an individual; if there be proper care taken
to render it formidable against foreign invasion, it is more likely that the
peace of that kingdom will be preserved, than if it was defenseless, especially
if it be an object of desire in the eyes of a foreign Prince. A sudden call to
arms on the surprise of an enemy's first appearance is so terrifying, that, if
the use of arms be not previously known, it will produce as many bad
consequences as the enemy's attack itself: It is better therefore to understand
the art of war, though it should serve only for an amusement, than by
neglecting it to expose ourselves to the hazard of an invasion, the
consequences of which must be dreadful to an unguarded and unprepared people:
And as other nations, and those in particular whom we have most reason to fear,
are expert in the use of arms, it must be a great piece of carelessness if we
suffer ourselves to remain ignorant of an art so essentially necessary to our
own safety.

The British continent is now swiftly advancing toward such a degree of
opulence as must render it an object worthy to be coveted by some ambitious
foe: The European nations cannot but be envious at the vast increase and
prosperity of our empire; and as it is well known that some of them are as
superior to us in the cabinet as they are inferior in the field, it is far from
impossible that intrigues may be formed to entangle our mother country in some
war upon the European continent, in support of her allies, and divide her
maritime forces by raising alarms in distant parts of the globe where we have
connexions; and when a suitable opportunity offers, a descent may be made on
our coasts, and our friends at home not being able to grant us the necessary
succors, we must be left to defend ourselves: Then, unless we know the use of
arms, of what avail will be our natural courage? it will only expose us to be
more easily marked out as objects of destruction.

We have known what it is to contend with a savage enemy where military art and
skill availed nothing, and vigilance could be our only security; but we have
never yet had to encounter with regular troops who have made the art of war
their study and exercise: To oppose them, is not a work that can be learnt in a
moment, but must be the result of experience and address, under the influence
of that natural fortitude which distinguishes the inhabitants of British
America, and of New England in particular, the descendants of an hardy race,
who, animated by the noblest principles, encountered every adversity with
unremitting ardour to leave this land a sacred legacy to their posterity.

But to discourage an enemy from attempting an invasion must in the eye of
reason be a more desirable advantage than to repel the invasion when it is
actually begun. It was a sensible remark which was made by a French prisoner of
distinction Le Marquis de la Maison Forte, commander of the Vigilant, a French
man of war, which was taken by the English ships before the harbor of
Louisbourg, during the siege.

See Douglas's Summary, vol. I. p. 341.
in the year 174^, That it was bad policy in the French officers of Louisbourg,
to hinder the English from viewing at all times the strength of their
fortifications; because if the English had been well informed of their
strength, the most sanguine rash person in the world could not have imagined
such a reduction, without regular troops and artillery. And, further, that our
allowing the French officers, prisoners, freely to view Boston and the country
of New England, would effectually discourage any French attempt to invade a
country so well peopled. As this country is now become an object of curiosity,
and is visited by many foreigners, who doubtless make just observations, and
carry them home for the information of their own countrymen, should they have
occasion to observe a martial spirit and military knowledge prevailing among
us, the report thereof spread among distant nations would be a much greater
security to us, than merely the knowledge of our country being 'well peopled;'
for then they would not dare to think of disturbing our repose without equal
numbers, skill and courage; and what European nation could furnish and support
an army equal to the vast attempt, without exposing herself defenseless to her
rival neighbors, and to the just resentment of our injured mother country?

For several years past, Great Britain has experienced the advantage of a
regular standing militia, in raising the spirit of the people, and rendering
them formidable against their neighbors. In the beginning of the last war a
general panic run through the nation, upon the news of an intended invasion,
and the preparations that were made from year to year in the ports of France;
the numbers of vessels that were said to be constructed for a speedy
disembarkation of troops raised a terrible alarm, and made the nation anxious
for their security; but when the genius of Britain awoke and gave birth to the
new militia laws, they begun to feel their own strength, dismissed their
foreign allies, and very soon the idea of an invasion from the flat-bottomed
boats of France became as ridiculous as it had been dreadful. The general
scheme of the present militia laws is to discipline a certain number of the
inhabitants of every county, chosen by lot for three years, and officered by
the Lord Lieutenant, the deputy Lieutenants and other principal Landholders,
under a commission from the Crown. They are not compellable to march out of
their counties, unless in case of invasion, or actual rebellion, nor in any
case compellable to march out of the kingdom. They are to be exercised at
stated times: and their discipline in general is liberal and easy; but when
drawn out into actual service, they are subject to the rigours of martial law,
as necessary to keep them in order. This is the constitutional security which
our laws have provided for the public peace, and for protecting the realm
against foreign or domestic violence; and which the statutes declare is
essentially necessary to the safety and prosperity of the kingdom.

Guthrie's Geography, p. 181.


Such a general and vigorous attention to the military art as now makes the
British nation the most formidable kingdom in Europe, would by God's blessing
be the best means that can be used either to defend or secure this valuable
country. The slothful herd who lie basking in the sunshine of prosperity,
regardless of future evils, may perhaps treat this as a matter of indifference
and idle amusement; but men of penetration and foresight cannot but see the
necessity of our making it an object of more general attention: And, if we
consider -- the undoubted right which we have to the possession of this land --
the many instances of a defenseless and secure people falling an easy prey to
foreign conquerors -- and, the value of our civil constitution, our friends,
our estates, and in short, our temporal all, we have so many cogent arguments
to enforce our attention to this important duty.

The right which we have to the possession of this country is as clear and
incontestible as any right that can be imagined. The God of nature, who has
determined the bounds of every man's habitation, was pleased in his just and
wise providence to make room for our forefathers in this wilderness by causing
a mortal sickness to prevail among the savage natives, which swept off such
numbers of them that the living were not sufficient to bury the dead: Anno
1617. This winter and the spring ensuing a great plague befalls the natives in
New England, which wastes them exceedingly; and so many thousands of them die,
that the living are not able to bury them, and their skulls and bones remain
above ground at the places of their habitations for several years after. -- The
Narragansets in the West, and Penobscots in the East, escaped this plague, and
it raged only in the countries lying between them, and prepared the way for
another people.

Prince's Chronology, part 1. page 46.
Some parts of this country were then destitute of inhabitants, and might
justly have been occupied by any other people who were obliged to seek an
habitation. But our forefathers did not content themselves with this title;
they also fairly and honestly purchased the soil of the remaining natives, so
that if they had any just title by pre-occupancy, it was expressly transferred
to our ancestors. And, if the crown of Great Britain had any right by priority
of discovery or otherwise, the grants which have been made under the royal
sanction from time to time, have imparted that right to the present occupants.
If any right can be claimed by us in consequence of the dereliction of the
former possessors; those territories from which they have been forced, either
by the necessity of seeking subsistence elsewhere, or by an utter extinction of
their political existence, are undoubtedly ours. And, lastly, if we ought in
justice to be recompensed for the numberless injuries we have suffered from
them in past years, we have a clear title to the possession of those wilds
which served as lurking places, from which they issued forth to commit their
depredations. Such being our uncontroverted right to this country, which is now
daily becoming more valuable and important, it is certainly our duty to defend
and secure it; and if we neglect the necessary means thereof we shall prove
ourselves unworthy our relation to those noble adventurers who first planted it.

Another argument arises from the many instances of a defenseless and secure
people falling an easy prey to the rapacity of foreign invaders. The limits of
this discourse will not allow me to be particular in recounting all the
instances that might be produced; but I may not omit the mention of those, the
remembrance of which is suggested by the place where we are now assembled: --
This very spot was once a scene of blood and devastation. -- An unaccountable
security reigning among the ancient inhabitants of this town, occasioned their
being surprised in one fatal night by an artful and vindictive enemy, who
sacrificed many of them to their implacable resentment; and within a few years
after two neighboring plantations suffered like dreadful effects of their
fury. The Indian war which began in Plymouth colony, in 1675, soon spread its
fatal effects into these parts, exciting and encouraging the eastern Indians to
commence hostilities against the English settlers, in revenge for some private
injuries. -- After Philip's death, in August 1676, numbers of those Indians who
were in confederacy with him, took refuge among the Indians of Penicook, who
had continued peaceable during the war, and were on friendly terms with the
people of Dover and other neighboring settlements. Forces being sent from
Boston to search for those disguised enemies, and being arrived at Dover, where
about four hundred Indians were peaceably assembled; by a stratagem of Major
Richard Waldron they surrounded and seized the whole body, without the loss of
a life on either side (September 6); and the perfidious Indians being separated
from the friendly, (who were dismissed) they were sent to Boston, to the number
of about two hundred, a few were put to death and the rest sold into slavery
abroad, of whom some found their way home. This action of the Major's was by
the Indians deemed treachery and breach of friendship, and though they might
have known he did it in consequence of orders from the Government of the
Massachusetts, under whose jurisdiction this province then was, yet according
to their principles he deserved similar treatment in revenge. But it was not
till thirteen years after that matters were sufficiently ripened to strike the
meditated blow. There had been then a renewal of friendly intercourse between
the Indians of Penicook and Saco and the English, which rendered the latter too
secure, and gave the former an opportunity to execute their vindictive purpose
more effectually. -- On the evening of the 27th of June, 1689, several Squaws
applied to each of the garrisoned houses at Cocheco for lodging, and
Mesandowit, Sachem of Pigwacket, was, as usual, kindly entertained by Major
Waldron: By an unaccountable negligence, no watch was kept in the night, so
that the Squaws in the several garrisons, and Mesandowit in the Major's,
silently opened the gates and gave the signal by a whistle to their comrades,
who were at hand, who rushed in and did their destructive work before the
English could have time to repel them: They barbarously murdered the old Major
and twenty-two others, took twenty-nine, and having burned the best houses,
drew off toward Canada, from whence they had been encouraged and supplied.

Within a year after, viz. March 18, 1690, a body of Indians and French fell
suddenly upon the inhabitants of Salmon-Falls, destroying the best part of that
plantation, about thirty persons were slain and above fifty carried captive;
the English boldly ventured in pursuit of the enemy, and had a skirmish, in
which about four or five were killed on both sides, but night put an end to the
action.

These exploits not being sufficient to glut the revenge of the Indians, who
were now newly engaged in the French interest, they were still determined on
further mischief: After having made diverse attacks upon the Eastern
settlements, and being informed by their spies of the defenseless and secure
state of the people at Oyster-River, they suddenly fell upon them in the
morning of the 18th of July, 1694, killing and captivating between ninety and
an hundred persons, with the loss of only one Indian. There had been a peace
made the year before at Pemaquid; but the Indians, like some of the politest
nations in Europe, could keep their faith no longer than till they saw a fit
opportunity to break it.

N. B. This account is collected from Mr. Hubbard's and Dr. Mather's histories,
and from the information of diverse aged and credible persons. -- One of the
captives (Mrs. Christina Baker) taken in 1689, is still living here.




The memory of these bloody transactions should be presented, not to excite our
rage against the inhuman perpetrators or any of their savage brethren, but to
teach us the necessity of being always on our guard, even in time of the most
profound peace, against the attacks of an enemy: In these cases nothing was
wanting but vigilance; fortitude and military skill were wholly useless against
an enemy whose chief strength lay in their secret arts of dissimulation and
treachery; but when we have reason to fear such attempts as require martial art
and courage to repel, we must fortify ourselves in an answerable manner.

Finally, if we set a just value on the happy constitution of government under
which we live; if we regard our lawful property, the prosperity of our friends
and families; if we esteem the blessings of peace and the happiness of human
society; if we prize the undisturbed enjoyment of our religious liberty, that
precious natural right which no people under heaven enjoy in fuller perfection
than we do, and which we cannot expect would be allowed us by any but a
Protestant government; if we wish to see America the asylum of liberty, the
repository of learning, and the mansion of plenty and peace; let us use the
means which God has put into our hands to guard ourselves against those evils,
which, the lust of power or fame, or the haughty resentment of foreign
potentates may hereafter occasion; and in so doing we shall discharge an
important trust committed to us by our Creator, and a duty which we owe to our
King, to ourselves and to our posterity.

The presence of our Captain General, and other gentlemen of rank and figure,
on this occasion, adds a dignity to the transactions of the day, and serves as
a strong confirmation of the truth and importance of what has now been
inculcated.

We congratulate ourselves, May it please your Excellency, on the happiness we
have hitherto enjoyed under your mild administration: We behold with
satisfaction your endeavors to unite the true interest of our gracious
Sovereign, and that of a free and loyal people, into one indivisible object: We
rejoice to see this province, long stinted in its growth, harrassed by repeated
and cruel wars, exposed as the barrier against a merciless and savage foe, now
expanding and flourishing, under the auspicious patronage which your Excellency
has afforded to our agriculture, and by the wise and generous institution of a
seminary of learning: While these happy events distinguish the annals of your
administration, permit us also to hope, that the defense of this territory by a
regular militia will employ your Excellency's attention in proportion to your
thorough knowledge of the beneficial effects of a similar institution in our
mother kingdom, and to your ardent zeal to promote the true interest of this
your native country.

May the Sovereign Ruler of the world incline the heart of our King still to
continue your Excellency a ^^ch and lasting blessing to this province: May the
wisdom which is from above direct and regulate your endeavors for the public
good: And, may the sanctifying grace of God's holy spirit so influence your
public services, that they may not only promote our happiness, but may receive
a gracious and eternal reward in a better world.

The Gentlemen who are commissioned to the several Offices in this regiment
will we hope distinguish themselves, and do honor to their stations by their
diligent and united attention to the duty assigned them. -- Gentlemen, the
cause in which you are engaged is good; the fear of the God of armies, the love
of your country, of its civil and religious Liberty, are noble principles to
animate you; these will render the duty of furnishing your own minds, and
instructing your countrymen in the art of war, a pleasing employment, and if
you are ever called to action will serve to alleviate the burdens of duty, and
inspire you with true courage and resolution. We trust, therefore, that the
same generous and manly spirit which you have already discovered, will not
suffer you to be content with enjoying the honor of a title, but will make you
studious to deserve well of your country, so that the respect shown you by
others may be not merely the effect of complaisance, but a just tribute to your
real merit.

No man I presume will think it beneath him to be a Soldier, in defense of his
family, his interest, his civil and religious liberty. My Brethren, many of you
have in time past girded on the harness, and proved yourselves good servants of
your King and country in the late wars; and those of you who have not been in
actual service have the same natural intrepidity and alertness which are
essential qualifications of a good soldier, and by which the men of these
northern colonies have been always remarkably distinguished. You will not
therefore need to be urged to a vigorous and graceful exertion of these gifts,
in the military service; you are not to be subject to the rigor and severity
of a standing army, but to that easy discipline which is sufficient among
neighbors united together for their own safety; your officers are not a set of
strangers, who might have ideas of rank and subjection different from
yourselves; but they are your friends and neighbors, who value your interest
and reputation as dearly as their own, and would expose you to no difficulties
but what they would cheerfully endure themselves: You know, that in all
societies there is a necessity for order and subjection, or the valuable ends
in view cannot be answered: As your duty is, therefore, so easy, and will be
but little interruption to your necessary business; as the end of military
knowledge and service is the good of the community, the defense and protection
of your dearest interests; so, we trust you will unanimously and cheerfully
address yourselves to the duty, and render yourselves in this as well as other
ways useful and ornamental members of society.

To conclude, Let us all remember that though the knowledge and practice of
military duty are so necessary to our defense and security as subjects of the
kingdoms of this world; yet all these improvements are of a temporal nature,
and the knowledge and utility of them will cease with our present form of
existence. Soon, very soon shall we get into the world of Spirits, where we
shall live and converse in a manner vastly different from what we do here; and
our eternal state will be determined according to our behavior in the present
life. If we would then obtain the crown of immortal glory, we must as good
soldiers of Jesus Christ fight (...) the banner of his cross against all the
enemies of our souls: We must look to the Great Captain of salvation for
strength and assistance, and depend on his (...) and righteousness for the
acceptance of our services and our reward: May he therefore enable us to be
faithful unto death, and then give us a crown of life.

AMEN.

