A VINDICATION OF THE GOVERNMENT OF NEW ENGLAND CHURCHES. Drawn from Antiquity;
the Light of Nature; Holy Scripture; it is Noble Nature; and from the Dignity
Divine Providence has put upon it.

BY JOHN WISE, A. M. Pastor to a CHURCH in IPSWICH.

There are none to guide her among all the Sons whom she has brought forth;
neither is there any that takes her by the hand of all the Sons that she has
brought up.

ISA. li.18. Say ye unto your Brethren Ammi, and to your Sisters Ruhamah.

HOS. ii.1. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by JOHN BOYLES, in Marlboro'-Street.
MDCCLXXII.

The constitution of New England CHURCHES, as settled by their Platform, may be
fairly justified, from Antiquity; the Light of Nature; Holy Scripture; and from
the Noble and Excellent Nature of the Constitution itself. And lastly from the
Providence of GOD dignifying of it.
1. The first demonstration contains the voice of Antiquity in the following
Chapters.

CHAP. I. To distribute the whole Christian Era into three Parts may serve to
raise a clearer light, and make a brighter aspect in this Essay.
1. THE first division contains the first three hundred years of christianity,
which may be accounted the most refined and purest time, both as to faith and
manners, that the christian church has been honored with; for that within this
space, is contained the ministry of the apostles and holy evangelists, and
other eminent persons authorized by them; and such others who succeeded in
office-trust through the several ages, within the space before named. This was
the time of an immense effusion of the Spirit of God upon the world, when there
was such a flux and inundation of the waters from the sanctuary, mentioned,
Ezekiel. 47. This was the age of miracles; a time of extraordinary gifts, and when
grace and true piety was in the greatest elevation. Christian religion was now
a dangerous business; every man that took it up, lay down his life, honor and
fortune at stake; he that owns Christ, must bid defiance to all the celebrated
deities of the Roman empire; and thereby run counter to the religion of the
imperial court. So that rationally we may expect to find the churches of Christ
in the purest capacity they were ever in; in all points, both of principles and
practice. That whatever their government was if they continue the same from the
days of the apostles, we may fairly conclude it to be authentic, and agreeable
with their grand and original copy. It is most apparent, that the churches in
those ages, were under too good an influence internally, and the eye of too
direful a guard, externally to prevaricate with God, in the known principles of
their order, any more than in their faith, though they were not without errors.
Two or three hundred years, is a long time in the world, to keep up our
constant mode and custom, either in religious or civil affairs amongst men, who
are so inclined to err, and apt to change their fashions; Nam est Natura
hominum Novitatis Avida, That for the churches through those many ages and in
their several communities, to agree in their discipline amongst themselves; and
not essentially to differ from those churches that were truly apostolical,
invincibly infers, that their original was divine. But this will appear more
plainly when we have made and finished our survey.

2. The second grand division of time, contains the space of the next twelve
hundred years, downward, more or less; within which circuit is included the
commencement and progress of a direful apostasy, both as to worship, and
government in the churches. Some symptoms of these things were rising within
the former division of time; but in this they grew a great pace, and to that
degree, that the christian world became a most notorious apostate. For as we
have it in the idea of the reformation, the great Lord of time allowed a space,
wearing the denomination of time, times, and half a time: or in plainer
expressions, twelve hundred and sixty years; in which space, all the effects of
a horrible apostasy made a very Gehennon of that which was called Christendom.
And says Dr. Owen, (in his preface, to the inquiry, into the original of the
churches) Ambros judged, that it was the pride, or ambition of the doctors of
the church, which introduced the alteration in its order. And moreover says the
doctor, somewhat after this manner, viz. 'The ambition of church rulers, in the
fourth and fifth centuries openly proclaimed itself to the scandal of the
christian religion; for that their interest led them to a deviation from the
order and discipline of the church according to its first institution': For
that the directions given about it in scripture, make it a matter so weighty in
itself, and attended with so many difficulties, it being laid under such severe
interdictions of lordly power, or seeking either of wealth or dignity; that
it is no pleasant thing to flesh and blood, to engage in the conduct, and
oversight of Christ's volunteers; to bear with their manners; to exercise
patience toward them in all their infirmities; and in all their weaknesses, to
continue a high valuation for them, as the flock of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood: All this requires abundance of self-denial; and
if so, then it is no wonder, that many of their prelates were willing gradually
to extricate themselves out of this uneasy condition; and embrace all
opportunities of introducing another order into the churches, that might tend
more to the exaltation of their own power and dignity. And this was done
accordingly; for the bishops by their arbitrary rules shared the flock of
Christ amongst themselves, and that without the consent of the people, as
though they had conquered them by the sword. For thus they divide the spoil.
This bishop say they, shall have such a share and number of them under his
power; and that other bishop shall have so many; and so far shall the
jurisdiction of one extend, ^^d so far another; that they soon canton out the
whole Roman empire under a few patriarchs and head men. These things were the
subject of their decrees and laws, which (those of Christ's being thrown by)
were now become a rule for the churches. But yet neither did the bishops long
keep within those bounds and limits, which their more modest ambition had at
first prescribed unto them; but went on, and took occasion from these
beginnings to contend amongst themselves about pre-eminency, dignity, and
power: In which contest, the bishop of Rome, at length remained master of the
field; and so Rome obtained the second conquest of the world. And then his
holiness the head of it came to ride admiral of all the Sees; and then soon
became lord of heaven and earth by the same rule of process which brought him
to his high trust. Hence, Query. What cannot wakeful ambition, learning and
fraud do, if jointly agreed, at rifling the greatest treasures bequeathed to
mankind; especially when the world is generally gotten into a sleepy fit.

3. Toward the latter end of this space of time began a glorious reformation.
Many famous persons, memorable in ecclesiastical history, being moved by the
spirit of God, and according to holy writ, led the way in the face of all
danger; such has Wickliff, who openly decryed the pope, as the very antichrist;
in the fourteenth century, and others in that age. And in the next century
Martin Luther pursued the reformation with great boldness, resolution and
constancy; this is that famous Luther, says my author, of whom they who
acknowledge the least, must yet make as much as Dr. More makes of him; for
says the Dr. I cannot think so very highly of Luther as some do; and yet I
think him to have been a very happy instrument in the hand of God, for the good
of Christendom against the horrid enormities of the papal hyrarchy. And though
he might not be allowed to be the Elias, the conductor and chariot of Israel,
as some have styled him; yet I think at least he might be accounted a faithful
postilion in that chariot, who was well accoutred with his wax boots, oiled
coat, and hood; and who turned the horses noses into a direct way from Babylon
toward the ci^y of God, and held on in a good round trot, through thick and
thin, not caring to bespatter others in this high fogg, as he himself was
finely bespattered by others: About which time Zuinglius, Oecolampadius,
Melancthon and other christian heroes also listed into the same quarrel, and
with great bravery and self denial went forward with the reformation. Yet after
the endeavors of such men, and others without number, through several ages
downward; the churches, which are called reformed, attained to a very imperfect
reformation, as Dr. Increase Matther says. And the defect has not been so much
in doctrine, as in worship and discipline. And notwithstanding says the Dr. in
this respect also, some churches have gone beyond others. Now to come to what I
aim at; these churches in New England, as to their order and discipline have
surpassed all churches of the reformation. And under the head of discipline, it
seems to me, that Christ the captain of salvation, has given out his word to
these churches, as to his troops coming up in the rear of time; and his word of
command is -- as you were; make good the old front; or place your selves in
that regimental order, which the primitive churches were in whilst they marched
under my banners, and encountered the devil in their heathen persecutors for the
first three hundred years. For that the churches in New England, and the
primitive churches are eminently parallel in their government. Those first ages
of the church it is certain were many times much annoyed with many pestilent
and damnable heresies; and many usages in worship, too superstitious crept in
amongst them; yet they continued in the constitution of their church order very
uniform and apostolical; and it is very obvious that these churches in this
wilderness, in the essentials of government; are every way parallel to them.

I shall represent this business by a collection of parellel notes out of
several authors of unquestionable veracity; and shall principally follow the
guidance of one who has concealed his name; and styles his treatise, 'An
inquiry into the constitution, discipline, unity and worship of the primitive
churches.' This author in his preface gives this fair account of his doings;
says he, What I have written I have wholly collected out of the genuine, and
unquestionably authentic writings of those ages; meaning such as writ in, or
of the three first centuries of christianity. And says he, I have been every
way honest and unbiast. And being well assured of his fidelity; I shall
endeavor to imitate his faithfulness, in transcribing what I find in him
suiting my present purpose. And I shall be well and sufficiently furnished when
I have laid before the reader the notion which the ancients had of the church
in its constituent parts both of officers and people, with the several
authorities, powers, rights, immunities and prerogatives belonging unto each.
And if we find that the primitive churches in their order and discipline, did
exactly agree in the essentials of government; with the churches in
New England; we may rationally then conclude that if they were apostolical, so
are we.

CHAP. II. Of the Church.
TO pass over all other observations, the most usual and common acceptance of
the word Church, of which we must chiefly treat, is that of a particular
church; which consists of a society of christians, meeting together in one
place, under their proper pastors, for the performance of religious worship,
and the exercising of christian discipline. This description of a church is
agreeable with the Idiom both of scripture and antiquity. Thus Tertullian, who
lived about the end of the second century, gives us an account of the state,
order and worship of the churches. ( Apol. ad Genesis Cap. 39.) The description of
a church he first lays down in these words, viz. Corpus sumus de Conscientia
Religionis, et Disciplinae Unitate, et Spei Foedere. We are a body united in
the conscience of religion, or for the conscientious observation of the duties
of religion; by an agreement in discipline, and in a covenant of hope. For
whereas such a body, or religious society could not be united but by a
covenant; he calls it a covenant of hope, because the principal respect therein
was had unto the things hoped for. This religious body, or society thus united
by covenant, did meet together in the same assembly, or congregation. For says
he, Corpus sumus, Coimus in Coetum, et Congregationem ut ad Deum, etc. We are a
body, and meet in an assembly, and congregation, to offer up our prayers unto
God, and attend the duties of the christian religion. So Iraeneus also in the
second century, tells us, That some of the brethren, and sometimes the whole
church of some certain place, -- by fasting and prayer have raised the dead.
Thus our own platform agrees in sense with the opinion of the ancients. Plat.
Chapter 2. Sect. 6. A congregational church, is by the institution of Christ, a
part of the militant church, consisting of a company of saints by calling,
united into one body by an holy covenant, etc. But as to the independency, or
real distinction between church and church; this will more clearly appear in
what follows. Therefore I shall proceed to consider the constituent parts of a
church, as divided,

1. Into the people who composed the body of the church, called the elect, or
the called and sanctified by the will of God; and sometimes they are called the
brethren, because of their brotherly love, etc.

2. Into those persons who were set apart for office, or for a peculiar and
ecclesiastical improvement. And each party under this distribution, had their
particular immunities and employments. And under these heads, I shall confine
the discourse to a parallel in the essentials in government or church order,
between the churches of Christ in the first ages of christianity, and the
churches of New England, as settled by their platform.

CHAP. III.
I SHALL proceed to distribute and enumerate the operations and immunities of
the churches.

1. With relation to the peculiar acts of the officers.

2. The peculiar acts of the laity, or fraternity.

3. The joint acts of them both; as performing the work and business of an
organic church, or complete corporation. And,

4. I shall lastly make some observations upon the union of distinct churches,
by acts of sisterly fellowship or communion. And hereby I shall complete the
parallel, in the essentials of order, between the primitive churches, and those
of this country.

1. The peculiar acts of the officers or clergy. Under this head might be
considered the functions of every particular order, and degree of the clergy;
which we may say were according to the purest antiquity, but three, viz.
bishops, priests or presbyters, and deacons. I shall principally consider the
bishop as the chief officer in trust and dignity, in the primitive church. And
in order to it,

1. In general observe, that though there were some distinctions in point of a
tetular dignity and degree between a bishop and presbyter; yet they were really
equal in order, and in the nature of their trust. For that in an ecclesiastical
sense, bishop and presbyters are synonimous terms, setting forth the same
office; and signify no more but an elder, a pastor, ruler, or overseer of a
church. Ignatius calls the apostles themselves the presbyters of the church;
and Theodoret renders the reason of the appellation, for says he, The holy
scriptures called the chief men of Israel, the senate or eldership. Wills. Dict.
And indeed according to the apostle himself, presbyters, or elders, and
bishop^, are plainly terms of office; and of equal signification. As in Tit. i.
5, 7. For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should -- ordain elders
-- For a bishop must be blameless, as the steward of God, etc.

In this dis^ourse I shall represent the bishop in the sense of the primitive
chur^hes, as head and chief officer of the church; for according to Cyprian,
there was but one bishop, strickly so called, in a church at a time, though at
the same time there were many elders or presbyters in the same church; and the
bishop in a peculiar manner was related to his flock, as a pastor to his sheep
and a parent to his children. Cyp. Epist. 38. 1. p. 90. And the titles of this
supreme church officer, are most of them reckoned up in one place, in Cyp.
Epist. 96. viz. Bishop, pastor, president, governor, superintendant or priest.
And this officer is he, which in the Revelation, is called, The angel of the
church, as Origin thinks.

2. We may consider more distinctly, the object of his care, or the dimensions
of the boshops diocese. Its very obvious, that this great and superior officer,
as has been said; had but one church under his pastoral care. The diocesses
government or dominion of these reverend prelates, are never (according to
antiquity) said to contain churches, in the plural, but only a church, in the
singular number. And the bishop was usually called the bishop of this or that
church. As Tertullian says, Polycarp was ordained bishop of the church of
Smyrna, etc. And moreever it is accurately to be observed, that the most
frequent word used to denominate the extent of the bishops care, or to set out
the limits of his diocese, was that of a parish. So in the synodical epistle of
Irenaeus to Victor. The bishoprics of Asia are called parishes: and in the
history of Eusebius, the word is so applied in several hundred pla^es. It Is
very usual there to read of bishops of this and that parish. As the bishop of
the parish in Alexandria, the bishop of the parish in Ephesus, and in Corinth,
^c. For that the word Paroikia, which we render parish, signifies housing, or
living together. And in ordinary and civil use, it notes a village, small town,
or part of a town, of people or persons dwelling together. And in a church
sense it signifies a competent number of christians dwelling near together, and
having one bishop, pastor or minister, or more set over them; with whom they
meet at one time or place, to worship and serve God. So that parish in this
sense, is the same with a particular church or congregation. And this is
plainly agreeable with the sense, custom and platform of New England churches.

3. That the bishops diocese exceeded not the bounds of a parish, or a small
town, or part of a town, is very evident from the following demonstrations,
according to antiquity.

Demonst. 1. For that all the people of a diocese did every Sunday, meet
together in one place, to celebrate divine service. Thus says Justin Martyr,
(Apol. 2. p. 98.) All assemble together in one place, where the bishop
preaches, and prays.

Demonst. 2. The bishop had but one alter, or communion table in his diocese,
at which his whole flock received the sacrament from him. There is but one
alter says Ignatius (Epist. ad Phila. p. 41.) as there is but one bishop. So
says Cyprian, we celebrate the sacrament; the whole brotherhood being present.
And thus it was in Justin Martyr's days. The bishops whole diocese met together
on Sunday, when the bishop gave them the eucharist.

Demonst. 3. All the people of a diocese were present at church censures; as
Origin describes an offender, as appearing before the whole church. In Mat.
T^m. 13* Page 133. vol. 1. So Clemens Romanus calls the censures of the church,
the things commanded by the multitude.

Demonst. 4. No offenders were restored again to the churches peace, without
the knowledge and consent of the whole diocese; they were to plead their cause
before the whole people, etc.

Demonst. 5. When the bishop of a church was dead, all the people of that
church met together in one place to choose a new bishop. So Sabinus was chosen
bishop of Emetria, by the suffrage of all the brotherhood. The whole diocese of
the bishops did meet together to manage church affairs. Thus when the schism of
Felicissimus, in the bishopric of Carthage was to be debated, it was to be
done according to the will of the people, and by the consent of the laity. And
when there were some hot disputes about the restitution of the lapsed, Cyprian
promised his whole diocese, that all those things should be examined before
them, and judged by them. So that from the premises, it is very evident, that
that diocese cannot possibly be more than one single congregation; nor that
church more than a congregational church, where all the people and members of
that church meet together at one time, and in one place to pray together, to
receive the sacrament together; assist at church censures together, and
dispatch church affairs together. And it is very apparent, that this was the
method and way of the primitive churches, according to the preceding
observations. And New England churches harmonize exactly in their common
practice, as though they had taken their directions from them.

4. The bishops duty, or the several particular operations of his honorable
office, were such as these, viz. preaching of the word, praying with his
people, administering the sacraments, taking care of the poor, ordaining of
ministers, governing his flock, excommunicating of offenders, and absolving of
penitents. In a word, whatever can be comprised under those three general heads
of preaching, worship and government, were parts of the bishops function and
office. And this also is very agreeable with our platform: Cap. 10. Sex. 8. The
power which Christ has committed to the elders, is to feed and rule the church
of God, etc.

CHAP. IV. The Prerogatives, or Peculiar Immunities of the Laity.
THE fraternity or body of the people had several high immunities inherent in
them; and exercised by them as a church. As,

1. Voting and giving their suffrage, for the admission and censure of members.
To this purpose before.

2. The electing their own officers. For when a parish, or bishopric was
vacant through the death of the incumbent, the members of that parish met in
church to choose a fit person for his successor; to whom they might commit the
care and government of the church. When Alexander was chosen bishop of
Jerusalem, it was by cumpulsion or choice of the members of that church. And so
in the church of Rome when their bishop was deceased; all the people met in the
church to choose a successor. Eusebius. Lib. 6. cap. 28. Though it is certain that
after some time the aspiring clergy robbed the people of this as well as of
other of their rights. As it is well represented by a late worthy anomolous
author, writing de Ordinatione, p. 30. Crescente Paulatim Cleri Potestate ad se
magis indies, etc. The power of the clergy gradually increasing, they daily
drew more new rights to themselves, which they took from the people; thinking
that the dignity which they had obtained, was not ample enough, if the people
had any share with them in elections. Therefore at length snatch or take the
whole business into their own hands; the people through their supine negligence
not much opposing of them. Yet that the people might be hushed into quiet (with
much grace) they grant them the favor of beggars, viz. Postulare; to ask for an
officer. But this plundering of the churches falls within the second grand
division of time. Not within the first three hundred years.

3. Of approbating of ordination. All the people were consulted; and none were
admitted into holy orders without their approbation. As we are assured by
Cyprian (Epist. 33.) who tells us it was his constant custom, in all
ordinations to consult his people, and with their common counsel to weigh the
merit of every candidate of the sacred orders.

4. Of deposing of their own officers the way. Page 96. Sect. 2. For if their
bishops proved scandalous and wicked in life; heretical and apostates from the
faith, the churches had power to degrade and depose them, and choose others in
their room. There is a peculiar example of this kind in a letter from the
church of Rome to the church of Corinth, written by Clemens Romanus, Eusebius.
Lib. 3. Cap. 14. upon which Dr. Owen makes this observation, viz. That the
church of Corinth was fallen into a sinful excess in the deposition of their
elders, whom the church of Rome judged to have presided amongst th^s laudably.
But yet in the whole epistle the church of Corinth is no where reproved, for
assuming an authority to themselves which did not belong to them. It seems what
Cyprian afterward affirmed, was then acknowledged, namely, that the right of
choosing the worthy, and rejecting the unworthy was in the body of the people.
But the Corinthian church is severely reproved for the abuse of their liberty
and power, State of churches; p. 94. Also when two Spanish bishops were deposed
by their churches, that the said churches might not seem to act by a power
which belonged not to them; they sent into Africa to several bishops to know
their judgment thereupon, who being convened in a synod ( Anno. Dom. 258.)
whereof Cyprian was president; they commended, and approved their proceedings;
assuring them it was according to the divine law, which was express, that none
but those that were holy and blameless, should approach God's altar; that if
they had continued to have communicated with their profane bishops, they would
have been accessory to their guilt and villainy and would have contradicted
those examples, and commands in scripture, which obliged a people to separate
from wicked, and ungodly ministers, that they had not acted irregularly in what
they had done; since the people had the chief power in choosing worthy bishops,
so also of refusing those who were unworthy. And many other passages there are
in that epistle which flatly assert the peoples power of deposing scandalous
bishops. Yet where the churches were associated to render their action more
unquestionable, they had assistance from others; but yet the power is plainly
acknowledged to be inherent in the church. Epist. 68. Apud Cyp.. 1.2.3. p. 200.
These premises are very harmonious with the constitution of th^se churches.
Platf. C. 10. Sect. 5.6. The power which is granted by Christ to the body of
the church, and brotherhood is a prerogative.

1. In choosing their own officers. 2. In the admission, and censures of their
own members. And, 3. In case an elder offend incorrigibly etc. as they had
power to call him to office; so they have power according to order to remove
him from his office, etc.
CHAP. V.
3. WE come nextly to consider the joint acts of officers and people, carrying
on, as an organic body. And these peculiarly refer to the discipline, and good
government of the church. And though ministerial trust (precisely considered) was
solely devolved on the officers; yet still the fraternity stood interested in,
and possessed of a share in the juridical part of government, the whole church
in ordinary cases were the judges which composed the ecclesiastical consistory.
So that the power of the keys was so lodged both in the bos^ops and people, as
that each had a share to exercise and improve in joint acts of judicature, and
thus the clergy and laity conjunctly made up that supreme court which was in
every parish, where all church offenders were tried, and when found guilty,
were sentenced and condemned. That the laity did exercise judicial power in the
church, is further evident from several testimonies. As in that of Clemens
Romanus. (Epist. 1. Ad Corinth, p. 69.) where he writes: Who will say according
to the example of Moses, If seditions, contentions, and schisms are happened
because of me, I will depart, I will go whithersoever you please, and I will do
what shall be enjoined me by the people, so the church of Christ be in peace.
So Origin discribes a criminal appearing be^^re the whole church. In Mat. Tom.
13. Cyprian, when some had committed some great misdemeanors, professes himself
not a sufficient judge, but they ought to be tried by all the people, Epist.
28. p. 64. And to the same purpose, he writes of other delinquents; viz. That
such matters should be adjusted according to the arbitrament, and common
council of the people. And that the lapsed in admitting them to communion,
should plead their cause before the clergy, and before all the people. And
concerning such matters he writes to the people, that when it should please God
to restore peace to the church, and reduce him from exile, then the case of the
delinquents should be examined in their presence, and according to their
judgment. And Cyprian writes in another place, that all things were debated in
common amongst them. And that whoever was excommunicated it was by the
suffrages of the people. And though the elders were principally concerned, in
preparing cases for the churches cognizance; yet its plain that the decisive
suffrage was (in part) the prerogative of the people. To this purpose we have
an instance in some that joined in the schism of Novatus; who being sensible of
their fault, came into the presbytery, and desired the churches peace; the
presbytery accepted their submission, and proposed it to the whole church, who
readily embraced it. Now it is to be observed, that agreably with the
forecited practice of the primitive churches, our own platform has decided the
question concerning the subject, and exercise of government, Platf. C. 10.
Sect. 11. The ordinary power of government belongs only to the elders; and
power of privilege remains with the brotherhood, (as the power of judgment
in matters of censure, and and power of liberty in matters of liberty) thence
it follows, that in an organic church, and right administration, all church
acts proceed after the manner of a mixed administration, so that no church act
can be consummated, or perfected without the consent of both.

CHAP. VI.
4. I Shall nextly consider the fellowship and communion that distinct churches
had and held one with another.

It is very obvious by this time, (and he must blind his own eyes that will not
see it) that the primitive churches according to the account we have of their
regiment for the first three hundred years from Christ) were distinct,
political bodies; and neither diocaesan, national, provincial nor classical,
but properly congregational churches. And as such, were perfect and complete
societies incorporate; so that they had a power, and capacity of carrying on
all church work within themselves, and wanted not to borrow, or receive from
others, for the support of their being, and so were independent. Yet
considering they were imperfect in their matter, and therefore to help forward
their well-being, wanted the advantage of all good means; with the influence of
the grace, love, knowledge, experience, wisdom, and counsel of each other; so
they were dependent, and became mutually officious, and accountable each to
other: somewhat after the manner, as Mr. Hooker distinguishes on the
independency, and dependency of gospel churches. Pol. lib. 2. Chap. 3. Says he,
independency implies two things. Either,

1. An absolute supremacy, opposed to subordination; and so a particular church
is not independent, it being accountable to civil government, etc. And also to
the consociation of churches. Or,

2. Independency signifies a sufficieny in its kind, for the attainment of its
end. And in this sense, independency is opposed to imperfection: And if we take
it thus, then a particular church may be said to be independent, it being
sufficient to attain the end it was instituted for; it having complete power,
when rightly constituted, to exercise all the ordinances of God. And thus we
find that the primitive churches in this sense were independent churches: that
is, every particular church had a sufficient right, and power, without the
concurrence and authority of any other church, to carry on the worship of God,
and exercise of discipline in their distinct society. And yet as they were
parts of the universal church, held themselves obliged to a suitable communion.
And for the support of unity, love, and concord amongst them, and to advise
about their common circumstances and condition; and also to regulate their
ecclesiastical affairs within their general limits, for their mutual advantage;
did therefore form themselves into synodical assemblies, and and were governed
in common by them; for their synodical decrees, canons or institutions, were
accounted abligatory to all the churches, who had their representatives in the
synods. For indeed to what purpose else did they draw up their resolves, but
for the good and benefit of the whole community. And it would have been very
fruitless to have made wearisome journeys, with great cost and pains to
determine such things, as they judged expedient for the churches well-being; if
after all, it were indifferent whether they were obeyed or no: or that when the
whole was agreed, some should reluct, and remonstrate; and especially when
things were fairly settled by a joint suffrage in synods, some small set of
wise men should hold themselves wiser than whole synods; and afterward should
of their own heads in their more private apartments set forward new schemes,
which in itself is disorderly, and a way to keep the churches constantly
fluctuating and wrestless like the unstable ocean. And indeed, considering the
regularity, wisdom and union in synodical settlements, whilst that all sorts of
persons interested, both officers and people having had their full liberty in
debates, and their free votes and suffrages, in drawing up the decrees and
settlements; it is a bold intrusion, and little better than defying and
trampling under foot the unity, love, honor an^ authority of the churches, to
run counter with synodical settlements, till they are fairly repealed by the
like power which made the settlements. And thus we come to consider the members
of the synods of the primitive churches.

And these were bishops, presbyters, deacons, and deputed laymen, in behalf of
the people of their respective churches. At a great synod at Antioch, which
condemned Paulus Samosatenus, there were present bishops, presbyters, deacons,
and the church of God; that is laymen, who represented the people of their
several churches. Eusebius. l. 7. cap. 30. Also when the heresy of the Montanists
was fixed and preached, the faithful in Asia met together several times to
examine it, and upon examination condemned it. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 16. Also
there being some heats in the church of Carthage, about the restitution of the
lapsed, Cyprian, bishop of that church, writes from exile, -- That there should
be convened a synod of bishops, and of the laity, who had stood firm through
the persecution, to consult about, and determine their affairs. Epist. 14. And
moreover at a great synod held at Carthage, Anno 258, there were present
eighty-seven bishops, together with presbyters and deacons, and a great part of
the laity. Apud Cypri. p. 443.

The principles of the churches in New England, asserting the right of the
people in synodical meetings, is fully set down in the chapter concerning
synods. Platf. And the practice of these in harmony with the primitive churches
has been all along agreeable to it. In the last synod which was in New England,
in the year 1679, some churches sent only their elders without their brethren,
with which the synod was so far unsatisfied, as that they would not allow those
pastors to sit with them, until they had prevailed with their churches to send
brethren also; being very tender of admiting any thing, that should look like
the infringement of that liberty and privilege, which does by the institution
of Christ belong to the brotherhood in particular churches. Dr. Mather's Order.
Q. 11. I shall conclude this head or demonstration with these weighty and
solemn words of the learned and famous Mr. Oaks, praesident of the college, in
his election sermon. Consider (says he) what will be the end of receeding, or
making of a defection from the way of church government established amongst us.
I profess that I look upon the discovery and settlement of the congregational
way, as the boon, the gratuity, the largeness of divine bounty, which the Lord
graciously bestowed on this people, that followed him into this wilderness, and
who were separated from their brethren. Those good people who came over had
more love, zeal, and affectionate desire of communion with God, in pure worship
and ordinances, and did more in order to it, than others; and the Lord did more
for them than for any people in the world, in showing them the pattern of his
house, and the truer scriptural-way of church government and administrations.
God was certainly in a more than ordinary way present with his servants, in
laying of our foundations; and in settling church order, according to the will
and appointment of Christ. Consider what will be the sad issue of revolting
from the way fixed on to one extreme or to another, whether it be to
presbyterianism or brownism. 'As for the presbyterians, it must be
acknowledged, that there are amongst them, as pious, learned, sober, orthodox
men, as the world affords; and that there is as much of the power of godliness
among that party, and of the spirit of the good old puritans, as among any
people in the world. And as for the ways of their church government, it must be
confessed, that in the day of it, it was a great step to reformation. The
reformation in king Edward's days, was a blessed work, and the reformation of
Geneva and Scotland, was then a larger step, and in many respects purer than
the other. And for my part, I fully believe that the congregational-way far
exceeds both, and is the highest step that has been taken toward reformation;
and for the substance of it, it is the very same way that was established and
practiced in the primitive times, according to the institution of Jesus
Christ.' Thus ends my first demonstration in a fair parallel drawn up between
the holiest churches that ever were in the world, and the churches of
New England; and however they may differ in their morals, they are very
harmonious in their order. And considering that the former cannot rationally be
thought but they derived their constitution from the apostles, and so it must
needs be of a divine original: and if so then these in New England who are
fashioned so exactly like them, must needs be of the same pedigree, etc. But I
shall wave all improvement of the premises, and leave the whole to the serious
and judicious thoughts of every impartial reader, not doubting but he will find
sufficient evidence of the divine original of these churches in what has been
said. And that I might now obtain a supersedeas, and forbear adding any further
plea in their defense. But yet to gratify my own curiosity, and divert the
reader, I shall proceed to inquire in to the natural reason of the constitution
of those churches we have been comparing. In this question I shall go out of
the common road, and take into an unusual and unbeaten path; wherein possibly I
may fall into some thickets now and then, and be somewhat entangled; yet I hope
the candid reader will afford some succor by his tender clemency, and his
friendly interpretation of my good intentions. For though I may in so devious a
way, miss of some part of the truth* yet I have a great presumption that I may
open a road to men of greater learning, and a deeper search, that will lead to
a rich treasure of knowledge, and wisdom, for ease and relief under those many
questions and crabbed debates concerning church government in the christian
world; for to me it seems most apparent, that under Christ the reason of the
constitution of these and the primitive churches, is really and truly owing to
the original state and liberty of mankind, and founded puculiarly in the light
of nature. And thus I come to the

2. Demonstration in defense of our platform, which is founded in the light of
nature.

CHAP. I.
THE divine establishment in providence of the forenamed churches, in their
order is apparently the royal assent of the supreme monarch of the churches, to
the grave decisions of reason in favor of man's natural state of being, and
original freedom. For if we should make a new survey of the constitution before
named under the brightest light of nature, there is no greater example of
natural wisdom in any settlement on earth; for the present and future security
of human beings in all that is most valuable and grand, than in this. That it
seems to me as though wise and provident nature by the dictates of right
reason, excited by the moving suggestions of humanity; and awed with the just
demands of natural liberty, equity, equality, and principles of
self-preservation originally drew up the scheme, and then obtained the r^l
approbation. And certainly it is agreeable that we attri^te it to God whether we
receive it nextly from reason or revelation, for that each is equally an
emanation of his wisdom, Prove. 20.27. The spirit of man is the candle of the
Lord, searching (...) the inward parts of the belly. There be many larger
volumes in this dark recess called the belly to be read by that candle God has
lighted up. And I am very well assured the forenamed constitution as a
transcript out of some of their pages, John 1.4, 9. And the life was the light
of men, which lights every man which comes into the world. This admirable
effect of Christ's creating power in hanging out so many lights to guide man
through a dark world, is as applicable to the light of reason, as to that of
revelation. For that the light of reason as a law and rule of right, is an
effect of Christ's goodness, care and creating power, as well as of revelation;
though revelation is natures law in a fairer and brighter edition. This is
granted by the London ministers, p. 8. C. 3. 'That, that which is evident by,
and consonant to the true light of nature, or natural reason, is to be
accounted, Jure Divine, in matters of religion. But in the further and more
distinct management of this plea; I shall,

1. Lay before the reader several principles of natural knowledge. 2. Apply or
improve them in ecclesiastical affairs. 3. Infer from the premises, a
demonstration that these churches, if not properly formed; yet are fairly
established in their present order by the law of nature.
CHAP. II.
1. I Shall disclose several principles of natural knowledge; plainly
discovering the law of nature; or the true sentiments of natural reason, with
respect to man's being and government. And in this essay I shall peculiarly
confine the discourse to two heads, viz.

1. Of the natural (in distinction to the civil) and then, 2. Of the civil
being of man. And I shall principally take baron Puffendorff for my chief guide
and spokes-man.
1. I shall consider man in a state of natural being, as a freeborn subject
under the crown of heaven, and owing homage to none but God himself. It is
certain civil government in general, is a very admirable result of providence,
and an incomparable benefit to mankind, yet must needs be acknowledged to be
the effect of human free-compacts and not of divine institution; it is the
produce of man's reason, of human and rational combinations, and not from any
direct orders of infinite wisdom, in any positive law wherein is drawn up this
or that scheme of civil government. Government (says the Lord Warrington) is
necessary -- in that no society of men can subsist without it; and that
particular form of government is necessary which best suits the temper and
inclination of a people. Nothing can be God's ordinance, but what he has
particularly declared to be such; there is no particular form of civil
government described in God's word, neither does nature prompt it. The
government of the Jews was changed five times. Government is not formed by
nature, as other births or productions; if it were, it would be the same in all
countries; because nature keeps the same method, in the same thing, in all
climates. If a commonwealth be changed into a monarchy, is it nature that
forms, and brings forth the monarch? Or if a royal family be wholly extinct (as
in Noah's case, being not heir apparent from descent from Adam) is it nature
that must go to work (with the kings bees, who themselves alone preserve the
royal race in that empire) to breed a monarch before the people can have a
king, or a government sent over them? And thus we must leave kings to resolve
which is their best title to their crowns, whether natural right, or the
constitution of government settled by human compacts, under the direction and
conduct of reason. But to proceed under the head of a state of natural being, I
shall more distinctly explain the state of human nature in its original
capacity, as man is placed on earth by his maker, and clothed with many
investitures, and immunities which properly belong to man separately
considered. As,

1. The prime immunity in man's state, is that he is most properly the subject
of the law of nature. He is the favorite animal on earth; in that this part of
God's image, viz. reason is congenate with his nature, w^ in by a law
immutable, instampt upon his frame, God has provided a rule for men in all
their actions, obliging each one to the performance of that which is right, not
only as to justice, but likewise as to all other moral virtues, the which is
nothing but the dictate of right reason founded in the soul of man. Molloy, De
Mao, Praef. That which is to be drawn from man's reason, flowing from the true
current of that faculty, when unperverted, may be said to be the law of nature,
on which account, the holy scriptures declare it written on men's hearts. For
being endowed with a soul, you may know from yourself, how and what you ought
to act. Romans 2.14. These having not a law, are a law to themselves. So that the
meaning is, when we acknowledge the law of nature to be the dictate of right
reason, we must mean that the understanding of man is endowed with such a
power, as to be able, from the contemplation of human condition to discover a
necessity of living agreably with this law: And likewise to find out some
principle, by which the precepts of it, may be clearly and solidly
demonstrated. The way to discover the law of nature in our own state, is by a
narrow watch, and accurate contemplation of our natural condition, and
propensions. Others say this is the way to find out the law of nature. scil. If
a man any ways doubts, whether what he is going to do to another man be
agreeable to the law of nature, then let him suppose himself to be in that other
man's room; and by this rule effectually executed, a man must be a very dull
scholar to nature not to make proficiency in the knowledge of her laws. But
more particularly in pursuing our condition for the discovery of the law of
nature, this is very obvious (...) view* viz.

1. A principle of self love, and self preservation, is very predominant in
every man's being.

2. A sociable disposition.

3. An affection or love to mankind in general. And to give such sentiments the
force of a law, we must suppose a God who takes care of all mankind, and has
thus obliged each one, as a subject of higher principles of being, than mere
instincts. For that all law properly considered, supposes a capable subject,
and a superior power, and the law of God which is binding, is published by the
dictates of right re^ as other ways: Therefore says Plutarch, to follow God and
obey reason is the same thing. But moreover that God has established the law of
nature, as the general rule of government, is further illustrable from the man^
sanctions in providence, and from the peace and guilt of conscience in them
that either obey, or violate the law of nature. But moreover, the foundation of
the law of nature with relation to government, may be thus discovered. scil.
Man is a creature extremely desirous of his own preservation; of himself he is
plainly exposed to many wants, unable to secure his own safety and maintenance,
without the assistance of his fellows; and he is also able of returning
kindness by the furtherance of mutual good; but yet man is often found to be
malicious, insolent, and easily provoked, and as powerful in effecting
mischief, as he is ready in designing it. Now that such a creature may be
preserved, it is necessary that he be sociable; that is, that he be capable and
disposed to unite himself to those of his own species, and to regulate himself
toward them, that they may have no fair reason to do him harm; but rather
incline to promote his interests, and secure his rights and concerns. This then
is a fundamental law of nature, that every man as far as in him lies, do
maintain a sociableness with others, agreeable with the main end and disposition
of human nature in general. For this is very apparent, that reason and society
render man the most potent of all creatures. And finally, from the principles
of sociableness it follows as a fundamental law of nature, that man is not so
wedded to his own interest, but that he can make the common good the mark of
his aim: and hence he becomes capacitated to enter into a civil state by the
law of nature; for without this property in nature, viz. Sociableness, which is
for cementing of parts, every government would soon moulder and dissolve.

2. The second great immunity of man is an original liberty instampt upon his
rational nature. He that intrudes upon this liberty, violates the law of
nature. In this discourse I shall wave the consideration of man's moral
turpitude, but shall view him physically as a creature which God has made and
furnished essentially with many enobling immunities, which render him the most
august animal in the world, and still, whatever has happened since his
creation, he remains at the upper-end of nature, and as such is a creature of a
very noble character. For as to his dominion, the whole frame of the lower part
of the universe is devoted to his use, and at his command, and his liberty
under the conduct of right reason, is equal with his trust. Which liberty may
be briefly considered, internally as to his mind, and externally as to his
person.

1. The native internal liberty of man's nature implies, a faculty of doing or
omitting things according to the direction of his judgment. But in a more
special meaning, this liberty does not consist in a loose and ungovernable
freedom, or in an unbounded license of acting. Such license is disagreeing with
the condition and dignity of man, and would make man of a lower and meaner
constitution than brute creatures; who in all their liberties are kept under a
better and a more rational government, by their instincts. Therefore as
Plutarch says, Those persons only who live in obedience to reason, are worthy
to be accounted free: They alone live as they will, who have learnt what they
ought to will. So that the true natural liberty of man, such as really and
truly agrees to him, must be understood, as he is guided and restrained by the
ties of reason, and laws of nature; all the rest is brutal, if not worse.

2. Man's external personal, natural liberty, antecedent to all human parts, or
alliances must also be considered. And so every man must be conceived to be
perfectly in his own power and disposal, and not to be controuled by the
authority of any other. And thus every man, must be acknowledged equal to every
man, since all subjection and all command are equally banished on both sides;
and considering all men thus at liberty, every m^n, has a prerogative to judge
for himself, viz. What shall be most for his behoof, happiness and well-being.

3. The third capital immunity belonging to man's nature, is an equality amongst
men; which is not to be denied by the law of nature, till man has resigned
himself with all his rights for the sake of a civil state; and then his
personal liberty and equality is to be cherished, and preserved to the highest
degree, as will consist with all just distinctions amongst men of honor, and
shall be agreeable with the public good. For man has a high valuation of
himself, and the passion seems to lay its first foundation (not in pride, but)
really in the high and admirable frame and constitution of human nature. The
word man says my author, is thought to carry somewhat of dignity in its sound;
and we commonly make use of this as the most proper and prevailing arguments
against a rude insulter, viz. I am not a beast or a dog: But am a man as well
as yourself. Since then human nature agrees equally with all persons; and since
no one can live a sociable life with another that does not own or respect him
as a man; it follows as a command of the law of nature, that every man esteem
and treat another as one who is naturally his equal, or who is a man as well as
he. There be many popular, or plausible reasons that greatly illustrate this
equality, viz. that we all derive our being from one stock, the same common
father of human race. On this consideration Boethius che^ks the pride of the
insulting nobility.

Quid Genus et Proavos Strepitis?
Si Primordia Vestra,
Auteremque Deum Spectas,
Nullus Degeuer Extat
Nisi vitiis Pejora fovens,
Proprium Deserat Ortum.
Fondly our first descent we b^ast;
If whence at first our breath we drew,
The common springs of life we view,
The ^^ry notion soon is lost.
The almighty made us equal all;
But he that slavishly complys
To do the drudgery of vice,
Denies his high original.
And also that our bodies are composed of matter, frail, brittle, and liable to
be destroyed by thousand accidents; we all owe our existence to the same method
of propagation. The noblest mortal in his entrance on the stage of life, is not
distinguished by any pomp or of passage from the lowest of mankind; and our
life hastens to the same general mark: Death observes no ceremony, but knocks
as loud at the barriers of the court, as at the door of the cottage. This
equality being admitted, bears a very great force in maintaining peace and
friendship amongst men. For that he who would use the assistance of others, in
promoting his own advantage, ought as freely to be at their service when they
want his help on the like occasions. One good turn requires another, is the
common proverb; for otherwise he must need esteem others unequal to himself,
who constantly demands their aid, and as constantly denies his own. And whoever
is of this insolent temper, cannot but highly displease those about him, and
soon give occasion of the breach of the common peace. It was a manly reproof
which Charactacus gave the Romans. Number Si vos Omnibus, etc. What! because you
desire to be masters of all men, does it follow therefore that all men should
desire to be your slaves, for that it is a command of natures law, that no man
that has not obtained a particular and special right, shall arrogate to himself
a larger share than his fellows, but shall admit others to equal privileges
with himself. So that the principle of equality in a natural state, is
peculiarly transgressed by pride, which is when a man without sufficient
reason, prefers, himself to others. And though as Hensius, paraphrases upon
Aristotle's politics to this purpose. viz. Nothing is more suitable to nature,
than that those who excel in understanding and prudence, should rule and
control those who are less happy in those advantages, etc. Yet we must note,
that there is room for an answer, scil. That it would be the greatest absurdity
to believe, that nature actually invests the wise with a sovereignity over the
weak; or with a right of forcing them against their wills; for that no
sovereignity can be established, unless some human deed, or covenant precede:
Nor does natural fitness for government make a man presently governor over
another; for that as Ulpian says, by a natural right all men are (...) free;
and nature having set all men upon a level and made them equals, no servitude
or subjection can be conceived without inequality; and this cannot be made
without usurpation or force in others, or voluntary compliance in those who
resign their freedom, and give away their degree of natural being. And thus we
come,

2. To consider man in a civil state of being; wherein we shall observe the
great difference between a natural, and political state; for in the latter
state many great disproportions appear, or at least many obvious distinctions
are soon made amongst men; which doctrine is to be laid open under a few heads.

1. Every man considered in a natural state, must be allowed to be free, and at
his own dispose; yet to suit man's inclinations to society; and in a peculiar
manner to gratify the necessity he is in of public rule and order, he is
impelled to enter into a civil community; and divests himself of his natural
freedom, and puts himself under government; which amongst other th^^gs
comprehends the power of life and death over him, together with authority to
enjoin him some things to which he has an utter aversion, and to prohibit him
other things, for which he may have as strong an inclination; so that he may be
often under this authority, obliged to sacrifice his private, for the public
good. So that though man is inclined to society, yet he is driven to a
combination by great necessity. For that the true and leading cause of forming
governments, and yielding up natural liberty, and throwing man's equality into a
common pile to be new cast by the rules of fellowship; was really and truly to
guard themselves against the injuries men were liable to interchangeably; for
none so good to man, as man, and yet none a greater enemy. So that,

2. The first human subject and original of civil power is the people. For as
they have a power every man over himself in a natural state, so upon a
combination they can and do bequeath this power unto others; and settle it
according as their united discretion shall determine. For that this is very
plain that when the subject of sovereign power is quite extinct, that power
returns to the people again. And when they are free, they may set up what
species of government they please; or if they rather incline to it, they may
subside into a state of natural being, if it be plainly for the best. In the
Eastern country of the Magul, we have some resemblance of the case; for upon
the death of an absolute monarch, they live so many days without a civil head;
but in that Interregnum, those who survive the vacancy, are glad to get into a
civil state again; and usually they are in a very bloody condition when they
return under the covert of a new monarch; this project is to indear the people
to a tyranny, from the experience they have so lately had of an anarchy.

3. The formal reason of government is the will of a community, yielded up and
surrendered to some other subject, either of one particular person, or more,
conveyed in the following manner.

Let us conceive in our mind a multitude of men, all naturally free and equal;
going about voluntarily, to erect themselves into a new commonwealth. Now
their condition being such, to bring themselves into a politic body, they must
needs enter into diverse covenants.

1. They must interchangeably each man covenant to join in one lasting society,
that they may be capable to concert the measures of their safety, by a public
vote.

2. A vote or decree must then nextly pass to set up some particular species of
government over them. And if they are joined in their first compact upon
absolute terms to stand to the decision of the first vote concerning the
species of government: Then all are bound by the majority to acquiesce in that
particular form thereby settled, though their own private opinion, incline them
to some other model.

3. After a decree has specified the particular form of government, then there
will be need of a new covenant, whereby those on whom sovereignity is
conferred, engage to take care of the common peace, and welfare. And the
subjects on the other hand, to yield them faithful obedience. In which covenant
is included that submission and union of wills, by which a state may be
conceived to be but one person. So that the most proper definition of a civil
state, is this, viz. A civil state is a compound moral person. Whose will
(united by those covenants before passed) is the will of all; to the end it may
use, and apply the strength and riches of private persons toward maintaining
the common pence, security, and well-being of all, which may be conceived as
though the whole state was now become but one man; in which the aforesaid
covenants may be suppos^d under God's providence, to be the divine Fiat,
pronounced by God, let us make man. And by way of resemblance the aforesaid
being may be thus anatomized.

1. The sovereign power is the s^ infused, giving life and motion to the whole
body.

2. Subordinate officers are the joints by which the body moves.

3. Wealth and riches are the strength.

4. Equity and laws are the reason.

5. Counselors the memory.

6. Salus P^puli, or the happiness of the people, is the end of its being; or
main business to be attended and done.

7. Concord amongst the members, and all estates, is the health.

8. Sedition is sickness, and civil war death.

4. The parts of sovereignity may be considered: So,

1. As it prescribes the rule of action: It is rightly termed legislative power.

2. As it determines the controversies of subjects by the standard of those
rules. So is it justly termed judiciary power.

3. As it arms the subjects against foreigners, or forbids hostility, so its
called the power of peace and war.

4. As it takes in ministers for the discharge of business, so it is called the
right of appointing magistrates. So that all great officers and public
servants, must needs owe their original to the creating power of sovereignty.
So that those whose right it is to create, may dissolve the being of those who
are created, unless they cast them into an immortal frame. And yet must needs
be dissoluble if they justly forfeit their being to their creators.

5. The chief end of civil communities, is that men thus conjoined, may be
secured against the injuries, they are liable to from their own kind. For if
every man could secure himself singly; it would be great folly for him, to
renounce his natural liberty, in which every man is his own king and protector.

6. The sovereign authority besides, that it inheres in every state as in a
common and general subject. So farther according as it resides in some one
person, or in a council (consisting of some select persons, or of all the
members of a community) as in a proper and particular subject, so it produces
different forms of commonwealths, viz. Such as are either simple and regular,
or mixed.

1. The forms of a regular state are three only, which forms arise from the
proper and particular subject, in which the supreme power resides. As,

1. A democracy; which is when the sovereign power is lodged in a council
consisting of all the members, and where every member has the privilege of a
vote. This form of government, appears in the greatest part of the world to
have been the most ancient. For that reason seems to show it to be most
probable, That when men (being originally in a condition of natural freedom and
equality) had thoughts of joining in a civil body, would without question be
inclined to administer their common affairs, by their common judgment, and so
must necessarily to gratify that inclination establish a democracy; neither can
it be rationally imagined, that fathers of families being yet free and
independent, should in a moment, or little time take of their long delight in
governing their own affairs, and devolve all upon some single sovereign
commander; for that it seems to have been thought more equitable, that what
belonged to all should be managed by all, when all had entered by compact into
one community. The original of our government, says Plato, (speaking of the
Athenian commonwealth) was taken from the equality of our race. Other states
there are composed of different blood, and of unequal lines, the consequence of
which are disproportionable sovereignity, tyranical or oligarchycal sway; under
which men live in such a manner, as to esteem themselves partly lords, and
partly slaves to each other. But we and our countrymen, being all born brethren
of the same mother, do not look upon ourselves to stand under so hard a
relation, as that of lords and slaves; but the parity of our descent incline us
to keep up the like parity by our laws, and to yield the precedence to nothing
but to superior virtue and wisdom. And moreover it seems to very manifest that
most civil communities arose at first from the union of families, that were
nearly allied in race and blood. And though ancient story make frequent mention
of kings, yet it appears that most of them were such that had an influence
rather in persuading, than in any power of commanding. So Justin discribes that
kind of government, as the most primitive, which Aristotle styles an heroical
kingdom. viz. Such as is no ways inconsistent with a democratical state. De
princip. Reru. 1. L. 1. C.

A democracy is then erected, when a number of free persons, do assemble
together, in order to enter into a covenant for uniting themselves in a body:
And such a preparative assembly has some appearance already of a democracy; it
is a democracy in embrio, properly in this respect, that every man has the
privilege freely to deliver his opinion concerning the common affairs. Yet he
who dissents from the vote of the majority, is not in the least obliged by what
they determine, till by a second covenant, a popular form be actually
established; for not before then can we call it a democratical government, viz.
Till the right of determining all matters relating to the public safety, is
actually placed in a general assembly of the whole people; or by their own
compact and mutual agreement, determine themselves the proper subjects for the
exercise of sovereign power. And to complete this state, and render it capable
to exert its power to answer the end of a civil state: These conditions are
necessary.

1. That a certain time and place be assigned for assembling.

2. That when the assembly be orderly met, as to time and place, that then the
vote of the majority must pass for the vote of the whole body.

3. That magistrates be appointed to exercise the authority of the whole for
the better dispatch of business, of every days occurrence; who also may with
more mature diligence, search into more important affairs; and if in case any
thing happens of greater consequence, may report it to the assembly; and be
peculiarly serviceable in putting all public decrees into execution. Because a
large body of people is almost useless in respect of the last service, and of
many others as to the more particular application and exercise of power.
Therefore it is most agreeable with the law of nature, that they institute their
officers to act in their name, and stead.

2. The second species of regular government, is an aristocracy; and this is
said then to be constituted when the people, or assembly united by a first
covenant, and having thereby cast themselves into the first rudiments of a
state; do then by common decree, devolve the sovereign power, on a council
consisting of some select members; and these having accepted of the
designation, are then properly invested with sovereign command; and then an
aristocracy is formed.

3. The third species of a regular government, is a monarchy, which is settled
when the sovereign power is conferred on some one worthy person. It differs
from the former, because a monarch who is but one person in natural, as well as
in moral account, and so is furnished with an immediate power of exercising
sovereign command in all instances of government; but the forenamed must needs
have particular time and place assigned; but the power and authority is equal
in each.

2. Mixed governments, which are various and of diverse kinds (not now to be
enumerated) yet possibly the fairest in the world is that which has a regular
monarchy; settled upon a noble democracy as its basis. And each part of the
government is so adjusted by pacts and laws that renders the whole constitution
an elisium. It is said of the British empire, that it is such a monarchy, as
that by the necessary subordinate concurrence of the lords and commons, in the
making and repealing all statutes or acts of parliament; it has the main
advantages of an aristocracy, and of a democracy, and yet free from the
disadvantages and evils of either. It is such a monarchy, as by most admirable
temperament affords very much to the industry, liberty, and happiness of the
subject, and reserves enough for the majesty and prerogative of any king, who
will own his people as subjects, not as slaves, It is a kingdom, that of all
the kingdoms of the world, is most like to the kingdom of Jesus Christ, whose
yoke is easy, and burden light. Present state of England 1st part, 64 p. Thus
having drawn up this brief scheme concerning man, and the nature of civil
government, he is become sole subject of, I shall nextly proceed to make
improvements of the premises, to accommodate the main subject under our
consideration.

2. I shall now make some improvement of the foregoing principles of civil
knowledge, fairly deduced from the law of nature. And I shall peculiarly refer
to ecclesiastical affairs, whereby we may in probability discover more clearly
the kind, and something of the nature of that government, which Christ has
placed in and over his church. The learned debates of men, and divine writ
sometimes seems to cast such a grandeur on the church and its officers, as
though they stood in peerage with civil empire. Rev. 1.6, 9. 1 Pet. 2.9. 1 Cor.
4.8. 1 Cor. 12.28. 2 Cor. 10.8. ^t all such expressions must needs be otherways
interpreted. God is the highest cause that acts by council; and it must needs
be altogether repugnant, to think he should forecast the state of this world
by no better a scheme, than to order two sovereign powers, in the same grand
community, which would be like placing two suns in the firmament, which would
be to set the universe into a flame: That should such an error happen, one must
needs be forthwith extinguished, to bring the frame of nature into a just
temper and keep it out of harms way. But to proceed with my purpose I shall go
back upon the civil scheme, and inquire after two things: First of rebellion
against government in general, and then in special; whether any of the
aforesaid species of regular government can be predictable of the church of God
on earth.

1. In general, concerning rebellion against government, for particular
subjects to break in upon regular communites duly established, is from the
premises to violate the law of nature; and is a high usurpation upon the first
grand immunities of mankind. Such rebels in states, and usurpers in churches
affront the world, with a presumption that the best of the brotherhood are a
company of fools, and that themselves have fairly monopolized all the reason of
human nature. Yea, they take upon them the boldness to assume a prerogative of
trampling under foot the natural original equality and liberty of their
fellows; for to push the proprietors of settlements out of possession of their
old, and impose new schemes upon them, is vertually to declare them in a state
of vassalage, or that they were born so; and therefore will the usurper be so
gracious as to insure them they shall not be sold at the next market: they must
esteem it a favor, for by this time all the original prerogatives of man's
nature are intentionally a victim, smoking to satiate the usurpers ambition.
It is a very tart observation on an English monarch, and where it may by
proportion be applied to a subject must needs sink very deep, and serve for
evidence under this head. It is in the secret history of K. C. 2. and K. J. 2.
p. 2. says my author, Where the constitution of a nation is such, that the laws
of the land are the measures both of the sovereigns commands, and the obedience
of the subjects, whereby it is provided; that as the one are not to invade what
by concessions and stipulations is granted to the ruler; so the other is not to
deprive them of their lawful and determined rights and liberties; then the
prince who strives to subvert the fundamental laws of the society, is the
traitor and the rebel, and not the people, who endeavor to preserve and defend
their own. It Is very applicable to particular men in their rebellions or
usurpations in church or state.

2. In special I shall now proceed to enquire, whether any of the aforesaid
species of regular, unmixt governments, can with any good show of reason be
predictable of the church of Christ on earth. If the churches of Christ, as
churches, are either the object or subject of a sovereign power entrusted in
the hands of men, then most certainly one of the forecited schemes of a
perfect government will be applicable to it.

Before I pursue the enquiry, it may not be improper to pause, and make some
caution here, by distinguishing between that which may have some resemblance of
civil power, and the thing itself; and so the power of churches is but a faint
resemblance of civil power; it comes in reality nothing near to the thing
itself; for the one is truly coercive, the other persuasive; the one is
sovereign power, the other is delegated and ministerial: but not to delay, I
shall proceed with my enquiry, and therein shall endeavor to humor the several
great claimers of government in the church of Christ. And,

1. I shall begin with a monarchy. It Is certain, his holiness, either by
reasonable pleas, or powerful cheats, has assumed an absolute and universal
sovereignity; this ^ills his cathedral chair, and is adorned with a triple
crown, and in defense thereof does protest, The Almighty has made him both
key-keeper of heaven and hell, with the adjacent territories of purgatory, and
vested in him an absolute sovereignity over the christian world. And his right
has so far prevailed, that princes and civil monarchs hold their crowns and
donations as his dutiful sons, and loyal subjects, he therefore decks himself
with the spoils of the divine attributes, stiling himself, our Lord God,
optimum, maximum et supremum numen in Terris; a God on earth, a visible deity,
and that his power is absolute, and his wisdom infallible. And many of the
great potentates of the earth have paid their fealty, as though it was really
so. One of them clad in canvas, going barefoot in the depth of winter, (in
obedience to the decree, stinting the penance in proportion to the wickedness
of princes) has waited many days for absolution at his pious ga^s. Another has
thrown himself down prostrate a humble penitent before him: He has placed his
holy foot on the monarchs profane neck as crushing a vermin, crawling out of
the stable of his sovereignty; and others frequently kiss his toes with very
profound devotion. These and such like triumphant signals of his sovereign
power does he wear. And indeed if he is the universal monarch of the catholic
church, princes that are members of it must needs knock under; for that in one
world there cannot possibly be two Most High's, any more than two Infinites.
Thus you see the clergy, or gospel ministry of the christian world have so
wisely handled business, and managed the gospel, that they have fairly (as they
avouch) found a sovereign power bequeathed in it to the ministry of Christ, and
romaging more warily and nicely, at last found a spiritual monarch, very
completely furnished with the keys of all sorts of power hanging at his girdle;
and may we not pronounce the wiser they! seeing the world growing weary of
religion, was willing to loll itself down to sleep, and leave them in sole
trust with the whole interest of God's kingdom. But the sad enquiry is, whether
this sort of government has not plainly subverted the design of the gospel, and
the end for which Christ's government was ordained, viz. the moral, spiritual,
and eternal happiness of men?

But I have no occasion to pursue this remark with tedious demonstrations: It Is
very plain, it is written with blood in capital letters, to be read at midnight
by the flames of Smithfield, and other such like consecrated fires. That the
government of this ecclesiastical monarch has instead of sanctifying,
absolutely debauched the world, and subverted all good christianity in it. So
that without the least show of any vain presumption we may infer, that God and
wise nature were never propitious to the birth of this monster.

2. An Aristocracy, which places the supreme power in a select company of
choice persons. Here I freely acknowledge were the gospel ministry established
the subject of this power, viz. To will and do, in all church affairs without
control, etc. This government might do to support the church in its most
valuable rights, etc. If we could be assured they would make the scripture, and
not their private will the rule of their personal and ministerial actions: and
indeed upon these terms any species of government, might serve the great design
of redemption; but considering how great an interest is embarked, and how frail
a bottom we trust, though we should rely upon the best of men, especially if we
remember what is in the hearts of good men, (viz. much ignorance, abundance of
small ends, many times cloked with a high pretense in rel^^ion; pride skulking
and often breeding revenge upon a small affront; and blown up by a pretended
zeal; yet really and truly by nothing more divine than interest or ill nature)
and also considering how very uncertain we are of the real goodness of those we
esteem good men; and also how impossible it is to secure the intail of it to
successors: and also if we remind how christianity by the foresaid principle
has been peeled, rob^d and spolied already; it cannot consist with the light of
nature to venture again upon such perils, especially if we can find a safer way
home. More distinctly.

It is very plain (allowing me to speak emblematically) the primitive
constitution of the churches was a democracy as appears by the foregoing
parallel. But after the christian churches, were received into the favor of the
imperial court, under the dominion of Constantine the great; there being many
pr^^liminaries which had furnished the ministers with a disposition thereunto,
they quickly deprived the fraternities of their rights in the government of the
churches, when they were once provided of a plentiful maintenance though the
liberality of Constantine, that when christianity was so luxuriantly treated,
as by his great bounty, and noble settlement, it is said there was a voice
heard from heaven, saying, Now is P^ poured into the church. But the subversion
of the constitution, is a story too long now to tell. Take therefore part of
it, out of a late author well versed in antiquity, which may give some brief
image of the whole.

Non multa seculu jus Plebis Illaesum Mansit, neque Aliter Evenire Potuit, Quin
Ill^d, vel amittatur, vel saltem diminuatur, etc. De Ordina; Diss. Hystorica.
P. 36.40, 41.

The right of the people did not remain unhurt through many ages; neither could
it well be otherways, but that it must be lost, or much diminished. Zonaras
does confess that heretofore bishops were chosen by the suffrage of the people.
But many seditions happening among them; it was decreed that every bishop
should hereafter be chosen by the authority of the bishops of every province.
The cause seemed to be so very specious, that nothing could be more decent, or
more conducive to the safety of the common wealth.

Yet (says my author) if you do well weigh the business, you must needs
acknowledge nothing could have happened more pernicious or destructive to the
church of God. For soon after these things came to pass, it is very obvious,
that tyranny over the consciences of the faithful; and an intolerable pride
every where grew rampant among the guides of the church. Yet there was one
thing still very needful to be done; and that was to establish or confirm the
power which the metropolitans, and bishops had acquired to themselves.
Therefore they fell to it tooth and nail to drive away the fraternity from all
interest in elections: And alas poor hearts! They began to sleep with both
ears; that then was scarce any enemy left to interrupt, or control the
conquerors. This was the manner of the clergy till they had made themselves the
subjects of all power, and then acted arbitrarily, and did what they pleased in
the church of God.

But let the learned, knowing world consider, what the issue of all this was,
scil. what a wretched capacity the drowsiness and cowardice of the people; and
the usurpation and ambition of the ministry brought the ^ofessing world into.
If those who were truly godly on both sides had in a few ages looked down from
heaven, and had eyed the following centuries, they might have beheld a world of
matter for sorrowful impressions; to think that they themselves had occasioned
the ruin of millions, by their remiss and passive temper in one sort; and too
much humo^ring, and nourishing pride, and high conceits of themselves and
others, in the other; when as if they had stood firm to the government as left
settled by the apostles; they had certainly prevented an apostasy that has
damned, and confounded a great part of about thirty generations of men, women
and children. That for my own part I can upon experience, in some measure truly
say (to the history of the primitive churches in the loss of their government;
and the consequents which followed, when I am impelled to repeat it to myself)
as one Eneas said to queen Dido, Infandum Regina Jubes Renovare Dolorem
-- Quis talia fando
Temperet e Lacrimis! --


So doleful a contemplation is it to think the world should be destroyed by
those men, who by God were ordained to save it!

In a word, an aristocracy is a dangerous constitution, in the church of
Christ; as it possesses the presbytery of all church power: What has been
observed sufficiently evinces it. And not only so but from the nature of the
constitution, for it has no more barrier to it, against the ambition, insults,
and arbitrary measures of men, than an absolute monarchy. But to abbreviate; it
seems most agreeable with the light of nature, that if there be any of the
regular government settled in the church of God it must needs be*

3. A democracy. This is a form government, which the light of nature does
highly value, and often directs to^ as most agreeable to the just and natural
prerogatives of human beings. This was of great account, in the early times of
the world. And not only so, but upon the experience of several thousand years,
after the world had been tumbled, and tossed from one species of government to
another, at a great expense of blood and treasure, many of the w^^e nations of
the world have shel^^ themselves under it again; or at least have blendishe^
and balanced their governments with it.

It is certainly a great truth, scil. That man's original liberty after it is
resigned, (yet under due restrictions) ought to be cherished in all wise
governments; or otherwise a man in making himself a subject, he alters himself
from a freeman, into a slave, which to do is repugnant to the law of nature.
Also the natural equality of men amongst men must be duly favored; in that
government was never established by God or nature, to give one man a
prerogative to insult over another; therefore in a civil, as well as in a
natural state of being, a just equality is to be indulged so far, as that every
man is bound to honor every man, which is agreeable both with nature and
religion, 1 Pet. 2.17. Honor all men. The end of all good government is to
cultivate humanity, and promote the happiness of all, and the good of every man
in all his rights, his life, liberty, estate, honor, etc. without injury or
abuse done to any. Then certainly it cannot easily be thought, that a company
of men, that shall enter into a voluntary compact, to hold all power in their
own hands, thereby to use and improve their united force, wisdom, riches and
strength for the common and particular good of every member, as is the nature
of a democracy; I say it cannot be that this sort of constitution, will so
readily furnish those in government with an appetite, or disposition to prey
upon each other, or embezle the common stock; as some particular persons may be
apt to do when set off, and entrusted with the same power. And moreover this
appears very natural, that when the aforesaid government or power, settled in
all, when they have elected certain capable persons to minister in their
affairs, and the said ministers remain accountable to the assembly; these
officers must needs be under the influence of many wise cautions from their own
thoughts (as well as under confinement by their commission) in their whole
administration: And from thence it must needs follow that they will be more
apt, and inclined to steer right for the main point, viz. The peculiar good,
and benefit of the whole, and every particular member fairly and sincerely. And
why may not these stand for very rational pleas in church order?

For certainly if Christ has settled any form of power in his church he has
done it for his churches safety, and for the benefit of every member: Then he
must needs be presumed to have made choice of that government as should least
expose his people to hazard, either from the fraud, or arbitrary measures of
particular men. And it is as plain as day light, there is no species of
government like a democracy to attain this end. There is but about two steps
from an aristocracy to a monarchy, and from thence but one to a tyranny; an
able standing force, and an ill nature, Ipso facto, turns an absolute monarch
into a tyrant; this is obvious among the Roman Caesar's, and through the world.
And all these direful transmutations are easier in church affairs (from the
different qualities of things) than in civil states. For what is it that
cunning and learned men cannot make the world swallow as an article of their
creed, if they are once invested with an uncontrollable power, and are to be
the standing orators to mankind in matters of faith and obedience? indeed some
very wise and learned men are pleased to inveigh, and reproach the notion of a
democracy in the church, which makes the Cetu fidelium or community of the
faithful the first subject of the power of government. This they say tends to
Brownism, and abhorred anarchy, and then say they upon such praemises, it must
needs follow that every member of the body must be an officer; and then every
one must preach and dispense the sacraments, etc.

Reply. Certainly such gentlemen, either designs to pose and baffle their
reader with falacy; or they themselves never took up, or understood the true
ideas of the several species of government; in that a democracy is as regular a
form, and as particular as any other.

For,

1. An absolute or limited monarch cannot manage the power or government
devolved upon him, without the great officers of the crown, or a large set of
ministers; though possibly he may with quicker dispatch issue out his decrees,
yet he must execute all by his ministry. And why may not a democracy be
indulged the same liberty? And this will prevent all anarchy or confusion most
apparently. But,

2. The bitter pill to swallow in this doctrine of a democracy in the church,
is the terrible power of life and death; or the accountableness of particular
members to the assembly, and especially those in the ministry; but yet this is
agreeable with the nature of the constitution, and easily managed without
anarchy, or popular confusion also, which would be made very evident, if we
should but run the parallel in all points between the democracy of the state
and church. But nextly from the premises, I shall

3. Infer, That if these churches are not properly formed, yet are fairly
established in their present order by the law of nature. And will they be
advised, I would exhort them to try who will be so bold as to dare to disseize
them. A monarchy has been tried in the church with a witness, but it has
absolutely failed us. An aristocracy in a deep calm threw the democracy
overboard, and took not only the helm in hand, but seized ship and cargo as
their right and title; but after some time brought all to ship-wreck, and that
in a good harbor too.

A democracy was the noble government which beat out in all the bad weather of
ten bloody persecutions under the management of antiquity. And this is our
constitution, and what cannot we be pleased? This constitution is as agreeable
with the light and laws of nature as any other whatsoever, as has been fairly
laid down and fully evinced, and more accommodated to the concerns of religion
than any other. Therefore I shall now conclude my demonstration with this brief
appeal to the common reason of mankind, viz.

How can it consist with the honorable terms man holds upon here on earth; that
the best sort of men that we can find in the world; such men as are adorned
with a double set of enobling immunities, the first from nature, the other
from grace; that these men when they enter into charter-party to man^ge a trade
for heaven, must ipso facto be clapped under a government, that is arbitrary and
dispotic; yea that carries the plain symptoms of a tyranny in it, when the
light of nature knows of a better species, and frequently has made use of it?
It wants no farther demonstration, for its most apparent, that nature is so
much mistress of herself, that man in a natural state of being, is under God
the first subject of all power, and therefore can make his own choice, and by
deliberate compacts, settles his own conditions for the government of himself
in a civil state of being: And when a government so settled shall throw itself
from its foundations, or the subjects of sovereign power shall subvert or
confound the constitution, they then degrade themselves; and so all power
returns again to the people, who are the first owners. And what! Is man become
so unfortunate, degraded and debased, as to be without all power in settling a
government over himself, relating to the matters of his eternal well-being? Or
when he comes back to a fathers house, must he fall into the capacity, of a
mere passive being, and be put under such tutors, as can easily turn tyrants
over him, and no relief left for him in his own hands; this is certainly most
repugnant to the light of nature, and very disagreable with the liberty and
free genius of a gospel state. Nay, in a word, if the government of the
churches be settled by God, either in the hands of a church monarch, or
aristocracy, and the people are no ways the subject of church power: Nay, if
they are not under Christ, the fountain of power; then the reformation so
called, is but a mere cheat, a schism, and notorious rebellion; neither is
there room left for the least paliation, or shadow of excuse, for the reformers
in renouncing their obedience to their public governors. And the Martyrologies
which pretend to immortalize the fame of eminent heroes, must be changed into
chronicles, handing along an account of the just and deserved fate of a crew of
rebels against God and government; for what business had such a company of
illiterate and crack brained fellows to meddle with their rulers, or examine
into their administrations? for if they have no right of power in government,
they stand absolutely bound to yield a passive obedience and non-resistance;
and if they are so hardy and daring as to oppose their lawful rulers, the
sharpest penalty in this world, is two easy for them; the inquisition is but
dallying and playing with them, hell is their desert. But how it comes about
that a state of grace, when in want of a suitable government, is become such a
vassal, and wise and cunning nature is by her creator entrusted, and adorned
with more enobling prerogatives, I must leave, and resign unto those learned
men to solve, who plead for an aristocracy in the churches of Christ.

But to wind up the whole discourse in a few words, I acknowledge many
objections may be here made, and several questions of moment might here fall
under debate; but having obtained what I have principally sought for, in
traversing the paths of nature, in the three following particulars; therefore
with them, and with one objection answered; and also with some brief
improvement of the grand hypothesis in this demonstration, I shall finish the
argument.

1. Three particulars; or so many golden maxims, securing the honor of
congregational churches.

Particular 1. That the people or fraternity under the gospel, are the first
subject of power; or else religion sinks the dignity of human nature into a
baser capacity with relation to ecclesiastical, than it is in, in a natural
state of being with relation to civil government.

Particular 2. That a democracy in church or state, is a very honorable and
regular government according to the dictates of right reason. And therefore,

Particular 3. That these churches of New England, in their ancient
constitution of church order; it being a democracy, are manifestly justified
and defended by the law and light of nature.

2. The objection. The plea from the law of nature for a democracy in the
church, is as forceable for any other species of government; because nature is
furnished with such a variety of schemes as has been pleaded to: And why may
not the wise christian nations take which likes them best?

Answ. We must distinguish between man left solely to the direction of the law
of nature, and as the subject of revelation, wherein divine wisdom may
interpose; and determine on some particular species, without hurting or
crossing the law of nature, Therefore,

1. I readily grant and acknowledge, a christian people may settle what species
of government they please, when they are solely left to determine by the law of
nature, what government in the church they will have. But then we must
remember, that by the argument or concession, the power is originally in the
people; and then our own case is secure and safe enough; both on the account of
the reversion of power, and especially, for that the people the first subjects
of power, have been pleased to settle a democracy for their government, in the
churches of this country. And if after the peaceable possession of about an
hundred years, any persons can persuade them to alter their government into any
other species, this will be less worthy of blame, than craftily, or unfairly to
force it out of their hands.

2. It Is granted, that according to the light of nature, there be various
regular models of government; but if divine wisdom is pleased to interpose and
overruled natures agitations, and cast the scales for this or that particular
form, nature will be but fair mannered to submit to its author and rector. So
that if we find that God has disclosed his mind by revelation, that his
churches be the subjects of a democracy, then all stand obliged to comply under
a double bond. And so we come under a proper crisis to enquire in the next
place for scripture-evidence in the justification of these churches.

But before I proceed to it, I shall

3. Make some brief improvement of the main Hypothesis in the demonstration;
that is to say, if the government of the gospel churches, be a democracy, these
consequences must necessarily follow, scil.

1. Cons. That the right of convoking councils ecclesiastical, is in the
churches.

2. Cons. That such a council has only consultative not a juridical power in
it. A juridical power committed to such a representative body is both needless,
and also dangerous to the distinct and perfect states they derive from.
Complete states settled upon a body of immutable and imperial laws as its
basis, may want council; but to create a new subject of juridical power, is
some way to endanger the being of the creators.

3. Cons. That all the members of an ecclesiastical council, deriving from a
democracy are subjects of equal power. Whatever the power is, the several
delegates must from the nature of the government they derive from, be equal
sharers in it. Democratical states, in their representative body can make but
one house, because they have but one subject of supreme power in their nature,
and therefore their delegates, let them be who or what they may be, are under
equal t^^t; so that none can justly claim superiority over their fellows, or
pretend to a higher power in the^^ suffrage. Indeed in such kingdoms, where the
sovereign power is distributed and settled in diverse subjects, that the
balance of power may be more even, for the safety of the whole, and of all
parts under all acts of sovereign power: From such a settlement of power, there
arises several distinct states in the same government, which when convened as
one subject of sovereign power, they make different houses in their grand
sessions; and so one house o^ state can negative another. But in every distinct
house of these states, the members are equal in their vote; the most ayes make
the affirmative vote, and most no's the negative: They don't weigh the
intellectual furniture, or other distinguishing qualifications of the several
voters in the scales of the golden rule of fellowship; they only add up the
ayes, and the no's, and so determine the suffrage of the house.

Demonstration III. From Holy Scripture.
THIS plea has with such variety of argument, and illustration, and by many
repetitions, been pursued, by a great number of persons eminent for learning
and piety, that I might here very fairly release myself from this task. But yet
to complete the number of my arguments, I will briefly sum up the demonstration
for the readers use under a few heads.

1. Head. It must needs be allowed, as a fundamental principle relating to
government, that (under God) all power is originally in the people. No man I
think will deny it to be a very sound principle in civil knowledge. But if any
man will, I imagine it is sufficiently set forth in the former demonstration.
And it is very plain that religion does always cultivate, and increase, rather
than diminish any of natures just prerogatives. That it must needs stand for a
paradox, or a riddle not to be expounded; if man is more of a slave by his
religion than by his nature.

But let us take a brief view of man by scripture account under a religious
notion, as the subject of grace, and he seems then not to have the least speck
of vassalage in him; but is represented as though lord of himself and owner of
heaven, and earth both, 1 Cor. 3.22. -- all are yours.

And though its very certain that man has greatly debased himself by his
apostasy; yet still God puts abundance of honor upon him in his reduction. As
we ^y consider man in a remark or two, under the measures of divine grace in
restoring him to favor. First, God treats him as a creature of a very honorable
character, as free and at his own dispose. Or as though he were some high and
mighty state placed at the top of this globe. Therefore he courts him into an
alliance as though he were likely to yield great honor to the crown. We are
ambassadors -- as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's
stead -- be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.20. This is much the tenor of Gods
heralds in their addresses of capitulation. That certainly if God did not
highly estimate man, as a creature exalted, by his reason, liberty and
nobleness of nature, he would not caress him as he does in order to his
submission; but rather with some peevish and haughty monarch, or the bloody
Mahomet, send his demands at the mouth of his canon. But instead of such harsh
measures, they are treated with the highest reason, attended with lenity and
great acts of condescension. Nay, divine menaces are frequently clothed with
such soft language as this; turn ye! turn ye! Why will ye dye! Yea under all
impulsive means, which God wisely and graciously makes use of to gain man's
consent, he sets the will to turn about itself without forcing it, that so man's
religion may be the free and candid emanations of his noble and exalted nature.
But when God has thus gained man; may we rationally imagine that in erecting
his trophies he will assign and make him over to some petty and arbitrary
potentates in matters of religion? or settle him under a dispotic government as
though he was the spoils of a spiteful war? No certainly, but man must now be
considered as some high allie invested with more power than ever. This would
still be more evident if we should consider what Christ has done and how they
stand joint heirs with him in his purchase and kingdom, Romans 8.1, 16, 17.

2. Head. The power placed in man that enables him to manage religious affairs,
is not sovereign, but limited and confined power. (1) All laws are enacted
already, and, (2.) There is no coercive power needful in the church. The
highest act in administering judicature, is excluding a person out of the
society. In the church there is no fees or fines, etc. In civil empire to keep
mankind in any good decorum, there is much hard work to be done, in peace and
war; under mein process, and in criminal causes. There Is forming of armies,
raising the posse comitatus, building of castles, etc. cropping of ears,
chopping off hands, and what not! so that civil government has need of an
immence power as well a^ treasure, and to be clothed with brass and iron. But
as for the church of God, faith, prayers and tears, are generally their best
weapons against the hostility of foreigners; and in the government of their
home-born, it may be done by soft words, or hard words, 1 These. 5.12. Heb.
3.13. -- 10.24.25. So that the business does not require abundance of external
force, or form of government. That it is a thousand pities to make such a great
noise and bustle in the world about church power, as though the subjects of it
were to furnish armies and navies to encounter half the potentates on earth in
defense of the church. When alas good men! as to all occasion for power its
quite another thing; and the exercise of it generally falls within reach of an
ordinary reason. That certainly whatever the right of the brotherhood is as to
the original of power; there cannot be abundance of bad omens in allowing them
some share in church judicatory.

3. Head. Power -- this word seems to be all thunder. But however; it is very
copious and may be applied to God and his creatures. It is predicable of the
latter, in their different classes and orders of being, and none so weak but
have some share of it. But to confine the word to polity, etc. It is by some
thus defined, viz.

Power or authority -- Is that whereby a man may claim, or challenge any thing
to ones self, without the injury of another, upon a supposition, this is a true
definition.

Query. Whether christian people may not claim or challenge the following
rights or prerogatives without doing injury to any, viz.

1. Whether if they are pleased (a suitable number of them) to enter into a
religious society, by punctual and voluntary compacts to support the worship of
God in the world; whether this may not be done without injuring and then,

2. When so united, whether they may not choose their own officers. (3.)
Discipline their own members. (4) Represent themselves upon proper emergencies,
by their delegates; (all which are the principal pillars of a democracy,)
whether I say they, cannot do all these without injury done to any others? But
to proceed a little farther in opening the nature of power. If we unite Dunamis
and Exousia, viz. Strength of nature, and authority of institution into one
proposition. Then political power may be thus defined. scil.

Power is an ability, furnished with a lawful right to act. Now upon a
presumption of the validity of this proposition; power may be easily
apprehended as vested in every church, and in every member and officer of a
church, according to the nature, degree and duty of each subject of power; and
may act and exert their several powers and authorities without any incongruity,
or interfering one with another.

4. Head. That a gospel church essentially considered as a body incorporated,
is the subject of all church power. Though a church thus considered cannot
formally exercise all branches of power belonging to it: neither can the
subject of sovereign power itself exert all acts of power till fitted with
proper organs or a suitable ministry, and yet it cannot be denied but that all
power really, and all acts of power virtually, must needs be in it. And so in a
church.

Therefore as to church power in the exercise of it; it may be distributed into
what belongs (1) To the combination of many, viz. The power of judgment and
donation. Or, (2.) To what belongs to one or more set off for that end, viz.
The power of office. This distribution Mr. Hooker pursues with great
illustration. Surv. p. 1. p. 187. Here I shall confine myself to the
consideration of the exercise of that power which belongs to the brotherhood in
distinction to office power. Which principle I shall pursue by evincing the
truths of the following proposition. scil.

That the scripture does warrant a government in gospel churches, consisting of
the exercise of several distinct powers inherent in the fraternity, in
distinction to office trust. This may be evinced.

1. By the recitation of the several distinct powers themselves.

2. By the dignity which the scriptures puts upon the churches as free states,
and subjects of power in distinction from their officers.

1. By the recitation of the several distinct powers; both preparitory to, and
resulting from their combination.

1. There is a preparatory power in them both as rational and sanctified beings
of forming themselves into churches. This affirmation seems to me as fully
contained in the genuine sense of scripture, as though written in some divine
manifesto, in such terms as these, viz. Let this be proclaimed through all the
earth, that I the Lord Jesus Christ, have invested all holy and good christian
people, both by nature and grace with power, to enter into church order, for
the advance of my name, and their own edification. If we had such an article in
scripture written in terms, we should have made great use of it in justifying
our constitution; for it plainly settles all power originally (under Christ) in
the people. And then if such a power or faculty be in them when in separate
parts, as to assemble, and enter into solemn engagements, and thereby to enter
into a church state; it necessarily follows, that having imbodied they may
easily go forward and provide for their own well-being. He that has read the
gospel, and observed how many churches are mentioned, without notice taken, of
the manner of their origination, must needs allow the observation to be a fair
consequence from it. It being so agreeable with the light of nature.

2. The powers resulting from their combination may be more distinctly recited.

1. Power. The election of officers. Officers are for the well-being, and
completing of any state. There is no regular government can well subsist
without them; these are the hands, the eyes, the ears and feet of government in
administration. To separate qualified persons to the highest office trust in a
state, is by civilians attributed to the creating power of sovereignity. So
that it must needs be a great power belonging to the church under this head,
and that it is the churches prerogative I might reason; Ex Jure Superioritatis.
For that the church is superior to its officers; and not the officers to the
church. For that churches are not made for officers, but officers for churches;
therefore says the apostle, 1 Cor. 3.22. All things are yours -- whether Paul,
or Apollos or Cephas. But I shall principally depend upon the example and
practice of the apostolical church under this head. It is a celebrated saying
of Cyprian in pressing, Acts 1.26. To confirm the power of the people in
choosing and refusing their officers. Plebs Christiana maxim potestatem habet,
vel Dignos Sacerdotes Eligendi, vel indignos Recusandi. The highest power of
electing worthy officers and rejecting unworthy is in the people. For the whole
church, says T^^rettinus (de Jure Vo.) Duos Eligit, chooses two to undergo the
lot for the apostleship, that they might supply the vacancy by the death of
Judas, Acts 1.23, 26. And indeed it is contrary to all civility and reason to
imagine the apostles would be so trivial in their ministry, or prodigal of
their own authority, as to indulge the fraternity in such actions, viz. Such as
electing an extraordinary officer, if the election of officers did not belong
to them. So in the choice of the deacons mentioned, Acts. 6.2, 3, 5. The twelve
called the multitude of the disciples unto them, and said -- brethren look you
out seven men, whom we may appoint over this business. The saying pleased the
whole multitude and they chose Stephen, etc. It must needs be very surprising,
if the apostles should thus dignify, and entrust the brethren with a
prerogative of electing these officers, if the power of election was not
inherent in them. That unless any one can fairly make it out that the apostles
were either in jest, or did they know not what, in directing the brethren, to
do as they did in the recited examples; it must needs stand for a truth that
the power of electing officers is in the fraternity of the church, by the
judgment of Christ's apostles.

2. Power judicatory, Mat. 18.15, 20. This paragraph of holy writ, lays open a
scheme of juridical power in the subject of it; that is the church: and this is
to be observed, that from the first commencement of the process to the final
issue in the execution of the obstinate and criminal member, all is to be
ascribed to the authority of the church; for what business has one man to
interrupt another in his crimes and unlawful pleasures, unless he has power so
to do? And how comes one man to have power over another, unless conquest,
hostility, or compacts have made them liable, as members of the same community,
or subjects of the same government? Therefore the offended person, proceeding
regularly for detecting a delinquent, must needs be supposed to derive his
power from the same fountain, viz. the sessions were the case is finally to
issue by execution. And the subject of this power is the church. Tell the
church.

But moreover, let it be considered, that to speak by way of allusion, there be
several removes of the action of trespass, from one hearing to another; as
though it go from an inferior to a superior sessions, and that Christ was here
in this precept, settling inferior and superior assizes in his kingdom. And
indeed there cannot be a wiser scheme drawn up, that shall carry the aspect of
more grace, love, humility, tender regard to honor, and also justice than
this; both for the encouragement of religion, the awing of spectators, and
keeping the church pure.

But to proceed,

1. In making out process, the first trial is to be had at the assizes of a
man's own intellectual powers, reason, conscience, etc. being assembled, are to
set in judgment, hear the pleas, and the indictment being read and justified,
must pass sentence; and at this bar the case may be fairly issued. If he shall
hear thee thou have gained thy brother. So that most certainly the plaintiff
has a right to enter his case at this sessions, and here we see it may be
issued; then certainly this is a branch of the power of judicature; otherwise
an agrieved person might expect a very severe repulse from a sturdier offender,
for interrupting a man's repose of mind in his own actions. What saucy clown is
that? who dare challenge my conscience with the cognizance of any crime?
Bold-face! where is you commission; Who made thee a ruler, Acts 7.27. In civil
affairs particular men when injured, must not make bold to correct an ordinary
trespass upon their persons, or interests, but by forms of law; if they do,
especially if by measures which are grievous, they may be indicted themselves,
for disturbers of the peace; That certainly this branch of the text refers to a
legal bar, and lawful power. So that the complaining party may commence his
suit with boldness, produce his pleas, and demand justice. But the critical
question is, Who is judge of this court? Certainly it is some lay-mans powers,
supposed to be very competent judges, as sufficiently skilled in the rules of
court, and how to apply them. And why may not all the judges contained in the
whole series of judicatory laid open in this text, be of the same sort? for
that the case is not so deep, but that the first judges and sessions it comes
before, are supposed by our wise Savior and lawgiver, capable fully to
understand and traverse it; and do justice and judgment upon it; to a final
issue. But,

2. Upon a defeat the process goes forward, by removing the suit by an appeal
to a more impartial hearing. The next sessions therefore by review, is to
consist of one or two of the brethren. (Take one or two more.) But possibly
some may be ready to say, ah! We are like to have very good justice, before so
wise a sessions! Well, it is what Christ has appointed, and let us keep his
path, and it will bring us safe home; for that these persons are commissioned
by Christ, as capable judges, and therefore are to exercise one branch of the
power fixed in the church. But when the case is gone thus far through the law,
and the adverse party will not submit to the last verdict that is brought in,
the case must be removed again. For that,

3. It is allowed to have one trial more, and no more; and that is to be before
the church. For if he hear not the church, he shall be as an heathen man, etc.
that is to say, the church shall then issue out execution, which is the end of
the law.

Object. But the great and stupendous objection, which crosses our way, is,
that the governing church is here meant; that is to say, the presbytery in
their classes, and several sessions, till you come home to the last appeal?

Answ. 1. It is very unscriptural to force such an interpretation on the text;
for if we consider the etimology, and universal acceptance of the word church,
the objection will be found very defective, both in its rhetori^k and divinity.
There being no harbor for it, within the sense of Farniby's tropes or figures.
And as for its divinity, let the objection but cite one text more, wherein
church is mentioned, and officers are intended, and we will resign. But without
it to yield so great an interest upon so slender a claim is repugnant to
justice and honor. But,

2. How can wise men manage their souls, or bring them into such a figure as to
think that Christ should have such a far reach in his thoughts in such easy
cases as are plainly contained in the text? The notions in the objections are
plainly ridiculous to the light of nature, in that civil measures adjust
according to the degree and nature of suits and cases. A cause of twelve-pence
is triable by a single justice, and one a^peal brings the suit to the end of
the law. Indeed cases which are of greater weight and value have a larger scope
in the law allowed them, etc. And what! Is there the least shadow for a
pretense that such cases as are within our text, viz. such as may be issued by
one single brother making his suit to his brothers reason and cons^ience, etc.
or by two at the most, and that at the sole charge of a few honest pleas from
the heads of charity or piety? I say, are these cases so grand as to be
transmitted from one classis to another, till they arrive at the chief seat
where the definitive sentence is to be given forth? There is apparently some
great fallacy in the objection, or certainly our blessed Savior did not state
his cases right; for let us again consider, who must sign the bill of cost at
last? or who must bear all the charges of writings, witnesses, travels of
horses and men; and for all expense of time and money, from the sessions first
mentioned, and so from sessions to sessions, and from classis to classis, until
all is brought to a final issue? when as possibly the original writ of process,
or first action, might not contain in real civil damage, a farthing more than
about a groat or sixpence. And what can we think that our wise Savior would
adjust his settlements at no better a rate than this comes to? vah! proh Dolor!
Men have plainly made a fool of mankind by corrupting this text, whereby they
have set the discipline of the church at such a charge, that millions of
millions have run out in waste, to humor their ambition; when as the wise and
innocent churches of God in their single capacities would have done better
justice, and have drained nothing more from you, than some tears of contrition.

For,

3. What is more natural, than to imagine a church of believers, with their set
of graces, and common prudence, (especially when under the influence of a
regular ministry) should be held capable to execute this rule, according to the
full sense of it; yea, though they bring the delinquent in the traverse of the
case, to the highest censure. Indeed it must be acknowledged, that
excommunication, major or minor, is an awful result of authority; yet not
really in every respect, and in all degrees quite so bitter as death itself:
And yet death is very frequently dispensed to capital sinners, and that solely
by the verdict of their peers, viz. Twenty-four good and lawful men of the
vicinage, are in forms of law a sufficent judicatory to take away a man's life,
and the venerable bench of judges must not overruled, but stand and say, Amen,
in that good justice is done in the world by such a small company of illiterate
men, the law having assigned them to this service. To the foregoing precept,
let us join Col. 4.17. 1 Cor. 5.12. Rev. 2.20. 1 These. 5.14. Gal. 6.1.

Now to conclude, let the reader lay all these scriptures together, which
contain rules of judicatory for the churches; and then let him answer me with
good reason if h^ can, and tell me why these scriptures may not be esteemed the
churches Magna Charta, in matters of censure and judicature; as well as that be
held such a golden rule in the judicial proceedings of English government,
mentioned in the great charter of English liberties, chap. 29. No freeman shall
be taken, or imprisoned, or be disseised of his freehold, liberty or free
customs, or be out-lawed or exiled, or any other ways destroyed, nor will we
press upon him nor condemn him, but by lawful judgment of his peers. Now
gentlemen! Don't you think that the Lord Jesus Christ, the king of heaven, is
as careful and tender of his subjects, as the king of England is of his? And
indeed, why should not each set of subjects be equally and alike guarded from
the hazard of oppression, or the arbitrary measures of each ministry unless
those that belong to the gospel, are formed out of a distinct clay from each
other?

3. Power. To represent themselves in synodical conventions, for the
establishment of this power in the churches. See Acts 15.2.22.23. And for a
more ample display and confirmation of this point, I refer the reader to the
excellent treatise of Dr. Increase Mather, in his disquisition concerning
ecclesiastical councils.

2. The dignity which the scripture puts upon the churches as free states, and
subjects of power in distinction from their officers.

It is very plain that most of the epistles of St. Paul which make up a great
part of the canon of scripture, were directed to the body of the brotherhood,
and peculiarly adapted for their use, with little or no notice at all taken of
the ministry therein.

In sum, when he was just concluding his letter and winding up his discourse
with his grace and respects to some choice christian friends, he puts the
officers in with them, and orders the brotherhood to give his salutations to
them as persons unconcerned with the contents of the epistle, Heb. 13.24. In
the last verse but one in the whole epistle, says the apostle, Salute all them
that have the rule over. That whatever other meanings may be in such methods of
divine writings, they must needs respect some high powers and trust vested in
the churches. Those epistles sent to the angels of the churches of Asia; the
principal share of those letters literally taken, which belonged to the
officers, is but the superscription; the contents of the letters are
immediately directed to the fraternity. Where there is any thing amiss the
fraternity is reprehended: Where there is any thing worthy of credit, they are
commended. Or if there is any thing in point of order or discipline to be done
they are directed and commanded. All is to the churches. Therefore it is said
again and again, He that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the spirit
says unto the churches, Rev. 1.7, etc. Finally, let any considerate man but
read and well ponder the epistles to the Corinthian, Ephesian, etc. churches,
and observe the characters of the brotherhood; with the precepts how they shall
act personally and with authority one toward another, etc. he must then needs
subject his mind to the force of this conclusion, scil. That Christ's gospel
churches in their fraternities, are not such ciphers as they stand in some
men's accounts; but are really and truly proper bodies full of powers, and
authorities, for the government of themselves and all their concerns, as all
democracies are.

Demonstration IV.
From the excellent nature of the constitution, in that it exceeds all that
have been yet extant in the christian world. This I shall endeavor to
illustrate by three pleas. Plea I.

In that it best suits the great and noble designs of the gospel, and that in a
peculiar manner as it tends to the promoting holiness in the world; not only
from the strict nature of the constitution in the admission of members, whence
the churches become a more exact emblem of heaven, both for the illuminating
and dreading of others, that beholding their goodness, may glorify God in the
day of visitation. 1 Pet. 2.12. But from the great advantage put into the hands
of the best sort of men, (solid, pious, wise and unbias'd men) of furnishing a
country with persons eminently qualified for the ministry, and keeping them so.
There is no lurking place for Symony in this constitution. There is no buying
and selling of offices, whereby the world has been miserably cheated, and
debauched. Here is no back stairs for cousins and favorites to climb up to high
seats without desert; it is merit and in^rinsic worth sets the value, and holds
the strongest plea for preferment here. Hence every village, and corner of a
town, where religious congregations are settled, are furnished with persons for
the gospel ministry of such learning, and bright saints, and of such real and
distinguishing virtue and zeal; that they must needs be very prevalent in
carrying on the main design, etc. But this plea is fully pursued by Dr. Owen,
in his enquiry, etc. (p. 120 and so on) whither I refer the reader that wants
more satisfaction.

Plea II.
For that it has the best balance belonging to it of any church government in
the world. Other governments have generally too high a top, and are very
lopsided too; nay the best we can meet with without vanity or envy it may be
said, that not only seemingly like Grantham steeple, but really it stands awry,
and being so overloaded on nature's corrupt side, with learning, power and high
trust, it plainly hangs over several degrees from a true perpendicular, toward
Babylon: And if it falls it buries you; and then you must remember it has
monopolized all power, so that you have none left to stir under your load, or
creep out with. But here is a government so exactly poised, that it keeps its
motions regular like the stupenduous spheres, unless some Phaeton chance to
mount the chariot box, and becomes the driver. I have sufficiently, I think,
evinced the power in the brotherhood; and though every church is a body
consisting of very numerous parts and a noble m^nistry, yet the balance of
power is very exactly and with great advantage preserved; both between the
members of the body in general, and between themselves, and their public
ministry in special.

1. Between the members of the body. For besides, the wisdom, love and other
enobling principles, in some measure actuating every member. The venerable
major vote, which guides and governs the august states of parliaments; nay all
assembly's superior and inferior, that have any equality of power dispersed
amongst the members, ordinarily keeps the whole body, in all points of
administration, in an exact equipoise.

2. And as for the state of the ministry; there is no grain of allowance wanted
on their side, to make their office power, if not an even balance
arithmetically upon an accurate, and distressing trial: yet in the series of a
laudable ministration, it is an equivalent of power; at least according to the
terms of our constitution, Platf. C. 10. Sect. 11. But let the case be s^ated
as accurately, as may be, and let every fair principle which grants the power
to be originally in the people, be yielded: and also establish a proper
judicature in the brotherhood; yet it is apparent in all examples, that the
ministry of this constitution are held, if not in proper speaking; yet in
conscience, and religious courtesy, as though all power were invested in them;
or at least to such a degree that there is no appearance of what many render
the government grevious to them, if they are but contented, to be the masters
of an assembly of freemen, and not of slaves. Amongst abundance of
illustrations I will mention two.

1. The great veneration in man's mind toward those who are sensibly clothed
with authority. If I am a father where it my honor, if a master where is my
fear, Mat. 1.6. The prophet reasons from the law of nature; there being such a
property planted in the soul by its maker to revere superiors, and especially
men in public trust. And also the authority shining in them, being such bright
rays both of the divine majesty and benignity, there being such a sensible good
and benefit accruing thereby, to the rest of mankind, hence springs a universal
disposition to obedience and submission, this is obvious through the whole
civil ministry of the world; there is no need to make every judge in
commission, or chief magistrate a sovereign prince to gain homage to him. No!
but as soon as a man appears vested with authority, there is that in the soul
of another which teaches reverence and obedience to him in his trust, both from
the suggestions of fear and sense of interest. So that a learned, painful and
pious ministry entrusted with the souls and happiness of men; and taking
indefatigable care to secure eternal life for them, has a most charming and
endearing aspect and influence upon all the rational powers. In so much that
nature itself has a high value for such subjects of trust. And as for grace its
ready to be lavish of its victims. -- ye received me as an angel of God even as
Christ Jesus. -- If it had been possible ye would have plucked out your own
eyes, and have given them to me, Gal. 4.14, 15. If any man doubts of the
validity of this plea, let him but view what conquests have been made by the
abuse of these principles, and you will find the ministry of the christian
world have far exceeded Caesar, in subduing mankind; for from an honest
obedience they have brought them to lie down, and be trampled on by their
spiritual owners. That there is no danger on the poople's side when things are
well stated, if there be but a wise and due management on the other.

And still it is more evident.

2. From the extent of commission, with the many enobling prerogatives fixed in
their trust. Though they are the ministry, and but the ministry of a democracy,
their commission is so large, and high-prerogatives so numerous, they carry so
great an appearance, as though in reality they were the subjects of all power.
And I think it is so from the nature and modes of all regular government; for
when a government has enacted their laws and precepts, and settled their
ministry, they leave the sway of things to them; that it is as though they had
resigned all the power to their ministry: So it is peculiarly in the affairs of
gospel churches. That let men at their leisure view this illustration by the
scripture, our platform, and by the laws and customs of nations, and they will
find it a truth. That certainly a painful ministry may easily be reconciled to
our constitution, unless they are raised to that temper of mind as he was, who
had this for his motto, Aut Caesar* aut Nihil. A Caesar or nothing.

Plea III.
From the near affinity our constitution holds with the civil governments of
some of the most flourishing commonwealths in the world. It Is certain, every
species of government simple and mixed, have their various excellencies and
defects; much may be said in honor of each, and also every constitution may
have something wanting; at least it may seem so, under a more critical survey
of its nature, principles, ill-conveniencies, corrupt ministry, misfortunes,
etc. And many times a government falls under scandal from distemper of mind,
from false ends and corrupt interests, which sway and overruled men's thoughts
relating to government, more than from the constitution itself. But however, to
evade all circular discourses, we may very fairly infer, where we find nations
flourishing, and their liberty and property, with the rest o^ the great
immunities of man's nature nourished, secured, and best guarded from tyranny, we
may venture to pronounce this people to be the subjects of a noble government,
and there be many such on earth, whose constitution will serve to justify ours.
I shall instance in three, and no more.

1. The Venetian commonwealth; though some are pleased to call the government
of this free state, an aristocracy; but it seems more properly a limited
democracy; for that the seat of sovereign power is their ancient commons,
called their families, enrolled in the golden book; these make up the grand
council of the nations, settle the public ministry, and enact laws, etc. This
people have by this mode of government raised themselves into so august and
flourishing a capacity, that from a very obscure original, they are grown to
that degree, as to bridle and curb the pride and haughtiness of Turk and Pope.
This example must needs be no small honor to our constitution.

But,

2. The Belgic provinces are without interruption allowed to be the subjects
of a formed democracy, they in some ages past being insulted, and unmercifully
trampled upon by that august tyrant, the Spanish Monarch; they being his
subjects broke loose from him, and set up for themselves. They assumed to
themselves their original power, and when they had got it into their hands, had
the wit, and kept it, and have improved it in the form of a democracy to this
day, and God has blessed them: That from the poor states of Holland, they are now
grown to wear the splendid title of Their High Mightinesses, and are a match
for most monarchs on earth. Says Gordon of their government: The seven
provinces of Holland being under a democratical government, are as it were
several commonwealths; each province being a distinct state; yea, and every
city having an independent power within itself to judge of all causes, whether
civil or criminal, and to inflict even capital punishments; but all joining
together, make one republic, the most considerable in the world.

Query. Whether such examples of popular governments now extant on earth, and
yielding such vast advantages to the subjects, and being so regular and
practicable; I say, whether they may not justly deter all men from reproaching
our constitution with the scandalous title of anarchy, unless they will allow
us to prepare a chronicle for them, and therein publish to the world their
profound ignorance of the several species of government; and the distinct way
of placing and exercising various powers in them. 3. P^re Engli^h. This nation
is repated to be the subjects of the finest and most incomparable government in
the world. And this original happy form of government, is (says one) truly and
properly called an English man's liberty: a privilege to be freed in person and
estate from arbitrary violence and oppression; and a greater inheritance than
we derive from our parents. And this birthright of English men shines most
conspiciously in two things.

1. In Parliaments; wherein the subject has by his representatives, a share in
legislative power: And so makes his own laws, and disposes of his own money.

2. In Jury's; whereby he has a share in the executive part of law, so that no
causes are tried, nor any man adjudged to lose his life, member or estate, but
upon the verdict of his peers; his equal or neighbors, and of his own
condition. These two grand pillars of English liberty, are the fundamental
vital privileges whereby we have been, and are still preserved more free and
happy, than any other people in the world; and we trust shall ever continue so.
For whosoever shall design to impair, pervert, or undermine either of these, do
strike at the very constitution of our government, and ought to be prosecuted
and punished, with the utmost zeal and vigor. -- For to poison all the springs
and rivers in the kingdom, could not be a greater mifchief; for this would only
affect the present age, but the other would ruin and enslave all our posterity.
I shall improve this example by three Queries.

Query 1. Ah! What Is the matter with English men, men of such courage to be
surprised with such fear, as though they were like to be taken captive, and
turned into slaves in their own home? Why, in good truth, there may be a reason
for it; therefore it becomes them to be very careful under this head; for if
they make themselves slaves in their own country, or let others do it for them,
when they can prevent it, they both deny God who made and redeemed them, and
plainly violate the law of nature?

Query. 2. Who is it English men are thus afraid of? Who do they thus reflect
upon in their frights and fears? It is neither France nor the great Turk which
dreads them! therefore it must needs be some body or another nearer home that
threatens their liberty. And may not New-England's gospel liberties deserve so
much fear and caution, although it should so happen that some body should be
reflected upon by their cautiousness.

Query. 3. If the settling such immunities, as the privilege of parliaments and
juries in the hands of the people be such effectual barriers to preserve a
nation from tyranny and slavery; then whether when gospel churches have the
means in their own power, it been't their wisdom to keep up the like barrier,
or something equivalent thereto; that they may preserve themselves safe from
the arbitrary measures of their own ministry? or thus, whether for English men,
when their liberties in church or state are fast locked up for them and their
posterity by law and regular settlements, it been't their best way to beware
how they repeal those laws, or weaken those settlements?

But at present I shall leave it to other men to run the parrallel between our
constitution, and the several governments I have mentioned, and infer what more
they shall think proper; only leaving to myself the liberty to conclude, that
the several examples of civil states, which I have named, do serve abundantly
to justify the noble nature of our constitution in church order; for that the
several famous and august nations which I have mentioned, in all their glory at
home, and success in arms and trade abroad; their several governments which
have brought them to all this, are either a perfect democracy, or very much
mixed and blendished with it.

Then why should we in New England be any more ashamed, or less careful of our
church government, which keeps us from tyranny and slavery in the concerns of
our consciences, than those nations are of their civil government, whereby they
are preserved from the like damnable circumstances in the concerns of their
outward life, and natural rights and fortunes?

Demonstration V.
From the dignity which the providence of God has put upon the constitution,
both in the first ages of the christian churches and in the last century.

1. In the first ages of the christian churches God has put many marks of
distinguishing favor upon this constitution, both in the smiles and frowns of
his providence.

1. In the smiles of providence upon the churches, whilst they continued
complete in their constitution. I shall offer but three parti^ulars to justify
this observation.

1. In the great and admirable success of the gospel, in the conversion of so
many nations.

2. In their singular purity, and virtuous deportment in the midst of a corrupt
world. That (as Mr. Cotton observes) was a general eulogy belonging to their
members, and ascribed to them by the wiser sort of heathen, scil. Bonus vir,
tantum Christianus, He is a good man only is a christian.

3. They were eminently supported and carried on by the grace and providence of
God through all their direful sufferings; the more they were wasted and
destroyed, the more they grew and increased, as Israel in Egypt. Indeed whilst
they remained firm to their constitution, they were not only like an army in
banners, but in reality the greatest conquerors that ever appeared on earth.
They merely baffled the bravery of the old Roman spirit, and were quite too
hard for those who had vanquished the world. I have seen, says Eusebius, the
executioner (tired with tormenting them) lie down panting and breathing, etc.
But I never saw the martyrs weary of sufferings, nor heard them desire a truce:
Nay, were rather ambitious of the longest and most terrible sufferings, that
they might be martyrs in every member. Thus the churches endured hardness as
good soldiers of Christ, through ten bloody persecutions; and at last retreated
by divine providence, under the umbrage of the great Constantine. And there the
churches of God made the finest show that ever was seen on earth, next to
Christ in his transfiguration. Till this time the churches remained the
subjects of their democratical government in some good measure though there
were some symptoms of an alteration in the last century, but indeed after the
churches were freed from the rage of heathen persecutors, there quickly
followed the perfect subversion of their order.

So we come,

2. To consider the frowns of Providence that pursued the christian world after
the subversion of their primitive constitution. Sufficient observations have
been made under the foregoing demonstrations, setting forth the change of
government which was made in the churches. And in short, it was really and
properly the altering the ministry of a democracy into an aristocracy; for to
speak plainly, the public officers to gratify their ambition, took all the
power into their own hands, and settled all affairs and concerns acccording to
their own minds without control. But let us eye the providence of God, and we
may observe that God did soon stain the pride and glory of these men;
especially in two eminent instances of his displeasure, which I shall only
mention.

Instance. 1. In the fatal Arian heresy, that spread it self like some mortal
contagion, through the christian world? that it was said the whole world was
become an Arian. Arius was the author of this damnable doctrine, viz. That our
Savior Christ was neither God, nor eternal, but a creature; and that he
assumed only the body, not the soul of man, etc. This damnable heresy soon
spread itself far and wide; the author was in the height of his wickedness,
and fell a victim to divine vengeance in the latter part of Constantine's
reign: But his heresy continued and prevailed, and especially amongst the
clergy. But this is very awful to observe, that when these men by their wit and
cunning had once cozened and cheated the fraternity of their ancient rights and
prerogatives, God left the devil to cheat and deceive them, as wise and learned
as they were, of their true religion and souls together. What good did all
their legerdemain to them now? Had not they better have kept holy and humble
pastors, confined to their parochial diocesses, and known and loved and
preached Christ the eternal Son of God, and him crucified, rather then stretched
their boundary like sovereign princes, and so left to perish under such a
dreadful dispensation, as the fruit of their ambition and infidelity?

To me (considering the commencement, the deadly nature, the rage, the
universal prevalence and continuance of this damnable heresy) it seems as
though God had looked down from heaven, and viewed the sacrilegious robbery
commitied upon the churches with detestation. And therefore summonned a
congress of the several states of the other world. (1 Kings 22.19. I saw the
Lord sitting on his throne) and issuing out proclamation. -- Be it known! That
never has a nobler cause been so baffled and sacrilegiously betrayed by the
dignified trustees of it as this. I have been down amongst my golden
candlesticks, my famous churches; I find the fraternity drowsy and remiss,
setting two low a value on their ine^timable rights. And those who should rowse
them from their security and incogitancy, rather esteem it a lucky omen; and
therefore to satiate their own ambition (instead of advising, and directing the
churches in the study of their constitution; and so plead their cause for them)
they consult how to defraud them, they wrest the scripture, darken all places
which settle their titles, and to end all disputes threaten them Diotrephes
like (3 John 10.) with the secular power that is now on their side. That they
have at last absolutely supplanted them, stripped and taken away the rights
belonging to the churches, and purchased at so dear a rate. That as though the
Almighty should say, my patience is out! And my justice has prepared a cup of
confusion for them; Who! of all this convocation will go and hand it to them?
And there came forth several legions with an arch-devil at the head of them,
and stood before the Lord, and said, we will go and persuade them; and God
said, you shall persuade them, and prevail also; therefore go forth and do so,
1 Kings 22.22. As though God should say, I have now in displeasure abandoned
them to ruin; they who should have had a zealous regard to my settlements and
as one chief end of their ministry, should have sought the happiness of the
people, and not their own ease, vain glory, pride and luxury; now leave them
exposed to obliterate the essentials of their faith, and so fall a sacrifice to
divine fury. Go you malignant powers do your worst, the hedges are now down.

Instance 2. The universal apostasy that has followed the subversion of the old
constitution. We may in some degree date Gods departure from his churches when
they began to subvert the order of them, and so gradually withdrew, till he --
at last left them to perish by whole ages together. It must not, indeed, be
thought, or said, but that God had a remnant through many ages, who continued
orthodox in faith, both in the ministry and brotherhood. But yet it is very
obvious that christianity Gradatim, declined till all was swallowed up in a
universal and direful apostasy, never sufficiently to be deplored; neither
fully expressed, unless we transcribe the volumns that contain it. I do account
indeed that the destruction of the churches, in moral speaking, may be
attributed immediately and nextly to other causes, as ignorance, pride,
hypocrisy, etc. But remotely to the dissolution of the order of them. For that
the constitution forenamed was adjusted by divine wisdom for preventing and
remedying such maladies as proved the ruin of the churches; that when the
remedy was quite taken away, bad humors predominate, and symptoms of a deadly
aspect appear, and so death inevitably follows.

2. In the last century God has been very admirable in the works of providence,
and has therein highly dignifyed our constitution. And we want no other
evidence under this head than the recognition of what God has done for these
famous English colonies in North America; who have all along distinguished
themselves, from all the world, by their singular regard both to the faith and
practice of the true religion. Now let any other constitution on earth but
parrallel ours; in the eminent shines of providence and in religious effects,
and we will resign the whole cause. But whilst then, we will go on and rejoice
in the grace of God, that we in these countries, are by his good providence
over us, the subjects of the most ancient, rational and noble constitution in
church order that ever was, will be, or can be; whilst the laws of nature and
grace remain unrepeal'd. For that it is a constitution which infinite wisdom
has authorized and founded in the law of nature; and his omniscient providence
has eminently honored, and dignified, both by the smiles and frowns of his
countenance, through all the ages of the christian world to this very morning.
And though some of the reverend churches within this grand consociation (who
settled upon the same platform with us) have with two great a precipitation
made a defection from the constitution: Yet this is our comfort, that their
alteration is not so firm, as the laws of the Medes and Persians; for that
those who turned them off, may by the same power bring them on to their old
basis again. And let Christ pity, and help them. For certainly their present
state is portentous, from what may be observed from the proceedings of
providence through the whole christian Era, unto this day.

The Conclusion.
I shall now conclude my whole essay, by annexing the joint testimony of those
eminent men, fathers in these churches, now in glory. viz. The reverend Mr.
John Higginson, and the reverend Mr. William Hubbard. And the rather because
Mr. Hubbard did some time before his death, desire to have their testimony
reprinted, and live with some other book which it might properly accompany. I
am well satisfied the foregoing subject is the most proper companion, their
testimony could have light on, in its travels through the world: I therefore
make bold to invite the said testimony, to set out again with fresh courage,
and improve its excellent language, together with former acceptance it found
with the churches to ingratiate and bespeak favor for this small treatise, its
new allie and fellow-traveller.

And let the holy churches (for whom these now appear in joint testimony to
confirm their divine pedigree) flourish in their strength, beauty and order,
after this triumvirate shall sink under the tyranny of moths, and human
forgetfulness, and lie down in the house of oblivion; where I hope the enemies
of the constitution will be gotten down before them, and there fast buried in
their own bones and dust.

But least any should think it absurd, that I here produce such venerable
authority in way of epilogue, which should rather in honor have been placed in
the front of this attempt. To this I reply, that in honor and prudence I choose
here to place these worthies. For you must note; I am now retreating out of the
field of battle, and I hope upon honorable terms too; and then the rear is the
highest place in dignity; so that though they are bringers-up, its no
diminution to them. And not only so, but out of prudent conduct; for though I
presume the enemy is fairly vanquished, yet some forlorn party may rally, and
to gratify their desperate fortune may disturb us, but I hope these valiant and
wise commanders thus posted, will secure our rear, beat back the enemy, and
bring all off with triumph.

A TESTIMONY To the order of the gospel, in the churches of New England: Left
in the hands of the churches, by the two most aged ministers of the gospel, yet
surviving in the country.
1. ABOVE seventy years have passed away, since one of us, and above sixty,
since the other of us came into New England, and having obtained help from God,
we continue to this day.

We are therefore capable to make some comparison, between the condition of the
churches, when they were first erected in this country, and the condition into
which they are now fallen, and more falling every day.

But we wish, that in making this comparison, we had not cause to take the
place, and the part of those old men, that saw the young men shouting aloud for
joy, at the new temple, Ezra. 3.12. Ancient men that had seen the first house;
when the foundation of this house ^as laid before their eyes, wept with a loud
voice.

2. We are under a daily expectation of our call to appear before our Lord
Jesus Christ; and we have reason to be above all things concerned, that we may
give up our account with joy unto him. That we may be the better able to do so,
we judge it necessary for us to leave in the hands of the churches, a brief
testimony, to the cause of God and his people in this land. And this the
rather, because we are sensible that there is risen and rising among us, a
number who not only forsake the right ways of the Lord, wherein these holy
churches have walked, but also labor to carry away as many others with them as
they can.

We are also informed, that many younger men of great worth, and hearty friends
unto the church state of the country, scarce know what interpretation to put
upon it; but find it a sensible disadvantage unto them, that the elder men are
so silent, and remiss upon the manifest occasions, that call aloud for us to
open our mouth in the cause of churches that we should be loath to see led unto
destruction.

3. We that saw the persons, who from four famous colonies, assembled in the
synod, that agreed on our platform of Church Discipline, cannot forget their
excellent character. They were men of great renown in the nation, from whence
the Laudian persecution exiled them; their learning, their holiness, their
gravity, struck all men that knew them with admiration. They were Timothies in
their houses, Chrysostomes in their pulpits, Augustines in their disputations.
The prayers, the studies, the humble enquiries, with which they sought after
the mind of God, were as likely to prosper as any men's upon earth. And the
sufferings wherein they were confessors for the name and the truth of the Lord
Jesus Christ, add unto the arguments which would persuade us, that our gracious
Lord would reward and honor them, with communicating much of his truth unto
them. The famous Brightman had foretold, Clariorem lucem adhuc Solitudo dabit,
etc. God would yet reveal more of the true church state unto some of his
faithful servants, whom he would send into a wilderness, that he might there
have communion with them. And it was eminently accomplished in what was done
for and by the men of God, that first erected churches for him in this American
wilderness.

We do therefore in the first place, earnestly testify, That if any who are
given to change, do rise up to unhinge the well established churches in this
land, it will be the duty and interest of the churches, to examine, whether the
men of this trespass, are more prayerful, more watchful, more zealous, more
patient, more heavenly, more universally conscientious, and harder students,
and better scholars, and more willing to be informed and advised, than those
great and good men, who left unto the churches what they now enjoy: If they be
not so, it will be wisdom for the children to forbear pulling down with their
own hands, the houses of God, which were built by their wiser fathers, until
they have better satisfaction.

It is not yet forgot by some surviving ear-witnesses of it, that when the
Synod had finished the Platform of Church Discipline, they did with an
extraordinary elevation of soul and voice, then sing together, the song of
Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, in the fifteenth chapter of
the revelation: God forbid, that in the loss of that holy Discipline, there
should be hereafter occasion to sing about breaking down the carved work of the
houses of God, with axes and hammers; or take up the eightieth psalm for our
lamentations.

4. It was a joy unto us, to see and read, a book which the reverend president
of our college lately published, under the tittle of 'The order of the gospel
professed and practiced by the churches of Christ in New England:' A book most
highly needful, and useful, and seasonable; a most elaborate and well composed
work, and well suited unto those two worthy designs; 1st. the maintaining the
congregational-church-discipline; and 2dly, the maintaining the sweet spirit of
charity and communion toward reforming presbyterians, who are our united
brethren. But we must here withal testify, that in that worthy book, there is
nothing obtruded upon the churches, but what they who were here, capable of
observing what was done sixty years ago, do know to have been professed and
practiced in the churches of New England; (except in one or two) then and ever
since, until of late, some who were not then born, have suggested otherwise.
Yea, it is well known, that the churches then publicly maintained those
principles, in several judicious discourses, which were never confuted by any
men whatever, unto this present time. And we do therefore most heartily commend
that book, of the order of the gospel, unto the perusal and acceptance of the
churches of the Lord.

5. It was one of the songs (as the jewish masters tell us) in the seat of the
tabernacles, Blessed be our youth, which have not made our old men ashamed. But
alas, we that are old men must confess ourselves ashamed, when we see after
what manner some of our youth, have expressed and behaved themselves, and with
what scoffs they have assaulted the order of the gospel, in some things lately
published, and scattered about the country: which have been so far from
answering the arguments brought for our church order, that they have been by
the wonderful providence of Christ, made useful to establish the minds of
serious christians, in those very points, which they see so weakly and so
rudely opposed. We have taught our children in the catechism, called milk for
babes, that there is to be a covenant of God in the churches, wherein they give
up themselves, first unto the Lord to be his people, and then to the elders and
brethren of the churches to set forward the worship of God, and mutual
edification. And it cannot but be grievous unto us, as well as unto all serious
christians, for my children of New England, scornfully to vomit up their milk
with scoffs upon that and other sacred actions in our churches, too horrible to
be repeated.

If they take from us, one of the songs among the ancient Jews, they would
however leave us room for one of the sighs uttered by a rabbi among them; the
worst fruit which we eat in our youth, excelled the best which we now eat in
our old age, for in our days the world is changed.

6. Concerning all sinful attempts to overturn the order of the gospel,
hitherto upheld in the churches of New England, and to spoil that glorious work
of God, which we have seen him doing, with a series of remarkable providence,
in erecting such congregational churches in these ends of the earth; we would
now therefore bear our testimony, that they are doubtless displeasing to our
Lord Jesus Christ, who walks in the midst of these golden candlesticks, and
they will prove bitterness in the latter end.

And this we declare with the more concern upon our minds, because of an
observation, so plain, that he that runs may read it.

It is too observable, that the power of godliness, is exceedingly decaying and
expiring in the country; and one great point in the decay of the power of
godliness, is men^ growing weary of the congregational church discipline, which
is evidently calculated to maintain it.

If that church discipline were more thoroughly and vigorously kept alive, even
by those that make profession of it, it might be hoped, that the Lord would
sanctify it, for the revival of all godliness in the land.

But if this church discipline come to be given up, we think it our duty, to
leave this warning with the churches, that probably the apostasy will not stop
there: For the ^ame spirit that will dispose the next generation to change
their way, in one point, will dispose them to more, and more changes (even in
doctrine and worship as well as in manners) until it may be feared, the
candlestick will quickly be removed out of its place.

7. We do therefore humbly propose it, unto all the churches, as a great
expedient, for the preservation of our church state, that more prayer (even in
whole days of prayer set apart for that end) with other appointed means, may be
used in the churches to obtain from the Lord, the out pourings of the spirit of
grace on the rising generation. If so rich a blessing were obtained, (and our
heavenly father will give his holy spirit unto them that ask it) and if the
rising generation might be a praying, pious, devout and regenerate generation,
there will not be such danger as now there is, of their easily giving away the
precious legacy which their fathers (now beholding the face of the Lord Jesus
Christ in glory,) left unto them, or of their doting upon innovations fatal to
the order of the gospel among us.

8. Now as aged Joseph said, I die, and God will surely visit you: even so, we
the unworthy servants of the Lord, whose age bids us every day look for death,
and our call to that world, where to be is by far the best of all, do conclude
with our prayers unto the Lord for these holy churches, that he would surely
visit them, and grant much of his gracious presence and spirit in the midst of
them; and raise up from time to time, those who may be happy instruments of
bringing down the hearts of the parents into the children. The Lord bless these
his churches, and keep them steadfast, both in the faith and in the order of the
gospel, and be with them, as he was with their fathers, and never leave them
nor forsake them.

JOHN HIGGINSON. WILLIAM HUBBARD.


POSTSCRIPT.
THAT our testimony to the old principles of New England, may be the more
distinctly apprehended, we recommend unto consideration, three Pages in the
life of Mr. John Cotton, written by his grandson, Mr. Cotton Mather. p. 33, 34,
35.

"Now that the world may know, the first principles of New England, it must be
known, that until the platform of church discipline, published by a Synod in
the year 1648, next unto the Bible, which was the professed, no perpetual, and
only directory of these churches, they had platform of their church government,
more exact than their famous John Cotton's well known book of the keys; which
book, endeavors to lay out, the just lines and bounds, of all church power, and
so defines the matter; that as in the state, there is a dispersion of powers
into several hands, which are to concur into all acts of common concernment;
from whence arises the healthy constitution of a commonwealth: In like sort,
he assigns the powers in the church, unto several subjects, wherein the united
light of scripture, and of nature, have placed them with a very satisfactory
distribution.'

"He asserts, That a presbyterated society of the faithful, has within itself,
a complete power of self-reformation, or if you will, of self-preservation; and
may within itself, manage its own choices of officers, and censures, of
delinquents. Now a special statute law of our Lord, having excepted women and
children, from enjoying any part of this power, he finds only elders and
brethren to be the constituent members, who may act in such a sacred
corporation; the elders he finds the first subject entrusted with government;
the brethren endowed with privilege, in so much that though the elders are to
rule the church, and without them there can be no elections, admissions, or
excommunications, and they have a negative upon the acts of the fraternity, as
well as it is they only that have the power of authoritative preaching and
administering the sacraments: Yet the brethren have such a liberty that without
their consent, nothing of common concernment may be imposed upon them.
Nevertheless, because particular churches of elders and brethren may abuse
their powers, with manifold miscarriages, he asserts the necessary communion of
churches in Synods, who have authority to determine, declare and enjoin, such
things as may rectify the male-administrations, of any disorders, dissentions
and confusions of the congregations which fall under their cognizance. But
still so as to leave unto the particular churches themselves, the formal acts,
which are to be done pursuant unto the advice of the council; upon the
scandalous and obstinate refusal whereof, the council may determine to withdraw
communion from them, as from those who will not be counseled, against a
notorious mismanagement of the jurisdiction which the Lord Jesus Christ has
given them. This was the design of that judicious treatise, wherein was
contained the substance of our church discipline; and whereof we have one
remarkable thing to relate as we go along. That great person who afterward
proved one of the greatest scholars, divines and writers in this age, then
under prejudices of conversation, set himself to write a confutation of this
very treatise, of the keys; but having made a considerable progress in his
undertaking, such was the strength of this unanswerable book, that i^stead of
confuting it, it conquered him; and this book of the keys, was happily so
blessed of God for the conveyance of congregational principles into the now
opened mind of this learned man, that he not only wrote in defense of Mr.
Cotton, but also exposed himself to more than a little sorrow and labor all
his days, for the maintaining of those principles. Upon which occasion the
words of the Doctor (Owen, in his review of the true nature of schism) are,
this way of impartial examining all things by the word, and laying aside all
prejudicate respect unto persons, or present traditions, is a course that I
would admonish all to beware of, who would avoid the danger of being made (what
they call) independants. Having said thus much, of that book, all that we shall
add concerning it, is, That the eminent Mr. Rutherford himself, in his treatise
entitled, a survey of the spiritual antichrist, has these words, Mr. Cotton in
his treatise of the keys of the kingdom of heaven, is well sound in our way; if
he had given some more power to assemblies, and in some lesser points."

JOHN HIGGINSON. WILLIAM HUBBARD.


THE CHURCHES QUARREL ESPOUSED: OR, A REPLY In Satyr, to certain Proposals
made, in Answer to this Question, -- What further Steps are to be taken, that
the Councils may have due Constitution and Efficacy in Supporting, Preserving,
and Well-Ordering the Interest of the CHURCHES in the Country?

BY JOHN WISE, A. M. Pastor to a CHURCH in IPSWICH.

Wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith.

TIT. 1.xiii. Abjiciendus Pudor, Quoties urget Necessitas.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by JOHN BOYLES, in Marlboro'-Street. MDCCLXXII.

GLOUCESTER, March 25, 1715. Reverend Sir,
WE have had the favor and satisfaction of reading, and according to our
measure considering the the transcendent logic, as well as grammar and
rhetoric, of your Reply to the Proposals; by which our eyes are opened to see
much more than ever before we saw, of the value and glory of our invaded
privileges, and are of opinion, that if your consent may be obtained to a new
edition, it may be of wonderful service to our churches, if GOD shall please to
go forth with it. However, it will be a testimony that all our watchmen were
not asleep, nor the camp of CHRIST surprised and taken, before they had warning.

We are, Reverend Sir, Full of dutiful respect and gratitude, Your Sons and
Servants, SAMUEL MOODEY. JOHN WHITE.


QUESTION AND PROPOSALS.
QUESTION.

WHAT further steps are to be taken, that the councils may have due
constitution and efficacy in supporting, preserving and well ordering the
interest of the churches in the country?

1st part, it was proposed,

1st, That the ministers of the country form themselves into associations, that
may meet at proper times to consider such things as may properly lie before
them, relateing to their own faithfulness toward each other, and the common
interest of the churches; and that each of those associations have a moderator
for a certain time, who shall continue till another be chosen. who may call
them together upon emergencies.

In these associations,

2dly, That questions and cases of importance, either provided by themselves,
or by others presented unto them, should be upon due deliberation answered.

3dly, That advice be taken by the associated pastors from time to time, ever
they proceed to any action in their particular churches, which be likely to
produce any imbroilments. That the associated pastors do carefully and lovingly
treat each other with that watchfulness which may be of universal advantage;
and that if any minister be accused to the association whereto he belongs, of
scandal or heresy, the matter shall be there examined, and if the associated
ministers find just accusation for it, they shall direct to the calling of the
council, by whom such an offender is to be proceeded against.

4thly, That the candidates of the ministry undergo a due trial by some one or
other of the associations, concerning their qualifications for the evangelical
ministry; and that no particular pastor or congregation employ any one in
occasional preaching who has not been recommended by a testimonial under the
hands of some association.

5thly, That they should together be consulted by bereaved churches, to
recommend to them such persons as may be fit to be employed amongst them for
present supply, from whom they may in due time proceed to choose a pastor.

6thly, That hereunto may be referred the direction of proceeding in any of
their particular churches, about ^he convening of councils that shall be
thought necessary, for the welfare of the churches.

7thly, That the several associations in the country, maintain a due
correspondence with one another, that so the state of religion may be the
better known and secured in all the churches, and particularly it is thought
necessary to the well-being of these churches, that all the associations of the
country meet together by their respective delegates once in a year.

8thly, And finally, That ministers disposed to associate, endeavor in the
most efficacious manner they can, to prevail with such ministers as
unreasonably neglect such meetings with their brethren in their proper
associations, that they would not expose themselves to the inconveniences that
such neglects cannot but be attended withal.

Second part, It is proposed,

1st. That these associated pastors, with a proper number of delegates from
their several churches, be formed into a standing or stated council, which
shall consult, advise and determine all affairs that shall be proper matter for
the consideration of an ecclesiastical council within their respective limits,
except always, the cases are such as the associated pastors judge more
convenient to fall under the cognizance of some other council.

2dly, That to this end these associated pastors, with their respecti^
churches, shall consociate and combine according to wh^ has been by the synods
of these churches recommended, that they act as consociated churches in all
holy watchfulness and helpfulness toward each other; and that each church
choose and depute one or more to attend their pastor, as members of the council
in their stated sessions, or occasionally, as emergencies shall call for.

3dly, That these messengers from the several consociated churches shall be
chosen once a year at the least.

4thly, It is propounded, as that which from our beginning has been
recommended, that the churches thus consociated for these purposes, have a
stated time to meet in their council, and once in a year seems little enough,
that they may enquire into the condition of the churches, and advise such
things as may be for the advantage of our holy religion. But the more
particular time is best left to the determination of each respective
association.

5thly, That the associations shall direct when there is occasion for this
council to convene, on any emergency, and shall direct whether the whole, or
only a certain number of these consociated pastors and churches shall convene
on such occasions.

6thly, It appears agreeable to the present condition of our churches, and from
our beginnings acknowledged, that no act of the councils are to be reckoned as
concluded and decisive, for which there has not been the concurrence of the
major part of the pastors therein concerned.

7thly, The determinations of the councils thus provided, for the necessities
of the churches are to be looked upon as final and decisive, except agrieved
churches and pastors, have weighty reasons to the contrary, in which cases
there should be provision for a further hearing; and it seems proper that the
council convened on this occasion, should consist of such pastors as may be
more for number than the former, and they should be such, as shall be directed
to, and convened for this purpose by the ministers of an association, near to
that whereto these of the former council belonged, unto which the agrieved
should accordingly apply themselves, and in this way expect a final issue?

8thly, If a particular church will not be reclaimed by council from such gross
disorders as plainly hurt the common interest of christianity, and are not mere
tolerable differences in opinion, but are plain sins against the command and
kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, the council is to declare that church no
longer fit for communion with the churches of the faithful; and the churches
represented in the council, are to approve, confirm and ratify the sentence,
and withdraw from the communion of the church that would not be healed:
Nevertheless, if any members of the disorderly church, do not justify their
disorders, but suitably testify against them, these are still to be received to
the wonted communion by the churches; and if after due waiting, the church be
not recovered, they may (upon advice) be actually taken in as members of some
other church in the vicinity.

These proposals were assented to by the delegates of the association, met
according to former agreement, at B. -- September 13th. 1705. To be commended
to the several associated ministers in the several parts of the country, to be
duly considered, that so, what may be judged for the service of our great Lord,
and his holy churches, may be further proceeded in.

At an association-meeting, the foregoing proposals were read and assented to,
etc. Present, Nov. 5. 1705.
THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY. To the Fraternity of the Churches in the New England
Colonies.
Truly honorable, and beloved in Christ,
IT is not from any disrespect, or for want of honor to the reverend eldership
and pastors of your several communities, that I apply myself more immediately
and thus abruptly to your selves in this dedication. But for that it seems most
agreeable with my present provence. The privileges of the fraternity being so
peculiarly the theme and subject of my pains, I esteem it very proper to
introduce my following essays, with a few words of advice more directly to
yourselves if you may be thence moved and encouraged to assist for the support
of Christ's and your own interests. I desire to be without offense to any, and
pray that all such worthy persons, wise and faithful pastors in these churches
(who are as much obliged by their office to stand by and defend the established
interest and rights of them as I am, and far more capable) will interpret my
whole action in the most favorable sense. And though I have not with the noble
Cortius leapt into a chasm made in the forum; yet I have ventured to step into
the gap, to keep the breach, till better hands come up, for the service of my
country, and in defense of their sacred liberties; so that I hope many of you
will come in with a new supply and recruit of courage and argument, when and
where mine fails; and for the present I presume none of you will be offended,
though I do thus immediately address the churches over which you preside, with
the following principles of their interest and duty wrapped up in each other.

Then, Honorable Brethren!

1st. In general, my advice is to you, that in good order, and with all
gracefulness which becomes wise men, you will with zeal, courage and
faithfulness, stand in the defense of, and maintain your church liberties; God
certainly obliges you to do it, with all the discretion and bravery of spirit,
which becomes free men, in withstanding vassalage or a servile state, Gal. 5.1,
13. Stand fast therefore in the liberties, wherewith Christ has made us free,
and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage: The plea is as forcible
against a christian, as a Jeweish Thraldom. For brethren, ye have been called
unto liberty. I must acknowledge I have no particular prejudice against any of
the governments of christian protestant churches in the world, so as to defraud
or dispossess any of them of heaven; or monopolize so great a royalty to our
own; but yet I am of this opinion, considering the just title of the crown, the
churches, the people, the capacity of soil and climate together, that the
constitution and way of New England churches cannot be mended by exchange.

Briefly, To instance in the civil part, or interest of the crown, I think it
very easy to evince, by the precepts both of religion and policy, that the
parliament (that wise and august council of the nation) could not have invented
an establishment in church order, more for the service of the imperial crown of
the British empire than our present constitution, especially in such a country
and climate as this is.

I shall not now any ways enter upon the question, but only give just a short
hint as to the revenue. Our present constitution does indeed, somewhat more
than sip; it takes an honest healthful draught at natures fountains, but leaves
the flowing streams for empire to sit at, till filled with satiety.

The ecclesiastics in some kingdoms in Europe are ready not only to chide with
crowned heads, but to take them by the throat, and wring out of their hands, if
not almost a moiety, yet a vast share of the golden fleeces that should supply
the public treasuries, and cloth the nakedness of the kingdoms, and the people
have no more wit but to justify and defend them in their claims and
oppressions, and that till they themselves (in great numbers) are as thin and
ragged as penury itself; for by their rules of adjustment, when the church has
gotten an unconscionable share, then the crown or subject must be almost
starved; for there is not left a sufficient and plentiful supply for both.

But now our New England constitution is very fair-mannered; for when its sits
down to the stalled ox (made ready) it carves temperately and (without much
defacing) leaves the whole to the empire to make its armies and navies, with
the rest of its needful and unwearied servants welcome. That in loyalty to your
prince, and for the support of the royal revenue, you may justly preserve your
freedoms.

Let us also consider the best good of a whole people.

It is most certain, true grace is the one thing needful, and the main concern
for the improvement of the powers both of prince, noble and peasant, and though
grace be of that nature that it will grow (after a fashion and in some sort of
soil) almost under any government; yet it is most agreeable with laws of piety
and wisdom (for the good of all in general) to choose and secure that
constitution and form of government that is most agreeable, and which most
naturally breeds it, and in greatest plenty.

By the suffrage of our nation, that government which sensibly clogs tyranny,
and preserves the subject free from slavery, under the ambition of men of great
fortune and trust, is the only government in the state to advance men's temporal
happiness; and we in this country honor the resolve in civil affairs, and also
affirm (upon great experience) that such a constitution in church government is
(also) the only way to advance grace and man's eternal happiness; and we are the
more ratifyed in our opinion, for that the experiment has on the other hand
been tried, with a witness, in almost all kingdoms of the christian world, and
that first, by disseising the fraternity of all interest in church government,
only they have had the liberty to be governed with a hook in their noise (like
wild cattle in a string) by the mercy and pleasures of their drivers; but as
for any share in the exercise of government, they have had no more, than the
horses in the royal stables, for that their spiritual owners having seized all
the keys of church power, they profess no dividend shall be made, and also they
themselves being uncontrolable by any, and unaccountable to any, unless it be
to Christ himself, as they pretend: Though I believe, thousands of them never
expect to meet with him, nor think that he ever will audit any accounts of
theirs.

But however, for the comfort and glory of the present life, the whole
government of the spiritual kingdom, in all its (...) inches, and with its
immense profits, has been established theirs. But this sort of discipline, has
sunk great part of the christian world, as many times over, as ages have past,
since it has been installed universal rector, and where it has kept absolute
possession of the throne.

And must the waves and present currents sit and w^ft these churches, toward
those rocks and shipwrecks, whilst we have such good hands and pilots an board?
God forbid!

Therefore let these churches and the noble fraternity of them, stand their
ground, keep fast hold of what you have got, Rev. 3.11. Hold that fast which
thou have, that no man take thy crown.

Hold your hold brethren! Et validis incumbite Remis, pull up well upon your
oars, you have a rich cargo, and I hope we shall escape shipwreck; for
according to the latest observation, if we are not within sight, yet we are not
far from harbor; and though the noise of great breakers which we hear, imports
hazard, yet I hope daylight, and good piloting will secure all.

More particularly I ask your patience with liberty (still for your service) to
make the few following distinct petitions.

I. PETITION.
Honorable brethren!
THAT you would know what you are, and who you are, in the more ample and
heroic sense of your state!

It is certainly very agreeable with grace, for the upright, sometimes to shift
ideas, and change such as are mournful, for those which bear a bright aspect in
their condition; otherways they may rob God of the glory of the best part of
his grace and bounty, and disinable their own strength, for some of the most
important services they are called to in the world; therefore Nehemiah plucks
up his courage, and says, "Should such a man as I flee?" As though he should say,
he knew himself owner of too many great endowments and instruments, to be so
little as to run for it, or be dreaded with such an alarm, Neh. 6.11, 12.

So brethren, imagine yourselves to be something more than ordinary; for really
you be so; and that as you are a gospel combination, and collectively
considered.

What! the best men of our country who form our courts, and command our armies,
that make the figure and (...) the true luster (by their great wisdom and real
accomplishments) in all great shows and appearances: Must all these be made
null, or buried in a miosis (as is frequently enacted by ambition) for the fake
of some inferior members in a fraternity? which is as much as to say, in state
affairs, because cobblers stalls or orange sellers baskets, afford no
statesmen, ergo, none to be found; or because that in many great counties
there may chance to be an hundred knaves, and twice the number of fools, ergo,
there be no legales homines, lawful men, fit for juries; no men fit for
burgesses or knights of the shire, to be found to make parliament men? and so
the kingdom must needs loose all its ancient righ^s by default. And whether or
no such observations as these, that are so very conclusive, as you see, may
stand for better law and logic in the churches than in the empire?

But if of equal force in each constitution, then* whether this is not the way
to inter and bury the glory of the empire and churches in their own rubbish,
whilst we incapa^itate the heroes of both by an argument a minoriad majus, viz.
by infering the insufficiency of the great and wise because of the mean and
base mingled in the same communities.

II. PETITION.
THAT you will put such an estimation and value on your church liberties as the
English do on their civil. And this is but a very reasonable request if you
consider the differing treasuries under custody, viz. Immortal souls on the one
hand, and outward fortunes on the other.

Many of you know the stories (possibly better than I can recite them) which
tell us, what ship loads of blood and treasure those civil things have cost the
English world; and how near they still lie to Englishmens hearts. And many of
you being immediate successors, cannot but be very sensible what these
New England liberties have cost your progenitors, some of them having buried
their estates, and all of them their bones in these foundations, and left you
now in possession, that if you should put contempt upon their adventures, their
courage, wisdom, zeal and self denial, by under-prizing these inestimable
infranchizments, and slight them as though they were now to be indorst by your
own hands with Hezekiah's Nehustan, God may then put you to learn the worth of
them at that school where they learnt it; and I am sure you will pay dear for
your tutoring if it comes to that.

III. PETITION.
Honor and oblige your pastors and public ministry:
IT is certain they are very great articles in the reasons of your well being,
Mat. 5.13, 14. They make all things more savory, and to go down with a better
relish; yea, they alter tradgedies and comedies into a more grateful
entertainment. What is all the glory in the world without the gospel purely
dispensed, and its most refined influence? These are the lights of the world,
and carry the lanthorn aloft in the dark night of your travels, through the
tempestuous ocean of a miserable life, to direct all to a safe landing at last.

Indeed, I must acknowledge, your ministers, when sound and faithful, are to be
accounted and esteemed amongst the best of your friends, though when corrupt and
prejudiced, the worst of your enemies.

I think the devil himself, and the world of his accomplices, cannot do you the
damage, they may upon a revolt. That I beg you will be curious and careful of
your interest embarked and deposited there.

And without making any scruple (in the main) they are your hearty and faithful
servants. Endeavor to increase their love, and let them see and feel you have a
double honor for them for their works sake. And if after all your repeated
grace and goodness, they will desert and betray you, they shall then incur a
double guilt both by transgressing the laws of gratitude to you and of loyalty
to their great Lord.

And I assure you, Sirs, I should upon such terms be very loath to share in
their triumphs, though their gains should be seemingly great, and their signals
and shouts equal with the Caesar's of the world in their going off.

IV. PETITION.
Furnish your churches with ruling elders!
THE nature of the office is not only agreeable with your frame, and exacted by
your principles, but indeed carries safety and protection in it to your
liberties: such trustees are not liable to corruption as other officers, in
that you do as it were transmit and entrust them with your very principles of
self-preservation, which are of that nature as never to alter their sentiments,
unless it be in the dissolution of the subject, when all falls together. The
office seems a creation, where your just and regular sympathies, and
antipathies center by the laws of nature; that what you love, they love; what
you hate, they hate; and being ex officio, of the standing watch and guard,
they will peculiarly personate your selves upon every notable crisis, and
naturally caring for your affairs, will, like wakeful sentinels curiously and
with courage guard your liberties. Let churches which are numerous and fuller
of eminent gifts, lead the way, and then excite and provoke their sister
churches to such love and good works for the advance of the common cause. There
are without doubt, in these churches, many private members, worthy persons,
suitably qualified for this office, who (like some edge-tools heedle^ly left to
rust out in oblivion) lie hid, yet, when found, and put to use, will prove
themselves truly eminent.

Let Christ's churches seek amongst their neglected hoards; for they are,
without doubt, church by church, far richer than they make for; there are,
indeed, complaints of great poverty, and of a dearth and scarcity of suitable
men. But I presume it is done with great injustice; and complaints of this
nature in these churches, are but the complaints of servants that are full fed;
and relieve no case by complaining, but rather reflect dishonor upon their
good master, who has bought all and bestowed enough, and also incur blame to
themselves for not improving those talents for the advance of his exchequer,
which they themselves have wrapped up in a napkin, and that in this case, by too
much symbolizing with the carnal and politic men of the world, who to humor
some by-ends (under the masquerade of indigent persons) make themselves very
poor, though God has given them great riches, Prove. 13.7. This is a true (though a
serious affirmation) that in our constitution and principles, there is as plain
a precept, if not as great a reason for this officer, as for any other in our
churches; and yet, as to matter of fact, we find it to be rara avis in terra,
like a black swan in the meadow; and though the whole species is not quite rooted
out, yet it is grown very rare to find one individual.

Now the fault must be some-where, and I am satisfied, our poverty is least to
blame.

That some body or another must needs be culpable, on the account of this great
omission, may I without offense issue out, search and inquest, to know who is
to blame, upon this failure, whether brethren, or public officers, or whole
churches?

I. Private Brethren.
MAY not the blame be laid in some cases and in some churches, upon some very
capable christian gentlemen, who though not encumbered (for the public) with any
other incoherent service, yet are possibly too shy of this trust, when offered
to them? It must needs be acknowledged, the office is almost perfectly a piece
of mortification and self denial; there is no provision in it to feed ambition,
or feast any other lust; all is full of watching and painfulness, and the
reward and wages quite out of sight. But however in such examples, whether
persons so qualified, and so called, ought not to comply, or themselves bear
the blame.

The terms of Christ's kingdom are very strict and rigorous, for the honor of
his own crown, when our just titles are competitors, and he lays the conditions
of our obedience, upon a great forfeiture, if we don't submit, when called to
duty, Mat^h. 10.37, 39.

2. Public Officers.
MAY not the ordained officers in some cases and in some churches, be taxed or
blamed, for this great omission? Such as out of timidity and distrust, jealous
ruling elders, least they should instead of colleagues prove corrivals in the
exercise of their own trust and authority, for being men not of such deep
learning, yet may prove so fortifyed with friends, and so popular, as that they
may be capable to overtop men of greater learning, and wiser principles of
conduct in all administrations.

Now if any of Christ's churches, are vacated of this officer, by such
jealousies as these, or of the like nature, can the officers be without blame?
and if so, then whether the first born son may not justly imprecate future
barrenness on his own mothers womb, for fear lest he should be supplanted of
the inheritance, by the next son or brother born of the same ventre?

2dly, Such officers as may plead their own particular conscience and
persuasion, against the office, as being of a doubtful original, or of an
uncertain institution, and therefore make bold to over rule our plain precept
for it and the church submits: whether is there not a great blame here?

It seems apparent by all rules of order and government, that this is too too
sovereign in the one, and too servile and careless in the other.

For that no officer's particular conscience must be a rule to govern any
particular church, contrary to the churches own law, or rule of establishment;
For if it be, then the churches must have as many distinct charters, and
differing books of canons, as their pastors have differing consciences; which
is a plain inlet to all sorts of confusion.

3dly, Such officers who plead the custom of the churches, and so make the
illegal omissions of some, a sanctuary for the same fault in others; but
whether this plea from custom will hold officers exempt from blame, when
weighed in a just balance? Custom is justly allowed a great conqueror in the
world, it subdues whole kingdoms to its empire, and all men submit and adhere
to its demands and dictates, as to an oracle? But then it must be custom that
is honorable, laudable, and uninterrupted, otherways a custom which continually
crosses a plain precept is very culpable, and contracts a long series of guilt,
and may expect to be pursued with a tedious train of sad consequences, although
it should with much presumption wipe its mouth and say, I am innocent.
Therefore custom is no plea in this case, but rather renders all who depend
upon it, to be reduced to a desperate posture in their thoughts and arguments;
for though there is a customary omission, that has prevailed in the churches to
a sad degree, as to this office, yet the omission has all along crossed a
precept, and has been confronted by the custom of other churches in the land,
who have attended their duty; so that those churches who have maintained the
practice, have kept lawful possession of the right, and the title being matter
of record, and founded in law, there remains no shelter here from custom for
delinquents.

4. Whether those officers are justifiable, who honor the office, yet do
honestly and uprightly think that the narrow extent of territory may (as to
many churches) serve as a supersede as to the office? For what need of so many
great commissions in so small bodies? But whether small churches have not great
work belonging to them, sufficient to improve a full complete set of officers,
and possibly, all little enough to do the work well, if the nature and extent
of it be rightly considered and faithfully managed; for who is sufficient for
these things?

3. The churches.
WHETHER the churches, as incorporate bodies, are free from blame when they
don't regularly endeavor to complete themselves in all offices, and prosecute
their claim to this with effect?

The ruling elders are the churches privilege, and a very great right, on which
their well-being and stability does much depend, and the great omission in the
country has probably brought things to that posture of fickleness as we now
find them at? Then whether the churches can be exempt from blame, when they
suffer such vacancies to continue, when it is in the power of their hands to
remedy it?

Here indeed is a great question commencing, viz.

Question, Whether any church can possibly, and according to rules of order,
proceed to elect ruling elders, when other of their officers in actual rule and
trust, shall refuse to call and guide the church in the choice?

I shall indeed transgress the bounds of my own intentions, and the civility of
an epistle, if I should now undertake a full and complete answer to this
question.

I shall therefore at present only just indix the principal titles or heads for
answer, by pointing briefly at the duties of officers, and the prerogatives of
the churches in the case.

1. It is most apparent through the whole ministry of the world (unless in
absolute monarchies) that it is the duty of all public officers, to minister
according to the plain rules of the public state, and not by their own fancy or
wills, and so in this case, the chief ruling officer or officers (then in
being) in point of conduct are obliged to lead the church in their opperation,
according to the churches plain and settled principles, and not reluct because
their own persuasions do otherwise incline them; It is now plainly too late for
any officer to pretend conscience against established rules: This objection
should have been made before they had taken office. But now it is out of
season, for they were elected and ordained to govern the church, not by their
own thoughts, as the rule, but by the churches canon, and that by their own
consent, when they took office. And moreover, this is most evident, that if
such powers which belong to the inside of men's being, viz. their hearts,
fancies, notions, judgments, imaginations or consciences, call them by what
names you please, or let the owners freely fix the titles (the odds is not
great,) now if these are to be the rule of churches, then pastors and ruling
officers have (in their degree) as absolute a dominion over the churches, as
the great Turk has over his bashaws, and other vassals.

But I hope none here will claim this dominion. And if not, then let pastors
and teachers do their duty in point of conduct (if the churches are not remiss
in theirs) and this great vacancy may be soon supplied, and there is also a
relief for officers, if their just prerogatives are any ways touched by the
traverse.

2dly, To confine the discourse to this present example, and t^ shorten terms,
for brevity's sake, it must be granted that any particular officer sensible of
his duty, that shall undertake to gratify and lead the church, in the election
and choice, etc. This makes the case very easy in point of conduct; yea, though
other officers in the same church, if there be any, should either oppose or not
act. For that any one ruling officer in a church, where they may be many of the
same nature, he himself is vertually the whole college of officers in any
office-act that he performs without them. As in civil affairs, a particular
executor so far sustains the whole executorship, as that he can make a valid
act in that ministry, though many others are joined with him in the same
testament, and yet don't nor will not act with him, in this or that affair, though
confirmed in their trust; which principal is founded in the nature of a joint
tenancy in general, and in a joint trust in particular, held by many equals.

3dly, The case is very difficult when the standing officers join as one man,
and will not guide the church in these elections referred to, etc. And I must
needs say, I fear here has been the great bar to this office.

We may from interest, as well as duty, rationally suppose the inclinations of
the churches, and the desires of many of them have been made known by repeated
and honorable solicitations therein, saying to Archipus, fulfill thy ministry,
Cor. 4.17. And we may also affirm, the principle is plain, the office is
acknowledged, at home and abroad to be of divine original. But however this is
certain it is a formal establishment by these churches, and not now to be
disputed. Yet the officers pretend, they see no reason to give way to the
churches desire or demands, neither will they conduct in this case, though
their duty does oblige, that so the church may be completed in its officers;
no! they are pleased by acts of a superintending power, to lock the church
door, and turn the key against this office, and no pleas or persuasions can
alter their resolutions. But hereby the officers do plainly abdicate their
office, by changing the acts of a limited trust, bounded by precept into what
is merely arbitrary; so in a degree, they break up the relation between
themselves and the church, and by such an essential error, so contrary to the
churches charter, and their own commission they forfeit all at once, though
lenity and mercy may favor them with a long life; yet in the eye of justice
they are dead men, if not in nature, yet in law, and upon their OBSTINACY may
justly be DEGRADED, therefore in such a case when it comes to that extremity,
the churches may and ought to call in council, and proceed in their work and
duty for their own well being, after the manner of an inorganic church,
platform, chap. 10. And this I need not stand to describe, our platform, the
laws of the province, and the practice of the churches in other cases, and
vacancies will do it.

Then whether these congregational churches through these provinces may not
justly reflect blame upon themselves, for too supine negligent a frame of
spirit, toward so great an interest, and so noble an office, seeing they have
such a share in government, and can fairly resque themselves and their own
rights, by the power and principles of their own essence, when their other
officers neglect duty?

V. PETITION.
THAT you will please to revise the study, (and in order to it) a new
impression of your platform.

It is very usual for many gentlemen in your country, landed men, and men of
estates, every men to keep his law-book by him, as his bible, the bible for the
solace of his mind, and the law-book for the safety of his estate, that upon
any defamation of title, or other encroachments, when his lands and properties
are in hazard, he may know whither to repair for his direction, and how to make
his defense. And so methinks it should be with the members of the churches as
to their stated rights by their cannon law? That there should be a kind of a
penalty (if the hazard in such a defect be not punishment en^ugh) on such
delinquents, as live members of Christ's visible kingdom here, and yet live
without the platform, the ecclesiastical political charter of these churches.

I must needs say, and I wish I could whisper it so low, that the echo might
never rebound to Gath or Askelon, and yet be distinctly heard through these
churches, That I fear the impression of the platform is almost extinct, if not
quite worn out in the country. And that as it was said in the day of battle,
under king Saul, that there was neither sword nor spear found in the hand of
any of the people; ^o here, though your bible, which is the sword of the
spirit, is in every man's hand, yet possibly, this spear or necessary weapon, in
the defense of your gospel liberties, your platform is scarce to be found in
the hands of one in a thousand, through all the host of Israel. I do therefore
advise my country* and these churches, to furnish yourselves, and that you
would encourage the printers in this design, and they can soon recruit you.

My honorable and dearest friends,

If we are push't on to battle, and our weapons are then in the oar, we may
justly suspect we shall be but too easy and cheap a conquest for assailants.
Therefore furnish yourselves in good time with this piece of artillery, that
you may be well fixed and equipt for service.

Don't you hear from the top of yonder proud and lofty mountain, the enemies
trumpets, and their drums beating a preparative? Therefore let all the good
soldiers of Christ be complete in this and all other parts of their armor, and
at an hours warning, unless you reckon your treasure not worth defending.

VI. PETITION.
WHETHER it may not be very proper for these churches, after so long an
interval, to admit of this address, viz. That they will please to meet or
represent themselves in a provincial or general synod?

That if there be any thing in our church government which may want emendation,
that (as they say) it may be done, Secundum usum sarum, or regularly and
according to the manner of these churches; or if there be any new forms,
needful to be inserted, or whatever else may in a way of order be thought
necessary for the advance of religion, it may be fairly decided for the service
of the whole. And also, if it then shall be judged prudent, our principles for
the seizing, and trial of the more ungovernable, and stouter sort of
delinquents and offenders, may be revised, and somewhat enlarged, that so it
may be made very easy for all particular churches, to make out processes
against them, and that they shall find the churches fetters will hold them.
That forever after all small juncto's of men, or particular persons, member or
members of the churches (let their character be what it may be) shall be
deterred from being so hardy and bold as to divulge their pernicious doctrines,
and seditious sentiments, with such presumption, and such hopes of impunity, as
some of late have done.

Thus, Right honorable and beloved in Christ!

I have n^thing more at present to add by way of petition to your selves, but
only that you will please to take this poor piece of service in good part.

But though it be but as a little goats hair, or a badgers hide or two, or skins
not well dressed, yet it may be some way useful for the tabernacle. And though it
will not shelter against storms of great shot, it may serve to cover and shield
from some slighter arrows.

But let it be what it may be in every other man's opinion, it is in mine (as to
design and intention) my love, honor and loyalty to my God, pri^e and country,
for whose service I was born, according to the received maxim, Non soli nobis
nati sumus. And here I pay one part of my debt to those great creditors in such
species as I have; therefore I hope for pardon from, and acceptance with all of
them.

My conclusion is with devoutest application to the supreme throne, that the
almighty God will bless the great ANNE, our wise and protestant princess;
New-England's royal nurse, and great benefactress, that she may live to see all
the protestant churches through her vast empire, more virtuous and more united,
and as they all meet and center with their differing persuasions, by their love
and loyal actions in her person and government. Let her most excellent majesty,
next to Christ, continue absolute in her empire over their hearts, and as she
has made such a complete conquest, of all differing parties within her
dominions, by her wise and virtuous measures, and thereby won all the fame of
rule and soverignity from her royal progenitors, who could never so charm such
mighty nations. Let her reign continue the exactest model for all courts in
Europe! and when she is full repleat and satisfied with length of days, and the
most glorious effects of a prosperous reign, let God favor her lasting and
flourishing name with an unperishing monument, on which justice shall become
obliged to inscribe this m^mento, viz. "Here lies in funeral pomp, the princess
of the earth, the storehouse of all enobling and princely perfections," That
if all the monarchs on earth, have lost their excellencies, their arcana
imperii, their state, wisdom, skill in government, and all sorts of heavenly,
princely and heroic virtues; here they may be found lodged in this one
unparralled MONARCH.

Let God bless his excellency, and preserve the government of the province, and
let it continue always in the hands of natives, and let our country,
successively breed men of such merit, as shall always enamor imperial majesty,
with their loyalty and worth; and that their true deserts may ever purchase for
them such a high station, whilst they shall plainly outweigh their rivals in
the royal balance. And let them be always patrons to these churches, as an
acknowledgement to the crown of heaven, as the settled condition of tenure they
hold by, and possess such royal demesness.

Let the great and good God of heaven and earth bless these churches, the
beauty of the wilderness, and continue so noble a ministry as they now have,
and prosper and requite their faithful and unwearied labors, and let him
continue the succession, and furnish the next set with greater accomplishments
and virtue.

Let Christ Jesus, the great sheppard, who has the care of the flocks in the
wilderness, preserve inviolable, the inestimable privileges and liberties of
these churches; and let them entail them, with all other civil and sacred
rights and immunities which they now enjoy, as a sure estate of inheritance, to
the last posterity of this people. And let their children, and childrens
children remain from generation to generation, until the world be done with;
and the sun has left shining.

So prays, the meanest of all your servants in CHRIST,

JOHN WISE.

AN ANSWER To the foregoing PROPOSALS.
THE nobleness of parentage, by the laws of honor, entails on posterity, (with
other rights) a protection from all incivilities, but not from the austerer
demands of justice, when that is affronted and violated. Justice keeping the
golden rule, Quo dat suum Cuique) observes no other distinctions, than what it
first makes in its distributions amongst the rich and poor, the noble and
ignoble, it is no respecter of persons; for that it is superior to all men, and
sits as a veiled empress, holding the balance to weigh out equal to each one
according to the merits of the cause, and sees no man.

There being now under cognizance, such as are of honorable families, and yet
arrested and brought by due course of law to answer for high crimes, it must
not be supposed rudeness in manners, though they be somewhat freely and rusty
handled whilst the prosecution is held agreeable with the impeachment and rule
of justice. And as for myself, who am under commission from authority, to
appear in defense of my country's sacred liberties: I can in my own
justification, affirm, that I have no dishonorable inclinations, but carry a
just mind, so as to condemn no man or thing, but upon plain evidence, nor to
aggravate any plea beyond its just bounds.

Therefore though in the following pages there may be discerned, a great liberty
in argument, with a mixture of satyrs, as though none but my inferiors were
involved in the charge; yet ascribe it unto my love and veneration for so great
an interest as I appear for, and not to any base intent of sinking the honor,
or darkening the luster of men. I neither desire nor design to hurt any man,
no, not so much as an hair on his head, but I solely aim at ERROR, that is the
butt I level for.

Thus having by this brief, but sincere apology, secured the honor of my
intentions, if I am worthy of belief; I shall no longer interrupt the process,
but shall nextly, draw up the indictment, upon which these proposals are to
pass, and abide a trial.

And this I shall do in a form borrowed from sir Edward Cook, the King's
attorney, in the arraignment of sir Walter Rawleigh, in these words.

HERE is mischief, mischief in Summo Gradu; yea, exorbitant mischief. This is
the charge I offer to make good against the proposals, at the bar of common
reason; in order thereto, I shall proceed, and expect to produce sufficient
evidence under two heads.

1st. By a few preliminary queries.

2dly, By a more critical examination of the proposals themselves.

1. As introductory, and for the bringing in further evidence against the
criminal proposals, now upon their trial, I offer these following queries.

1st Query.
Whether the churches in New England are not fairly in possession of a form of
government, by which they are distinguished from most of the reformed churches
in the world, more than by their grace? and if so, (which no man that knows
them will deny,) then it must be some superior power, or their own voluntary
act, regularly obtained, that must out or dispossess them. Did an equal claimer
appear, yet long and quiet possession holds against a writ of ejectment, a very
strong plea in the sessions, both of reason and law; according to that
acknowledged maxim, in Aequali Jure, melior est Conditi^ Possidentis, when two
plead an equal right, he is in the best condition who is in possession; then it
can be no less than a very indisputable right, and duly prosecuted with effect,
that can dispossess these churches of their government.

2d Query.
Whether length of time has discovered any essential error in the government of
these churches?

And 1st, it has, or 2dly, it has not.

1. If time has made any such discovery, yet the proposals have not been so
fair as to detect it, or describe wherein, or in what respect. The great
service these churches, with their government, have done, in subduing and
beautifying a wilderness, bespeaks some considerable respect from all men, who
value wisdom or piety; that it must needs seem a harsh piece of justice,
without any formal trial for them to be driven from plenty, and sent to the
doors of their own tenants, to beg for a booty, out of that estate which was
once their own at least, by a seisin in fact, if not in law; for that the
proposals kill, and take possession with far less ceremony or legal
formalities, than Ahab did, in gaining the right of Naboth's vineyard; when as
if there is any essential error in their frame or constitution, and that they
have either ignorantly or treacherously assumed any peculiar prerogative which
belongs to Christ's throne, as king, that was never their due to possess (and
so being considered as usurpers, are dead in law) yet notwithstanding it would
not have offended against the laws of gratitude in sending them to their
graves, to have put some more marks of honor upon them, by certain solemn and
usual forms of trial in the prologue of their dissolution; for they have been
certainly great and good servants to the public, that if they deserve to die,
they ought to die under all the marks of honor which justice can allow of, at
the least a grand sessions, a jury, and liberty to make plea in their own
defense, and under the influence of royal council, should have been granted;
unless they may be treated as conquerors, serve unfortunate pirates, who when
taken, are without form of law hung up at the yards-arm.

2dly. But if no such discovery can be made, whether it is a wise and just
thing for men to alter their government? The churches of Christ in this
country, have been in possession of this form of government; and it has been
established by certain legal and orderly familiarities, and universal consent;
and has continued upwards of threescore years. And as the poet says, Pervarios
Casus Per Tot Discrimina Rarum Tendimus in Caelum, They have passed various
changes, and great temptations, and yet to this day by this besome of
discipline have been kept as clean swept, as any churches of God in the world;
and any such embroilments as have lately happened in the churches, have been
more the folly of administrators, in not keeping to the rules of government,
than from any defect in the constitution. Then what reason have we to meditate
a change? No, certainly; it will be more divine and agreeable with the law of
our religious gratitude, to join with the rev. Mr. Nicholas Noise, in his
doxology, or use of triumph and praise for the great mercies he recites in his
election sermon, p. 79. says he, Thanks be to God and the king! our houses and
our lands are our own, without every man's being at the cost of a charter; and
yet we have the liberty of our religion, and the free exercise of it, without
subscribing new articles of faith, worship or discipline; which is a great
favor of God, if we have wisdom and grace to improve it rightly.

Query, Whether the right improvement will be to alter the scheme of our
government or discipline, seeing no body else will do it for us? No surely! But
it will be more agreeable, with both our policy and duty, to follow the good
advice Mr. Cotton Mather leaves us in his golden-street, page 40, in these
words, "Where we have a platform left us that is according to the word of our
gracious Lord, and the pattern in the mount; we shall be great enemies to
ourselves, if we do not keep to it."

3d Query.
Whether it be not great boldness for any particular gentlemen to invade, null,
alter or weaken so great a right and property, as is the government of these
churches, without their consent?

Government is the greatest blessing in the world, of a worldly nature; it is
felony, cheaper by far to the loosers, to plunder men of their estate and
wealth, nay, and of their lives too, then to dispoil them of government; for by
the latter, you harrass and worry them in the world, with plagues and miseries,
worse than death itself, that the basest is far better than no government; a
churlish tyranny, is better than an insolent anarchy, where men are without
law, and all hail fellows, not well but badly met. And for men to alter or swap
government, without all interested parties are agreed, is a very bold intrusion.

That, yea, that government which is in any good measure formed, and does agree
with the natural freedom of human beings, and is adjusted by the laws of wisdom
and honor, and plainly, and fairly established; is too much of God in the
world, and too great a royalty belonging to men, for any to play the knave or
fool with.

And when a government has done all things in the main well, and has reapt in
a great stock of blessings, now to shuffle it out of place, is fickleness, and
not policy; for a sensible series of blessings will always atone for some
seeming defects in a constitution. Therefore when all Israel met at Ramah, in a
general assembly, to alter their consular government, which had been crowned
with signal blessings, they got ill will in the court of heaven for it, 1 Samuel
8.7.

The great success which attended, signified it to be a theocracy, and that it
had more of God, than of man in it, which is an argument, (Caeteris Paribus)
for all other governments, and so for this of New England churches, which has
been honored with great success, and many blessings from its beginnings to this
day; therefore well does Mr. Cotton Mather describe the subject and advise his
country, in his late sermon on the street of gold, says he, (in a remarkable
pa^sage out of a letter) page 40. "Here is a temple built more glorious than
Solomon's, not of dead stones, but living saints; which may tempt the greatest
queen of Sheba to come and see, and allure even kings from far to come and
worship in. Therefore, as to their government, (says he) sirs, do not spoil it,
oh, destroy it not! there is a blessing in it."

4th Query.
Whether by comparing the proposals and our platform, we don't find them
repugnant, and so contradictory, that if one stands, the other must fall?

And that we can as soon reconcile a republic with an absolute monarchy, or the
best sort of free states with a politic tyranny, or at least with an oligarchy,
where the chief end of government is the enriching and greatness of its
ministers; and this we may do, when we have compounded these proposals and our
platform, so that as that faithful and noble friend to these churches, the
famous and learned Increase Mather, D. D. in an appendix to his dissertation
concern^ng the sacrament, laments several plots conspiring the dissolution of
these famous churches, in these words, viz. The bold attempts which have of
late been made to unh^nge and overset the congregational churches in
New England, by decrying their holy covenant, etc. We may here justly highten
the complaint, and cry, Pro Dolor! hinc Lachrimae! Alas, alas! here is the
grief! hence flows our tears! for here is a bold attempt indeed, not only to
despoil the house of some particular piece of furniture, but to throw it quite
out at windows; not only to take away some of its ornaments, but to blow up its
foundations. For these bold attempts which that WORTHY complains of, seem now
to be grown very rampant; for here is in view a combination of workmen
disaffected with the fashion of the old fabric, who (in pretense) design to
repair, but in reality to ruin the whole frame. They appear (indeed) something
in the manner of Nehemiah's men on the wall, Neh. 4.17. As it were with a
trowel in one hand, with which they now and then put on a little untempered
mortar, to plaster over a think or two, where the old work by length of time,
is somewhat weather-beaten, to pacify the jealousies of the inhabitants, that
they may think these builders (surely) are ^ending, and not ma^ing their old
comfortable habitation. But in reality, they have in the other hand a
formidable maul, not as Nehemiah's weapon to defend, but to break down ^he
building; for they are all hands at work banging the platform in pieces, upon
which the old fabric is built. That may not the churches, and all their lovers
sigh and complain, as once Cicero did, O Tempora! O Mores! who would have
expected such times and such things from such men?

5th Query.
We must needs then enquire, from whence the proposals derive their force? Who
gives them letters of attorney, or commission to sue these churches (by a Quo
Warranto) out of possession of their government? To me (I must needs confess)
the attempt is very daring; and I see no way of reconciliation, unless the
scheme drawn in the proposals can be fairly sheltered under some more authentic
and specious umbrage, than the bold dictates, though of the wisest of men, when
they are pleased to set themselves up oracles for their country.

So I come,

2. To the more critical examination of the proposals themselves, which I shall
attend,

1. More generally.

2. More particularly, by taking a survey of them in their distinct sections.

1. More generally, by enquiring into their original, and nature.

1. By making a more exact inquest and search after their original; and in this
debate, they forfeit their essence, unless they can derive their pedigree,
either,

1. From Gods immediate inspiration. Or,

2. From ancient revelation. Or,

3. From right reason, which is a ray of divine wisdom, instampt upon human
nature. Or,

4. From the platform of the churches, which is a system of government,
collected by our ancestors out of several fountains, and principally from the
scriptures. Now in pursuing this distribution, I shall diligently enquire,
whether we can hear of their original under any of these heads.

1. As to immediate inspiration, I must needs presume, these gentlemen will not
dare to assert, that they are sent immediately from God with this message to
the churches; they are too good and wise to pretend (with enthusiasts) to
immediate vision, or a spirit of prophecy; both the matter and manner of their
writing, sufficiently convinces, that these proposals are their own sentiments;
they durst not put, a, Thus says the Lord upon them; such an inscription is
too heavenly and royal for such coin; for both they and we know, according to,
Deuteronomy. 30.12. It is not in heaven, that thou should say, who shall go up for
us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may know it, and do it? There is no
need to send messengers to that court, to learn by immediate and extraordinary
information, either laws of our duty or interest; for that God has made all
things sufficiently plain, by this time of day, either by scripture or reason,
for the conduct and government of his churches; yea, of the subjects of his
universal intellectual monarchy in this world.

2. As to ancient revelation; holy scripture, that best, though not the biggest
of books, is the saint's library, and the clergy-man's pandects, whence he
takes the rules for the management of his trust: so that it is very amusing,
that the bible should be forgotten in drawing up such schemes as these; as,
though the usuage of the pope's conclave, which turns the bible out of doors for
a wrangler, and gives the chief seat to tradition, etc. were here in fashion.
Indeed, I cannot but esteem them very unfortunate proposals, to be turned so
naked into the world, as not to have the least tincture of scripture to guard
them from contempt; no, not so much as a citation, that might admit of so much
as a strained consequence in their defense. And so, though less profane, yet
they are also less politic than the most desperate of heretics, who always
bring their errors on the stage, guarded with scriptures, and craftily
endeavor to make their citations look with such an aspect, as though they were
encampt on their side. But here we have nothing for our faith to lean on, but
so many austerer Ipse Dixits, as bitter pills of death for the churches to
swallow, without any of the confection of heaven, or the sweet manna sprinkled
upon them; or else only so many naked human presumptions, as arrows or bolts,
too rashly shot out against the sides of our churches, and no word of scripture
to tip or feather them. Nay, it is very memorable, and I account fatal, and to
be observed that God, that sacred title of the almighty, with which the holy
scripture does so abound, is not once named (as I can find) in the whole
treatise; as though the most sacred titles, as well as sections of that heavenly
book, would move fears, and irritate jealousies, rather than pour down solace
and comfort upon this undertaking. Therefore, in a word, the whole bible is
thrown by as a sealed parchment, or as one that never prophecies good to such
adventurers. Therefore these proposals being apprehended as sea rovers, and
indicted upon the statute of piracy; and upon examination being found without
the prince of princes colors, and yet doing great mischief, in assaulting and
wounding his churches and lawful subjects, on their honest occasion; being
bound on a voyage to their own country, they can no ways in justice escape, but
must pass under the sentence, and endure the pains of death, for they are taken
fighting without commission.

3. As to REASON.

Recta Ratio, Right reason, that great oracle in human affairs, is the soul of
man so formed and endowed by creation, with a certain sagacity or acumen (in
many particular examples, sharpened by the constitution of nature by grace and
study) whereby man's intellect is enabled to take up ( pro Medulo, or in a
degree) the true idea or preception things agreeable with, and according to
their natures. So that if we bring these proposals under examination by the
laws of reason; we must enquire, whether they are agreeable with the nature and
constitution of the churches, if they fully harmonize with their principles of
essence, then they may be enroled for canons; but if they jar, and are plainly
repugnant, we may then lawfully censure them, and pronounce them irrational.
Whether these churches are constituted by scripture or reason, yea or no, that
is not our question, but being of such a frame or constitution, as they now
are, and always have been; all who pretend to support and preserve them, and
yet take such measures, as will utterly overthrow and dissolve them, such
repairers have apparently deserted the dictates and government of right reason.

And here we may collect an induction of some few hints of certain particulars
for evidence; the platform asserts a classes to be no gospel form of church
order; the proposals say it is; or they abuse our credulity. The proposals
orders the association to have the first cognizance of church cases; our
government says, no, it belongs to the jurisdiction of particular churches. The
proposals gives power to the association to have the first cognizance of church
cases; our government says, no, it belongs to the jurisdiction of particular
churches. The proposals gives power to the association to limit elections, and
to direct them; but our government says, no, it will not consent; the election
of officers is the prerogative of the churches, and they wont, as yet, part
with it, etc. So that when we can by the rules of grammar, resolve yea and nay,
to be the same voice and word, then you may reconcile the proposals and the
platform; that certainly whatever there be of religion, the method is
apparently disagreable with common reason.

4. As to the PLATFORM.

I shall represent it by a kind of a short prosopopa, thus, viz. enquiring
whether the proposals are reduced from this fountain, the platform with all its
chapters, and with one joint consent, as plain as the tongue in their heads can
utter it, say, that ever since it possessed the government, so much as dreamed of
them. It may say with destruction, (Job 28.22.) we have heard of the fame of
these things, with our ears, but never imagined so much as a seminal virtue in
our own being, for their procreation; but rather starts with the news of their
approach, out of fear of its own dissolution, from their repugnant and
formidable nature. Therefore as in a grievous fright from surprise, cries out
with Athaliah, treason, treason! And begs that zeal and conscience, those two
sollicitors for the crown, will at this grand court of Oyer and Terminer,
implead and prosecute them as traitors to the prince of peace, and felons to
these churches, Christ's loyal subjects. So I come,

2. To enquire into the nature of these proposals, by surveying their
composition and properties.

1st. Their composition.

They seem a conjunction of almost all the church governments in the world, and
the least part is congregational. Indeed, at the first cast of the eye, the
scheme seems to be the spectre or ghost of presbyterianism, or the government
of the church by classes; yet if I don't mistake, in intention there is
something considerable of prelacy in it, only the distinct courts of bishops,
with the steeples of the churches, tithes, surplice, and other ornaments, do
not show themselves so visible, as to be discerned at the first look, yet with
a micrescope you may easily discern them really to be there in Embrio, et in
Rerum natura; For this is a known maxim, Quod necessario Subintellegitur non
deest. What is necessarily understood, or lies hid in the intention of a
design, is really there, by a just interpretation; therefore these proposals
which dare revolt so far at a step, as these have done, must needs understand
no less in their aim, than an enobling government for clergymen, which our
princes and parliaments have adorned the churches with. This seems rational,
that those which never stick at robbing the churches of such an immense
treasure, as the proposals carry off, will never stand. Shall we! shall we! at
the offer of a bishopric, which is a barrony with all its rights, and royal
appurtenances.

There is also something in it, which smells very strong of the infallible
chair, to assume the power of making rules, to engross all principles of
process, the right of election, the last appeal, the negative vote, and all
superintending power in matters ecclesiastic, as the prerogatives of clergymen,
distinct from all other estates, and ministers in government; or thus, for the
clergy to monopolize both the legislative and executive part of canon law, is
but a few steps from the chair of universal pestilence, and by the ladder here
set up, clergymen may, if they please, clamber thus high; for when they are
invested with what is in these proposals provided and intended for them, who
then can control them, but the Almighty himself? as was said of those daring
men, Genesis 11.6. And now nothing will be restrained from them, which they have
imagined to do; for who can now withold from them infallibility, or stop the
direful and definitive sentence? Who can limit their power, or shorten their
arm in their executions? Their bulls can now upon any affront, bellow and
thunder out a thousand terrible curses, and the poor affrighted and invassal'd
laity, both princes and subjects (being here as in the grave, put under one and
the same to pick) must fo^feit their salvation, if they don't tamely submit,
and obediently become their executioners; for that it is now evident, that all
power is if not really given, yet formerly stolen, and in intent bequeathed to
them.

2 dly. Their properties.

1st Property, is Disorder. Order is both the beauty and safety of the
universe; take away the decorum whereby the whole hangs together, the great
frame of nature is unpin'd, and drops piece from piece; and out of a beautiful
structure we have a chaos. These proposals are therefore very mischievous, if
not in matter, yet in the manner of production; they are full of disorder,
being things born out of due time, their conception is without countenance,
from the rule of order. Indeed, there is no statute to be found that will
justify the first coitus of the parents, neither will any allow their social
life; that the birth must bear the attender, of being both begotten and born,
out of lawful wedlock, and so in point of honor fall under the censure of the
Levitical law, and must be kept back from promotion; for, Deuteronomy. 32. "A bastard
shall not enter into the congregation."

That to pass all other remarks, if we are under mistake in the assertions; I
then demand and enquire, where is that lawful authority, which published legal
banes, with the consent of all the interested persons, and the regular
consummation of the match? If any rule can be found to shelter and honor the
conception and birth, let it be produced; and it escaping other felonies with
life, this scandal shall be taken off, but otherwise it must remain as a bar to
the tenth generation.

The 2d Property, is Usurpation. The proposals apparently usurp the church
prerogatives. It has been asserted, and it is true, these churches have been
settled upon the platform of their own government for upwards of sixty years;
they have often revised and re-inforc'd the establishment, both as the
principles of their consociation and union in general, and the form of
government, for every church in particular. -- Then for these proposals without
license to assume a legislation, and form a government so repugnant to their
own, can be no less than usurping a dominion over them, contrary to the rule,
1. Pet. 5.3. neither as being lords over God's heritage. Lesser acts against
empire, has cost many a bold man his he^d; What! for a particular knot or
juncto of gentlemen to make so bold with a settled government, as to pick out
all the enobling royalties, liberties and enfranchizements in it, and sacrifice
them to their own ambition! It is enough to put mankind into an uproar.

It is fresh in memory, that when some of our English princes (and one would
think, if any men may, they may be allowed to aspire, yet when they) have
presumed on less things than these proposals reach after, in gratifying their
aim at an absolute monarchy, when as they have not dared to lay out with such
freedom, a new form of government, with a wide mouth, gaping to devour the
English liberties, (as these proposals do the churches,) but only with much
secrecy, covin and policy, they have by some more clandestine measures, been
intruding upon the ancient liberties of the English nation. Every one knows
what direful convulsions this has bred in the bowels of the kingdom. And may it
not serve to enliven this plea? To invite all such who are with Plato, owners
of a great genius at inventing new, or modelling old government, to try their
skill in altering the English monarchy, and see how it will be probated. That
is, suppose you should venture to interdict the royal assent, or convert the
present monarch into a duke of Venice, or dissolve the lords in parliament or
(rather in harmony with this scheme) turn the burgesses and knights of the
shires (as a sort of men not fit for politics in parliament) out of doors? And
whether our sovereign, the peerage, or subjects of English liberties would take
it well? And whether christian men may make bolder with the established
government of Christ's churches, than with that which belongs to civil affairs?
In honor to the New England churches, and with veneration for the English
monarchy, I dare assert, that there is in the constitution of our church
government, more of the English civil government in it, and it has a better
complexion to suit the true English spirit, than is in the English church, or
any other, both as to the legislative and executive part of government. Indeed,
considering how things are at home in church and state, I have been sometimes
ready to query, why the nation should be so enamoured with their civil, and yet
so careless and regardless of their gospel liberties, so as to trust their
consciences, with their clergy, more immediately, and yet wont venture their
estates with their learned judges, without the privilege and mediation of
juries; as though they were more careful and wise in securing their estates
than their souls, and valued one far more than the other. But I shall go on
with the comparison.

1. As to the legislation; our New England convocation admits, and the
government does profess the fraternity as necessary to the being of all
synodical assemblies, that as far as legislation spiritual, is left to men, and
as they have a great treasure, viz. their salvation embarked, so they have a
great interest in the management of it; and herein they agree with the English
caution and wisdom, in the modes of civil government of the empire; for the
commons are one great estate in the civil legislation; and they have a great
power in the management of that great trust.

2. As to administration, or the executive part of government, our New England
government grants a juridical power to the frat^^^ity, and makes them proper
judges in all ecclesiastical cases and administrations, on persons cognizable,
or that must pass a trial juridice; which is agreeable with the constitution,
nature and practice of the civil government of the empire; for under the
prosecutions of law, no English subject in life, limb or estate, must be past
upon, but by the judgment of his PEERS; yea, in all pleas of the crown, such
confidence has the government put in the loyalty and discretion of the commons,
that our English juries are stated arbitrators, and umpires between our prince
and his subjects. Yea such a dependence has the whole nation in keeping these
liberties in their own hands, that they reckon the commons in parliament, and
juries in the common wealth, to be the great pillars of English honor and
liberties, and they esteem them as ramparts built by the wisdom of our
ancestors to defend us from tyranny and slavery.

That considering the affinity in these two constitutions, one would be ready
to query, whether the heroic true English spirit is not parent to both? Or
whether they are not equal debtors to the gospel, for their original? The
improvement of this comparison is briefly this; suppose some of the great
ministers of state should venture to sweep away all those civil
enfranchizements which are English-mens birthright, and set up an arbitrary
power, with a prete^^e of doing justice and judgment in the kingdom, by more
(...) and expedite measures, whether they might (...) seized? And whether the
statutes would not be chains strong enough to hold them, as traitors, to a well
formed government, and then laid fast by a mittimus for great usurpers? And
whether the plea will not hold in just proportions, on the other side of the
comparison?

3d Property, Riotous. The nature of a riot may (in part) be thus described; it
is an unlawful assembly of more than three met in one place, to do an unlawful
act, as violently breaking down of walls, and pulling up of hedges, and
wrongfully entering into other men's rights and possessions, and that in affray
and terror of the people. In managing this plea, I shall only desire that the
illegality of the assembly which formed these proposals, with the objects and
things they intend, and the ancient boundaries which they plainly invade,
together with the fearful apprehensions that many good and sober people in the
vicinage have concerning the enterprise, may be critically examined; and I
doubt not but when we obtain the suffrage of this honorable court, it will
determine, the impleaded criminals are of a riotous nature, and so the
indictment will stand more valid against them.

4th Property, Sacriligious, etc.

5th Property, Rebellious.

It grieves me to utter the epithits agreeable with the nature of th^se
proposals; yet they must blame their own nature, but not my justice, if I give
them but their due; for I find them in the breach of a royal statute; yea, I
think of a penal law. This is plain, they take away the liberties, privileges,
discipline and government of these churches, all which are established to them
by the law; and that not only by their own canons, but by the laws of this
province, as by a royal Magna Charta, v^z. in an act for the settlement and
support of the ministers, page 3, in these words, "The respective churches in
the several towns within this province, shall at all times hereafter use,
exercise and enjoy all their privileges and freedoms, respecting divine
worship, church order and discipline; and shall be encouraged in the peaceable
and regular profession and practice thereof."

This act (as one says on the great charter of English liberties)deserves to be
written in letters of gold, and hung up in all our houses of God'^ public
worship, to signali^e the zeal (in presence of God, angels and men) of the
authority of the throne and empire, for the establishing of these churches, and
Christ's interest in them. Now, considering that the power, policy, and grace
of the English crown, should, thus lock up the churches treasure for them, and
set such a centinal, with the flaming sword of justice in its hand, to dread
and awe intruders, it must needs be a very bold action, (if it been't plump
rebellion) to attempt or design such a sequesteration or imbezelment as the
proposals DO.

6th Property, Unfaithfulness, etc.

7th Property, Ingratitude.

For the stewards of great families, when advanced to honor, and a profitable
trust, by the free election and grace of noblemen, when their lords are laid
down to rest, and sleep too securely, or are gone out of town, with this
presumption, that their estate is secure, it being put under the care of loyal
trustees, and thankful servants; now for such trustees and stewards, upon such
opportunities to pocket up, or load away the riches of the family, and set up
for themselves, and leave the proprietors beggars, whom they found in wealth
and plenty, is both infidelity and ingratitude. Now let the churches be plucked
and deplum'd as the proposals in^end, and they are after possessing a fair
estate, become bankrupts: And let those stewards that are guilty, answer for
the robbery; for my part, I will have no share in it.

8th Property, Impolicy.

And I am sure there is great store of this in these proposals; I shall
instance but in two particulars.

1. In timing the challenge that is here made, to brave a rich and powerful
enemy at so great a distance, and invite him by sound of trumpet to a pitched
battle, when surprise and ambushments might be laid, and do the work with the
expense but of a tenth part of the blood which this may cost. This is not
agreeable with the art of war; Achitophel would have put a derision upon such
measures. Jacob's sons when taking a bloody design in hand, first contrived to
stupify and blunt the courage of their enemies, and then came upon them by
surprise, ever they could arm in their own defense, (though it does not justify
their cruelty, yet it magnifies their subtilty) for thereby they bro't their
design about; whenas if they had gone a more blunt and daring way to work,
Simon and Levi had not been half a breakfast for the Hivites. Genesis 34.25.

So here, had the churches been convened, and no noise made of this design,
they possibly (though their treasures are fortified by right, and so in safety,
and their troops more, ten to one, than their enemies) yet by ambushments or
surprise, they might have chanced to have been coakered or conquered out of
all, by being flattered, overawed, or over-argued, into a surrender or
submission; but we may now rationally hope the alarm will rouse the whole camp,
and each squadron will rebound it to the next with a hinc Proximas Urit
Ucalogon; and so the plot may upon a defeat, blame its own bad conduct, more
than its fortune.

2. The design itself ( Quo ad fluem Executionis) let it come to birth, as is
designed or desired, and the very heavens would either frown upon, or laugh at
it for its folly: If we examine the climate of the country, the degrees of
latitude, and the several stars that chiefly govern, there is no good policy in
the design; so that, methinks the universal frame of nature cries it down for a
Non compos mentis; for there are no such great creatures as are here conceived,
can fare in hard cold countries as the Camelion does in warm, there must be a
very great hoard to support them; and nature does honestly confess, she cannot
answer the bills of fare, which belong to their table, and do her duty to the
royal exchequer; and this must be maintained, or all breaks to pieces.

Again, let it be considered, whether it been't great intellectual weakness, or
want of policy, for one generation to contrive needless loads for the next,
especially when they may get as well to heaven, without carrying such packs
along the road? It has been universally the humor of mankind, according to the
laws of nations and nature, when roused by the regular dictates of self-love,
to endeavor that every following generation might be more lightsome, free,
noble and happy than that which did immediately preceed.

They say the Chinees dig clay and use it not, but leave it heapt, or in pits,
mellowing for the next age. Every prudent man builds his house for duration.
The prince enlarges and betters his dominions. The peasant sweats to advance
his estate, and then each leaves all in greater triumph to their heirs.

The Kentish Yeomantry are had in honor to this day, for not stooping to the
conqueror, till they had conditioned, and thereby secured their fair estates of
lands in fee and free-holds for ever from all forfeiture by felony, according
to their country proverb, The father to the bough,
The son to the plough.


Such is the merciful foresight of mankind, and his charitable care and
forecast for such as shall follow, though they may never be seen or known by
their wise progenitors.

But here is plainly a conspiracy very heterogenious to such judicious acts of
human providence; a design plainly, if not perfectly to enslave, yet to bring
posterity into a needless vassalage and thraldom.

This is an acknowledged verity amongst wise statists, That that monarch who
has the command of the seas, can at his pleasure command any maritime country.
And so, those men who have the command and empire of the conscience of mankind,
can command their estates, and indeed whatsoever else is grateful to them.

Then, whereabouts are we in our politics, when we have delivered up the
royalties that are challenged? And in what a weak capacity shall we leave
posterity in? Nay, these virtuoso's themselves seem to be hardened with the
ostrich against their own natural issue, unless the thing would chance to
spring up as quick as Jonas's goard, and hang as full of pearls and diamonds,
as the seas, and rocks of India, and they themselves shall have the first
shake* and fill all their coffers, with this harvest, or at least, that they
are assured that they can and shall entail their offices as securely as their
lands, upon their own children; as was the order of priesthood, and the fashion
of the house of Levi. But alas! These modes are all worn out and made null; and
such men's sons, as we are now treating of, fall in with the multitude, and must
carry their equal share of the common load; that should the project prevail,
under their management, (might they but look up out of their graves in about
half an age) they may complain in elegy, after the manner of Virgil with his,
Sic vos non vobis hos ego versiculos feci, Tubit alter Honorem. These verses I
made, but another man carries away the honor. So these gentlemen might even
say, we have contrived to greaten the clergy, and with bees have filled a rich
hive; and built a fair nest well feathered, but our posterity we see, is never
the warmer, nor will they lick their fingers of it; and not only so, but are
the men that must make up the tenth sheaf, and deliver the tenth cock, calf and
lamb unto others out of poor demesnes. And also it may justly beget a mournful
remembrance in posterity of their parents, and make them often look wi^h a sad
countenance upon their fathers graves, not because they are dead, but because
they had not ended their days sooner, viz. before this scheme (so oppressive
and cruel to their small freeholds) had taken effect under their management.

2. We come now according to engagement, to take a survey of the proposals in
their distinct sections.

SECT. I.
THAT the ministers of the country form themselves into associations, that may
meet at proper times to consider such things as may properly lie before them.

Answer. There is no doubt or question to be made, but that the ministers and
pastors of Christ's churches may meet in greater or lesser numbers; for they
are masters of themselves, and no more accountable how they spend their time,
than other men are; but to meet at certain times and places, as political
incorporate bodies, or in the form of classes, for the exercise and management
of government, this must be determined by some precept issued from a
legislative power; and without this, such who give the advice, and exhibit the
call, are very dispotic and arbitrary; and those who attend it, are servile in
their submission; for there is no man in his right wits will take this honor
unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron, Heb. 5.4. The offer
or invitation, bids defiance to our constitution; for our platform denies the
classical state of the church under Christ, chap. 2. sect. 5. Therefore this is
a daring article, in the criminals case; and as it strikes at the vitals of our
government, it must in the TRIAL bear weight accordingly.

Sect. And that each of these associations have a moderator for a certain time,
who shall continue till another be chosen, who may call them together upon
emergencies.

Answer.

1st. What limits shall be assigned for the precincts of every distinct
association? Or may we conclude the best model is to follow the civil
distinctions made by the counties? And if so, then the pastors of each classes
are scattered through a territory of twenty or thirty miles square, more or
less, and then it must needs follow, that the moderator, to discharge his duty,
provide messengers to cite all these distinct gentlemen upon any emergency; but
the great difficulty is, what kind of messenger it must be, whether king
Solomon's tell-tale bird may be trusted with matters of such importance? Or,
whether the moderator must re-imburse him? Or, must he go on his own cost,
contrary to equity in that law? 1 Cor. 9.7. Who goes to warfare on his own
charge? It is apparently an error, that care has not been taken to find horse
and man, and bating-places for both on this journey, otherwise for a
legislative power to prescribe chargeable offices, and leave them destitute of
a temporal support, they must of necessity die to save charges, or turn
mendicants, or hope in their travel to meet with the prophet's juniper-tree;
all which are as disagreeing with good reason as the proposal it self.

2. The moderator has an unlimited power during the prorogation of the
assembly. (1.) He must judge of emergencies, that he may summon the members;
and being left vested with such a prerogative, if after he has made his
citation, he recants, he can then countermand his own order, though the
gentlemen should be all mounted, and ready to move. (2.) If there chance to be
an emergency of common concernment, if he finds his own favorites involved in
the guilt and danger; he then gives no notice, but stifles the business, and so
cheats the company. (3.) And upon any disgust, it is now at his mercy to null
the whole frame; for he must be in place till another be chosen; and how will
they get together, if he will not give the word? Unless they are creators of
themselves the second time, as they were the first. That to institute such
charitable designs without a fund, and tie such trust and dominion on the
shoulders of men after such a lax and careless manner, and leave them at such
loose ends, as easily to make fools of men; for my own part, I slight such
methods in government.

SECT. II.
THAT questions and cases of importance, either provided by themselves, or by
others presented unto them, should be upon due deliberation answered.

Answer. I suppose there is no intent to erect a young or mock-royal society,
or that all questions and cases of experimental philosophy be admitted; if it
should be so, I think this somewhat touches upon the prerogative of the crown,
and may be called in question, under the head of high misdemeanors, if not Pro
Crimini Iesae Majestatis; but howsoever, though there be no distinction made,
yet we will take it in a more charitable sense, and that the proposal (in
intent) is wholly confined to church matters; and if so, we must then inquire,
how many deep questions can be found in our country, grown moldy with the
Gibeonites bread, for want of wise handling? Or can we find any such heaps of
gordian knots, as Opprobria Theologorum? The reproach of divines laid up
against this consistory meet, to untie them, that we must needs molest our old
settlements for their solution? For my own part, I cannot comprehend the
proposal, unless it be a plot to introduce the enemy, that is in the rear, that
is, by making show of great illuminations, we may be dazeled with their luster,
and thereby the more easily taken in the snare here laid. But however, to
conclude, as the wise says of things more physical or artificial, Eccle. 1. So
I may say of questions and cases, there are none new under the sun. They have
been all well spoken to; every learned casuist, is full of them, etc. And Ames
and Turrettinus, etc. for a few shillings will do more in a month, for an
inquisitive mind, than this proposal can do in the tedious apprenticeship of
many years, then certainly, computing by rules of proportion, we can no ways
expect that the clear gains should countervail the great damage we shall
sustain by swapping governments upon these terms.

SECT. III.
THAT advice be taken by the associated pastors, from time to time, ever they
proceed to any action in their particular churches, which may be likely to
produce any embroilments.

Answer. This is very dishonorable, and also a very unreasonable incroachment
upon the officers and government of the churches.

It divests the officers of the free exercise of that office-authority, which
God's word and our platform places in them; read Platform, chap. 10. sect. 8,
9. These are to feed and rule the churches, they are to receive the
accusations, and prepare them for the churches hearing. This section of the
platform fixes both process and judicature in particular pastors and churches,
without any limitation? But the proposal allows no process to be opened. till
letters of license be obtained, from the classes. But why may not all other
persons in office be thus fettered, as well as pastors of churches? Are these
the only students of wisdom and righteousness, that are strangers to the nature
of actions, to the rule and application of it? All other officers, in trust and
commission, who are wise and loyal, execute the hardest articles in their
employ; and who may say to them, why do ye so? Our judges never stick to hang a
man, so long as their commissions and the law will bear them out, and they
themselves are left, to be interpreters of both. And that this proposal is a
sanctuary for officers against a storm: alas! the most that we can make of it,
is a covering of fig leaves, and may serve for a harbor to cowards and fools,
but not for men of spirit and conduct. The dream of an embroilment, can never
counter-poize duty; if men are trusted with duty, they must consult that, and
not events. If men are placed at helm, to steer in all weather that blows, they
must not be afraid of the waves, or a wet coat.

It is certain, it was no dimunition for Timothy to carry St. Paul's cloak and
parchments from Troas, 2 Timothy 4.13. Yet for particular pastors in the
management of church government to do little more than to carry the copies and
parchments of associations about the country, and hang up their decrees on the
pillars of churches, according to the order of the proposal can never entitle
them to such a tribute of love and honor as the scripture does assign them, as
the purchase of their great merits, 1 Timothy 3.5. 1 These. 5.12, 13. Such
bequestments as these from the fountain of honor, must signify more than some
such poor low servile business (no ways too high for Jereboam's priest to
execute) as is laid out in the proposal, but especially if they have but some
one head man to conduct and draw up the conclusion.

Sect. That the associated pastors do carefully and lovingly treat each other
with that watchfulness which may be of universal advantage.

Answer 1st. Whether watchfulness is proper, or a term applicable to persons so
qualified, so sacred, and in so high a function as those who are here intended?

2dly. Whether to institute watchmen over watchmen, be not to distribute the
clergy into inferior and superior degrees, and so ad infinitum, etc. or at le^
till the churches of this country (for you must know this is one proposal made
for their support) be supported and well ordered by suffragons, metroplitans,
and other great pillars of those churches, where clergymen in higher orbs,
inspect those in the same order, who are beneath them in trust and dignity?

3dly. But if you intend honestly, only the watch of one brother over another,
as is the duty of all christian people, one toward another, then I cannot
understand the sense of the word, as applicable here, with the least good
meaning or syntax imaginable.

1st. For though there is a design of new-modelling of men, and bringing
clergymen into another form of society; yet there is no intent divulged, that
they shall co-habit, bed and board together upon certain charters, as the
Friars or Benedictines, in their royal monastries. Indeed, the section might
have been ingrost with the first canons of the Dominicans, or St. Bennets laws,
when first entering upon their monastic life; but it no ways agrees with this
constitution.

2dly. For, as for the occasional meeting of men, eminently sober and virtuous,
what business can be supposed for a watch, for about the space of twenty-four,
or forty-eight hours in such examples? Very bad men will hold out longer than
so, in a good behavior, under the awe of but some one venerable person, or a
grave Cato.

3dly. And when these eminent persons, members of the association, are
dispersed to their own proper precinct, the proposal surely does not intend
they shall follow the chargeable example of princes, who usually keep spies in
each others courts, to inform themselves, how things are managed there; for its
plain, the charge and expense in managing such a watch as this, will reduce all
clergymen to this dilemma, that they must either vote up the s^l^ry, or vote
down the method. But then the thing itself is not fair; for it would seem as
though they watched more for the halting than the help of each other. But as for
the proposal, a riddle I found it, and a riddle I leave it.

Sect. And that if any minister be accused to the association where he belongs,
of scandal or heresy, the matter shall be there examined, and if the associated
ministers find just occasion for it, they shall direct a calling of the
council, by which such an offender is to be proceeded against.

Answer. I must boldly and freely enquire, whether this is an honest answer to
the question propounded in the head of the proposals? Or whether in reality
this is the supporting, preserving and well-ordering the interest of the
churches there meant? If you mean as you speak, I am sure there is either so
(...) dishonesty or misunderstanding between the question and the answer; for
it cant possibly be otherwise, unless the parts of speech are lately become a
chaos, and all words are not only of the doubtful gender, but such unreasonable
epiceens, that not only both kinds, but both contraries are signified in them;
or thus, that to build, plant, repair, pluck up, pull down and demolish, are
all now become convertable terms; for take away these high prerogatives from
the churches, and you take away their being. These and such like royalties, are
their Formalis ratio, or the formal cause ( per Quam Res est id quod est) by
which they are, what they are; and this will be very evident, if we do but read
a short lecture on the churches essence anatomized, or let their essential and
constituent parts and powers be viewed in the history, and philosophy of their
own beings, and we shall quickly discern your mistake; for that end read
platform, chap. 5. sect. 2. Ordinary church power, viz. of privilege belongs to
the brotherhood, and may be acted or exercised immediately by themselves. And
more directly to the case in hand, look into chap. 10. sect. 6. Where there we
read* If an elder offend incorrigibly, the matter so requiring, as the church
had power to call him to office, so they have power, according to order (the
council of other churches, where it may be had, directing thereto) to remove
him from his office; and being now but a member, in case he add contumacy to
his sin, the church that had power to receive him into their fellowship, has
also the same power to cast him out, that they have concerning any other
members.

Now herein we find an essential article in the government and being of these
churches, that they have and hold such jurisdiction over their own members;
that the highest tribunal ecclesiastical on earth, is there; and that their own
delinquent private members, and public officers are triable only there, and
there they must receive the definitive sentence, and abide the execution of it.

And if so, then I shall make bold to revive my query again, viz. Whether the
proposal is either honorable, civil or honest, thus to tumble down at one blow,
this high seat of authority? and to break open our prison doors* and loose the
fetters of our great offenders? and at the best to take them out of our hands,
and make their mittimus to foreign pastors to do justice upon them, and yet in
the mean time to profess, they are doing us no other injuries but only
repairing and mending our churches? Again, whether this is fair, and
work-man-like amongst honest men.

But to make a stop here, I must remind you, that this head is not to be passed
over slightly; for this is the one thing in the essence of our churches, it is
their peculiar infranchizement and birthright, and we may not sell it with
Esau, at a cheap market; if we do, we undo ourselves; for indeed you must know,
here lies the marring or making of our churches; here is laid up their
strength, and here hangs the pick-lock of their treasure; for by this key
stolen, or wrinched out of their hands, the churches of Christ in the world,
have been exposed and plundered, for more than a thousand years, and many of
them have nothing at this day left them, comparatively, but a poor, starved,
shabbid implicit faith, and a dull, fa^urnal blunt and blind obedience, that a
man would scarcely give a groat for both of them. In a word, the usurpations of
the pastors, since the great revolt, having unshackled one another, and broke
loose from the restrictions they are justly subjected to, under the churches
power of privilege, has utterly undone the christian world, from this root of
bitterness and pride, from this seed sprung up, the man of sin, as we have it
in an anomulous author, viz. the Eletherians, page 4. In words to this purpose,
"Then a little priest had an opportunity to establish himself, then there
appeared in the temple of God that antichrist, who calls himself the vicar of
Christ." And then the same author going on to discover the original of this
monstrous birth; he says thus, "Antichrist was conceived in, by, and from
certain ^ffectations of ecclesiastical preheminencies." As though he should
say, the first spawn or embryo of that insolent Hector, or aspiring Nimrod,
(who first robbed the laiety of their christian liberties, and then hunted down
the potentates of the world, and brought them as a rich spoil, into his
habitation of violence) took its commencement from this principle, viz. from
the clergies assuming to themselves this ecclesiastical pre-eminence, viz.
first their obtaining an exemption from the cognizance of the churches, for
their crimes, and then in possessing themselves of the sole and absolute
jurisdiction (by a dispotic government) over the churches themselves.

But however things have been hitherto, I shall no longer uphold the debate, by
revising the abuses that have been done to the christian churches by an
ambitious clergy, in the ages past, which might more amply be discovered, by
tracing the footsteps of the great apostasy: But I shall end the whole dispute
on this head, by drawing up a protest, and denying the jurisdiction of the
court, erected and opened by the proposals, as being perfectly disagreeing and
repugnant to our former settlements, and present constitution.

SECT. IV.
THAT the candidates of the ministry undergo a due trial by some or other of
the association, concerning their qualification for the evangelical ministry;
and that no particular pastor or congregation, employ any one in occasional
preaching, who has not been recommended by a testimonial, under the hands of
some association.

Answ. To monopolize (in the great articles of trade) some very rich species,
and of such use for the good of kingdoms, that they must needs perish without
it, or be greatly injured by excessive sales, is accounted by good
common-wealths-men intolerable; for such men or companies, so invested, can,
with Joseph in Pharoah's court, buy and sell a country at their own prices;
even so, when these churches have delivered up the right in their candidates to
the classes, they may then go a begging to their doors for their ministers, and
be contented to take what they are pleased to put off, and at their own lay.

Obj. But you may object, Exomni Ligno, non fit Mercurious. Therefore the
judicious must determine and set their mark upon what is merchantable, and
throw by what is refuse ware, or else there may be great damage done for want
of caution. And thus we come to the plain point in hand, which is to be debated
by disputing this question, viz.

Quest. Whether a trial by association is preferable to the old custom of the
churches, in promoting their candidates for the ministry to public trust?

Answ. In the reply, I shall, first, consider our candidates under trial; as to
their qualification; and (secondly) implead the proposal on a just prejudice
from the corruption of the clergy.

1st. We may consider our candidates under trial, as to their qualifications,
(1.) As to their human learning; and here we absolutely object against the
trial of associations, as bootless, useless and perilous, both to them and to
us.

1. As to the association, it is no diminution, or trespass upon the laws of
honor or truth to affirm, "That the settled ministry in general (with some
reasonable exception) is less expert in grammar and points of philosophy, than
our learned children are at the degree of junior batchellors," and that from
dis-use, proved from all experience, Nam usus Promotos facit; and also for the
sake of more divine studies, which crowd out those first ideas a great pace,
according to that observation, on a learned memory, Imago Imaginem Expellit,
Aliisque Aliae Succedunt, for as one wave thrusts out another, so one idea
another. Therefore it is a pity to expose such venerable persons to the hazard
in this service, least when they become posers of others, they should be posed
themselves. I do remember an odd story when I was at college; it was retained
as a reproach on a very divine and worthy person; though he was bred in England a
good scholar, and also had been a schoolmaster, and had taught the grammar in
his young times, but yet having laid by in a great measure, the use of such
things, for the sake of more valuable and heavenly speculations, being at the
solstice, and one of the corporation, ventured in the hall, to propose this
question, to one of the commencers.

Quot sunt Caela! To which the lad with sausiness enough, yet with a
grammatical niceness, only answered, Sed Audi.
Mascula Duntaxat Caelos vacitabis et Argos:


That Prisians head will in likelihood be kept bleeding from one generation to
another, by reason of some unlucky strokes, if this form be established, and
that to the great detriment of those who strike the blows.

2dly. To US. Accademical learning we profess to be a very essential
accomplishment in the gospel ministry. It is introduced by the ordinary
blessing of God upon human endeavors, to supply the place of the cloven
tongues, and those other miraculous gifts and endowments of mind, impressed upon
Christ's ambassadors, whereby fishermen commence (per Saltum) doctors of
divinity; and in an instant were stocked with such principles of religion,
reason, and philosophy, that they were capable to dispute with Athens it self,
and baffle the greatest wits she could produce, in defense, and for the
advancement of Christ's kingdom, Act 17.18.

Thus it is very reasonable that the churches should be well assured of the
sufficiency of the learning of those persons, ever they presume on the
ministry; yet there is a fairer way in view, fuller of honor and safety, than
what the proposal directs to.

Our accademy is the storehouse of learning, and this all mankind will assent
to. When you have lost the company of the muses, there they are found in their
freeholds, where they hold the balance of honor amongst the learned. This is
the place, if not of the goddess Minerva or Apollo, yet the Bethel or temple of
God himself; the God of wisdom, where he, as chief architect, with his under
workmen, form wise and learned men, and where you may have them wrought off at
first-hand: Then certainly here we are to secure our credulity and confidence
in this affair; here we are to know whether they be of the right stamp, yea or
no.

That of all men living, the best and most infallible standard for the
philosophical accomplishments of our candidates, is the judgment of the
honorable president, and noble fellows of our famous col^ege; for this I am
sure must needs stand for a verity, that the judgment of a real honest and
skilful artificer (keeping close to his shop) concerning the nature and
qualities of an edge tool which he has wrought, and hammered on his own anvil,
out of its first rude matter, must certainly excel him that has been long from
the trade, that only takes it, turns and tries the edge slightly, or has but a
transient view of it: so that hence we may fairly infer, that (as to human
learning) Harvard's Commendamus is most valuable and sufficient, and justly
supplants these testimonials.

2. With respect to the more evangelical qualifications of the gospel ministry,
we shall be ready to honor the sufficiency of the associates, yet must take
liberty to object a few things.

1. Suppose we, that the trial is made per Contionem ad Clerum, by preaching a
sermon, in audience of the association, and I think this is the way proposed
and generally agreed upon, as the square or rule most agreeable with gunter, to
take the dimensions, length and breadth of our candidates by.

Reply 1. What can a sermon do at deciding this question? for that the most
sensible and valuable, who are usually most humble and tender, are liable by
this stupendous examination, to be baffled by their own timerity, and quite
dashed out of countenance by their own fear. Alas! upon their first entrance
upon the stage, to appear in so august and awful a prese^^e, this must needs
disanimate and put their thoughts into a raffle, as having in their affrighted
minds the resemblance of their going into the Spanish inquisition, rather then
dwelling amongst the softer measures of the gospel? Luther himself, (that
unparalleled instance of spirit and magnanimity, as I remember of his life)
hardly ever got over something of a panick fear attending him, through the
course of his ministry; and indeed men of the quickest senses are most liable
to these paroxisms. Then surely to put our tyros to this test, which may daunt
and dispirit the greatest hero, is no ways proportionable, especially seeing
they may under the inspection of learned, honest and judicious men, both
pastors and churches, and thereby under covert of more private invitations
(with all their natural fear) creep into this noble work, and keeping on, as
their courage and strength will bear the journey, may, gradatim attain a just
and sufficient probation, as our learned youth have hitherto done.

Indeed, the bold and brazen, who can make a greater figure with half the
stock, by many shirking tricks, and dissembling artifices, defended and
supported with confidence and delivery, may obtain the Euge Juvenis, that they
no ways deserve, as will be found, when they come to be detected by a more
dilatory search, or a more tedious Analysis made of them. That, to conclude, as
the proverb is, Una Hirundo non facit ver; one swallow makes not the spring; so
in this trial, one good or mean sermon cannot determine the man, or umpire his
case.

2. Suppose the trial must be made, and the question determined by a person's
conversation. And this is a very great article in the state of all serviceable
men, and especially in the ministry, 1 Timothy 4.12. 1 Pet. 5.3. Being ensamples
to the flock. Then certainly a more intimate converse and society, is a very
invincible plea. By the laws and customs of England, the vicinage must be
allowed, as affording the most competent judges, when persons reputation lies
at stake in criminal cases, because they are presumed to know somewhat
considerable of persons and cases of their own knowledge; and so more capable
of giving a just verdict. So in the case, what do those persons know of our
learned youth, who make up the association? Our candidates appear on a certain
day, (as blazing stars once in an age, and are gazed on, and then they vanish)
Now what judgment can be made on a man's conversation, by such a transient view?
unless they must be handled in this consistory, as persons that have been bound
to the peace, and in open court are to be delivered from their recognizance by
three outcries?

3. Suppose the whole stock of ministerial qualifications must be enquired
into, and judgment must pass by the direction of apostolic law, 1 Timothy 3.2.
Tit. 1.6.9. Let them be blameless, sober, apt to teach, etc. and add what more
you please, which the scripture mentions, to fill up the character of an
evangelical minister, to complete him in all his gifts and graces, either in
his beginnings, or in his riper state; and it is most apparent, that our
particular pastors and churches, with the learning, experience, grace, wisdom
and discretion they are owners of, can make a more upright, judicious and solid
trial; and give a better account of our candidates from their frequent converse
with them, and their occasional and repeated preaching amongst them, than the
wisest association in the world can do; and it is easier dissembling with the
latter, than the former, unless the association will take them home, and both
winter and summer them.

Now then, considering that their degrees with the express testimony of the
college (when particularly desired) are sufficient testimonials of their
learning; and the experience of their other good gifts and ministerial
qualifications, obtained by converse, and their occasional preaching, has been
the chief test and trial for our candidates; and by these methods they have
been approbated in order to settlement in office-trust; and this has been the
custom of the country and churches for near four score years. Wherefore to
conclude this argument, I make this proclamation, That if any person or
persons, disaffected with our old settlements, and way in church conduct, will
produce one example led into the public ministry by this practice, which has
justly offended him, and he will or can evince this to be the blameable cause,
we will then surrender the custom to your mercy.

2dly. I shall now implead the proposal on a just prejudice or presumption of
corruption in the clergy, though we are in charity for the present, yet in this
way proposed, we have no assurance for the future, against the corruptness of
such societies; and let any sober man observe, and he will find abundance of
poor tools under the mark of the office, where these measures, and such like,
are in force and form. How often is it repeated, that poor sordid, debaucht
wretches are put into Holy Orders, when as they were fitter to be put into the
stocks, or sent to bridewell for madmen, than to be sent with their
testimonials, to work in Christ's vineyard? How long have the Indies, the seas,
the provinces, and many other parts of the empire groaned under this damnable
way of cheating God of his glory, and the world of salvation?

Simony we know began almost as early as the christian church, and has
prevailed amongst clergymen to a prodigy. The sacred things of God's house
have been a trade and merchandise, which has beggared churches, and filled the
clergy in some kingdoms with a sacriligious and exorbitant pile of wealth, and
the world with a flood of debau^h^es; and this proposal puts us into the way to
open the shop-windows again, and expose the same wares to sale upon a little
indulgence in our country; for who can render a reason that the same
opportunities, the same temptations, the same corruptions, the same nature, and
the same power, would not produce the same effects? or that the same climate,
seed, ground, and manner of culture, should not yield the same grain at harvest?

And what have we in pledge for our security, more than the fallacy and
sickleness of human nature, when the power is delivered out of our hands?

Obj. You may object, that our candidates, through their own ambition, and the
indulgence of particular pastors, thrust themselves into the work too young,
and this our way will prescribe due boundaries to them?

Answ. 1. In general, Paul solves a worse case, than can be found (pick whilst
you are weary for an example to quadrate with the objection, and render it
forceable) amongst all our learned youth, who have hitherto adventured upon the
ministry, Phil. 1.18. What then? etc. as though he should say, What Is that to you
sir? If Christ be preached, all is well. And as to our case, we may say,
despise not the day of small things, all men must have a beginning, and every
bird which is pretty well fleg'd must begin to fly. And ours are not of the
nest where Icharus was hatched, whose feathers were only glewed on; but these
belong to the angelic host, and their wings grow out from their essence;
therefore you may allow them, with the lark, now and then to dart heavenward,
though the shell or down be scarce off from their heads. And so we conclude
with our charitable and divine apostle* "What then! if Christ be preached,
whether in pretense, or in truth, either by old or by young, yet therein we do
rejoice, yea, and will rejoice, etc. to see our Nazarites, so forward and
well-disposed, it shall add to our joy, and no ways increase our horror, unless
our ambition should surprise us with fear, that such young stars should
outshine us.

2. In particular, where will you six the Quando, and settle the precise era,
or period of time, for their beginning?

1. There is no college or statute law yet enacted, to decide this question:
Then of necessity you must do damage to long and laudable custom, as to a
superior authority, and honorable ruler; and where that fixes the time, you
must submit; for custom, when full of days, and of noble examples, becomes the
common law of a nation; and is as sovereign and pleadable, as the dictates of a
parliamentary power; at least it shelters from rebukes and calumny: That for
any gentlemen to affront, talk high and frown at the early zeal and beginnings
of our candidates, is but too much in imitation of the Great Mogul of India,
who after he has dined, orders his trumpets to be blown, to signify to the
princes of the earth, that they have liberty now to go to dinner; and when he
has finished his formalities, if they please, they may vail their royal
bonnets, and thank him for nothing; for where there is no law, there is no
transgression.

2. Under the gospel, we have no precise time, though there was under the law,
when to begin and enter into the ministry, the gospel knows no bar from time
where persons are other ways meetly qualified. Days and qualifications, are
diverse things, and the latter are the essentials of a minister of Christ. It is
not how old, but how capable a person is, which is the main point to be
enquired after here. Therefore where (in some good measure) there is an honest
life, a gracious heart, an orthodox head, and a learned tongue, there is no
reason to send such youths to Jerico, with David's messengers, (though their
beards are not yet grown) to wait upon time and nature, for such an
accomplishment; for certainly those recited are the principal in the argument.
It is a story in the history of Persia, "That when the Grecians sent some very
young noblemen upon an embassage to that court, the Persians reflected upon the
Grecian republic, for sending b^^rdless boys on so grave a message to so mighty
a monarch," To which the young Grecians very smartly answered, "That if state
policy did consist in beards, then he-goats would do for ambassadors, as well
or better than men." I must confess, I am somewhat of their mind* and
therefore I think it is not, how long men have lived, but how wise they are
grown: God has oadained praise out of the mouths of babes. Jeremiah pleads he
was a child, but that cannot null his commission for the ministry, Jer. 1.6.
Paul guards the ministry of young Timothy, by heavens authority, to defend him
from censure for audaciousness. What! for a child to teach old men their duty!
Hold! says Paul, 1 Timothy 4.12. Let no man despise thy youth. What shall not our
great Lord illustrate his grace and power in what examples he pleases? Has he
not formed all the powers of nature? and does he not furnish them with their
distinct virtues, etc.

Object. But you may say, days are full of wisdom, and youth of ignornce in the
great affairs of salvation.

Answ. Not always and universally so; as in the examples just now recited, and
in many others that may be named, called in at the third and sixth hour, Mat.
20. But however, if our candidates must never begin till they are without
ignorance, or not till they have gained all points ( ad unguem) in the vast
studies of divinity, then it may be said of all our ministers, as queen
Elizabeth was wont to say of bishops, when she visited the schools (study hard
children, study hard, for) bishops are old men. So of necessity, all our
ministers must be very old men. But I think that is more agreab^ with our
necessity and state, both in nature and grace, which one of the ancients was
wont to say of himself, viz. that whilst he studied to teach other men, he
learnt himself. That considering theology, as well as art, is a long study, and
life is very short, why may they not begin young? And also, considering that
our churches are no ways over cluttered with candidates, there is no need to
serve them as Christ did the money changers, who with a whip of small cords, he
drove them out of the temple; and especially they having hitherto acquitted
themselves in the main as men that need not be ashamed, and yet never any one
of them, to this day, has been represented as learned or virtuous, or any ways
supported by these testimonials.

SECT. V.
THAT they together be consulted by bereaved churches, to recommend to them
such persons as may be fit to be employed amongst them, for present supply,
from whom they may in due time proceed to choose a pastor.

Answer. According to my apprehension, this proposal insults very daringly over
the churches in two things.

1. By engrossing the right of jurisdiction, not only over the visible freedom
and liberties, but conjugal and secret powers of Christ's virgin and widow
churches. That it seems to me very advisable (if this proposal may stand for a
sound precept) that forthwith another office be erected* and put into the hands
and under the government of a few men, exactly skilled in physiognomy, and
deeply studied in the sympathies and antipathies of human nature, with an
absolute superintending power to control and direct all wooers in their choice
for the marriage bed; for that there is many a fond lover who has betrayed the
glory of wedlock, by making an unwise and unfortunate choice; and why may not
particular beds be overruled, as well as particular churches? both being for
the good and service of mankind, and for that both parties, husband and wife,
pastor and church, by our sort of government, are bound for term of life, or so
long as both shall live. Indeed, were our constitution in church order under
the superintendency of a patron, or a lord bishop, who can send (pro Tempore) a
curate, etc. and then recall him, and place another in his stead, the project
might be very advisable; but seeing these churches are settled congregational,
and by their principles, the ordination is, as it were, the nuptials, or
marriage day of two lovers, that nothing but death, or a bill (...) divorce
(for betraying the glory of the union) can part; it is then good and
reasonable, that they be left to choose as they best affect, and not forcibly
be tied up to a kind of Hobsons choice, one of these or none. This apparently
puts too hard upon the churches liberties, and overthrows the government; for
that our platform, in chap. 2. treating of the nature of the churches, asserts,
sect. 5. That the state of the visible church since the coming of Christ, is
only congregational; therefore neither national, provincial, nor classical;
then what does this proposal do here?

Also, our platform asserts the free electing power of the churches, chap. 5.
In these words, ordinary church power is that of privilege, such as belong to
the brotherhood, whereby they design persons unto office. So also in chap. 10.
In these words, the power granted by Christ unto the body of the church and
brotherhood is a prerogative or privilege which the church does exercise in
the admission of her own members, and in choosing their own officers. Now if
Christ has given these high powers and authorities to his churches, he has
certainly furnished them with skill and wisdom to manage them.

So we come to the second part of the affront in this proposal, and that is,

2dly. By its making a plain presumption of incapacity in the churches of doing
their own proper work with out the^r graces help. It is as much as to say,
Alas! Alas! It is w^ll known that the churches are generally a sort of plain
men, little skilled in deep matters; that there is app^rent danger, if left in
their elections to their own conduct, of introducing very illiterate persons
and doleful creatures, to preach in the temple of God, as officers there. Now
this is much agreeing with the old arguments, against the laity, who were
described by the learned to be without the knowledge of the original languages,
and other parts of polite learning, and so no ways fit to interpret scripture;
therefore it is very rationally enacted, that the BIBLE be taken from them lest
they should study heresy and not holiness out of that divine book. But to pass
by all such pleas, I shall come to the main point in plain terms, and that is
this, our platform is our settlement, and it has secured to the churches these
preroga^ives, and they are part of their entailed inheritance; and it is a vain
thing to pretend to plead the incapacity of right owners and rich proprietors,
especially whilst there is a competent set of senses left them. Indeed, when
any gentleman can show any precept, and produce a commission for the taking
into their hands the estate of idiot-churches, they may then cite their
intellectuals to a proper bar, and verdict going against any particular
example, they then, Ipso facto, become guard^ans, and may enter into their
worship. But in the mean time, as to our own churches, and the whole
constellations of them, and every individual or particular church amongst them
remains compos mentis, and therefore must not be intrigued by such offers as
these are.

Bu^ yet before I close this argument, I shall a little further ^umour the
presumption of insufficiency here laid down; and therefore I shall desire, that
a survey be made of the state of the churches, and if their free election be
sound for this thirty years last past (and we will go no higher) have by the
major part of voices introduced insufficient officers, then let the platform be
nulled, and the proposal stand as a more valid canon. And in this inquiry we
would know, whether the dictators will give leave (in drawing up the catalogue
of defective elections) that they themselves be put on the back of the title
page, and there stand as the errata of our old government? Or whether they
themselves are the only exceptions?

But suppose we, when we have accomplished our search, we find their own, and
all other elections for the main have hit right; and if so, then whether we
ought not to pay a veneration to the practice, as ^^ving more of Christ in it
than we can in the rufflings of ambition presently find out, or perceive? And
whether after such long experience and good success, it may not be our wisdom to
keep this via Trita, which we have found to be via Tuta, that is to say, keep
the good old way of our blessed predecessors, lest going into a new and
untrodden path, we fall into some ambuscado, and come off with broken bones and
ruined churches?

Quicquid Praecipiti via.
Certum Deserit Ordinem
Laetos non habit exitus. Boetious.
Rashly to leave the plain and good old way
Turns into mournful night, a joyful day.
SECT. VI.
THAT hereunto may be referred* the direction of proceeding in any of their
particular churches, about the convening of the councils, that shall be though it
necessary for the welfare of the churches, about the convening of the councils,
that shall be though it necessary for the welfare of the churches.

Answ. Query, Who must give the direction, and judge what councils are
necessary for the welfare of the churches?

Answer. The association.

Reply, I thought as mcuh; for the sole and whole power, is, by these
proposals, resigned to them, as their indisputable and undoubted right,
insomuch that their Ben^ placita, the Elicit and free resolves of their will,
shall and must be the absolute and uncontrolable rule of conduct; that is to
say, the churches are to be in vassalage; and the association is to rule all by
prerogative; so that forever hence forward, we may inscribe across the door of
the conclave (to notify the rule of the house) that imperial law.

Sic Volo, sit Jubeo, stat pro Ratione Voluntat.
We will and doom, none now can us withstand;
Our will is reason; for the churches in the land.
Indeed, when great men turn beggars for small booties, with the famous general
Baziliareous, it signifies, the ebb of fortune runs low with them; but when
they ask an ancient inheritence upon gift, it signifies either the doner to be
in a languishing posture, and that his estate is like to escheat to the crown,
through failure of natural heirs, or else great boldness in the beggars. But
what should be the meaning of this demand, who can divine? I hope they don't
reckon the churches to be making their last will, and design them for their
heirs.

The churches in New England are fairly possessed of this high prerogative, viz.
Of convening councils necessary for their own well being, they are also as
likely to continue as they were forty years ago, unless their own pastors
should betray them. And they are also as capable of managing all instruments
devolved upon them by Christ, as they were in the days of their youth. Then
what can we make of this contrivement, viz. When the churches shall have
occasion to seek relief by council (as sometimes the emperor, has been confined
at the insolent threshold of his holiness, and upon his coming forth in his
infallibility, this pile of temporal glory has been his horse-block; and so
here) they must humbly wait at the door of the association, till they shall be
informed, When, what, who, and where they shall have one. But not to interrupt
the world with long stories, we must again here demur upon title.

Sect. That the several associations in the country maintain a due
correspondence with one another.

Answ. If the platonic notion concerning the universal soul of the world or
spirit of nature (whereby one body is affected by the operations of another at
some considerable distance) where established for an infallible theorem, and
these societies could circulate their intelligence by the power and echoes of
his mighty essence, the design might then be practicable; or had we in all
corners of our country, doves trained up to carry mails or packets of letters,
from country to country, there might be some hopes for supporting this mighty
correspondence; but to do it wholly by human means, the charge plainly
threatens to eat out the profit.

But we may suppose the seat of these things shall be universally settled,
fully butting upon the post road, and what a mighty business is a six-penny or
four penny letter in such a good cause? Nay, indeed that is no great matter in
itself, yet these six-penny, or four pennys, are like the sand on the sea
shore, a great many of them put together grow very heavy, especially where wife
and children are to be maintained upon 70 or 80 l. income ^er annum.

Wise men may do as they please, yet for my part, I can see no good policy in
the proposal, unless you can court some rich potentate to espouse the cause,
and sacrifice annually some part of his royal revenue to support the Fantasy.

Sect. So that the state of religion may be the better known and secured in all
the churches?

Answ. Religion in its infallible original, the wisdom and authority of God! in
its infinite object, the ineffable persons and perfections of the divine
essence; in its mean^, the gospel of salvation: In its inspired, wakeful and
capacious ministry; in its subject, the inestimable immortal soul of man; in
its transcendent effects. (1.) In time, the charming peace and joys of
conscience. (2.) In eternity, the joyful retreat and shouts of glory, is the
most incomparable gift of Paladium, which ever came from heaven; amongst all
the favors of the father of lights, there is none parallel with this; when
disclosed in its beauty, it ravisheth all the intellects of the universe; and
challenge may be made, that the prerogatives and glory belonging to all the
crowned heads in the world, do how and wait upon its processions through the
earth, to guard it from its innumerable and inveterate enemies. Yet in paying
our veneration and attendance, we must distinguish right, and place every thing
properly, and the means must be proportionate with the end, and agreeable in
their natures; or otherwise whilst we go about to accomplish a good end, viz.
the security of religion by improper means we may lose our attempt, and have no
thanks, but be blamed for our pains; for we must not do evil, that good may
come.

It is certain, that the church of Christ is the pillar of truth, or sacred
recluse and peculiar assylum of religion, and this sacred guest, religion,
which came in the worlds infancy from heaven, to gratify the solitudes of
miserable man, when God had left him, has long kept house with us in this
land, to sweeten our wilderness state, and the renowned churches here, are her
sacred palaces. Then certainly it is not fair for her lovers, under pretense of
maintaining her, welcome in greater state, to desolate her pleasing
habitations, though they stand somewhat low like the myrtle grove, Zach. 1.8, etc.

Sect. And paticularly it is thought necessary to the well being of these
churches, that all the associations in the country meet together, by their
respective delegates, once in a year.

Answ. Th^s is a great thesis; and whoever was the father, the womb of it is
very fertile, and big with articles of moment; it comprehends a large
territory, and a great treasure, we must therefore survey it by cosinography:
And then nextly by the laws of the church stock.

1. The country contained in this proposal, by a just consequence, and from the
nature of the design, must extend so far as we can find any gospel churches
planted, or to be planted within the English dominion on the firm land or
continent of America, there is no restriction made to exclude any; and charity
is a grace that would have every one virtuous, and equally privileged with
means for that end; so that we may begin our lines of latitude in in the south,
somewhat northward of the capes of Florida, and then extend them to the north,
to some parts of Nova Scotia, if not to the bay of St. Laurence, and from those
points on to the atlantic; we must stretch our lines overthwart, keeping equal
longitudes, till we meet with other princes dominions.

Now this is a noble territory; enough for an empire, and all English; and why
may we not be thus extensive for the good of the churches therein planted?
Other countries have sent their delegates near as far as this comes to, to wait
upon the conventions of his holiness. But, the mischief is, the revenue will not
hold out. But I have though it of one way, and that will do, if we can but obtain;
though I acknowledge it is somewhat chimerical, or whimsical; yet though it be,
the proposal has no reason to repine or and fault, for that it is it is near
kins-man.

The project is this, viz. Upon the great settlement^ which we hope for,
between the two crowns, I advise, that petitions be made (if the articles of
settlement will allow it) that either the rents of Toledo, or, some good stout
gold mine in Peru, be reserved wholly to the use of this design, and if you are
pleased to keep or settle within narrower limits, (when we know your territory)
we can by rules of porportion and substraction, compute the charge; and if
there be any overplus, when your own charges are defrayed, the rest may be
assigned to the next province, for such good uses. But however, let the
petitions go forward, for you will have want enough of your share; for I am
sure your present supplies are not full enough for your daily bread, and these
contingent and unexpected charges; especially seeing they were never thought
of, or provided for, in your first settlements.

SECT. VIII.
AND finally, that ministers disposed to associate, endeavor in the most
efficacious manner they can, to prevail with such ministers, as unreasonably
neglect such meetings with their brethren in their proper associations, that
they would not expose themselves to the inconveniences that such neglects
cannot but be attended withal.

Answer. This proposal seems to be founded upon the Epicurian doctrine of
atoms; for by the scheme which athiestical atomists give concerning the
beginning of the world, by their account; it was after this lucky manner, that
is to say, there was before time a vast pile of incoherent atoms, which
globically hung sleeping upon a centre-atom, without the least grain of sense,
through the vast eternity, a Part Ante; but at last, and no body can tell how,
they were inclined to throw off their present posture; but being neither of one
form, inclination nor prop^nsion, quickly great heaving and shuffing (from
various sympathies and antipathies) began to be amongst them, that a chaos is
presently rolled together, and in a little time, this magnificent and curious
world, which you look upon, came out of the horrid womb of this distracted heap
of atoms, and that without any help from a creating power, but by a wonderful
good chance. Thus far you have the doctrine of atoms, which I could not well
avoid, because of so much noble matter pre-existing, and repesented in various
shapes and forms, with a sound of motion, and various sympathies and
antipathies appearing, and represented by the proposal; but yet can hear of no
superintending siat, or any creating voice to overruled, or say, Let it be. But
only if persons are disposed, or indisposed, the business must be managed as
wisely as you can; and if it should so chance, that some fine thing (never
before seen in the country) should be made out of these materials, without the
help of a creating power, the world would be a great debtor to the accident;
and the churches may they not be justly stripped of their being to make room for
it, and maintain it?

But to be more distinct, and somewhat more close in my answer, I must remind
you, that our blessed Lord commands us to pray, Mat. 6. Our father which art in
heaven, etc. Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. And if
sincere, he has promised, to stablish us, and keep us from evil. 2 Thessalonians. 3.3.
From these divine principles, the question is, whether those pastors are the
stable or unstable, the reasonable, or unreasonable men, viz. Either those who
have promoted this design in the country, or those who have withstood it? And
also where has temptation prevailed most? And to put this debate under a
brighter light, I will make bold to recite a brief history of this matter, till
we bring you to the nativity of these proposals, and to the day wherein they
were born; with some present improvement of the history.

About thirty years ago, more or less, there was no appearance of the
associations of pastors in these colonies, and in some parts and places, there
is none yet. But after the country had suffered much in the slaughters and
depredations committed by the heathen, and by many other afflictions, the
neighboring ministers in some counties, met to pray together, etc. and for no
other intent, that I ever knew or heard of. But after they had continued their
meetings for some years, and others following the example began to converse
together, and communicate cases, as best suited each person; and at last
perceiving they were almost gotton into a classical form, before they though it of
it, they began to give their meetings the specious titles of classes,
associations and ecclesiastical conventions, etc. as securely as though these
titles were a fruit growing out of our own constitution; and by degrees began
to dream that they were really, and de Jure, what their new titles and late
custom had made them only de facto; and time increased their inclinations and
purposes to compass a more formal and complete settlement. It is certain, their
opportunities were considerable, the keys of the church treasures being put
into their hands. The more the main point is studied, the more glory appears to
feed men's ambition, like the impression by the eye, on our great parents in
paradise, Genesis 3.8. The tree was pleasant to the eyes, a tree to be desired.
Alas! Alas! empire and supreme rule is a glorious thing! Parcere subjectis et
debellare Superbus, is a very royal business. Now this conceit did begin pretty
much to predominate, especially in some gentlemen that were inclined to
presbyterain principles, men of worth and learning, who improving their
advant^ges of sense and influence, to intreague others of a lower set of
intellectuals, etc. bro't the business so near to a conclusion, as you find it
in the last recited proposal, wherein you have the main of this history
contained, like Homer's Illiads in a nut shell. But to make short, and conclude
my story; when they had thus far advanced and ripened their design, out comes
these proposals, like Aaron's golden calf, the fifth day of November, 1705.

Thus have you a short account how things have been carried on, relating to
associations; and having a convenient crisis, I shall improve the history, to
promote my present design, in a few particulars.

1. By considering the present duty of our erring pastors. 2. The justice to be
done on these proposals. 3. Make some small astrological remarks relating to
the date, which the clew of our history has bro't us to.
1. As to the duty of such as are involved in the charge, whether or no (upon a
presumption that thi^ history be true) they ought not to cease exciting others
to wander from their proper post, and they themselves (if not by the open acts
of the churches authority, yet) by the good government of their own wisdom,
prudence and grace, be remanded within their proper boundaries, and there
continue as stars within their own orbs, to influence and act, Tam in Modis
quam in statis, qua prius, according to the former usage* and the nature of
their trust, and no more go beyond their own line, 2 Cor. 10.16.

2. Whether these proposals here offered to view, be not like Aaron's golden
calf? And whether they ought not to be served, as Moses dealt with that, (Exodus
32.20.) when he took it, and burnt it in the fire; and ground it to powder; for
that it is very evident, that though it be but a calf now, yet in time it may
grow (being of a thirsty nature) to become a sturdy ox, that will know no whoa,
and it may be past the churches skill then to subdue it.

For if I am not much mistaken (and Pareus too) That great and terrible beast
with seven heads and ten horns, described in the Revelations 13, was nothing
else a few ages ago, but just such another calf as this is. It was indeed
finely shaped, and of neat limbs, when it was first calved; insomuch that the
great potentates of the earth were much ravished with its aspect and features;
some offered to suckle it on the choicest cows amongst all the herds of royal
cattle, (that it might be large) hoping to stock their own countries with the
breed, and when it was grown to a considerable magnitude, to render it more
shapely and fair, they put iron tips on to its horns, and beset its stupenduous
bulk with very rich ornaments, that they might make it the more awing to all
beholders, and if possible, by such artifices to add to the natural pride rnd
choler of the creature.

But alas, poor men! they have paid dear for their prodigality and fondness;
for this very creature that was but a calf when they first began to feed it, is
now grown to be such a mad furious and wild bull, that there is scarce a
christian monarch on earth, unless the great Anne, their Sweedish and Prussian
majesty's, and their High Mightinesses, with this exception, there is scarce a
potentate in the world, the best horseman or hunts-man of them all, that dare
take this beast by the horns, when he begins to bounce and bellow. Indeed the
emperor within these few years, has recovered so much courage, that he took him
by the tail, to drive him out of his royal granges, being quite angry, and
weary with his cropping and brouzing on the flowers of his imperial crown. But
otherwise the beast generally goes at large and does what he will in all
princes dominions, and keeps them in awe. Therefore to conclude, and infer,
Obsta Principiis! It is wisdom to nip such growths in the bud, and keep down by
early slaughter such a breed of cattle. Nam omne malum nascens facile
opprimitur.

3dly. In all the astrological remarks I have made, I find its nativity full of
favoruble aspects to English churches. The fifth day of November has been as a
guardian angel to the most sacred interest of the empire: It has rescued the
whole glory of church and state, from the most fatal arrest of hell and Rome.
That had I been of the cabal, or combination, which formed these proposals; so
soon as I had seen and perceived the date, (as I imagine) my heart with king
David's, would have smo^e me, and I should have cried out, M^serere nostri
Deus: The good Lord have mercy upon us; this is the gunpowder treason day; and
we are every man ruined, being running Faux's fate! why gentlemen! have you
forgot it? It is the day of the gun-powder-treason, and a fatal day to traitors.

Our measures certainly intend the blowing up the churches, as Faux's did the
parliament; that for my own part, I have such an awe upon my mind of this very
day, that I have made a settled resolution, that of all the days of the whole
year, I will never conspire treason against my natural prince, nor mischief to
the churches on the fifth day of November.

And so farewell, gentlemen, for I dare not join with you in this conspiracy.

PART. II.
SECT. I.
THAT these associated pastors with a proper number of delegates from their
several churches be formed into a standing and stated council, which shall
consult, advise and determine all affairs that shall be proper matter for the
consideration of an ecclesiastical council within their respective limits,
except always the cases are such as the associated pastors judge more
convenient to fall under the cognizance of other council.

Answer. Seeing it is the first time we have in these proposals heard of a
standing council for these churches, and though the whole doctrine of it is not
precisely or in terms contained in this section, yet that we may pass over what
remains more briefly, when I come upon each following section, I will therefore
make a stop here, and discourse this subject, in its several distinct branches,
and make but one work of it; and I shall thus methodize the business.

1. I shall observe the seeming favor to the lay-delegates here offered to them
in this proposal. 2. Survey the nature of the council. 3. Inquire into its
original. 4. Take an account of the work which is assigned it. 5. View the time
appointed, certain and uncertain. 6. Inquire for the place where it is to meet.
7. And lastly, discourse its maintenance.
1. We must observe the seeming favor the lay-delegetes or fraternity of the
churches are treated with in this proposal; for at the first tender, they seem
very honorable to be invited into the association, as though they were to be
established members of this council; and were to be equal sharers in the
authority and government in it; yet do but mind the connection of both parts of
the proposition, and you will find there is nothing of this nature intended for
them. But only by a specious show, they are in^ited to establish the
associations on their tottering basis, and that is soon done, if all parties
are agreed; and from the fraternity, there is no need of any more formalities,
than paying homage to their authority by this act of submission and obedience
here proposed; and so soon as this is done, you shall find the fraternity very
fairly released at the door of the sessions, every man repairing to his own
home. It is an observation, on the monarchy of bees, that the drones formerly
supposed to be not only a lumpish, but a useless be, yet is of that nature,
and so essential a member of that commonwealth, that it is really the
male-bee, and does impregnate the females, who are the sole laborers in that
kingdom, but when that crisis is over, the poor drones are by common consent
banished, as a great incumberment. So in our case, alas! what can be expected,
when the lay-delegates have done the former jobb, but that they shall be laid
by, for their wisdom and capacity is no ways admired in these proposals. And it
has always been found that the laity are a clog to clergymen, when they begin
to soar a-loft, or above their proper sphere; and if you will but view the
proposal again, in the hindermost part of it, you will see a backdoor very
artificially finished and left upon l^tch* for their exclusi^n; for tho they
are called to be members of the council in the first part of the proposal, yet
by exception made in the last part, they are to sit upon no case but what the
associates please; and seeing it is at their dispose, you may rationally and
forcibly conclude, that those who have made it their business to unpin the
whole tabernacle, and have but this choar to do, and then all is their own,
will now finish their work with a wet finger, upon the aforesaid compliance.
For you must note, that after they have admitted the brethren, and viewed the
certificates of election from the several churches, containing some
congratulatory compliments, to honor the new constitution and government, as is
usual in all states, and having also treated the delegates with the civilities
of the house, and also with a long and tedious harrangue of the mighty
blessings these new settlements plainly predict and promise the country, etc.
the delegates are then advised, there is no case at present depending fit for
their cognizance, but what are upon file, the associates have already
considered about it, and referred to some other council best known to their
graces. And so good brethren, you are now with many thanks for your obedient
attendance, released till Latter Lammas, or till the Greek Calands come about.

And here we may dig a grave to bury all our ancient privileges in, and hang
our harps upon the willows, and when we are thus wasted, should you call us in
once more to sing one of the songs of Sion, all our notes must be Elegy et De
tristibus, yet the broken accents, and lowly murmurs of our sorrow will serve
for elahs and sweet diapasans, in your conquering song of triumph.

2. We must nextly, survey the nature of the council, which cannot be sooner,
and with better advantage (to represent the true idea of it to every man's
understanding) than in a brief definition, thus, the council is to be standing
and stated, to meet once in the year at least, and at other times as each
association shall please to determine, to enquire into the condition of the
churches, and advise such things as may be for the advantage of our holy
religion. Thus you have the nature of it laid out in terms very concisely.

But if a longer description, according to the genuine sense of expressions in
the proposals, will better suit you, and give a better impression of its nature
upon you^ tho'ts we may then describe it thus,

It it a council of human invention, stated and settled to convene once in the
year, yearly, during the revolution of the heavenly bodies, and at other
certain times of the year, so as to keep its course parallel with our high and
superior sessions of the peace, if the creators please; and to consult, advise
and determine all affairs within the reach of ecclesiastical councils, and
especially, etc.

And thus, we being a people swimming in such plenty, that all our chargeable
measures both domestic in our private families, and public in church and common
wealth, being not near sufficient, to take off our waste, and superfluous
streams, and our riches and stores so plainly overloading us, we have here
formed a creature, that will help to sup up all, and seeding upon our fall
baskets, we shall find that the further we go with Aesop's load the lighter we
shall grow; then who will not admire the wisdom of the invention?

3. Our next task is to examine the original of this council, which enquiry,
may be resolved into this disjunct proposition, viz. This council in the result
of the will, obeying the understanding in its last dictates, erring or not
erring.

The question being thus stated, it is at every man's liberty, to take the part
in the disjunction which best likes him. I suppose the proposal arrested and
brought to trial, will plead not erring, or not guilty, as is usual with all
criminals, when indicted; and therefore seeing you expect to be cleared by the
jury, you must give us an honest account, who set you on work, and what rule
you were guided by to assure us that your intellectual powers were free from
error in forming this council, and we will give you room enough in your own
defense. For,

1st. If you can produce evidence from the canon of scripture, in express
terms, or by sound consequence, and prove New England churches are obliged to
form a standing and stated council, or that you are to do it for them, etc. we
will submit. But no such canon can be found. The proposals then incur a heavy
praemunire for making so bold with a settled government, and no text to warrant
the attempt.

2. Is it by any authority, derived from the civil government of the country by
law, or practice, that this council is here erected?

1. By law, if there be any such law, you have liberty to plead it in your own
defense.

2. By practice, has the civil government ever set such an example? Have they
ever entrenched upon the priviliges of the churches in the least degree? And in
their own orb, are they not more exemplary? Don't all men keep to commission?
Are they not curious in maintaining all settled forms, as the limits and
boundaries of all men's actions and interests? Nay, is not the exalted head of
this body politic in his whole ministry, careful to steer all his actions by
his commission, and the precept of law? Is not the least error (though made by
jealousy, and not found in reality) that looks but like an arbitrary action
presently drawn into complaint, as a great grievance, and common nuisance? If it
be but in dream, that the exchequer appears touched, without a precept, or the
wings of our civil liberties clipped, or so much as a feather be plucked from
them, is not the country here and the court at home filled with complaints?
What means all this? And yet must these churches, formed by principles of piety
and honor, and under the steerage of a wise and just government, bear whole
cart-loads of injuries, and have all their liberties violated? And at last have
a stated antichristian arbitrary council, that can cut their throats for all
the wise regulation, that is in it, be thurst in upon them, and both scripture
and the wise fathers of the commonwealth, no patrons to it? And what must we
swallow all this? This must needs be a very heavy meal to digest!

Ut opes et Lamentabile Regnum -- Eruerint?
They spoil our kingdom, and our courage dash,
They take our wealth, and leave us naught but trash.
3. Is there any certificate, order, or vote, from the churches, as the womb of
this council? If there be, the proposals shall then pass for the innocent
midwife, and no harm shall come. But alas! if we search all church records, the
pursuit is blankt! Therefore it must stand for a daring intrusion upon the
churches power of privilege.

It is and will be acknowledged, with great justice and satisfaction, that the
pastors of the churches are in a high station, as they represent the great
shepherd, and their trust is noble and great; they are rulers, and to conduct
all transactions, etc. But yet must never infringe the churches power of
privilege in any branch of it? It becomes the holiness, wisdom and honor of the
ruling officers at a crisis, when the churches are in exercise of this power,
not to allow themselves to dictate too imperiously: They must never indeed, in
all their ministration, talk with such an elevated language, as in the 3d
section of the second part, in these words, viz. That each church choose and
depute one or more (private members) to attend their pastor in their stated
session, etc. As though the high commission court was returned from exile, and
now opened, and some of your graces were to be lord chancellor; this plainly
carries too high a crest. What! to consider yourselves as a distinct estate
from the churches, and to send out of your higher house your orders to be
obeyed in the lower house, etc? But, I say, this is not right, for in convening
and calling of councils the churches are your superiors; and upon a severe
interpretation of their canons, they may, if they please, leave you at home.
For though you have been elected once into office, yet in the exercise of this
their power, you stand but competitors with other principal persons, for their
choice and election, to determine you members of an ecclesiastical council:
Possibly this doctrine may seem to be but a very crude dose. But yet I assure
you, it is approbated by a college of very able and learned physicians; and I
hand it to you as I find it made up in the churches chest of medicines,
platform, chap. 16. sect. 2. The efficient cause of ecclesiastical councils, or
synodical assemblies, next under Christ, is the power of the churches sending
forth their elders and other messengers, etc. sect. 3. Magistrates have power
to call a synod, by calling to the churches to send forth their elders, and
messengers, etc. for the consti^uting of a synod, is a church act, sect. 6.
Because none are or should be more fit to know the state of the churches, nor
to advise of ways, etc. Therefore it is fit, that in the choice of the
messengers for such assemblies, they have special respect unto such, viz.
elders: That certainly if you expect your council shall escape condemnation,
you must then produce the Probatum est of the churches, or else it perishes
under this trial.

4. Can you show any patent for the imperial chamber of our mighty monarch, to
take into your hands (tha^ you may new model) these churches (the royal
demesnes of Christ Jesus, the prince of peace) as an escheat to the crown? Or
have you commission with instructions from thence to erect within the province,
such costly and formidable assemblies, as are here projected? Nay, if you can
find or pick up amongst the old statutes, that are not quite worn out, or
produce one venerable precept or example throughout the whole English empire,
for the government of church or state therein; we will state your case, and
grant you one imparlance (with due time) if you can make any reasonable
presumption, it may be had for your justification; and in the mean time, I
shall venture to recite a few principles of the English government, that are
like the Vana Cava, or great arteries in nature, which circulate the blood and
spirits through the imperial body; and if they don't all with a joint voice (like
a jury in their return, where no man dissents) condemn your council and whole
scheme, you shall still have a goal delivery, and be set free.

Principle I. There is no one of the three estates of the empire, can make a
valid act to bind the subject, or institute any new forms of government.

It is certain the parliament, that supreme court, by an united voice, is very
transcendent; it makes null, enacts, and abrogateth all laws, statutes and
ordinances concerning matters ecclesiastical, civil, martial, martime, etc.
Therefore all acts, institutions, creations of trust, corporations and offices
either originally and immediately, or by a fair consequence, derive from this
fountain the imperial crown, inricht with many prerogatives, and adorned with
many ample flowers; they were there planted by the creating power of the
nation, and no English monarch can at pleasure enlarge that garden with a new
species. That to meet with such things as these now under debate within an
English province, etc. Query, Whether they are enacted by single men, or small
factions; or by the united voice of the kingdom? If not by the latter, they
must die traitors to the empire, as transgressing against the essentials of its
constitution, and liberty of conscience is no city of refuge here.

Principle II. All English men are privileged by and strickly bound to the law;
that is the fruitful reason of all good, and rule of duty. To be bound to the
peace, or the good behavior, is to be bound to the law, that is every man's
master and guide. Query, whether these proposals, and this council, have not
put a slight upon this dominion?

Principle III. The vengeance or vindictive justice of the nation, flames (in
the sanction of the law) against all transgressors.

Every one that breaks the law, breaks from the rule of his duty and trust, and
in a degree violates the power of the nation, and usurps the whole legislation;
therefore in the execution of these direful sanctions and penalties affixed to
the statutes, the omnipotent power of the nation, revenges the glory of its own
independence and unaccountableness upon its insolent subjects, according to
that, Genesis 2.17. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die.
Therefore I may say to this council, Memento Mori.

Principle IV. Every great person is under the awe of the law, either as
directive or coersive.

It is the saying of those who are skilled in the law, That Reg in Rego Suo,
Superiores habet, DEUM et LEGEM; The king has in his realm two superiors, GOD
and the LAW, though he is only under the directive; but all his great subjects
are under the coersive power of it. The nobles and great ministers in church
and state look upon the law as the watchful eye of some direful numen. The
superior clergymen, the great bishops of the kingdom, though they appear masters
of such prerogatives, yet they have nothing but what they derive from the law;
and the laws are their boundaries, saying Hitherto you shall go, and no further
at your peril. That those great men might as well have undertaken with
Archimides, to have removed the earthly globe (upon condition) as to have done
such a thing as this. What! to alter the constitution of church government,
which is established by the statute, and canon law of church and nation? This
is to blow up the whole kingdom. Ergo, put out your matches, and dissolve your
trains.

Principle V. All Englishmen live and die by laws of their own making. That
they are never pleased with upstart lawmakers.

Principle VI. That English government and law is a charter-party settled by
mutual compact between persons of all degrees in the nation, and no man must
start from it at his peril.

Query, Whether these proposals have kept to the articles of this great
covenant?

Principle VII. Englishmen hate an arbitrary power (politically considered) as
they hate the devil.

For that they have through immemorial ages been the owners of very fair
infranchizements and liberties, that the sense, favor or high esteem of them
are (as it were) extraduce, transmitted with the elemental materials of their
essence from generation to generation, and so ingenate and mixed with their
frame, that no artifice, craft or force used can root it out. Naturam expellas
furca licet usque recurrit. And though many of their incautelous princes have
endeavored to null all their charter rights and immunities, and agrandize
themselves in the servile state of the subjects, by setting up their own
separate will, for the great standard of government over the nations, yet they
have all along paid dear for their attempts, both in the ruin of the nation,
and in interrupting the increase of their own grandeur, and their foreign
settlements and conquests.

Had the late reigns, before the accession of the great William and Mary, to
the throne of England, but taken the measures of them, and her present majesty,
in depressing vice, and advancing the union and wealth, and encouraging the
prowice and bravery of the nation, they might by this time have been capable to
have given laws to any monarch on earth; but spending their time in the pursuit
of an absolute monarchy (contrary to the temper of the nation, and the ancient
constitution of the government) through all the meanders of state craft: It has
apparently kept back the glory, and dampt all the most noble affairs of the
nation. And when under the midwifry of Machiavilan art, and cunning of a daring
prince, this MONSTER, tyranny, and arbitrary government, was at last just born,
upon the holding up of a finger! or upon the l^^st signal given, ON the whole
nation goes upon this HYDRA.

The very name of an arbitrary government is ready to put an Englishman's blood
into a fermentation; but when it really comes, and shakes its whip over their
ears, and tells them it is their master, it makes them stark mad; and being of
a m^mical genius, and inclined to follow the court mode, they turn arbitrary
too.

That some writers, who have observed the governments and humors of nations,
th^^ distinguish the English:

The emperor (say they) is the king of kings, the king of Spain is the king of
men, the king of France the king of asses, and the king of England the king of
devils; for that the English nation can never be bridled, and rid by an
arbitrary prince. Neither can any chains put on by dispotic and arbitrary
measures hold these legions. That to conclude this plea, I find not amongst all
the catalogues of heroes or worthy things in the English empire, peers to these
undertakers; therefore we must needs range them with the arbitrary princes of
the earth, (such as the great Czar or Ottoman monarch) who have no other rule
to govern by, but their own will. And therefore under this branch of our
discourse, and their arbitrary measures, I shall venture to annex the following
Theses, as conclusions fairly deducted from the premises, and leave them to
consideration.

Thesis 1. They have out-king'd all kings on earth, whose prerogatives are
bounded, and their kingdoms governed by law.

Thesis 2. They have out bishop't all the bishops of Great Britain, whilst they
they themselves have acted with such lawless liberty, and left the bishops
fettered in the statutes.

Thesis 3. They have out-pop't the pope himself, who is head of an hierarchy,
supported by certain laws, acts and ordinances, for the maintaining an harmony
or union between head and members. So in the next place,

4. We come to survey the work cut out for this council.

CATO, that great and grave philosopher, did commonly demand (when any new
project was propounded unto him) Cui Bono? or what good was like to ensue? Now
in this present business, the definition pretends to make a satisfactory answer
to such a question, viz. In the employment of this annual council; and that is
to inquire into the condition of the churches, and advise such things as may be
for the advantage of our holy religion.

It is certain, considering the nature of the creature here formed, there had
need be some Herculean labor assigned. Those who are purveyors, and must
provide quarters, will find it very chargeable, that it had need do very
extraordinary business. As once king James the first said to big-lim'd country
fellow, who came to court to be a porter; some that knew him, told the king how
many bowls full, and quarters of mutton he would eat at a meal; says the king
to the fellow, You sirrah, that eat so much more than other men, if you cannot
do so much more work than other men, by my so'l (says the king) I Will hang you.
So here, there had need go a handsome stock of small cattle, and other expenses
to maintain one sessions: that if it has confidence to meet, and is treated
with an ordinary allowance, if it cant do abundance of work, it will be waste
charges, and great incumberment.

Now, if this be all that is here proposed (in my opinion) the creators are
very defective in their proportions; for though the work mentioned is in itself
good work; but it is all done already to their hands, there is nothing of this
nature neglected in New England churches; at least, no means or methods wanted;
but as God says, Jer. 5.4. "What could have been done more for my vineyard,
that I have not done in it:" may properly be applied to the churches here, and
all for the anvantage and good of our holy religion; that, in a word, there is
no want in this country, unless it be the want of good and honest hearts; and I
suppose you have none of those to bequeath, Mat. 25.9. Upon the first view of
this stupenduous business, I was ready to fancy, whether or no you had dreamed
of, or seen king Henry the eighth a coming with his old case and question,
which involved the pope, his conclave, and all the accademies in Europe, and
whether you were getting a mighty casuist ready, to take the king's conscience
into consideration? Or, whether you had news of the old Arian war, its breaking
out again, that you should in such haste, (without citing other estates for the
defense of the kingdom, but only by virtue of your prerogative) run up such a
formidable and costly redoubt? But if it be all come to this, and there is no
more to do, than what every pious and wise man does every day, every week, and
every sessions, it is even another fit or paroxism of the mountains bringing
forth, as the poet says, Par^uriunt Montes, etc.

But to humor what would seem serious in the proposal, I shall consider both
parts of the work dictinctly.

The first is, to enquire into the condition of the churches?

Answ. Now whether this precept, so full of sw^at and servitude, may not vie it
for merit, as equal in pains with any of the great prelates in Europe, in their
laborious visitations; who when they come into some capital town in the other
part of their diocese, and being treated with the solemn formalities of
sumptuous feasts by the nobility and gentry in the neighborhood, and having
spent the bigest part of their pastoral visit in glutting themselves with honor
and full tables; at last begin the other part of their work, and inquire
(possibly) how many parishes in this great town, and whether there be any
chyrurgeons, physicians or schoolmasters, that do good to their neighbors
without license? Or, whether there be any new Golgotha's to be dedicated, for
the securer retreat of the dead to that place? Or, whether the parish curates
read service well, and observe to time their particular lessons, with the
canonical days? And especially, whether the bells are kept in good order? All
which makes up a noble piece of service, to requite a crown or kingdom for the
revenues of a barony! And, whether it may be thought, that our great and yearly
council, will come a whit behind the aforesaid ministry in the first or last
part of service mentioned? And whether if they do but equal them, we may not be
thought to have made a wise settlement? But notwithstanding we shall grant, the
proposal makes mention of a christian duty; for that it becomes all men, who
bear a love to Christ, to enquire into the state of his churches, both for the
manifesting their love to men, and directing their prayers and gratitude to
GOD. Therefore,

1. As to their outward and temporal state, we may inform ourselves, by virtue
of neighborhood, by christian travelers, and public letters of intelligence:
and thus we may rationally, and with very good moral certainty know the state
of the churches, both in other countries and our own; and thus good Nehemiah
informs bimself at Shushan, how it fared with his brethren at Jerusalem, Neh.
1.2, 3.

2. As to their moral state (which consists in their profession, faith, manner
of worship, discipline and conversation) this is discovered particularly, by
their directories, confessions of faith, platforms, rubric, liturgies, and
other canonical systems, made public for that end, etc. And considering, that
whatever of this nature is necessary for the advance of religion, is well
adjusted in this country, it must needs be but a vain repetition, or seaseless
tautology for a council to meet yearly or quarterly for this end, viz. To
enquire what news, or whether New-England's confession of faith is the same
this year, as it was last? Or, whether all the churches, their manner of
worship, is this sabbath as it was the other? And as to their conversation
(which may seem to lie most out of sight) sufficient provision made by the
principles of our wise platform (for upholding the communion of churches) for
our enquiry and information here also. And thus we come to the other part of
this good work, viz.

2. To advise such things as may be for the advantage of our holy religion.

Answ. Query, Whether or no there be not published weekly from the oracles of
God (and that with great soundness and zeal) more truth in a day than all
New England can practice in a long time after? And whether all the churches in
the whole land are not honored and addressed, from week to week, in such measures
by infallible truth, if not by infallible men? Or whether or no these methods
don't divulge the whole mind of God to each plantation? Or, whether these
gentlemen have any secrets of wisdom not yet made known? Or, whether they
intend to serve the churches, as some great philosophers and profound artists
in medicine serve the world, viz. such who carry some great inestimable
Catholicon to the grave with them? And, whether they will be thus hard hearted
in religion, as the other are in philosophy, unless he will gratify them with
this piece of prodigality here exacted? I must acknowledge I have little
patience toward these things, that under such a specious show and pretense,
such a direful catastrophe should be shrouded! I must needs say, its plainly
some of Joab's friendship, when he spoke quietly and peaceably to Abner, smiled
in his face, as his friend, but stabbed him to the heart, under the fifth rib,
that he dropped, and died.

But however, I shall endeavor, to resque myself from all impatience, and with
deliberation sum up my answer, in an appeal to your own reasons concerning
those several created trusts, which God has established, and clothed with his
own authority, every one of which is acted with great vigor, and success; and
whether you think you can do more than all these for religion? Or prescribe
something new which they never though it of. As,

1st. Civil authroity, in two great branches.

1. Legislative power (that civil omnipotence) is doing very great things for
religion, by their proclamations, and all penal laws enacted for the crushing
of immorality and vice, and all their wise and exact precepts for the support
of justice and piety. They are opening many civil channels, whereby they are
conveying judgment, justice and righteousness down our streets, from the great
fountain. Nay, this great and dread assembly puts awe upon all mankind. And the
more daring and desperate are kept within compass, from a sense of this most
terrible seat of thunder hanging over their heads, and upon every affront ready
to break in strokes of vengeance and woes upon them, especially if they grow
beyond the reach of common law.

And in ordinary cases.

2. The executive power, or ministers of the law, are like a standing camp to
awe, and a flying army to beat off the enemy; they have their spies and scouts
out in every quarter to observe his motions, and break his measures, viz. In
the innumerable numbers of all sorts of civil officers; and thus by the sword
of justice they hunt down sin and impiety in the land. They are a terror to
evil men and a praise to them that do well; for the civil authority, by their
wise and just precepts, their personal and noble examples and zealous
administrations, outdo Plato himself with all his moral reasons; for they can
turn a Sodom into a Sion, and keep Sion to be Sion evident by the history and
chronicles of several governments of God's ancient people. Nam Regis ad
Exemplum Totus Componitur Orbis. For chief rulers, by their good or bad
measures, can make or mar, kill or cure a nation, in a moral sense.

2 The churches.

View once more, from some lofty promontory or Pisgah, those goodly tents and
tabernacles of Israel! Listen! Is not God with them, and the shout of a king
amongst them? Are they not as valleys spread forth, and as gardens by the river
side, which the Lord has planted? And yet notwithstanding, may we, must we
under your conduct, break up their fences, to give them another sort of
culture? Nay, consider well! Are not the flowers better wed, and the weeds more
kept down, than in most of the enclosures in the world, belonging to the great
husbandman? And may you not (in reckoning up of means) allow us peculiarly to
ascribe to their government and other of their measures agreeing with the
nature of it in dressing the ground? But I will not enlarge this head; it is
obvious enough from their ministry, from their faith, their discipline and
conversations.

3. The nurseries of learning.

1. The inferior schools, where the leaven is laid hid and kneaded in the soft
dough; Et Em^llit mores, nec s^nit esse feros, etc.

2.The college (that artillery garden from whence we receive our most expert
soldiers of Christ, and whence Christ's troops are supplied with chief
commanders, who lead on to ^^^m the strong holds of the common enemy, and
secure our great ally, religion) this is the seminary of learning and virtue,
and the success is almost to a miracle, unless for humiliation we must secret
the great grace and gifts of God which flow from that fountain, and are
dispersed through the land.

Query. Were a council called, of all the learned heads of the whole universe,
could they dictate better laws, and advise better measures for the acquirement
of learning, the increase of virtue and good religion, than are in that royal
province?

4. The families of the country with their economy and family religion; if we
take a survey of the whole land we shall find religion placed in the body
politic, as the soul in the body natural. Nam est Tota Anima, in Toto Corpore,
et Tota in Qualibet part; that is, the whole soul is in the whole body, and
whole in every part. That were any other part of the body organized besides the
head, it would be capable to exercise reason, etc. So religion is placed and
exercised in its principles, virtues and governments through the families of
the country, so many families so many little sanctuaries.

I do acknowledge, there is no general rule, but has its execptions; but under
this caution I may affirm, there is no such spot of earth in the earthly globe
(so belabored with family devotion, reading God's word, catechizing and well
instructing youth, with neat and virtuous examples and divine prayers, non ex
Codice, sed ex Cord, not out of books, but out of hearts, the solemnizing
sabbaths and and family attendance on public means) as is New England. And if
so, then what need have we of this late invention? Therefore to conclude, I
shall, for my own part, with the jealous Laccoon, enter a caution against
taking down the sides of the city, or opening the walls of our Sion to let in
this Trojan horse; and let all Israel say, amen! For, blessed be God, though we
want to have our hearts renewed daily, but as for means, though we have no
glut, we have plenty enough, and want no new institutions.

We come now to measure, and find out the time appointed for the council.

1. Certain, viz. Once in the year at the least, all the associations in the
country, and according to the most plausible interpretation of the proposals,
one or more lay-delegates shall join and meet yearly and every year in the
great assemblies.

Answer. As Austin says of time, Vivo in Tempore, Loquor de Tempere, sed Nescio
quid sit Tempus, I live in time, I speak of time, but yet I know not what time
is. So I do imagine, the dictators did not well weigh time by exact balance,
in all its contents, sense and meaning, when they carved out such a large
proportion to this illegal claimer. Time is justly esteemed precious, in
relation to heaven and grace, and also very valuable with respect to the
interest of nature and this life. Therefore, care should be had, that it been't
squandered away wastfully. Our natural lives, healths and honor, families and
estates are all very significant and costly things, and their dependence is
much on the well husbanding of time, insomuch that in hard and penurious
climates, the inhabitants had need be very saving of time for the support of
all these great interests, and especially seeing there is so much time already
set off for religion. As,

1. The seventh part of time is assigned by the wise author of time, and that
well improved, will do much for the support of religion.

2. There are great proportions (out of the time left to our dispose) frankly
bequeathed for the good of religion, as in courts, churches, college, school,
families, closets, and in many other sacred intervals, breathing spells from
the hurry of business, render to men more sedate and heavenly (called time out
of season) and all for the service of religion; then to add and make this
offering also, without a divine mandate, is but a work of superarrogation or
superstition, and so will prove not only a needless, but an extravagant victim.

And moreover, to add a just aggravation or two, to set forth the evil in the
imposition, I shall, with them, conclude the plea.

Aggravation I. Is taken from the great and sufficient care and provision made
by the 15th and 16th chapters of our platform, for the convening of occasional
and needful councils, for the service of the churches, and support of religion
upon all emergencies. Then what need we throw away so many years of time at a
venture, as is here tendered in the proposal, before our necessities or
occasions call for the expense; unless we would in imitation of the Rhodian
Coloss, or Egyptian Pyramids, erect a monument of our vain glory and pride,
more than of our prudence, policy or duty.

Aggravation II. Is taken from the great affront real and rational, done to
empire.

1. Real, In making thus bold, with the time and estates of loyal subjects.

2. Rational; For let us but consider, that about three hundred men (gown men,
and swordmen) with twice the number of attendants, which will make up near a
thousand strong (and all well horsed and provided) to be mustered no man living
on earth can tell for what, cannot be well resented by crowned heads, those
admirers of order: That the project carried on, may breed jealousies in the
heart of our prince, least that Ket, Cade, Straw or Tyler have pitched upon an
oak of reformation again, with an intent to overhawl the government, etc. And
especially seeing the crown was never advised of any such thing (as is
proposed) by the regular forms of empire. There is danger of losing our time,
and the credit of our loyalty together; that all things considered, the best
way will be for us to keep well, whilst we are well; and therefore let every
man and society be advised to improve their time wisely, keep in their post and
honestly study to do their own business, which God, law and regular settlements
has entrusted them with; and we may then hope things will go well with us, and
our holy religion.

2. Uncertain, viz. When the creators please, and can agree, for the more
particular time is best left to the determination of each association, as the
proposal affirms. And thus we are left very uncertain, when, where or whether
it will ever be; so that I preceive, you have no great dependence upon it,
neither must we; The wisdom of civil government has another sort of conduct.
Such things are not left to discretion, for that would be indiscretion, and the
way to turn the world into a bedlam, or the dewlling place of mad men. And in
the example before us, suppose the arbitrators (when the question for the time
is propounded) should differ, and hotly dispute the matter; and some should
plead, it was best to be in the winter, and some in the summer; some argue for
the fall, and some for the spring, according as every man's temper leads him;
and at last, referring to a majority of voices, should they (for want of an odd
man) lock it by an equal vote, and so keep it like a game atchess for several
years on the table, and neither side get the mastery; we may then in our
distresses hollow whilst our throats ach, and no help comes; for they have
voted themselves fast (like two bucks in their own horns) and cannot stir for
our relief.

6. We must, according to promise, make some enquiry whether this council is to
meet, or for the place of meeting?

It is held in opinion, that castles in the air, and immaterial substances do
not occupy place; philosophy assigns them no more than a Ubi, where many may
exist in Puncto Indivisibli, or on the point of a needle; and if this council
is (as I apprehend it) belonging to that conjugation or cataloglue of beings,
it will then have this privilege belonging to it, viz. There will be no house
to build, nor house rent to pay,

7. We come now (in the last place) to consider its maintenance, by three
queries.

1 st. Query, Whether the churches in their expiring, must (as all criminals
do) pay for their own execution, and their estates be confiscate, and reserved
as a fund, yielding a certain stipend per annum, to support their executioners?

2 d. Query, Whether the contingent fees of the sessions, or the free and
voluntary contribution of clients, may be thought a medium sufficient? Or,

3 d. Query, Whether it must not be here, as it is in some civil cases, under
the cognizan^e of a very peaceble and good natured justice, that for the
healing of a difference amongst neighbors, advises them to agree, etc. and so
let every man bear his own charges*

But how it is, or which way they intend to raise a support for a standing
council, yearly, and every year, I cannot find out; there is no stipend
settled, or provision made in the canons, which give it being.

It is certain, in the history of God's works, he first makes his house, etc.
then furnishes his table with great varieties; and then invites his guests, and
makes them welcome; and so it is with all regular created efficients both
rational and natural; but in this scheme there is nothing done for the support
of the new born infant, but like a runaway dam, you leave it to the mercy of
the heavens. But possibly the relief is stored up in your creating power; so
that if the charitable churches will but find a cradle for the first night, and
naturalize it, you will by your creating fiat, soon find a fortune, if all the
tithes in the province will do it.

Thus, according to engagement, we have passed through the several heads,
relating to the standing council, and I think by the analysis, it is
sufficiently resolved into its first nothing; and therefore in what remains, I
shall be more brief in my answer.

SECT. II.
THAT to this end, these associated pastors, with their respective churches
shall consociate and combine.

Answer. There is plainly an Hysteron and Proteron, (a preposterous speech, or
misplacing of terms, pastors and churches) in this section; and though in
rhetoric it breaks no great squares, yet in politics, where the just boundaries
of governments are to be set out, the mis-placing some great words, may ruffle
the whole scheme; so that according to the more wary idiom of our church
government, it should be written thus, viz. The respective churches, shall
consociate and combine, and their pastors shall attend and minister, as their
duty does oblige them.

SECT. III.
ACCORDING to what has been by the synods of these churches recommended, that
they act as consociated churches, in all holy watchfulness and helpfulness
toward each other.

Answer. Titus the Roman general, is very honorable for his great pity to the
Israelites, in many examples that fell into his hands; but all this while he
was in siege of that famous town and temple, and designed to root them out of
house and home, or subject them to the mercy and pleasure of a conqueror.

So here. Though you smile upon us, in reciting some of the principles of our
own government, (for which we thank you) yet still we must observe the noise of
your mattocks, that we may meet with your trenches, for you are still carrying
on your works, and undermining us.

SECT. IV.
IT is propounded, as that which from our beginning, has been recommended, etc.

Answer. You seem to reflect upon our beginnings, with a singular air and
aspect, when you find any word or passage, that falls in with your design, as
though you were sensible those things were very argumentative and binding; and
indeed they are so. Then why cant you fall in with the whole settlement, and
say to yourselves, what need we stand puzling our heads for new schemes about
church government? There is one from our beginnings, that is complete, being
adjusted by the laws of honor, and assigns to all parties their due, and gives
to officers rule, power and honor enough; therefore let us, now we are met,
order a new impression, and so break up. For alas, alas! What need you, like
the thievish bird, pick here and there a straw or a feather in our yards, to
build a new nest? or now and then gather up a kernal, or a grain out of our
first fruits? The whole plantation and crop is yours, if you please to make use
of it; and it will be your livelihood, as it has been hitherto; only you must
remember to pay the quit-rent, as honorable tenants, and not take yourselves to
be lords of the manor.

SECT. V.
THAT the association shall direct, when there is occasion, for this council to
convene, on any emergency, and shall direct whether the whole, or only a
certain number of these consociated pastors and churches shall convene on such
occasions.

Answer. The begged prerogatives of clergymen come so thick in this place, and
smell so strong of the pope's cooks and kitchen, where his broaths and
restoratives are prepared, that they are enough to strangle a freeborn
Englishman, and much more these churches, that have lived in such a clear air,
and under such enlargements so long a time. For indeed, (forsooth) four score
years has brought (not our hogs, but) our innocent flock to a fair market, if
it is come to this, that clergymen may buy and sell them (as the Romans did the
Jews) thirty for a penny, or at least say, pro and con, at their pleasure, upon
all the high immunities and ancient liberties of the churches, lion-like (who
claims the whole prey, and leaves no share to his allies, vel Actum est de
Amicitia) all is mine (says he) or farewell friendship.

SECT VI.
IT appears agreeable with the present condition of our churches, and from our
beginning acknowledged, that no act of the council is to be reckoned, concluded
and desicive, for which there has not been the concurrence of the major part of
the pastors therein concerned.

Answer. 1. The specificating act, that impowers any member for an
ecclesiastical council, is the churches election or delegation, according to
our government; so that the members sent, are invested with the power, and
represent those who send them: The officers have no more of this power devolved
upon them, than any member, and therefore can challenge no more right (as
elders) in a major or in a negative vote, than any others, as is very apparent
in all representative bodies; therefore all acts must be determined by the
majority of the whole, as in the house of commons, though made up of men of
many different characters, when in their own countries, both as to their trust,
learning and wisdom, and other distinguishing qualifications; yet the meanest
man there has as great a force and power in his vote or suffrage, as the best
man in the house, for that they all equally represent the nation, one man as
much as another: So in this case; for that the churches and officers were never
yet since New England stood, held or accounted two distinct estates in an
ecclesiastical council. Therefore,

2. Your challenge plainly defines your intention, that is to null the power of
the churches, and set up yourselves, as the subject or fountain of a
superintending power. And then, if the churches may have so much favor as to
represent themselves by their lay-delegates, in a council you shall see meet to
call, you must needs allow them to be a distinct house and estate. And if so,
then you must grant them the privilege of a major vote, as well as yourselves,
and so nothing can be acted but by their compliance also. But I must
acknowledge, I have no plenipotentiary power to settle articles of agreement,
for the infringing any of the rights of the churches, and therefore must draw
up my memorials or complaints of encroachments upon ancient lines and
boundaries, and so leave them.

SECT. VII.
THE determinations of the councils, thus provided for the necessities of the
churches, etc.

Answer. Let any man read the 15th and 16th chapters of our platform, and then
judge, whether the necessities of these churches are so urgent as this
proposal, with too much falacy insinuates, or whether they are any ways in
Esau's straits, who thought he might sell his birthright for a mess of
pottage, if not to save his life, yet to gratify his peevish and distrustful
hunger.

SECT. VIII.
IF a particular church will not be reclaimed, etc.

Answer. This whole long section is the third way of the communion of churches,
laid out in the 15th chapter of our platform, almost Totidem verbis, or, in so
many words. And whether or no the annexing some of the principles and rules of
our vindictive and more public justice to the scheme, will sufficiently atone
for the dissolution of the whole frame, which is intended by you?

CONCLUSION.
THESE proposals were assented to by the delegates of the association, met
according to former agreemet at B. Sept. 13th, 1705, to be communicated.

Answer. The church of England has been wont to look upon us as men out of our
wits, therefore they term us phantics, or madmen, but much more now. What! for
men to break from the government they themselves have established by consent
and practice, and arbitrarily to rally together, and draw up a direful sentence
(if not in terms, yet in intent) for the dissolution of a country full of the
best churches of Christ in the world, and then (as it were) upon the bold sound
of a trumpet, to excite others to ratify the dead warrant, in order to
execution! What can this import or signify in the thoughts of considerate men,
but a vertiginous brain? We might have learned better, and more caution, from
that mother church of the nation, if not from common reason; for though our
sovereign confides in the loyalty of the English clergy, yet to maintain the
grandeur of government, and keep in good repair that common sense which keeps
every man in his station, therefore, according to the law and custom of
England, the convocation, both the higher and lower house of that learned and
august assembly, neither debates nor transacts any matter whatsoever, but what
our sovereign by commission expressly allows of, according to his prerogative;
so that certainly to acquit yourselves for wise men you should have done no
less (in a matter of such weight and moment) than have petitioned the public
authority for commission, before you had ventured thus far.

Object. But possibly some may say, We have petitioned authority to establish
our councils, since we have drawn them up in form.

Answ. This is to be preposterous, and agrees with that illegal way of hanging
men and then judging them; but however it seems they turned a deaf ear to your
demands; and well they might, for they are two wise men to alter the laws of
the province, long customs and orderly settlements of the churches to gratify
an implicit faith in the stark naked Ipse Dixits of any men; that unless you
can produce a mandamus from the crown, or a precept from a higher court, which
by its divine authority shall awe and direct them, you may always expect such
entertainment in your precarious addresses; for most certainly you beg at the
wrong door. For you beg without a brief.

To be commended to the several associated ministers in the several parts of
the country, to be duly considered.

Answ. And why not commended to the general court, as has been the custom of
our beginnings, etc. or why not commended nextly to the several churches? By
the question proposed, the comfort, support, and well being of these churches
was peculiarly pretended, then why might not they be nextly advised with, for
their approbation or esteem? for if you intend it for a new suit, or change of
apparel, or a set of armor for this army in banners, it must be the only way
to try it on, it being now so near finishing; and if it be done work-man-like,
you will have the credit and they the comfort of it; but if it prove too
strait-laced, or should they feel themselves as David in Readiness coat of mail,
and should shrug at it, and say, we cannot go in these, we have not proved
them; yet they may throw all by and keep to their own old suit, which is not
yet half worn, and the worst come to the worst, you may by any lawful writ
recover your wages of those who set you on work to blow at this forge.

That so what may be judged for the service of our GREAT LORD, and his holy
churches.

Answ. You acknowledge, and so do I, that these are holy churches, and (through
the grace of their great Lord) they being so; then why should they be
interrupted in their government and discipline, which has been a peculiar means
for the advance and promoting holiness among them? They are strict in their
government; curious, yet charitable in their admissions; in the election of all
officers, they are nice, cautious, judicious, and in the main hitherto very
successful. They are eagle-eyed in their watch; duly hot, and impartial in
their process and exemplary acts of justice; and so dependent and free from
arrogance, that they acknowledge themselves accountable under the eye of the
consociation, for their astministration; and freely and without covin, render
an account of their actions, and are willing to receive advice, and etc. Then
why should you disturb them?

You acknowledge them to be holy churches, and you may well! Then certainly
they are the bethels, where God dwells; and from his grace and presence, so
illustrious in them, why may not we conclude, God has said, this is my rest for
ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it? And will then any good man have
an hand in pulling down these tabernacles of the almighty? No! rather let every
man involved, say, as once Job did, I will lay my hand upon my mouth; once have
I spoken, but I will not answer; yea, twice, but I will proceed no further,
lest I am found fighting against God; for it is most certain, all men will find
themselves over-match't in such a war.

Be proceeded in.

Answ. I think we are proceeding in the best method we can for the present, for
the service of these churches* that is to say, the criminal proposals being now
at the bar, and having been indicted upon several statutes; and evidence for
proving matter of fact, being legal and sufficient, the case is now to be
delivered to the great jury of trials, viz. The impartial reason of the
churches, and there having been no such deed done, or seen, from the day that
this good people came up out of the land, from the other side of the great sea,
unto this day, consider of it, take advice and speak your minds, Judge. 19.30.

And upon due deliberation, if under the conduct of law and reason, you shall
bring in guilty; then I petition for the crown, that justice be done in this
following manner, not by banishment, praemunire or perpetual imprisonment I but
that the proposals be sentenced to die the death of heretics, and their ashes
be exposed to the four winds; that the whole scheme may, beyond all hope of
retrieve, be lost in oblivion. And let the churches, according to their
platform, recover and maintain their authority, liberties and luster, so long
as the sun and moon shall continue.

The date, -- November the 5 th 1705.

Answ. Blessed! Thrice blessed day! Uphold and maintain thy matchless fame in
the calendar of time, and let no darkness or shadow of death stain thee; let
thy horizon comprehend whole constellations of fovorable and auspicious stars,
reflecting a benign influence on the English monarchy. And upon every return,
in thy anniversary circuits, keep an indulgent eye open and wakeful upon all
the beauties (from the throne to the footstool^ of that mighty empire!

And when it is thy misfortune to conceive a monster, which may threaten any
part of the nations glory, let it come crippled from the womb, or else travel
in birth again, with some noble hero, or invincible Hercules, who may conquer
and confound it.

The last binding vote.

At an association meeting, the foregoing proposals were read, and assented
to.

Answ. Whether for a small juncto of gentlemen, without being orderly called
(as a commit of wise and learned men to survey an old government, and make
their report) by any supreme authority; for them of their own heads, to meet
and to draw up articles against, and in imitation of the highest and most
regular state on earth; to vote up a scheme of their own inventing, and thereby
sign the condemnation of a grave ecclesiastical government, which has been
adjusted by the rules of equity and honor, and for the security of all persons
and parties interested and involved, and regularly settled and established by
all the churches in the province; and owned ratifyed, and honored by the civil
authority of the empire; and eminently blessed God, through a long series and
succession of years; now whether such a daring action as this, can be placed
under any of the topics of political or moral wisdom, either of the fear of
God, allegiance to their prince, or love to their country? Or whether or no
they don't (for their defiance to the churches, in this bold and terrible vote)
rather merit a page in the chronicles of time, and there in capital letters, be
written, not an association of wise, but, a faction of disorderly, etc. and
impolitic men?

The introduction to personal signing. PRESENT.

Answ. A council of war (by adjournment met, without commission) consulting the
most plausible way to blow up the walls of our Zion. But where the place was,
or the persons who were present in this rendezvouze, shall never be told by me,
unless it be extorted by the rack. And though I have endeavored with freedom of
argument to subvert the error, I will never stain their personal glory by
repeating or calling over the muster-roll.

Therefore* as Noah's sons cast a garment upon their fa^^ers nakedness, (so
leaving them in the crowd) their names (for me) shall repose under a mantle of
honorable pity and forgetfulness.

Yet wishing they may never more harbor such thoughts, or promote such a
design as is projected by these proposals; but hereafter when temptation makes
its signal, let them rather trespass upon gravity, by following the hounds in
the forest, or by a more submissive and moderate way (to baffle the enemy, and
wear off the impression) let them write on the ground, or with the famous
Domitian, spend the time in catching flies, rather then contrive how to subvert
or alter the government in the churches, by such dispotic measures especially
in an empire and province so charmed with such enchanting liberties as ours
are. For otherwise they may chance to bring, if not an old, a new house upon
their heads, according to that saying, Debile fundamentum, fallit Opus.

A work if done, and no foundation laid*
Falls on the work-mens head; thus they (...) paid.
The following is an Extract from a Book entitled, New-England's LAMENTATIONS,
wrote by the Reverend Mr. JOHN WHITE, late Pastor of the first Church in
Gloucester; to which is subjoined a Letter by another Hand, showing Reasons for
adhering to our PLATFORM, as a Rule of Church Government, and Objections
against Ruling Elders answered: Which extract and Letter are here inserted at
the Request of a Number of the Subscribers to Mr. WISE's two Publications.
"THE present weak and shattered state of our CHURCHES, on the account of their
Order, Government, and Discipline, (says Mr. White) is matter of LAMENTATION.
This is evident to every person of observation. Hence particular churches run
into confusion. Many are aggrieved, and abide year after year in their
sorrowful circumstances. And a farther evidence thereof, is the ineffectualness
of councils to ^^lieve the aggrieved, and to make peace. As also anti-councils,
whereby contrary results are given on the same case, to the great reproach of
councils, and blemish of our church government, and discouragement of the
aggrieved, who are ready to lie under their troubles as remediless. Hence it is
that some councils have persuaded the church and aggrieved, to promise to
acquiesce in the determination of the council, before they heard the case, by
which their consciences have been ensnared, and the council turned into a
solemn Arbitration. This therefore is matter of just Lamentation.

I come to enquire,

1. Into the MEANS, which have brought us under these lamentable circumstances.
In a word, it is our being prejudiced against, and not attending to the rules
and principles of congregational churches, as laid down in our platform. To go
from the rule is arbitrary; and to go against professed principles, making our
wills the rule, is tyranny. And when a people fairly possessed of liberties and
privileges, are thus dealt with, this leads directly to contention and
confusion.

1. These churches have not attended the rule, as to the complete organization
of churches. It Is the privilege of a church to choose its own officers; as,
platform, chap. 10. sect. 5. viz. The power granted by Christ unto the body of
the church and brotherhood, is a prerogative and privilege which the church
exercises, in choosing their own officers, whether elders or deacons, etc. So
chapter 6. sect. 4. Of elders some attend chiefly to the ministry of the word, as
pastors and teachers; some attend especially unto rule, who are therefore
called ruling-elders. Now the want of these officers exposes churches to
arbitrariness, contentions and confusions. As also it renders the government of
the church, in some cases impracticable. An instance of all these great
inconveniences, we have lately had in a neighbor church; where all possible
endeavors have been used by the aggrieved (a very great and valuable part of
the church) to have a church-meeting, and when there was great occasion for it;
and yet it could not be obtained: They had not a church-meeting for about 14
years: Whereas if they had been furnished with a full supply of officers, they
might have easily obtained it, and (...) that means put an end to a long and
very threatening ^tention. Besides, had the pastor called the church together at
their request, there being but one elder, viz. a teaching one, and he the
(supposed) offending party, it was not possible according to congregational
principles, to have proceeded to judge and censure in that case. For ministers
are under no ecclesiastic government, but in the church, where they are members
as well as ministers. Now it is a rule in the congregational government, as in
platform, chap. 10. sect. 11. No church-act can be consummated or perfected,
without the consent of both; that is, the eldership and brethren. Now it is not
at all proper, that an accused and faulty elder should be a judge in his own
case; therefore when he is the peccant party and no ruling elders to join the
brethren in an ^act of discipline and censure, there cannot be a valid act. And
so it is also when a minister is the accuser. Thus by the disuse of ruling
elders (so necessary in our constitution) the government is rendered weak; yea,
in some cases impracticable. Therefore it was that when the synod convened,
Oct. 15, 1679, to enquire what wanted reformation in the land, and to propose
expedients therefore; in the 5th place they say, It Is requisite that the utmost
endeavors should be used, in order for a full supply of officers in the
churches, according to Christ's institution; the defect of these churches on
this account is very lamentable, there being in most of the churches only one
teaching officer for the burden of the whole church to lie upon. The Lord
Christ would not have instituted pastors, teachers, ruling elders, (nor the
apostles ordained elders in every church) Acts 4.23. Tit. 1.5. if he had not
seen there was need of them for the good of his people; therefore for men to
think they can do well enough without them, is to break the second commandment,
and to reflect upon the wisdom of Christ, as if he did appoint unnecessary
officers in his church. Experience has evinced, that personal instruction and
discipline have been happy means to reform degenerate congregations; yea, and
owned by the Lord for the conversion of many souls. But where there are great
congregations, it is impossible for one man besides his public labors, fully
to attend those other things of great importance, and necessary to be done, in
order to an effectual reformation of families and congregations. Thus the synod.

2. Again, these churches have reduced their church state to great darkness, by
not attending the rule of our constitution in councils. It has been the
practice of councils convened according to the second way of communion in our
platform, who are only to hold forth light, and give advice, to usurp the power
of judgment in matters of fact, as also the power of admonition, in case of
offense. Which to do is proper to the third way of communion; and supposes that
a church wants correction for an offense, and not merely light and counsel. And
by this means the third way of communion has been shut out, and not practiced.
This thing I am bold to say, has been the occasion of all our anti-councils, as
well as the contentions and confusions churches have been left in, after all
endeavors used by neighbor churches, by way of councils.

2. I come to the other thing remaining, and that is, the METHODS of our relief.

And here I would say,

1. Let our churches be advised to get completely furnished with
church officers according to the platform. By this time I hope ye see the
necessity of it. Arise, for this matter belongs to you; and it is just matter of
offense if you neglect it any longer.

Remember, it is necessary in a congregational church: And the ministers and
members of these churches would do well to get reconciled to every part, and
branch of the constitution. Prejudices against, aversions and disaffections to
the same, have greatly threatened the utter dissolution of these churches. Our
government is firm and strong; but if such as should keep it in good repair, do
weaken it, it is in danger of falling to pieces. A brick house (be it never so
firm) if every tenant takes out a brick, in time it will be weak, and shatter
to pieces. But some objections offer, which it may be needful to remove.

1. Obj. Our reverend pastors are against it, and think that the office is not
of divine right.

Ans. 1. Ministers should reconcile themselves to the congregational government
before they accept of the pastoral office in such a church.

2. There are especially three scriptures, which may satisfy the scrupulous, as
to the divine right of ruling elders; as, Romans 12.8. 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Cor. 12.28.
God has set in his church, governments. These are church governors and distinct
from teachers; who else can they be but ruling elders? Let such as have any
conscientious scruples in this affair, weigh in the balance of the sanctuary,
the arguments brought for the divine right of ruling elders, in a book
entitled, Jus Divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastici; as also a sheet not long since
published, entitled, The Divine Right of Ruling Elders; as also, a rational and
nervous letter lately published on this argument. Enough is said in these to
satisfy an unprejudiced mind as to their divine right.

3. It Is the right and privilege of the brethren to choose their officers; and
therefore if they be clear in the matter, they should not be discouraged or
obstructed in the use of their just liberties.

4. If the pastors will be so arbitrary, as utterly to refuse to call the
church together to choose these officers; I suppose, the church may look upon
themselves in that case, and so far, to be without a ruler; and may conve^e for
this purpose, as when they have no minister to choose one. It must be a great
abuse of a minister's power, to obstruct the church in the exercise of that
power or privilege, Christ has given them, for the preservation of their peace
and purity. Englishmen cannot patiently submit to arbitrary measures. Two kings,
within our memory, have smarted for attempting it. One lost his head, the other
his empire. And will English Christians tamely submit thereto? Can they be
easy, when those, who by divine appointment are to minister to them for their
spiritual edification, Lord it over them who are God's heritage? It Is
unreasonable for any to desire or expect it, and base for christians to submit
to it.

Obj. 2. We would proceed to choose ruling elders, if there were any men in the
church fit for it.

Ans. It Is God's work to fit men for offices in church or state. It Is your duty
to choose such as are best qualified, and depend upon God farther and more fully
to fit them. I remember, as introductory to our election of ruling elders, near
thirty years ago, I preached from those words, Number. 11.25. And the Lord came
down in a cloud, and spoke unto him, (that is to Moses) and took of the spirit
that was upon him, and gave it to the seventy elders. -- There is the residue
of the spirit to furnish for every office of trust, to which one and another is
chosen. And in that the getting ruling elders was opposed by many in town and
church, I preached another sermon from those words in 2 Timothy 2.25. In meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves. Reformations are commonly attended
with great oppositions. Lay aside then I pray, your objecting, and attend your
duty.

2. Let discipline be prudently, strictly, and impartially exercised in
particular churches. Negligence and partiality herein is very hurtful to the
peace, purity, and growth of churches.

3. Let councils move in their proper sphere: Let them act agreeable to their
nature, and the rules laid down in the platform. Let such as are called to give
advice, and to hold forth light, do that; and proceed no further.

4. Come into the practice of the third way of communion, as laid down in the
platform. When a church is rent with division among themselves, and lie under
any open scandal, and yet refuse to consult with other churches for healing and
removing the same, this is matter of offense; and the aggrieved making a
complaint hereof to a particular church, this church is in a christian manner
to make enquiry, and demand an account of the other church, in order to their
conviction and admonition, if faulty; or in order to their vindication, if
innocent: as in platform, chap. 15. There has been in times past, great
opposition to the practice of this rule. But the late venerable council held at
Salem, saw cause to countenance the practice of that way of the communion of
churches, and advised the aggrieved there, in case they receive not speedy
satisfaction from the reverend pastor, pursuant to the result and advice of
said council, to apply to a particular church in the neighborhood for help, as
directed in the third way of communion. Which thing I humbly apprehend will
prove of greater service toward the establishing these churches, than any thing
done for scores of years. For,

1. It Is that rule, and the wise practicing it, that wipes off the raproach of
independency from congregational churches. They are unaccountable, unless in
this way.

2. It Is this rule that preserves churches pure in their communion one with
another. For if a church gives offense, and continues obstinate in any sinful
way, and other churches held communion with such disorderly church, and don't
use all possible means to reclaim her, they are partakers of her sin. But there
is no other regular way to enquire into her administrations, to convince her,
and admonish her, and separate her from their communion, but this. Although one
church has not authority over another, yet churches have power to preserve
the^^ purity, and to put a church obstinately offending out of their communion;
or else they must hold fellowship with her in a sinful way.

3. This rule is necessary to the peace of particular churches, as it will
effectually relieve persons aggrieved. There cannot much peace be expected where
a great part of a church, are gauled by arbitrary measures. But in this way
they must give satisfaction, or sustain the sentence of non-communion. And this
opens a door for all aggrieved ones, to resettle in an orderly way, in stated
fellowship in some neighbor church, as though they had been dismissed.

4. This rule does effectually hinder anti-councils, or having councils against
councils; of which there have been too many instances, to the great reproach
and confusion of these churches. For if aggrieved persons are allowed to call
councils, the church has power and liberty to call them; and by this means,
anti-councils come upon the stage. But if the aggrieved make complaint to a
particular church, there is no possibility of anti-councils. It Is therefore much
to be wondered at, that such mighty opposition has been made against
introducing this rule into practice in these churches. And it is matter of
thankfulness that the way is prepared by the foresaid council at Salem, for the
practice thereof.

Obj. It may be objected, this rule was not put in practice in the early days
of these churches.

Ans. 1. Our fathers were but men, and had their defects. Hence, though they in
the synod declared so fully for the full supply of officers in the church; and
this result of the synod was approved by the general court, recommending the
same to the serious consideration of all the churches; yet how shamefully has
this expedient for reformation been disregarded by most of our churches!

2. I suppose the true reason why the third way of communion was not practiced
in our early days, was because then there was little or no occasion for it;
churches were more tender and willing to receive light, when offered by
councils called in the second way of communion: And when it is thus, there is
no room for the practice of this rule.

I shall add the following moving considerations.

1. Our church government is too good to be slighted and thrown away. I am
persuaded it is nearer ^he scripture and better warranted and supported by it,
than any church government in the world.

As to the church of England, there is no scripture foundation for their
hierarchy, as, archbishops, lord-bishops* archdeacons, officials,
chancellors, etc. Of late, by one and another masterly hand, the following
truth has been set in so clear a light, that none but the wilfully ignorant can
resist it, viz. That the scripture bishop, is no other than the pastor of a
particular church. And it is an innovation and usurpation, that they are
dignified as they are in the church of England. Besides, to take out of the
hands of the presbyters or pastors all rule in the church, is unscriptural; for
what is more plain, than that they who watch for souls, are to rule over them
also? as Heb. 13.17. Their taking away from churches the liberty of choosing
their own officers, is an intolerable invasion of the right of churches, as
well as their introducing many unscriptural ceremonies into divine worship.

Again, the presbyterian government, I grant, has been accompanied with eminent
holiness; as witness the church of Scotland, Geneva, and many other reformed
churches. And I acknowledge there is but little difference between them and us;
especially, if we have ruling elders, and practice the third way of communion.
Yet wherein we differ, I am humbly of opinion we have the scripture on our
side. Let any if they can, give a genuine interpretation of the 1 Cor. 5 chap.
and ex^lude the brethren from having any hand in church discipline and
censures. Besides what is written, Mat. 18. Tell it to the church; that is say
they, to the ministers. This is to put the scripture upon the rack, to make it
speak what we would have it. Let us then be thankful for our constitution;
strictly adhere to and practice it.

2. Our church government, if strictly adhered to, will effectu^lly answer all
the intentions of government. There is no member in a church, no church in the
whole consociation of churches, though never so stubborn and obstinate, but must
submit, or sustain the dreadful sentence of non-communion: which methinks no
good minister and christian can make light of.

I shall conclude the whole with a few words further by way of advice or
counsel.

1. Let us be very thankful to God, who has hitherto secured for us our civil
and sacred privileges; notwithstanding our great barrenness and
unprofitableness, yea, and our many and great provocations. God is slow unto
anger, and abundant in goodness and kindness. We have for an 100 years enjoyed
the dispensation of the glorious gospel, in its power and purity, and free from
persecution. What could God have done for this his vineyard, which he has not
done, in order to our fruitfulness?

2. Let us be warned against withdrawing from the fellowship of these churches,
until we find more pure churches and worship; and of a more scriptural faith
and order. Such as break with, and break off from these churches, because their
stubborn wills will not submit to the just and regular censures of the church
to which they belong; or because they cant have their will, as to the place of
their worship; these deserve the character of heady and high-minded. And if
their unreasonable desires are restrained by the civil government, then they
will turn churchmen. Surely such churchmen are guilty of will worship with a
witness. These converts are worthy to be called children of Belial, who rise up
against lawful authority, and take sanctuary in the church. The church of
England does too much honor our churches, when they account those worthy of
their fellowship, who are worthy to be rejected by us. I would wisper in the
ears of these thoughtless and unnatural converts, not to say apostates; will
you rashly, and to have your wills in lesser matters, return to a state of
bondage, when you enjoy matchless liberties and privileges? Will you take upon
you a yoke which your gracious predecessors could not bear? Will you bring a
burd^en upon posterity, which is intolerable, to humor and ease yourselves?
Know, when the yoke is once on your necks, you must pay the tithe, the tenth
part of which you are apt now to think is too much for you to give, or your
minister to receive. And do you think the vast arrearages will not be
recovered, one way or other? I mean the vast sums expended for the propagation
of the gospel; that is, for the bringing over our churches to the mother church.

3. Be kind to your ministers; and don't give them any just provocation to
desert you, or to endeavor to reconcile themselves to the discipline and
ceremonies of the church. The discount of the bills of credit has insensibly
and exceedingly hurt them in times past; and it is well if it be not so to this
day with some. I am fully persuaded that ministers salaries ought in justice to
be raised nearly in proportion to the depreciation of the bills of credit; for
the price of the necessaries of life rise in proportion. By no means discourage
the hearts, or weaken the hands of your faithful ministers, who are willing to
spend and be spent, in the service of your precious souls. Especially be
cautious at this juncture, when so great temptations are laid before them to
desert you, and go home and take orders.

4thly, and finally, Study the principles of your faith and order; be heartily
reconciled to, and be zealous in the defense and practice of them. And as often
as any of our holy churches do want a pastor, I would advise them when treating
with any candidate in order to settlement, to know his mind with respect to the
professed faith and order of these churches; and proceed not to election; until
he has given his assent to the one, and his promise to practice according to
the other. This indeed is implicitly done by his acceptance of the invitation
of a congregational church; but the more explicit, the better. And when the
elders and messengers of neighbour-churches are (upon invitation) convened, to
assist in the solemn separation of a pastor to the sacred work of the
gospel ministry, in his ordination; they would doubtless do well to satisfy
themselves in these things, lest they be found to lay their hands too suddenly
upon his head.

To conclude, Let us then stand fast in the liberties wherewith Christ has
made us free, Gal. 5.1. Our country thinks it worth while to spend many
thousands, in defense of their civil privileges, settled upon us by charter;
and are not these sacred privileges of equal, yea of greatter worth and value?
O then let us contend earnestly for the faith and order of the gospel, lest we
be found to despise our birthright, and to destroy ourselves."

JOHN WHITE.
The following Reverend Gentleman recommended the foregoing, as well worthy the
perusal of the Public.

PETER THACHER, JOSEPH SEWALL, THOMAS PRINCE, JOHN WEBB, WILLIAM COOPER, THOMAS
FOXCROFT.

Boston, Jan. 25, 1733-4.


REASONS For adhering to our PLATFORM, as a Rule of Church Government, and
Objections against Ruling ELDERS answered. In a Letter to a Friend. By another
Hand.
SIR,
I Received a message from you, that a friend of yours desires to have some
reasons (drawn up in writing) to show why we should adhere to the PLATFORM as a
rule of church government, at least till another and better be provided. I wish
a better head were employed in assigning reasons for it: But to gratify you (in
the interim) I shall give you the general reasons inducing me to be of the
opinion that we ought so to do. But first I premise, that whereas it is
objected, That the scriptures are the only rule both of worship and discipline,
and that it is both sinful and dangerous to set up human composures as our
rule; I perfectly agree with the objectors and acknowledge that no human
composure ought to be received, which disagrees with the holy scriptures. But
if the platform must be rejected merely because it is of human composure; then
by the same parity of reason, not only the association principles, but also all
sermons, confessions of faith, creeds, catechisms, and the like, are to be
rejected, these being also human composures. And it is very observable that the
same persons who are for rejecting the platform, would at the same time have us
subject to such a government as they themselves shall from time to time fancy
to be agreeable to the scriptures; not allowing us to judge for ourselves,
whether it be agreeable to the scripture or not; nor willing to be governed or
restricted themselves by any rule, except the scriptures in the sense they
themselves understand them, or (which is one and the same thing) by any other
than what agrees with their own sentiments. And with this allowance I suppose
the Pope himself could comply with the scripture as the rule of his government.

But that there ought to be a platform extracted from the Holy scriptures, as a
particular rule of church government, and that it is our wisdom and interest to
adhere to ours, at least till another and better be provided, is evident to me,
from the following considerations, viz.

1. The nature, use and ends of all government necessarily imply ORDER: Order
cannot be preserved without known and certain rules: The duties of rulers and
ruled must be stated, circumscribed, and limited by a rule; otherwise rulers
may be tyrants at pleasure, and subjects rebel whenever they have opportunity,
and neither of them be accountable.

2. Though the scriptures are in themselves a perfect rule, and the only standard
by which all other rules are to be tried; yet it is evident that through the
darkness or corruption of men's minds, this rule is very diversely understood
and practiced upon, both with respect to doctrine and discipline. Hence the
authors of the most corrupt doctrines pretend to the scriptures to support
their tenets. So with respect to church government, the congregationalist, the
presbyterian, the episcopalian, yea, and even the papist, pretend to rule and
govern according to the scripture. So that they don't so much differ upon the
question, whether the scripture shall be the rule, as upon the question, how
the scripture is to be understood; or what is agreeable and what contrary to it.

3. Hence it follows, that without some platform or constitution, there can be
no orderly government upheld. This appears to be agreeable to the sense both of
papists and protestants, episcopalians, presbyterians and congregationalists;
who all have their platforms or constitutions of church government.

4. The church government in this country is founded upon a particular compact
or agreement: wherein the officers and members of each particular church
combine to set forward the worship of God, and maintain the discipline of his
kingdom, in a way which they judge to be agreeable to the Holy Scriptures; and
to act in way of consociation with other churches of the same principles, for
their mutual good and edification. 'Upon this foundation were the churches of
New England first settled; and for their more regular proceeding therein the
platform (expressing their sense of the scripture relating to church order and
government) was composed and consented to by the churches in our primitive
times: And this form of government is so far established, that our general
consent to continue and abide in this way, would secure to us the privileges of
it. And this indeed is our only barrier against episcopacy; unless some other
form of government (not disallowed by the crown) be received and embraced by
the churches.

5. But if we slight the method of government in our platform, and don't by
agreement fix on another, it will follow, that either the government of the
church must cease, or a government imposed and enforced by human laws must
succeed. I presume most certainly, the churches (so unhinged) must immediately
fall into an absolute independency at first: and the members of each individual
church, must either be allowed to be under no government but what will suit
with their own private judgment on the scriptures (which they may be tempted to
vary or alter as occasion may offer;) or else a power of judging for themselves
as to the meaning of the scripture must be denied to the brethren, and put over
to the minister for him to judge and determine as he thinks fit, and to state
and fix the boundaries both of his own authority and the people's obedience, as
he shall from time to time understand the scripture. And who can tell how much
or how often his judgment may also vary, upon occasions or temptations which
may offer? But such a confused state of things cannot last long; a more certain
and regular form of government will quickly be found necessary; and perhaps a
presbyterian government may be sought after, but not found to be attainable.
May it not therefore be proper (before we part with our platform) not only to
enquire whether the presbyterian constitution be more agreeable to the
scripture; but also whether that government can be set up and supported here,
unless some other laws than we have hitherto had, be enacted, and do obtain the
royal approbation. That the royal approbation may be obtained in favor of the
way of the church of England, cannot be doubted; but that it will be obtained in
favor of a presbyterian church government here, seems hardly probable: which if
duly considered, it may well be wondered how gentlemen (who would not be
willing that themselves or posterity should be placed under episcopacy) can
think of departing from our own platform; at least till another and better be
instituted in the room thereof.

6. Our platform was doubtless the result of great though it and deliberation, and
of earnest prayer and supplication; composed and consented to by men of as
great learning, piety and prudence as any our age affords; and such as had more
knowledge and larger experience of the state of the church at home and abroad,
than perhaps any among us of the present age have; and as careful of avoiding
human inventions as the best of us. Now the platform agreed with their
understanding of the scripture, not only then, but many years after, when it
was revised by a succeeding synod. And I am persuaded, if it were now
impartially considered and compared with the scripture, it would be found very
consonant therewith. And even that part thereof which asserts the office of the
ruling elder (which is as I suppose the most distastful, to such as would
explode the platform) agrees with the scripture not only in the judgment of the
divines and churches in New England in our purest times; but also in the
judgment of the most famous reforming divines and churches that have been in
other parts of the world. Both the necessity and divine authority of that
office having been asserted by divines vastly more in number than those (among
presbyterians and congregationalists) who do or have decried it; and not
inferior to them in learning, piety or solid judgment. I am told by a gentleman
of learning and ingenuity, That the protestant churches of Geneva, France,
Scotland, Holland, and in general almost all the churches of the reformation
(except episcopalians) have upheld this office; and that it has never been
denied by any considerable number of protestant churches (exc^pt as aforesaid)
till that about the space of fifty years ag^ a number of ministers rose up in
New England, who did oppose it.

Upon the whole therefore, though no man's conscience ought to be bound by this
or any other platform, in any matter which he verily believes to be contrary to
the scripture; yet it seems impossible to conceive, how a particular church can
uphold an orderly discipline, or a number of churches form a consociation,
unless they do unite in the foundation-principles of church government; or that
the civil authority prescribe the rules or canons of church government, and
enforce obedience, and subjection thereto, as in the case of national churches.

From the foregoing considerations laid together, I think it will appear to be
the wisdom and interest of all those who prefer our own constitution before a
national church government, and its forcing canons, steadily to adhere to our
platform; at least till another and better be found, and (after mature
consideration) consented to and agreed upon by the churches.

And now because the office of a ruling elder is an essential branch of
congregational church government, which if left out, quite alters the
constitution, and changes the government of the church into a monarchical form;
and because I apprehend that the prejudices that are taken against the
platform, are principally upon this head; I would now acquaint your friend
(though this is further than his request expresses) upon what grounds I satisfy
my self respecting the objections I meet with against that office.

1. Whereas it is objected, That the generality of our ministers do not hold
this office to be of divine institution: to this objection I oppose the
judgment of formor divines (more in number, and not less capable of judging as
to the meaning of the scriptures;) as also the judgment of several divines now
living among us.

2. Whereas'tis objected, that according to Ephesians.IV.8.11.12. the ordinary
officers left by Christ in the church, are only pastors and teachers; and
according to Phil. 1.1. bishops (or pastors) and deacons are the only officers
mentioned: I satisfy my self as to this objection, by considering that the word
bishop, pastor and shepherd, signify one and the same thing whenever applied to
ecclesiastical officers; and imply a power af teaching, overseeing, feeding and
governing. The word pastor is applicable to all rulers whether civil or
ecclesiastical, and is so used in scripture; and though the word bishop seems in
a more appropriated sense to belong to the ecclesiastical ruler; yet under that
word so appropriated are comprehended all ecclesiastical rulers, guides,
overseers, shepherds; even as the word magistrate comprehends all civil rulers
of every rank and station. So that neither of these expressions do exclude any
sort of elder, overseer or ruler in the church; but on the contrary do include
and comprehend them all. And though a power of teaching, overseeing and ruling,
may all be attributed to one man; yet it does not follow that the power of
overseeing and ruling must lie solely and absolutely in him. For there may be,
and is, a government, where there is not a lordly power, or (which is the same
thing) power in a single officer, which has no other branch of government to
check and control it.

3. Whereas it is objected, That we have not men capable, etc. If it be so
indeed, that there are no men in our churches, that have skill enough or
integrity enough to guide in the external administrations of the government and
discipline of the church; and capable too of assisting, directing, exhorting
and comforting their brethren, as they may have opportunity; our degeneracy is
very lamentable indeed. Our churches have then none suitable for service in
ecclesiastical councils. Every thing at home and abroad must be left to the
prudence and fidelity of the ministers; and woe to that church (if such a thing
should bappen) that falls under the influence of a minister no bet-qualified
than themselves.

4. I find an assertion in a late printed pamphlet, that the keys of doctrine
and discipline were committed to the apostles. And again, To be sure to the
same persons is there committed the ruling and feeding of the flock. The author
refers to the last chapter of Matthew. But would he restrain the power of
ruling to the persons of the apostles or to the persons of gospel ministers as
their successors in the work of teaching and baptizing, and to them only; he
must then either prove the government of the church to be monarchical, or else
that every church is obliged to provide a number of such teaching elders.

5. Another objection is, That if we will have ruling elders, we must provide
them a maintenance; and this, some suppose, would fright us out of the notion
of such officers. But to me it appears no ways formidable. For in the first
place, I don't believe that double honor principally intends maintenance (as
some would have it, from 1 Timothy 5.17.) and the next words proves no more than
this, that a suitable reward is due, according to the labor performed. It
therefore remains to be proved, that a ruling elder must spend his whole time
in the service of the church, before he is entitled to a maintenance from the
church. But if a suitable and honorable reward were assigned in proportion to
their service, I believe no body would have reason to complain; and abundance
of good might be done, and evil prevented, by their prudent labors, which
would take up no great quantity of time. And in extraordinary matters, I see no
reason but their labors should be handsomely rewarded. Submitting the whole to
the censure of your friend, (unknown to me) I rest

Your Friend and humble Servant.
JUNE 20, 1732.
A PLATFORM OF CHURCH DISCIPLINE: Gathered out of the Word of GOD, and agreed
upon by the ELDERS AND MESSENGERS Of the CHURCHES assembled in the SYNOD At
CAMBRIDGE in NEW ENGLAND: To be presented to the Churches and General Court,
for their Consideration and Acceptance in the Lord, the 8th Month, Anno 1648.

How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts.

PSALM. lxxxiv.1. LORD I have loved the Habitation of thy House, and the place
where thine Honor dwells.

PSALM. xxvi.3. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will seek after,
that I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the days of my Life, to behold
the Beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple.

PSALM. xxvii.4. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by JOHN BOYLES, in Marlborough-Street,
MDCCLXXII.

At a General Court held at BOSTON, May 19, 1680.
THIS court having taken into serious consideration the request that has been
presented by several of the reverend elders, in the name of the late SYNOD, do
approve thereof, and accordingly order, THE CONFESSION OF FAITH, agreed upon at
their second session, and, THE PLATFORM OF DISCIPLINE, consented unto by the
Synod at Cambridge, Anno 1648, to be printed, for the benefit of the churches
in present and after times.

EDWARD RAWSON, Sec'ry.

The PREFACE.
THE setting forth of the public confession of the faith of churches has a
double end, and both tending to public edification: First, the maintenance of
the faith entire within itself: Secondly, the holding, forth of unity and
harmony, both amongst, and with other churches. Our churches here, as (by the
grace of Christ) we believe and profess the same doctrine of the truth of the
gospel, which generally is received in all the reformed churches of Christ in
Europe, so especially we desire not to vary from the doctrine of faith and
truth held forth by the churches of our native country. For though it be not
one native country that can breed us all of one mind; nor ought we to have the
glorious faith of our Lord Jesus with respect to persons, yet as Paul, who was
himself a Jew, professed to hold forth the doctrine of justification by faith,
and of the resurrection of the dead, according as he knew his godly countrymen
did, who were Jews by nature, ( Gal 2.15. Acts 26.6, 7.) so we who are by
nature Englishmen, do desire to hold forth the same doctrine of religion
(especially in fundamentals) which we see and know to be held by the churches
of England, according to the truth of the gospel.

The more we discern (that which we do, and have cause to do with incessant
mourning and trembling) the unkind, and unbrotherly, and unchristian contention
of our godly brethren and countrymen in matters of church government; the more
earnestly do we desire to see them join together in one common faith; and
ourselves with them. For this end, having perused the public confession of the
faith, agreed upon by the reverend assembly of divines at Westminster, and
finding the sum and substance thereof (in matters of doctrine) to express not
their own judgment only, but ours also; and being likewise called upon by our
godly magistrates, do draw up a public confession of that faith which is
constantly taught, and generally professed amongst us; we thought good to
present unto them, and with them to our churches; and with them to all the
churches of Christ abroad, our professed and hearty assent and attestation to
the whole confession of faith (for substance of doctrine) which the reverend
assembly presented to the religious and honorable parliment of England:
Excepting only some sections in the 25, 30. and 31. chapters of their
confession, which concerns points of controversy in church discipline; touching
which we refer ourselves to the draught of church discipline in the ensuing
treatise.

The truth of what we here declare, may appear by the unanimous vote of the
synod of the elders and messengers of our churches, assembled at Cambridge, the
last of the sixth month, 1648, which jointly passed in these words; This synod
having perused and considered (with much gladness of heart, and thankfulness to
God) the confession of faith published of late by the reverend assembly in
England, do judge it to be very holy, orthodox and judicious in all matters of
faith; and do therefore freely and fully consent thereunto, for the substance
thereof. Only in those things which have respect to church government and
discipline, we refer ourselves to the platform of church discipline, agreed
upon by this present assembly; and do therefore think it meet, that this
confession of faith should be commended to the churches of Christ, and to the
honored court, as worthy of their due consideration and acceptance. Howbeit, we
may not conceal, that the doctrine of vocation, expressed in chap. 10. sect. 1.
and summarily repeated in chap. 13. sect. 1. passed not without some debate.
Yet considering the term of vocation, and others by which it is described, are
capable of a large, or more strict sense and use, and that it is not intended
to bind apprehensions precisely in point of order or method, there has been a
general condescendency thereunto.

Now by this our professed consent and free concurrence with them in all the
doctrinals of religion, we hope it may appear to the world, that as we are a
remnant of the people of the same nation with them, so we are professors of the
same common faith, and fellow-heirs of the same common salvation. Yea moreover,
as this our profession of the same faith with them, will exempt us (even in
their judgments) from suspicion of heresy; so (we trust) it may exempt us in
the like sort from suspicion of schism: that though we are forced to dissent
from them in matters of church discipline, yet our dissent is not taken up out
of arrogance of spirit in ourselves (whom they see willingly condescend to
learn of them) neither is it carried with uncharitable consoriousness toward
them, (both which are the proper and essential characters of schism) but in
meekness of wisdom, as we walk along with them, and follow them as they follow
Christ; so where we conceive a different apprehension of the mind of Christ (as
it falls out in some few points touching church order) we still reserve due
reverence to them (whom we judge to be, through Christ, the glorious lights of
both nations) and only crave leave (as in the spirit we are bound) to follow
the Lamb withersoever he goes, and (after the apostles example) as we believe,
so we speak.

And if the example of such poor outcasts as ourselves might prevail, if not
with all (for that were too great a blessing to hope for) yet with some or
other of our brethren in England, so far as they are come to mind and speak the
same thing with such as dissent from them, we hope in Christ it would not only
moderate the harsh judging and condemning of one another in such differences of
judgment as may be found in the choicest saints; but also prevent (by the mercy
of Christ) the peril of the distraction and destruction of all churches in both
kingdoms. Otherwise, if brethren shall go on to bite and devour one another,
the apostle feared (as we also with sadness of heart do) it will tend to the
consuming of them, and us all: which the Lord prevent.

We are not ignorant, (that besides these aspersions of heresy and schism)
other exceptions also are taken at our way of church government, (but as we
conceive) upon as little grounds. As,

1. That by admitting none into the fellowship of our church but saints by
calling, we rob many parish churches of their best members, to make up one of
our congregations, which is not only to gather churches out of churches, (a
thing unheard of in scripture) but also to weaken the hearts and hands of the
best ministers in the parishes, by despoiling them of their best hearers.

2. That we provide no course for the gaining and calling in of ignorant, and
erroneous, and scandalous persons, whom we refuse to receive into our churches,
and so exclude from the wholesome remedy of church discipline.

3. That in our way we sow seeds of division, and hindrance of edification in
every family; whilst admitting into churches only voluntaries, the husband will
be of one church, the wife of another; the parents of one church, the children
of another; the master of one church, the servants of another. And so the
parents and masters being of different churches from their children and
servents, they cannot take a just account of their profiting by what they hear;
yea, by this means the husbands, parents and masters shall be chargeable to the
maintenance of many other churches, and church officers, besides their own;
which will prove a charge and burden unsupportable.

But for answer, as to the first; for gathering churches out of churches, we
cannot say that it is a thing unheard of in scripture. The first christian
church was gathered out of the Jewish church, and out of many synagogues in
that church, and consisted partly of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and partly
of the Galileans; who though they kept some communion in some part of public
worship with the temple, yet neither did they frequent the sacrifices, nor
repair to the sanhedrim for the determining of their church causes, but kept
entire aad constant communion with the apostles church in all the ordinances of
the gospel. And for the first christian church of the Gentiles at Antioch, it
appears to have been gathered and constituted partly of the dispersed
brethren of the church at Jerusalem (whereof some were men of Cyprus and
Cyrene) and partly of the believing Gentiles. Acts. 11.20, 21.

If it be said, the first christian church at Jerusalem, and that at Antioch,
were gathered not out of any christian church, but of the Jewish temple and
synagogues, which were shortly after to be abolished: and their gathering to
Antioch was upon occasion of dispersion in time of persecution,

We desire it may be considered, 1. That the members of the Jewish church were
more strongly and straightly tied by express holy covenant, to keep fellowship
with the Jewish church till it was abolished, than any members of christian
parish churches are wont to be tied to keep fellowship with their parish
churches. The episcopal canons, which bind them to attend on their parish
church, it is likely they are now abolished with the episcopacy. The common law
of the land is satisfied (as we conceive) if they attend upon the worship of
God in any other church, though not within their own parish. But no such like
covenant of God, nor any other religious tie lies upon them to attend the
worship of God in their own parish church, as did lie upon the Jews to attend
upon the worship of God in their temple and synagogues.

2. Though the Jewish temple church at Jerusalem was to be abolished, yet that
does not make the desertion of it by the members to be lawful, till it was
abolished. Future abolition is no warrant for present desertion, unless it be
lawful, in some case, whilst the church is yet in present standing, to desert
it; to wit, either for avoiding present polutions, or for hope of greater
edification, and so for better satisfaction to conscience in either. Future
events, or foresight of them do not dissolve present relations, else wives,
children, servants, might desert their husbands, parents, masters, when they be
mortally sick.

3. What the members of the Jewish church did, in joining to the church at
Antioch in time of persecution, it may well be conceived the members of any
christian church may do the like for satisfaction of conscience. Peace of
conscience is more desirable than the peace of the outward man; and freedom
from scruples of conscience is more comfortable to a sincere heart, than
freedom from persecution.

If it be said, these members of the christian church at Jerusalem that joined
to the church at Antioch, removed their habitations together with their
relations; which if the brethren of the congregational way would do, it would
much abate the grievance of their departure from their presbyterial churches.

We verily could wish them so to do, as well approving the like removal of
habitation, in case of changing church relations (provided that it may be done
without too much detriment to their outward estates) and we for our parts have
done the same. But to put a necessity of removal of habitation in such a case,
it is to foment and cherish a corrupt principle of making a civil
co-habitation, if not a formal cause, yet at least a proper adjunct of church
relation, which the truth of the gospel does not acknowledge. Now to fom^nt an
error to the prejudice of the truth of the gospel, is not to walk with a right
foot, according to the truth of the gospel, as Paul judges, Gal. 2. 1.

4. We do not think it meet or fa^e, for a member of a presbyterial church
forth with to desert his relation to his church, betake himself to the
fellowship of a congregational church, though he may discern some defect in the
estate or government of his own. For,

1. Faithfulness of brotherly love in church-rel^tion, requires that the
members of the church should first convince their brethren of their sinful
defects, and duly wait for their reformation, before they depart from them. For
if we must take such a course for the healing of a private brother, in a way of
brotherly love, with much meekness and patience; how much more ought we so to
walk with like tenderness toward a whole church.

Again, 2. By the hasty departure of sound members from a defective church,
reformation is not promoted, but many times retarded, and corruption increased.
Whereas on the contrary, while sincere members breathing after purity of
reformation abide together, they may (by the blessing of God upon their
faithful endeavors prevail much with their elders and neighbors toward a
reformation, it may be so much as that their elders in their own church shall
receive none to the seals but visible saints; and in the classis shall put
forth no authoritative act (but consultative only) touching the members of
other churches, not touching their own, but with the consent (silent consent at
least) of their own church. Which two things, if they can obtain with any
humble, meek, holy, faithful endeavors, we conceive they might (by the grace of
Christ) find liberty of conscience to continue their relation with their own
presbyterial church without scruple.

5. But to add a word further, touching the gathering of churches out of
churches: what if there were no express example of such a thing extant in the
scriptures? That which we are wont to answer the antipaedo-baptists, may
suffice here: It is enough, if any evidence thereof may be gathered from just
consequence of scripture light. Dr. Ames his judgment concerning this case
passes (for ought we know) without exception, which he gave in his fourth look
of conscience, in answer to two questions, chap. 14. number. 16. If any (says he)
wronged with unjust vexation, or providing for his own edification, or in
testimony against sin, depart from a church, where some evils are tolerated,
and join himself to another more pure, yet without condemning of the church he
^leaveth, he is not therefore to be held as a schismatic, or as guilty of any
other sin.

Where the tripartite disjunction which the judicious doctor puts, declares
the lawfulness of the departure of a church member from his church, when either
through weariness of unjust vexation, or in way of provision for his own
edification, or in testimony against sin, he joineth himself to another
congregation more reformed; any one of these he judges a lawful cause of
departure, though all of them do not concur together. Neither will such a
practice despoil the best ministers of the parishes of their best hearers.

For,

1. Sometimes the ministers themselves are willing to join with their better
sort of hearers in this way of reformation, and then they and their hearers
continue still their church relation together; yea, and confirm it more
straightly and strongly, by an express renewed covenant, though the ministers may
still continue their wonted preaching to the whole parish.

2. If the ministers do dislike the way of those whom they otherwise count
their best members, and so refuse to join with them therein; yet if those
members can procure some other ministers to join with them in their own way,
and still continue their dwelling together in the same town, they may easily
order the times of the public assembly, as to attend constantly upon the
ministry of their former church, and either after or before the public assembly
of the parish, take an opportunity to gather together for the administration of
the sacraments and censures, and other church-ordinances amongst themselves.
The first apostolic church assembled to hear the word with the Jewish church in
the open courts of the temple, but afterward gathered together for breaking of
bread, and other acts of church order, from house to house.

3. Suppose presbyterial churches should communicate some of their best gifted
members toward the erecting and gathering another church, it would not
forthwith be their detriment, but may be their enlargement. It is the most
noble and perfect work of a living creature (both in nature and grace) to
propagate and multiply his kind; and it is the honor of the faithful spouse of
Christ to set forward the work of Christ as well abroad as at home. The church
in Cant. 8.8. to help forward her little sister church was willing to part with
her choice materials, even beams of cedar, and such precious living stones as
were fit to build a silver palace. In the same book the church is sometimes
compared to a garden, sometimes to an orchard, Cant. 4.12, 13. No man planteth
a garden or orchard, but seeks to get the choicest herbs and plants of his
neighbors, and they freely impart them; nor do they account it a spoil to
their garden and orchard, but rather a glory. Nevertheless, we go not so far,
we neither seek nor ask the choice members of the parishes, but accept them
being offered.

If it be said, They are not offered by the ministers, nor by the parish
churches (who have most right in them) but only by themselves,

It may justly be demanded, what right or what power have either the ministers
or parish church over them? Not by solemn church government, for that, though it
be the firmest engagement is not owned, but rejected. If it be their joining
with the parish in calling and election of a minister to such a congregation at
his first coming, there is indeed just weight in such an engagement; nor do we
judge it safe for such to remove from such a minister, unless it be upon such
grounds as may justly give him due satisfaction. But if the union of such
members to a parish church, and to the ministry thereof, be only by
co-habitation within the precincts of the parish, that union, as it was founded
upon human law, so by human law it may easily be released. Or otherwise, if a
man remove his habitation, he removes also the bond of his relation, and the
ground of offense.

4. It need not be feared that all the best hearers of the best ministers, no,
nor the most of them will depart from them upon point of church government.
Those who have found the presence and power of the spirit of Christ breathing
in their ministers, either to their conversion or edification, will be slow to
change such a ministry of faith and holiness, for the liberty of church order.
Upon which ground, and sundry other such like, there be, doubtless, sundry
godly and judicious hearers in many parishes in England, that do and will
prefer their relation to their ministers (though in a presbyterial way) above
the congregational confederation.

5. But if all, or the most part of the best hearers of the best ministers of
parishes should depart from them, as preferring in their judgment, the
congregational way, yet in case the congregational way should prove to be of
Christ, it will never grieve the holy hearts of godly ministers, that their
hearers should follow Christ; yea many of themselves (upon due deliberation)
will be ready to go along with them. It never grieved nor troubled John Baptist
that his disciples departed from him to follow after Christ, John 3. But if the
congregational way should prove to be, not the institution of Christ (as we
take it) but the invention of men, then doubtless the presbyterial form (if it
be of God) will swallow up the other, as Moses's rod devoured the rods of the
Egyptians. Nor will this put a necessity upon both the opposite parties to
shift for themselves, and seek to supplant one another, but only it will call
upon them (Aletheuein en agape) to seek and follow the truth in love, to attend
in faithfulness each unto his own flock, and to administer to them all the holy
things of God, and their portion of food in due season; and as for others,
quietly to forbear them, and yet to instruct them with meekness, that are
contrary minded, leaving it to Christ (in the use of all good means) to reveal
his own truth in his own time, and mean while endeavoring to keep the unity of
the spirit in the bond of peace, Phil. 3.15.16. Ephesians. 4.3.

To the 2d exception, that we take no course for the gaining, and healing, and
calling in of ignorant and erroneous persons, whom we refuse to receive into
our churches, and so exclude them from the remedy of church discipline.

We conceive the receiving of them into our churches, would rather lose and
corrupt our churches, than gain and heal them. A little leaven laid in a lump
of dough, will sooner leaven the whole lump, than the whole lump will sweeten
it. We find it therefore safer to square rough and unhewn stones before they be
laid into the building, rather than to hammer and hew them when they lie
unevenly in the building. And accordingly two means we use to gain and call in
such as are ignorant and scandalous.

1. The public ministry of the word, upon which they are invited by counsel,
and required by wholesome laws. And the word it is, which is the power of God
to salvation, to the calling and winning of souls.

2. Private conference, and conviction by the elders, and other able brethren
of the church, whom they do the more respectively hearken unto, when they see
no hope of enjoying church fellowship, or participation in the sacraments for
themselves or their children, till they approve their judgments to be sound and
orthodox, and their lives subdued to some hope of a godly conversation. What
can classical discipline, or excommunication itself do more in this case.

The third exception wrapeth up in it a threefold domestical inconvenience,
and each of them meet to be eschewed. 1. Disunion in families between each
relation. 2. Disappointment of edification, for want of opportunity in the
governors of families to take account of things heard by their children and
servants. 3. Disbursements of chargeable maintenance to the several churches,
whereunto the several persons of their families are joined.

All which inconveniences either do not fall out in congregational churches,
or are easily redressed; for none are orderly admitted into congregational
churches, but such as are well approved by good testimony to be duly observant
of family-relation: or if any otherwise disposed should creep in, they are
either orderly healed, or duly removed in a way of Christ. Nor are they
admitted, unless they can give some good account of their profiting by
ordinances, before the elders and brethren of the church, and much more to
their parents and masters. Godly, tutors in the university can take an account
of their pupils; and godly householders in the city can take an account of their
children and servants, how they profit by the word they have heard in several
churches, and that to the greater edification of the whole family, by the
variety of such administrations. Bees may bring more honey and wax into the
hive, when they are not limited to one garden of flowers, but may fly abroad to
many.

Nor is any charge expected from wives, children or servants to the maintenance
of congregational churches, further than they be furnished with personal
estates or livings, which may enable them to contribute of such things as they
have; and not of such things as they have not. God accepts not robbery for a
sacrifice. And though a godly householder may justly take himself bound in
conscience to contribute to any such church, whereto his wife, or children, or
servants do stand in relation, yet that will not aggravate the burden of his
charge no more than if they were received members of the same church whereto
himself is related.

But why do we stand thus long to plead exemptions from exception? The Lord
help all his faithful servants (whether presbyterial or congregational) to
judge and shame ourselves before the Lord, for all our former compliances to
greater enormities in church government, than are to be found either in the
congregational or presbyterial way; and then surely either the Lord will clear
up his own will to us, and so frame and subdue us all to one mind and one way,
(Ezekiel. 43.10.11.) or else we shall learn to bear one another burdens in a
spirit of meekness. It will then doubtless be far from us, so to attest the
discipline of Christ, as to detest the disciples of Christ: so to contend for
the seamless coat of Christ, as to crucify the living members of Christ; so to
divide ourselves about church communion, as through breaches to open a wide gap
for a deluge of antichristian, and profane malignity to swallow up both church
and civil state.

What shall we say more? Is difference of church order become the inlet of all
the disorders in the kingdom? Has the Lord indeed left us to such hardness of
heart, that church government shall become a snare to Zion (as sometimes Moses
was to Egypt, Exodus 20.7.) that we cannot leave contesting and contending about
it, till the kingdom be destroyed? Did not the Lord Jesus, when he dedicated
his sufferings for his church, and his also unto his father, make it his
earnest and only prayer for us in this world, that we all might be one in him?
Joh. 17.20, 21, 22, 23. And it is possible that he (whom the Father heard
always, Joh. 11.42.) should not have this last most solemn prayer heard and
granted? Or shall it be granted for all the saints elsewhere, and not for the
saints in England, so that amongst them disunion shall grow even about church
union and communion? If it be possible for a little faith (so much as a grain
of mustard seed) to remove a mountain, is it not possible for so much strength
of faith as it is, to be found in all the godly in the kingdom, to remove those
images of jealousy, and to cast those stumbling blocks out of the way, which
may hinder the free passage of brotherly love amongst brethren? It Is true
indeed, the national covenant does justly engage both parties faithfully to
endeavor the utter extirpation of the antichristian hierarchy; and much more of
all blasphemies, heresies and errors. Certainly, if congregational discipline
be independent, from the inventions of men is it not much more independent from
the delusions of satan? What fellowship has Christ with beliel? Light with
darkness? Truth with error? The faithful Jews needed not the help of the
Samaritans, to re-edify the temple of God; yea, they rejected their help when
it was offered, Ezra. 4.1, 2, 3. And if the congregational way be a way of
truth (as we believe) and if the brethren that walk in it be zealous of the
truth, and hate every false way (as by the rule of their holy discipline they
are instructed, 2 John 10.11.) then verily there is no branch in the national
covenant, that engages the covenanters to abhor either the congregational
churches or their way; which being duly administered, do no less effectually
extirpate the antichristian hierarchy, and all blasphemies, heresies, and
pernicious errors, than the other way of discipline does, which is more
generally and publicly received and ratified.

But the Lord Jesus commune with all our hearts in secret, and he who is the
king of his church, let him be pleased to exercise his kingly power in out
spirits, that so his kingdom may come into our churches in purity and peace,
AMEN.

END OF THE PREFACE.
CHAP. I. Of the form of church government; and that it is one, immutable, and
prescribed in the word.
ECclesiastical polity, or church gevernment or discipline, is nothing else but
that form and order that is to be observed in the church of Christ upon earth,
both for the constitution of it, and all the administrations that therein are
to be performed. Ezekiel. 43.11. Col. 2.5. 1 Timothy 3.15.

2. Church government is considered in a double respect, either in regard of
the parts of government themselves, or necessary circumstances thereof. The
parts of government are prescribed in the word, because the Lord Jesus Christ,
the King and lawgiver of his church, is no less faithful in the house of God
than was Moses, who from the Lord delivered a form and pattern of government to
the children of Israel in the old Testament; and the holy scriptures are now
also so perfect, as that they are able to make the man of God perfect, and
thoroughly furnished unto every good work; and therefore doubtless to the well
ordering of the house of God. Heb. 3.5, 6. Exodus 25.40. 2 Timothy 3.16.

3. The parts of church government, are all of them exactly described in the
word of God, being parts or means of instituted worship, according to the
second commandment and therefore to continue one and the same unto the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, as a kingdom that cannot be shaken, until
he shall deliver it up unto God, even to the father. So that it is not left in
the power of men, officers, churches, or any state in the world to add or
diminish, or alter any thing in the least measure therein. 1 Timothy 3.15. 1 Chronicles. 15.13. Exodus 20.4. 1 Timothy 6.13, 16. Heb. 12.27, 28. 1 Cor. 15.24. Deuteronomy.
12.32.

4. The necessary circumstances, as time and place, etc. belonging unto order
and decency, are not so left unto men, as that under pretense of them they may
thrust their own inventions upon the churches, being circumscribed in the word
with many general limitations, where they are determined in respect of the
matter, to be neither worship it self, nor circumstances separable from
worship. In respect of their end, they must be done unto edification. In
respect of the manner, decently and in order, according to the nature of the
things themselves, and civil and church custom. Does not even nature itself
teach you? Yea, they are in some sort determined particularly, namely, that
they be done in such a manner, as all circumstances considered, is most
expedient for edification: So, as if there be no error of man concerning their
determination, the determining of them is to be accounted as (...) were divine.
Ezekiel. 43.8. 1 Kings 12.31, 32, 33. 2 Kings 12. Exodus 20.19. Isa. 28.13. Col.
1.22, 23. Acts 15.28. Mat. 15.9. 1 Cor. 11.28. and 8.34. 1 Cor. 14.26. and
14.40. and 11.14.16. and 14.12.19. Acts 15.28.

CHAP. II. Of the nature of the catholic church in general, and in special of a
particular visible church.
THE catholic church is the whole company of those that are elected, redeemed,
and in time effectually called from the state of sin and death, unto a state of
grace and salvation in Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. and 5.25, 26, 30.

2. This church is either triumphant or militant. Triumphant, the number of
them who are glorified in heaven: Militant, the number of them who are
conflicting with their enemies upon earth. Heb. 12, 23. Romans 8.17. 2 Timothy 2.12.
and 4.8. Ephesians. 6.12, 13.

3. This militant church is to be considered as invisible, and visible.
Invisible, in respect of their relation wherein they stand to Christ, as a body
unto the head, being united unto him by the spirit of God, and faith in their
hearts. Visible, in respect of the profession of their faith, in their persons
and in particular churches. And so there may be acknowledged an universal
visible church. 2 Timothy 2.19. Rev. 2.17. 1 Cor. 6.17. Ephesians. 3.17. Romans 1.8. 1 Thessalonians. 1.8. Isa. 2.2. 1 Timothy 6.12.

4. The members of the visible militant church considered either as not yet in
church order, or walking according to the church order of the gospel. In order,
and so besides the spiritual union and communion common to believers, they
enjoy moreover an union and communion ecclesiastical-political. So we deny an
universal visible church. Acts 19.1. Col. 2.5. Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.12.

5. The state of the members of the militant visible church walking in order,
was either before the law, oeconomical, that is in families; or under the law
national; or since the coming of Christ, only congregational. (The term
independent we approve not.) Therefore neither national, provincial nor
classical. Genesis 18.19, Exodus 19.6.

6. A congregational church is by the institution of Christ a part of the
militant visible church, consisting of a company of saints by calling, united
into one body by an holy covenant, for the public worship of God, and the
mutual edification one of another, in the fellowship of the Lord Jesus. 1 Cor.
14.23, 36. and 1.2. and 12.27. Exodus 19.5.6. Deuteronomy. 29.1. and 9 to 15. Acts
2.42. 1 Cor. 14.26.

CHAP. III. Of the matter of the visible church, both is respect of quality and
quantity.
THE matter of a visible church are saints by calling. 1 Cor. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.1.

2. By saints, we understand, 1. Such as have not only attained the knowledge
of the principles of religion, and are free from gross and open scandals, but
also do together with the profession of their faith and repentance, walk in
blameless obedience to the word, so as that in charitable discretion they may
be accounted saints by calling, (though perhaps some or more of them be unsound
and hypocrites inwardly) because the members of such particular churches are
commonly by the Holy Ghost called saints and faithful brethren in Christ; and
sundry churches have been reproved for receiving and suffering such persons to
continue in fellowship amongst them, as have been offensive and scandalous; the
name of God also by this means is blasphemed, and the holy things of God
defiled and profaned, the hearts of the godly grieved, and the wicked
themselves hardened, and helped forward to damnation. The example of such does
endanger the sanctity of others: A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. 2.
The children of such, who are also holy. Heb. 6.1. 1 Cor. 1.5. Romans 6.17. 1
Cor. 1.2. Phil. 1.2. Col. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.1. 1 Cor. 5.12, 13. Rev. 2.14.15, 20.
Ezekiel. 44.7, 9, and 23.38, 39. Number. 19.20. Hag. 2.13, 14. 1 Cor. 11.27.29. Psalm.
37.21. 1 Cor. 5.6. 2 Cor. 7.14.

3. The members of churches, though orderly constituted, may in time
degenerate, and grow corrupt and scandalous, which though they ought not to be
tolerated in the church, yet their continuance therein, through the defect of
the execution of discipline and just censures, does not immediately dissolve
the being of a church, as appears in the church of Israel, and the churches of
Galatia and Corinth, Pergamus and Thyatira. Jer. 2.21. 1 Cor. 5.12. Jer. 2.4.
Gal. 5.4. 2 Cor. 12.21. Rev. 2.14, 15. and 21.21.

4. The matter of the church in respect of its quantity, ought not to be of
greater number than may ordinarily meet together conveniently in one place; nor
ordinarily fewer, than may conveniently carry on church-work. Hence when the
holy scripture makes mention of the saints combined into a church estate, in a
town or city where was but one congregation, it usually calls those saints
(the church) in the singular number; as, the church of the Thessalonians; the
church of Smyrna, Philadelphia, and the like: But when it speaks of the
saints in a nation or province, wherein there were sundry congregations, it
frequently and usually calls them by the name of churches, in the plural
number, as the churches of Asia, Galatia, Macedonia, and the like; which is
further confirmed by what is written of sundry of those churches in particular,
how they were assembled and met together, the whole church in one place, as the
church at Jerusalem, the church at Antioch, the church at Corinth, and
Cenchrea, though it were more near to Corinth, it being the port thereof, and
answerable to a village, yet being a distinct congregation from Corinth, it had
a church of its own, as well as Corinth had. 1 Cor. 14.21. Mat. 18.17. Romans
16.1. 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. Rev. 2.8. and 3.7. 1 Cor. 16.1, 19. Gal. 1.2. 2 Cor. 8.1. 1 Thessalonians. 2.14. Acts 2.46. and 5.12. and 6.2. and 14.27. and 15.38 1 Cor. 5.4. and
14.23. Romans 16.1.

5. Nor can it with reason be thought but that every church appointed and
ordained by Christ, had a ministry ordained and appointed for the same; and yet
plain it is, that there were no ordinary officers appointed by Christ for any
other than congregational churches; elders being appointed to feed, not all
flocks, but the particular flock of God, over which the Holy Ghost had made
them overseers, and that flock they must attend, even the whole flock; and one
congregation being as much as any ordinary elder can attend, therefore there is
no greater church than a congregation, which may ordinarily meet in one place.
Acts 20.28.

CHAP. IV. Of the form of a visible church, and of church covenant.
SAINTS by calling must have a visible political union among themselves, or
else they are not yet a particular church, as those similitudes hold forth,
which the scripture makes use of to show the nature of particular churches, as
a body, a building, house, hands, eyes, feet, and other members must be united,
or else (remaining separate) are not a body. Stones, timber, though squared,
hewn and polished, are not a house, until they are compacted and united; so
saints or believers in judgment of charity, are not a church, unless orderly
knit together. 1 Cor. 12.27. 1 Timothy 3.15. Ephesians. 2.22. 1 Cor. 12.15, 16, 17. Rev.
1.

2. Particular churches cannot be distinguished one from another, but by their
forms: Ephesus is not Smyrna, nor Pergamus Thyatira, but each one a distinct
society of itself, having officers of their own, which had not the charge of
others; virtues of their own, for which others are not praised; corruptions of
their own, for which others are not blamed.

3. This form is a visible covenant, agreement or consent, whereby they give up
themselves unto the Lord, to the observing of the ordinances of Christ together
in the same society, which is usually called the church covenant: For we see
not otherwise how members can have church power one over another mutually. The
comparing of each particular church to a city, and unto a spouse, seems to
conclude not only a form, but that form is by way of covenant. The covenant, as
it was that which made the family of Abraham, and children of Israel to be a
church and people unto God, so it is that which now makes the several societies
of Gentile believers to be churches in these days. Exodus 19.5, 8. Deuteronomy. 29.12,
13. Zech. 11.14. and 9.11. Ephesians. 2.19. 2 Cor. 11.2. Genesis 17.7. Deuteronomy. 29.12, 13.
Ephesians. 2.12, 18.

4. This voluntary agreement, consent or covenant, (for all these are taken
here for the same) although the more express and plain it is, the more fully it
puts us in mind of our mutual duty, and stirs us up to it, and leaves less
room for the questioning of the truth of the church estate of a company of
professors, and the truth of member-ship of particular persons; yet we conceive
the substance of it is kept, where there is a real agreement and consent of a
company of faithful persons to meet constantly together in one congregation,
for the public worship of God, and their mutual edification; which real
agreement and consent they do express by their constant practice in coming
together for the public worship of God, and by their religious subjection to
the ordinances of God there; the rather if we consider how scripture-covenants
have been entered into, not only expressly by word of mouth, but by sacrifice,
by handwriting and seal, and also sometimes by silent consent, without any
writing or expression of words at all. Exodus 19.5. and 20.8 and 24.3.17. Josh.
24.18 to 24. Psalm. 50.5. Neh. 9.3, 8 and 10. 1. Genesis 17. Deuteronomy. 29.

5. This form being by mutual covenant, it follows, it is not says in the
heart, nor the profession of that faith, nor co-habitation, nor baptism. 1. Not
says in the heart, because that is invisible. 2. Not a bare profession,
because that declares them no more to be members of one church than another.
3. Not co-habitation; atheists or infidels may dwell together with believers.
4. Not baptism, because it pre-supposeth a church estate, as circumcision in
the old testament, which gave no being to the church, the church being before
it, and in the wilderness without it. Seals pre-suppose a covenant already in
being. One person is a complete subject of baptism, but one person is incapable
of being a church.

6. All believers ought, as God gives them opportunity thereunto, to endeavor
to join themselves unto a particular church, and that in respect of the honor
of Jesus Christ, in his example and institution, by the professed
acknowledgement of, and subjection unto the order and ordinances of the gospel;
as also in respect of their good of communion, founded upon their visible
union, and contained in the promises of Christ's special presence in the
church; whence they have fellowship with him, and in him one with another;
also, for the keeping of them in the way of God's commandments, and recovering
of them in case of wandering (which all Christ's sheep are subject to in this
life) being unable to return of themselves; together with the benefit of their
mutual edification, and of their posterity, that they may not be cut off from
the privileges of the covenant. Otherwise if a believer offends, he remains
distitute of the remedy provided in that behalf. And should all believers
neglect this duty of joining to all particular congregations, it might follow
thereupon, that Christ should have no visible political churches upon earth.
Acts 2.24. and 9.26. Mat. 3.13, 14, 15. and 28, 29, 30. Psalm. 123.2.3. and
87.7. Mat. 18.20. 1 John 1.3. Psalm. 119.176. 1 Pet. 2.25. Ephesians. 4.16. Joh.
22.24, 25. Mat. 18.15, 16, 17.

CHAP. V. Of the first subject of church power, or, to whom church power does
first belong.
THE first subject of church power, is eitheir supreme or subordinate and
ministerial: The supreme (by way of gift from the father) is the Lord Jesus
Christ: The ministerial is either extraordinary as the apostles, prophets and
evangelists; or ordinary, as every particular congregational church. Mat.
18.18. Rev. 3.7. Isa. 9.6. John 20.21.23. 1 Cor. 14.32. Tit. 1.5. 1 Cor. 5.12.

2. Ordinary church power, is either the power of office, that is, such as is
proper to the eldership, or power of privilege, such as belongs to the
brotherhood. The latter is in the brethren formally, and immediately from
Christ, that is, so as it may be acted or exercised immediately by themselves;
the former is not in them formally or immediately, and therefore cannot be
acted or exercised immediately by them, but is said to be in them, in that they
design the persons unto office, who only are to act, or to exercise this power.
Romans 12.4.8. Acts 1.2, 3, and 6, 3, 4, and 14.23. 1 Cor. 10.29, 30.

CHAP. VI. Of the officers of the church, and especially of pastors and
teachers.
A Church being a company of people combined together by covenant, for the
worship of God, it appears thereby, there may be the essence and being of a
church without any officers, seeing there is both the form and matter of a
church; which is implied when it is said, The apostles ordained elders in every
church, Acts 14.23.

2. Nevertheless, though officers be not absolutely necessary to the simple
being of churches, when they be called, yet ordinarily to their calling, they
are, and to their wellbeing; and therefore the Lord Jesus, out of his tender
compassion, has appointed and ordained officers, which he would not have done,
if they had not been useful and needful for the church; yea, being ascended
into heaven, he received gifts for men, and gave gifts to men, whereof officers
for the church are justly accounted no small parts, they being to continue to
the end of the world, and for the perfecting of all the saints. Romans 10.17.
Jer. 3.15. 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. Psalm. 68.18. Ephesians. 4.8, 11, and 4.12, 13.

3. These officers were either extraordinary or ordinary: Extraordinary, as
apostles, prophets, evangelists; ordinary, as elders and deacons. The apostles,
prophets and evangelists as they were called extraordinarily by Christ, so
their office ended with themselves. Whence it is that Paul directing Timothy
how to carry along church administrations, gives no direction about the choice
or course of apostles, prophets or evanglists, but only of elders (...) ^s; and
when Paul was to take his last leave of the church of Ephesus, he committed the
care of feeding the church to no other but unto the elders of that church. The
like charge does Peter commit to the elders. 1. Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. Acts
8.6, 16, 19. and 11.28. Romans 11.13. 1 Cor. 4.9. 1 Timothy 3.1, 2, 8 to 13. Tit.
1.8. Acts 20.17, 28. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3.

4. Of elders (who are also in scripture called bishops) some attend chiefly to
the ministry of the word, as the pastors and teachers; others attend especially
unto rule, who are therefore called ruling elders. 1 Timothy 2.3. Phil. 1.1. Acts
20.17, 28. 1 Timothy 5.17.

5. The office of pastor and teacher, appears to be distinct. The pastors
special work is, to attend to exhortation, and therein to administer a word of
wisdom: The tercher is to attend to doctrine, and therein to administer a word
of knowledge: And either of them to administer the seals of that covenant, unto
the dispensation whereof they are alike called; as also to execute the
censures, being but a kind of application of the word: The preaching of which,
together with the application thereof, they are alike charged withal. Ephesians.
4.11. Romans 12.7.8. 1 Cor. 12.8. 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. Tit. 1.9.

6. And forasmuch as both pastors and teachers are given by Christ for the
perfecting of the saints, and edifying of his body; which saints and body of
Christ is his church ^ And therefore we account pastors and teachers to be both
of them church officers, and not the pastor for the church, and the teacher
only for the schools; Though this we gladly acknowledge, that schools are both
lawful, profitable and necessary for the training up of such in good literature
or learning, as may afterward be called forth unto office of pastor or teacher
in the church. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. and 1.22, 23. 1 Samuel 10.12, 19.20. 2 Kings 2.3,
15.

CHAP. VII. Of ruling elders and deacons.
THE ruling elders office is distinct from the office of pastor and teacher.
The ruling elders are not so called, to exclude the pastors and teachers from
ruling, because ruling and governing is common to these with the other, whereas
attending to teach and preach the word is peculiar unto the former. Romans 12.7,
8, 9. 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Cor. 12.28. Heb. 13.17. 1 Timothy 5.17.

2. The ruling elders work is to join with the pastor and teacher in those acts
of spiritual rule, which are distinct from the ministry of the word and
sacraments committed to them. Of which sort these be as follows: 1. To open
and shut the doors of God's house by the admission of members approved by the
church; by ordination of officers chosen by the church, and by excommunication
of notorious and obstinate offenders renounced by the church, and by restoring
of penitents forgiven by the church. 2. To call the church together when there
is occasion, and seasonably to dismiss them again. 3. To prepare matters in
private, that in public they may be carried to an end with less trouble, and
more speedy dispatch. 4. To moderate the carriage of all matters in the church
assembled; as, to propound matters to the church, to order the season of speech
and silence, and to pronounce sentence according to the mind of Christ, with
the consent of the church.

5. To be guides and leaders to the church, in all matters whatsoever
pertaining to church administrations and actions. 6. To see that none in the
church live inordinately, out of rank and place, without a ca^ling, or idly in
their calling. 7. To prevent and heal such offenses in life or in doctrine, as
might corrupt the church. 8. To feed the flock of God with a word of
admonition. 9. And as they shall be sent for, to visit and pray over their sick
brethren. 10. And at other times as opportunity shall serve thereunto. 1 Timothy
5.17. 2 Chronicles. 23.19. Rev. 21.21. 1 Timothy 4.14. Mat. 28.17. 2 Cor. 2.7.8. Acts
21.18, 22, 23. and 6.2, 3. and 13.15. 2 Cor. 8.19. Heb. 13.7, 17. 2 Thessalonians.
2.10.11, 12. Acts 20.28, 32. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. James 5.14. Acts. 20.20.

3. The office of a deacon is instituted in the church by the Lord Jesus;
sometimes they are called helps. The scripture tells us how they should be
qualified, -- "Grace, not double tongued, not given to much wine, not given to
filthy lucre." -- They must first be proved and then use the office of a
deacon, being found blameless. The office and work of a deacon, is to receive
the offerings of the church, gifts given to the church, and to keep the
treasury of the church, and therewith to serve the tables, which the church is
to provide for; as the Lord's table, the table of the ministers, and of such as
are in necessity, to whom they are to distribute in simplicity. Acts 6.3. Phil.
1.1. 1 Timothy 3.8. 1 Cor. 12.28. 1 Timothy 3.8, 9. Acts 4.35. and 6.2, 3. Romans 12.8.

4. The office therefore being limited unto the care of the temporal good
things of the church, it extends not to the attendance upon, and administration
of the spiritual things thereof, as the word and sacramentss, or the like. 1
Cor. 7.17.

5. The ordinance of the apostle, and practice of the church, commends the
Lord's day as a fit time for the contribution of the saints. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2, 3.

6. The instituting of all these officers in the church, is the work of God
himself, of the Lord Jesus Christ, of the Holy Ghost; and therefore such
officers as he has not appointed, are altogether unlawful either to be placed
in the church, or to be retained therein, and are to be looked at as human
creatures, mere inventions and appointments of men, to the great dishonor of
Christ Jesus the Lord of his house, the king of his church, whether popes,
patriarchs, cardinals, archbishops, lord-bishops, archdeacons, officials,
commissaries, and the like. These and the rest of that hierarchy and retinue,
not being plants of the Lord's planting, shall be all certainly rooted out and
cast forth. 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.8, 11. Acts 20.28. Mat. 15.13.

7. The Lord has appointed ancient widows (where they may be had) to minister
in the church, in giving attendance to the sick, and to give succor unto them,
and others in the like necessities. 1 Timothy 5.9, 10.

CHAP. VIII. Of the election of church officers.
NO man may take the honor of a church officer unto himself, but he that is
called of God, as was Aaron. Heb. 5.4.

2. Calling unto office is either immediate, by Christ himself, such was the
call of the apostles and prophets, this manner of calling ended with them as
has been said: Or mediate, by the church. Gal. 1.1. Acts 14.23. and 6.3.

3. It is meet that before any be ordained, or chosen officers, they should be
first tried and proved, because hands are not suddenly to be laid upon any, and
both elders and deacons must be of honest and good report. 1 Timothy 5.22. and
7.10. Acts 16.2. and 6.3.

4. The things in respect of which they are to be tried, are those gifts and
virtues which the scripture requires in men that are to be elected into such
places, viz. that the elders must be blameless, sober, apt to teach, and endued
with such other qualifications as are laid down, 1 Timothy 3. 2. Tit. 1.6 to 9.
Deacons to be fitted as is directed, Acts 6.3. 1 Timothy 3.8 to 11.

5. Officers are to be called by such churches whereunto they are to minister.
Of such moment is the preservation of this power, that the churches exercised
it in the presence of the apostles. Acts 14.23. and 1.23. and 6.3, 4, 5.

6. A church being free, cannot become subject to any, but by a free election;
yet when such a people do choose any to be over them in the Lord, then do they
become subject, and most willingly submit to their ministry in the Lord, whom
they have so chosen. Gal. 5.13. Heb. 13.17.

7. And if the church have power to choose their officers and ministers, then in
case of manifest unworthiness and delinquency, they have power also to depose
them: for, to open and shut, to choose and refuse, to constitute in office, and
remove from office, are acts belonging to the same power. Romans 16.17.

8. We judge it much conducing to the well-being and communion of churches,
that where it may conveniently be done, neighbor churches be advised withal,
and their help be made use of in the trial of church officers, in order to
their choice, Cant. 8.8, 9.

9. The choice of such church officers belongs not to the civil magistrates,
as such, or diocesan-bishops, or patrons; for of these, or any suchlike, the
scripture is wholly silent, as having any power therein.

CHAP. IX. Of ordination, and imposition of hands.
CHURCH officers are not only to be chosen by the church, but also to be
ordained by imposition of hands and prayer, with which at the ordination of
elders, fasting also is to be joined. Acts 13.3. and 14.23. 1 Timothy 5.22.

2. This ordination we account nothing else but the solemn putting a man into
his place and office in the church, whereunto he had right before by election;
being like the installing of a magistrate in the common wealth. Ordination
therefore is not to go before but to follow election. The essence and substance
of the outward calling of an ordinary officer in the church, does not consist
in his ordination, but in his voluntary and free election by the church, and
his accepting of that election; whereupon is founded that relation between
pastor and flock, between such a minister and such a people. Ordination does
not constitute an officer, nor give him the essentials of his office. The
apostles were elders without imposition of hands by men; Paul and Barnabas were
officers before that imposition of hands, Acts 13.3. The posterity of Levi were
priests and levites, before hands were laid on them by the children of Israel.
Numb. 8.10. Acts 6.5, 6. and 13.2.3. and 14.23. 1 Timothy 4.14. 1 Timothy 5.22.

3. In such churches where there are elders, imposition of hands in ordination,
is to be performed by those elders.

4. In such churches where there are no elders, imposition of hands may be
performed by some of the brethren orderly chosen by the church thereunto. For
if the people may elect officers, which is the greater, and wherein the
substance of the office does consist, they may much more (occasion and need so
requiring) impose hands in ordination, which is less, and but the
accomplishment of the other. Numb. 8.10.

5. Nevertheless, in such churches where there are no elders, and the church so
desire, we see not why imposition of hands may not be performed by the elders
of other churches. Ordinary officers laid hands upon the officers of many
churches: The presbytery at Ephesus laid hands upon Timothy, an evangelist; the
presbytery at Antioch laid hands upon Paul and Barnabas. 1 Timothy 4.14. Acts 13.3.

6. Church officers are officers to one church, even that particular church
over which the Holy Ghost has made them overseers. Insomuch as elders are
commanded to feed, not all flocks, but that flock which is committed to their
faith and trust, and depends upon them. Nor can constant residence at one
congregation be necessary for a minister, no, nor yet lawful, if he be not a
minister to one congregation only, but to the church universal; because he may
not attend one part only of the church to which he is a minister, but he is
called to attend unto all the flock. 1 Pet. 5.2. Acts 20.28.

7. He that is clearly loosed from his office relation unto the church whereof
he was a minister, cannot be looked at as an officer, nor perform any act of
office in any other church, unless he be again orderly called unto office;
which when it shall be, we know nothing to hinder, but imposition of hands also
in his ordination ought to be used toward him again. For so Paul the apostle
received imposition of hands twice at least from Annanias. Acts 9.17. and 13.3.

CHAP. X. Of the power of the church, and its presbytery.
SUPREME and lordly power over all the churches upon earth does only belong
unto Jesus Christ, who is king of the church, and the head thereof. He has the
government upon his shoulders, and has all power given to him both in heaven
and earth. Psalm. 2.6. Ephesians. 1.21, 22. Isa. 9.6. Matt. 28.18.

2. A company of professed believers ecclesiastically confederate, as they are
a church, before they have officees, and without them; so even in that estate,
subordinate church power, under Christ, delegated to them by him, does belong
to them in such a manner as is before expressed, chap. 5. sect. 2. and as
flowing from the very nature and essence of a church: It being natural to all
bodies, and so unto a church body, to be furnished with sufficient power for
its own preservation and subsistence. Acts 1.23. and 14.23. and 6.3, 4. Mat.
18.17. 1 Cor. 5.4.5.

3. This government of the church is a mixed government, (and so has been
acknowledged long before the term of independency was heard of) in respect of
Christ, the head and king of the church, and the sovereign power residing in
him, and exercised by him, it is a monarchy; in respect of the body or
brotherhood of the church, and power from Christ granted unto them, it
resembles a democracy; in respect of the presbytery, and power committed unto
them, it is an aristocracy. Rev. 3.7. 1 Cor. 5.12. 1 Timothy 5.27.

4. The sovereign power which is peculiar unto Christ, is exercised. 1. In
calling the church out of the world unto holy fellowship with himself. 2. In
instituting the ordinances of his worship, and appointing his ministers and
officers for the dispensing of them. 3. In giving laws for ^e ordering of all
our ways, and the ways of his house. (...) * In giving (...) and life to all
his institutions, and to (...) 5. In protecting and delivering his (...) and
from all the enemies of their peace. (...) Rev. 5.8, 9. Mat. 28.20. Ephesians. 4.8,
11. (...). 4.1^. Isa. 33.22. 1 Timothy 3.15. 2 Cor. 10. (...) 5. Isa. 32.2. Luke
17.1.

5. The power granted by Christ unto the body of the church and brotherhood, is
a prerogative or privilege which the church does exercise. 1. In choosing their
own officers, whether elders or deacons. 2. In admission of their own members,
and therefore there is great reason they should have power to remove any from
their fellowship again. Hence in case of offense, any brother has power to
convince and admonish an offending brother; and in case of not hearing him, to
take one or two more to set on the admonition; and in case of not hearing them,
to proceed to tell the church; and as his offense may require, the whole church
has power to proceed to the censure of him, whether by admonition or
excommunication; and upon his repentance, to restore him again unto his former
communion. Acts 3.5. and 14.23. and 9.26. Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. Tit. 3.10. Col.
4.17. 2 Cor. 2.7, 8.

6. In case an elder offend incorrigibly, the matter so requiring, as the
church had power to call him to office, so they have power according to order
(the council of other churches, where it may be had, directing thereto) to
remove him from his office; and being now but a member, in case he add
contumacy to his sin, the church that had power to receive him into their
fellowship, has the same power to cast him out, that they have concerning any
other member. Col. 4.17. Romans 16.17. Mat. 18.17.

7. Church government or rule, is placed by Christ in the officers of the
church, who are therefore called rulers* while they rule with God; yet in case
of male administration, they are subject to the power of the church, as has
been said before. The Holy Ghost frequently, yea always, where it mentions
church rule, and church government, ascribes it to elders; whereas the work
and duty of the people is expressed in the phrase of obeying their elders, and
submitting themselves unto them in the Lord. So as it is manifest, that an
organic or com^^oat church is a body politic, consisting of some that are
governors, and some that are governed in the Lord. 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 13.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. Romans 12.8. 1 Timothy 5. 17. 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. Heb. 13.7, 17.

8. The power which Christ has committed to the elders, is to feed and rule the
church of God, and accordingly to call the church together upon any weighty
occasion; when the members, so called, without a just cause, may not refuse to
come, nor when they are come, depart before they are dismissed, nor speak in
the church before they have leave from the elders; nor continue so doing when
they require silence; nor may they oppose nor contradict the judgment or
sentence of the elders, without sufficient and weighty cause, because such
practices are manifestly contrary unto order and government, and in-lets of
disturbances, and tend to confusion. Acts 20.28. and 6.2. Number. 16.12. Ezekiel.
46.10. Acts 13.15. Hos. 4.4.

9. It belongs also unto the elders to examine any officers or members before
they be received of the church; to receive the accusations brought to the
church, and to prepare them for the churches hearing. In handling of offenses,
and other matters before the church, they have power to declare and publish the
counsel and will of God, touching the same, and to pronounce sentence with
consent of the church. Lastly, They have power, when they dismiss the people,
to bless them in the name of the Lord. Rev. 2.2. 1 Timothy 5.19. Acts 21.18, 22,
23. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. Numb. 6. 23 to 26.

10. This power of government in the elders does not any wise prejudice the
power of privilege in the brotherhood; as neither the power of privilege in the
brethren does prejudice the power of government in the elders, but they may
sweetly agree together; as we may see in the example of the apostles, furnished
with the greatest church power, who took in the concurrence and consent of the
brethren in church administrations. Also that scripture, 2 Cor. 2.9. and 10.6.
do declare, That what the churches are to act and do in these matters they were
to do in a way of obedience, and that not only to the direction of the
apostles, but also of their ordinary elders. Acts 14.15, 23, and 6.2. 1 Cor.
5.4. 2 Cor. 26.7. Heb. 13.17.

11. From the premises, namely, That the ordinary power of government belonging
only to the elders, power of privilege remains with the brotherhood (as the
power of judgment in matters of censure, and power of liberty in matters of
liberty) it follows, that in an organic church and right administration, all
church acts proceed after the manner of a mixed administration, so as no church
act can be consummated or perfected without the consent of both.

CHAP. XI. Of the maintenance of church officers.
THE apostle concludes, that necessary and sufficient maintenance is due unto
the ministers of the word, from the law of nature and nations, from the law of
Moses, the equity thereof, as also the rule of common reason. Moreover, the
scripture does not only call elders, labourors and workmen, but also speaking
of them does say, that the labourer is worthy of his hire; and requires, that
he which is taught in the word should communicate to him in all good things;
and mentions it as an ordinance of the Lord, that they which preach the gospel
should live of the gospel; and forbids the muzling the mouth of the ox that
treads out the corn, 1 Cor. 9.14, 15. Mat. 9.38. and 10.10. 1 Timothy 5.18. Gal.
6.6. 1 Cor. 9.9, 14.

2. The scriptures alleged, requiring this maintenance as a bounden duty, and
due debt, and not as a matter of alms and free gift, therefore people are not
at liberty to do or not to do, what and when they please in this matter, no
more than in any other commanded duty, and ordinance of the Lord; but ought
^^duty to minister of their carnal things, to them that labor among them in
the word and doctrine, as well as as they ought to pay any other workmen their
wages, and to discharge and satisfy their other debts, or to submit themselves
to observe any other ordinance of the Lord, Romans 15.27. 1 Cor. 9.21.

3. The apostle (Gal. 6.6.) enjoining, that he which is taught communicates to
them that teaches in all good things, does not leave it arbitrary, what or how
much a man shall give, or in what proportion, but even the latter as well as
the former, is prescribed and appointed by the Lord, 1 Cor. 16.2.

4. Not only members of churches, but all that are taught in the word, are to
contribute unto him that teaches in all good things. In case that
congregations are defective in their contributions, the deacons are to call
upon them to do their duty: if their call suffices not, the church by her
power is to require it of their members; and where church power, through the
corruption of men, does not or cannot attain the end, the magistrate is to see
that the ministry be duly provided for, as appears from the commended example
of Nehemiah. The magistrates are nursing fathers, and nursing mothers, and
stand charged with the custody of both tables; because it is better to prevent
a scandal that it may not come, and easier also, than to remove it when it is
given. Its most suitable to rule, that by the churches care each man should
know his proportion according to rule, what he should do, before he do it, that
so his judgment and heart may be satisfied in what he does, and just offense
prevented in what is done, Acts 6.3, 4. Neh. 13.11. Isa. 49.23. 2 Cor. 8.13.14.

CHAP. XII. Of the admission of members into the church.
THE doors of the churches of Christ upon earth do not by God's appointment
stand so wide open, that all sorts of people, good or bad, may freely enter
therein at their pleasure, but such as are admitted thereto, as members, ought
to be examined and tried first, whether they be fit and meet to be received,
into church-society or not. The eunuch of Ethiopia, before his admission was
examined by Philip, whether he did believe on Jesus Christ with all his heart.
The angel of the church at Ephesus is commended for trying such as said they
were apostles, and were not. There is like reason for trying of them that
profess to be believers. The officers are charged with the keeping of the doors
of the church, and therefore are in a special manner to make trial of the
fitness of such who enter. Twelve angels are set at the gates of the temple,
lest such as where ceremonially unclean should enter thereinto. 2 Chronicles. 23.19.
Mat. 13.25. and 22.12. Acts 8.37. Rev. 2.2. Acts 9.26. Rev. 21.12. 2 Chro.
23.19.

2. The things which are requisite to be found in all church members, are
repentance from sin, and faith in Jesus Christ; and these are the things
whereof men are to be examined at their admission into the church, and which
then they must profess and hold forth in such sort, as may satisfy rational
charity that the things are there indeed. John Baptist admitted men to baptism
confessing and bewailing their sins; and of others it is said, That they came
and confessed and showed their deeds. Acts 2.38 to 42. and 8.37. Mat. 3.6. Acts
1.9, 18.

3. The weakest measure of faith is to be accepted in those that desire to be
admitted into the church, because weak christians, if sincere, have the
substance of that faith, repentance and holiness which is required in church
members; and such have most need of the ordinances for their confirmation and
growth in grace. The Lord Jesus would not quench the smoking flax, not break
the bruised reed, but gather the tender lambs in his arms, and carry them
gently in his bosom. Such charity and tenderness is to be used, as the weakest
christian, if sincere, may not be excluded nor discouraged. Severity of
examination is to be avoided. Romans 14.1. Mat. 12.20. Isa. 40.11.

4. In case any through excessive fear, or other infirmity, be unable to make
their personal relation of their spiritual estate in public, it is sufficient
that the elders having received private satisfaction, make relation thereof in
public before the church, they testifying their assents thereunto; this being
the way that tends most to edification. But where persons are of great
abilities, there it is most expedient that they make their relations and
confessions personally with their own mouth, as David professes of himself,
Psalm. 66.16.

5. A personal and public confession, and declaring of God's manner of working
upon the soul, is both lawful, expedient and useful, in sundry respects, and
upon sundry grounds. Those three thousand, Acts 2.37, 41. before they were
admitted by the apostles, did manifest that they were pricked in the heart at
Peter's sermon, together with earnest desire to be delivered from their sins,
which now wounded their conscience, and their ready receiving of the word of
promise and exhortation. We are to be ready to render a reason of the hope that
is in us, to every one that asks us; therefore we must be able and ready upon
any occasion to declare and show our repentence for sin, faith unfeigned, and
effectual calling, because these are the reasons of a well grounded hope. I
have not hidden my righteousness from the great congregation, Psalm. 40.10. 1
Pet. 3.15. Heb. 11.1. Ephesians. 1.18.

6. This profession of faith and repent^nce, as it must be made by such at
their admission, that were never in church society before; so nothing
hinders, but the same way also be performed by such as have formerly been
members of some other church, and the church to which they now join themselves
as members may lawfully require the same. Those three thousand, Acts 2, which
made their confession, were members of the church of the Jews before, so were
they that were baptized by John. Churches may err in their admission and
persons regularly admitted, may fall into offense. Otherwise if churches might
obtrude their members, or if church members, might obtrude themselves upon
other churches without due trial, the matter so requiring, both the liberty of
churches would hereby be infringed, in that they might not examine those,
concerning whose fitness for communion they were unsatisfied; and besides, the
infringing of their liberty, the churches themselves would unavoidably be
corrupted, and the ordinances defiled, whilst they might not refuse, but must
receive the unworthy; which is contrary unto the scripture, teaching that all
churches are sisters, and therefore equal. Mat. 3.1, 6. Gal. 2.4. 1 Timothy 5.24.
Cant. 8.8.

7. The like trial is to be required from such members of the church as were
born in the same, or received their membership and were baptized in their
infancy, or minority, by virtue of the covenant of their parents, when being
grown up unto years of discretion, they shall desire to be made partakers of
the Lord's supper; unto which, because holy things must not be given to the
unworthy, therefore it is requisite, that these as well as others, should come
to their trial and examination, and manifest their faith and repentance by an
open profession thereof, before they are received to the Lord's supper, and
otherwise not to be admitted thereunto. Yet these church members that were so
born, or received in their childhood, before they are capable of being made
partakers of full communion, have many privileges which others (no^ church
members) have not; they are in covenant with God, have the seal thereof upon
them, viz. baptism; and so if not regenerated, yet are in a more hopeful way of
attaining regenerating grace, and all the spiritual blessings both of the
covenant and seal: they are also under church-watch, and consequently subject
to the reprehensions, admonitions, and censures thereof, for their healing and
amendment, as need shall require, Mat. 7.6. 1 Cor. 11.27.

CHAP. XIII. Of church members their removal from one church to another, and of
recommendation and dismission.
CHURCH members may not remove or depart from the church, and so one from
another as they please, nor without just and weighty cause, but ought to live
and dwell together, forasmuch as they are commanded not to forsake the
assembling themselves together. Such departure tends to the dissolution and
ruin of the body, as the pulling of stones and pieces of timber from the
building, and of members from the natural body tends to the destruction of the
whole. Heb. 10.25.

2. It is therefore the duty of church members in such times and places where
council may be had, to consult with the church whereof they are members about
their removal, that accordingly they having their approbation, may be
encouraged or otherwise desist. They who are joined with consent, should not
depart without consent, except forced thereunto. Pro. 11.16.

3. If a member's departure be manifestly unsafe and sinful, the church may not
consent thereunto; for in so doing, they should not act in faith, and should
partake with him in his sin. If the case be doubtful, and the person not to be
persuaded, it seems best to leave the matter unto God, and not forcibly to
detain him. Romans 14.23. 1 Timothy 5.22. Acts 21.14.

4. Just reasons for a member's removal of himself from the church, are, 1. If
a man cannot continue without partaking in sin. 2. In case of personal
persecution; so Paul departed from the disciples at Damascus. Also in case of
general persecution, when all are scattered. 5. In case of real, and not only
pretended want of competent subsistence, a door being opened for better supply
in another place, together with the means of spiritual edification. In these or
like cases, a member may lawfully remove, and the church, cannot lawfully
detain him. Ephesians. 5.11. Acts 9.25, 29, 30. and 8.1. Neh. 13.20.

5. To separate from a church, either out of contempt of their holy fellowship,
or out of covetousness, or for greater enlargements, with just grief to the
church; or out of schism, or want of love, and out of a spirit of contention,
in respect of some unkindness, or some evil only conceived, or indeed in the
church, which might and should be tolerated and healed with a spirit of
meekness, and of which evil the church is not yet convinced (though perhaps
himself be) nor admonished; for these or the like reasons to withdraw from
public communion in word, or seals, or censures, is unlawful and sinful. 2 Timothy
4.10. Romans 16.17. Judge 5.19. Ephesians. 4.2, 3. Col. 3.13. Gal. 6.1, 2.

6. Such members as have orderly removed their habitation, ought to join
themselves unto the church in order where they do inhabit, if it may be;
otherwise, they can neither perform the duties, nor receive the privileges of
members. Such an example tolerated in some, is apt to corrupt others, which if
many should follow, would threaten the dissolution and confusion of churches,
contrary to the scripture. Isa. 56.8. Acts 9.26. 1 Cor. 14.33.

7. Order requires that a member thus removing, have letters testimonial, and
of dismission from the church whereof he yet is, unto the church whereunto he
desires to be joined, lest the church should be deluded; that the church may
receive him in the faith, and not be corrupted by receiving deceivers, and
false brethren, until the person dismissed be received into another church, he
cease not by his letters or dismission to be a member of the church whereof
he was, the church cannot make a member no member, but by excommunication. Acts
18.27.

8. If a member be called to remove only for a time, where a church is, letters
of recommendation are requisite, and sufficient for communion with that church,
in the ordinances, and in their watch; as Phoebe, a servant of the church at
Cenchrea, had letters written for her to the church at Rome, that she might be
received as becomes saints. Romans 16.1, 2. 2 Cor. 3, 1.

9. Such letters of recommendation and dismission were written for Apollos, for
Marcus to the Colossians; for Phoebe to the Romans, for sundry others to other
churches. And the apostle tells us, that some persons, not sufficiently known
otherwise, have special need of such letters, though he for his part had no
need thereof. The use of them is to be a benefit and help to the party for whom
they are written, and for the furthering of his receiving amongst the saints in
the place whereto he goes, and the due satisfaction of them in their receiving
of him. Acts 18.27. Col. 4.10. Romans 16.1. 2 Cor. 3.1.

CHAP. XIV. Of excommunication, and other censures.
THE censures of the church are appointed by Christ for the preventing,
removing, and healing of offenses in the church; for the reclaiming and gaining
of offending brethren, for the deterring others from the like offenses, for
purging out the leaven which may infect the whole lump; for vindicating the
honor of Christ, and of his church, and the holy profession of the gospel; and
for preventing of the wrath of God, that may justly fall upon the church, if
they should suffer his covenant, and the seals thereof to be profaned by
notorious and obstinate offenders. 1 Timothy 5.20. Deuteronomy. 17.12, 13. Jude 5.19.
Deuteronomy. 13.11. 1 Cor. 5.6. Romans 2.24. Rev. 2.14, 15, 16, 20.

2. If an offense be private, (one brother offending another) the offender is
to go and acknowledge his repentance for it unto his offended brother, who is
then to forgive him; but if the offender neglect or refuse to do it, the
brother offended is to go and convince and admonish him of it, between
themselves privately: If thereupon the offender be brought to repent of his
offense, the admonisher has won his brother; but if the offender hear not his
brother, the brother offended is to take with him one or two more, that in the
mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established, (whether the
word of admonition, if the offender receive it; or the word of complaint, if he
refuse it;) for if he refuse it, the offended brother is by the mouth of the
elders to tell the church, and if he hear the church, and declare the same by
penitent confession, he is recovered and gained; and if the church discern him
to be willing to hear, yet not fully convinced of his offense, as in case of
heresy, they are to dispense to him a public admonition; which declaring the
offender to lie under the public offense of the church, does thereby withold or
suspend him from the holy fellowship of the Lord's supper, till his offense be
removed by penitent confession. If he still continue oststinate, they are to
cast him out by excommunication. Mat. 5.23, 24. Luke 17.3, 4. Mat. 18.15, 26,
17. Tit. 3.10.

3. But if the offense be more public at first, and of a more heinous and
criminal nature, to wit, such as are condemned by the light of nature, then the
church, without such gradual proceedings, is to cast out the offender from
their holy communion, for the further mortifying of his sins, and the healing
of his soul in the day of the Lord Jesus. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5, 11.

4. In dealing with an offender, great care is to be taken, that we be neither
over strict or rigorous, nor too indulgent or remiss; our proceeding herein,
ought to be with a spirit of meckness, considering ourselves, least we also be
tempted; and that the best of us have need of much forgiveness from the Lord.
Yet the winning and healing of the offender's soul, being the end of these
endeavors, we must not d^ub with untempered mortar, nor heal the wounds of our
brethren sligh^ly. On some have compassion, others save with fear. Gal. 6.1.
Mat. 18.34, 35. Ezekiel. 13.10.

5. While the off^nder remains excommunicate, the church is to refrain all
member-like communion with him in spiritual things, and also from all familiar
communion with him in civil things, further than the necessity of natural,
domestical or civil relations do require; and are therefore to forbear to eat
and drink with him, that he may be ashamed. Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 These.
3.6, 14.

6. Excommunication being a spiritual punishment, it does not prejudice the
excommunicate in, nor deprive him of his civil rights, and therefore touches
not princes, nor other magistrates in point of their civil dignity or
authority, and the excommunicate being but as a publican, and a heathen,
(heathens being lawfully permitted to come to hear the word in church
assemblies) we acknowledge therefore the like liberty of hearing the word may
be permitted to p^^sons excommunicate, that is permitted unto heathen, And
because we are not without hope of his recovery, we are not to account him as
an enemy, but to admonish him as a brother. 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.

7. If the Lord sanctify the censure to the offender, so as by the grace of
Christ he does testify his repentance with humble confession of his sins, and
judging of himself, giving glory unto God, the church is then to forgive him,
and to comfort him, and to restore him to the wonted brotherly communion, which
formerly he enjoyed with them, 2 Cor. 2.7, 8.

8. The suffering of the profane or scandalous livers to continue in
fellowship, and partake in the sacraments, is doubtless a great sin in those
that have power in their hands to redress it, and do it not: Nevertheless,
inasmuch as Christ and his apostles in their times, and the prophets and the
other godly in theirs, did lawfully partake of the Lord's commanded ordinances
in the Jewish church, and neither taught nor practiced separation from the
same, though unworthy ones were permitted therein, and inasmuch as the faithful
in the church of Corinth, wherein were many unwor^hy persons and practices, are
never commanded to absent themselves from the sacraments, because of the same;
therefore the godly in like cases are not presently to separate, Rev. 2.14, 15,
20. Mat. 23.3. Acts 3.1. 1 Cor. 6. and 15.12.

9. As separation from such a church wherein profane and scandalous persons
are tolerated, is not presently necessary; so for the members thereof,
otherwise unworthy, hereupon to abstain from communicating with such a church
in the participation of the sacraments is unlawful. For as it were unreasonable
for an innocent person to be punished for the faults of others, wherein he has
no hand, and whereunto he gave no consent; so is it more unreasonable, that a
godly man should neglect duty, and punish himself, in not coming for his
portion in the blessing of the sea^s, as he ought, because others are suffered
to come, that ought no^; especially considering that himself does neither
consent to their sins, nor to their approaching to the ordinance in their sin,
nor to the neglect of others who shall put them away, and do not; but on the
contrary, does heartily mourn for these things, modestly and seasonably stir up
others to do their duty. If the church cannot be reformed, they may use their
liberty, as is specified, chap. 13. sect. 4. But this all the godly are bound
unto, even every one to do his endeavor, according to his power and place,
that the unworthy may be duly proceeded against by the church, to whom this
matter does appertain, 2 Chronicles. 30.18. Genesis 18.25. Ezekiel. 9.4.

CHAP. XV. Of the communion of churches one with another.
ALTHOUGH churches be distinct and therefore may not be confounded one with
another, and equal, and therefore have not dominion one over another; yet all
the churches ought to preserve church communion one with another, because they
are all united unto Christ, not only as a mystical but as a political head,
whence is derived a communion suitable thereunto. Rev. 1.4. Cant. 8.8. Romans
16.16. 1 Cor. 16.19. Acts 15.23. Rev. 2.1.

2. The communion of churches is excercised sundry ways. 1. By way of mutual
care, in taking thought for one another welfare. 2. By way of consultation one
with another, when we have occasion to require the judgment and counsel of
other churches, touching any person or cause wherewith they may be better
acquainted than ourselves. As the church at Antioch consulted with the apostles
and elders of the church at Jerusalem, about the question of circumcision of
the Gentiles, and about the false teachers that broached that doctrine. In
which case, when any church wanted light or peace amongst themselves, it is a
way of communion of churches (according to the word) ta meet together, by their
elders and other messengers in a synod, to consider and argue the points in
doubt or difference; and having found out the way of truth and peace, to
commend the same by their let^ and messengers to the churches whom the same may
concern. But if a church be rent with divisions among themselves, or lie under
any open scandal, and yet refuse to consult with other churches for healing or
removing of the same, it is matter of just offense both to the Lord Jesus, and
to other churches, as bewraying too much want of mercy and faithfulness, not to
seek to bind up the breaches and wounds of the church and brethren; and
therefore the state of such a church calls aloud upon other churches to
exercise a fuller act of brotherly communion, to wit, by way of admonition. 3.
A third way of communion of churches is by way of admonition, to wit, in case
any public offense be found in a church, which either discern not or are slow
in proceeding to use means for the removing and healing thereof. Paul had no
authority over Peter, yet when he saw Peter not walking with a right foot, he
publicly rebuked him before the church. Though churches have no more authority
one over another, than one apostle had over another, yet as one apostle might
admonish another, so may one church admonish another, and yet without
usurpation. In which case, if the church that lies under offense, do not
hearken to the church that does admonish her, the church is to acquaint other
neighbor churches with that offense which the offending church still lies
under, together with the neglect of their brotherly admonition given unto them;
whereupon those other churches are to join in seconding the admonition formerly
given; and if still the offending church continue in obstinacy and impenitency,
they may forbear communion with them, and are to proceed to make use of the
help of a synod, or council of neighbor churches walking orderly (if a greater
cannot conveniently be had) for their conviction. If they hear not the synod,
the synod having declared them too obstinate, particular churches approving and
accepting the judgment of the synod, are to declare the sentence of
non-communion respectively concerning them; and thereupon, out of a religious
care to keep their own communion pure, they may justly withdraw themselves from
participation with them at the Lord's table, and from such other acts of holy
communion as the communion of churches does otherwise allow and require.
Nevertheless, if any members of such a church as live under public offense, do
not consent to the offense of the church, but do in due sort bear witness
against it, they are still to be received to wonted communion; for it is not
equal that the innocent should suffer with the offensive. Yea, furthermore, if
such innocent members, after due waiting in the use of all good means for the
healing of the offense of their own church, shall at l^^t (with the allowance
of the council of neighbor churches) withdraw from the fellowship of their own
church, and offer themselves to the fellowship of another, we judge it lawful
for the other church to receive them (being otherwise fit) as if they had been
orderly dismissed to them from their own church. 4. A fourth w^y of communion
of churches is by way of participation. The members of one church occasionally
coming to another, we willingly admit them to partake with us at the Lord's
table, it being the seal of our communion, not only with Christ, nor only with
the members of our own churches, but also of all the churches of the saints; in
which regard we refuse not to baptize their children presented to us, if either
their own minister, be absent, or such a fruit of holy fellowship be desired
with us. In like case, such churches as are furnished with more ministers than
one, do willingly afford one of their own ministers to supply the place of an
absent or sick minister of another church for a needful season. 5. A fifth way
of church communion, is by way of recommendation, when the member of one church
has occasion to reside in another church, if but for a season, we commend him
to their watchful fellowship, by letters of recommendation, but if he be called
to settle his abode there, we commit him according to his desire, to the
fellowship of their covenant, by letters of dismission. 6. A sixth way of
church communion is in case of need, to minister relief and succor one unto
another, either of able members, to furnish them with officers, or of outward
support, to the necessities of poorer churches, as did the churches of the
Gentiles contribute liberally to the poor saints at Jerusalem. Cant. 8.8. Acts
15.2, 6, 22, 23. Ezekiel. 34.4. Gal. 2.11 to 14. Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. by
proportion. Genesis 18.25. 1 Cor. 12.13. Romans 16.1. Acts 18.27. and 11.22, 29.
Romans 13.26, 27.

3. When a company of believers purpose to gather into a church fellowship, it
is requisite for their safer proceeding, and the maintaining the communion of
churches, that they signify their intent unto the neighbor churches, walking
according unto the order of the gospel, and desire their presence, and help,
and right hand of fellowship, which they ought readily to give unto them, when
there is no just cause to except against their proceedings. Gal. 2.1, 2. and 9.
by proportion.

4. Besides these several ways of communion, there is also a way of propagation
of churches: when a church shall grow too numerous, it is a way, and fit season
to propagate one church out of another, by sending forth such of their members
as are willing to remove, and to procure some officers to them, as may enter
with them into church estate amongst themselves. As bees, when the hive is too
full, issue forth by swarms, and are gathered into other hives, so the churches
of Christ may do the same upon like necessity; and therein hold forth to them
the right hand of fellowship, both in their gathering into a church, and in the
ordination of their officers, Isa. 40.20. Cant. 8.8.9.

CHAP. XVI. Of Synods.
SYNODS orderly assembled, and rightly proceeding according to the pattern,
Acts 15, we acknowledge as the ordinance of Christ; and though not absolutely
necessary to the being, yet many times, through the iniquity of men, and
preverseness of times, necessary to the well-being of churches, for the
establishment of truth and peace therein, Acts 15.2 to 15.

2. Synods being spiritual and ecclesiastical assemblies, are therefore made up
of spiritual and ecclesiastical causes. The next efficient cause of them under
Christ, is the power of the churches, sending forth their elders and other
messengers, who being met together in the name of Christ, are the matter of a
synod: and they in arguing, debating, and determining matters of religion
according to the word, and publishing the same to the churches it concerns,
do put forth the proper and formal acts of a synod, to the conviction of errors
and heresies, and the establishment of truth and peace in the churches, which
is the end of a synod, Acts 15.2, 3, 6, 7, to 23, 31. and 16.4, 15.

3. Magistrates have power to call a synod, by calling to the churches to send
forth their elders, and other messengers, to counsel, and assist them in
matters of religion; but yet the constituting of a synod is a church act, and
may be transacted by the churches even when civil magistrates may be enemies to
the churches, and church assemblies, 2 Chronicles. 19.4, 5, to 11. Acts. 15.

4. It belongs unto synods and councils, to debate and determine
controversies of faith, and cases of conscience; to clear from the word holy
directions for the holy worship of God, and good government of the church; to
bear witness against male administration and corruption in doctrine or manners
in any particular church; and to give directions for the reformation thereof;
not to exercise church censures in way of discipline, nor any other act of
church authority or jurisdiction, which that presidential synod did forbear,
Acts. 15.1, 2, 6, 7. 1 Chronicles. 15, 13. 2 Chronicles. 29.6, 7. Acts 15.24, 28, 29.

5. The synods directions and determinations so far as consonant to the word of
God, are to be received with reverence and submission; not only fort heir
agreement therewith (which is the principal ground thereof, and without which
they bind not at all) but also secondarily for the power where by they are
made, as being an ordinance of God appointed thereunto in his word, Acts 15.

6. Because it is difficult, if not impossible, for many churches to come
together in one place, in all their members universally; therefore they may
assemble by their delegates or messengers; as the church at Antioch went not
all to Jerusalem, but some select men for that purpose. Because none are or
should be more fit to know the state of the churches nor to advise of ways for
the good thereof, than elders; therefore it is fit that in the choice of the
messengers for such assemblies they have special respect unto such; yet
inasmuch as not only Paul and Barnabas, but certain others also were sent to
Jerusalem from Antioch, and when they were come to Jerusalem, not only the
apostles and elders, but other brethren also do assemble and meet about the
matter; therefore synods are to consist both of elders, and other church
members endued with gifts, and sent by the churches, not excluding the presence
of any brethren in the churches, Acts 15.2, 22, 23.

CHAP. XVII. Of the civil magistrates power in matters ecclesiastical.
IT is lawful, profitable and necessary for christians to gather themselves
together into church estate, and therein to exercise all the ordinances of
Christ, according unto the word, although the consent of the magistrate could
not be had thereunto; because the apostles and christians in their time did
frequently thus practice, when the magistrates all of them being Jewish or
Pagan, and most persecuting enemies, would give no countenance or consent to
such matters, Acts 2.41, 47. and 4.1, 2, 3.

2. Church government stands in no opposition to civil government of
commonwealths, nor any way intrencheth upon the authority of civil magistrates
in their jurisdiction; nor any whit weakneth their hands in governing, but
rather strengthens them, furthereth the people in yielding more hearty and
conscionable obedience unto them whatsoever some ill affected persons to the
ways of Christ have suggested, to alienate the affection of kings and princes
from the ordinances of Christ; as if the kingdom of Christ in his church could
not rise and stand without the falling and weakening of their government, which
is also of Christ; whereas the contrary is most true, that they may both stand
together and flourish, the one being helpful unto the other, in their distinct
and due administrations. John 18.36. Acts 25.8. Isa. 49.23.

3. The power and authority of magistrates is not for the restraining of
churches, or any other good works, but for helping in and furthering thereof;
and therefore the consent and countenance of magistrates, when it may be had,
is not to be slighted or lightly esteemed; but on the contary, it is part of
that honor due to christian magistrates to desire and crave there consent and
approbation therein, which being obtained, the churches may then proceed in
their way with more encouragement and comfort. Romans 13, 4. 1 Timothy 2.2.

4. It is not in the power of magistrates to compel their subjects to become
church members, and to partake at the Lord's table; for the priests are
reproved that brought unworthy ones into the sanctuary: Then as it was unlawful
for the priest, so it is as unl^wful to be done by civil magistrates, those
whom the church cast out it they were in, the magistrate ought not to thrust
them into the church, nor to hold them therein, Ezekiel. 44.7.9. 1 Cor. 5.11.

5. As it is unlawful for church officers to meddle with the sword of the
magistrate, so it is unlawful for the magistrate to meddle with the work proper
to church officers. The acts of Moses and David, who were not only princes, but
prophets, were extraordinary, therefore not imitable. Against such usurpation,
the Lord witnessed by smiting Uzziah with leprosy, for presuming to offer
incense. Mat. 2.25, 26. 2 Chronicles. 26.16, 17.

6. It is the duty of the magistrate to take care of matters of religion, and
to improve his civil authority for the observing of the duties commanded in the
first, as well as for observing of the duties commanded in the second table.
They are called Gods. The end of the magistrates office, is not only the quiet
and peaceable life of the subject in matters of righteousness and honesty, but
also in matters of godliness. Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon, As^, Jehosaphat,
Hezekiah, Josiah, are much commended by the Holy Ghost for the putting forth
their authority in matters of religion: On the contrary, such kings as have
been failing this way, are frequently taxed and reproved by the Lord. And not
only the kings of Judah, but also Job, Nehemiah the king of Nineveh, Darius,
Artaxerres, Nebuchadnezzar, whom none looked at as types of Christ, (though
were it so, there were no place for ^y j^^^ objection) are commended in the
book of God, for exercising their authority this way, Psalm. 82.8. 1 Timothy 2.1,
2. 1 Kings 15.14. and 22.43. 2 Kings 12.3. and 14, 4. and. 15.35. 1 Kings
20.42. Job 29.25. and 31.26, 28. Neb. 13. Jonah 3.7. Ezra. 7. Dan. 3.29.

7. The objects of the power of the magistrate are not things merely inward,
and so not subject to his cognizance and view, as unbelief, hardness of heart,
erroneous opinions not vented, but only such things as are acted by the outward
man; neither is their power to be exercised in commanding such acts of the
outward man, and punishing the neglect thereof; as are but mere inventions and
devices of men, but about such acts as are commanded and forbidden in the word;
yea, such as the word does clearly determine, though not always clearly to the
judgment of the magistrate or others, yet clearly in itself. In these he of
right ought to put forth his authority, though oft-times actually he does it
not. 1 Kings 20.28, 42.

8. Idolatry, blasp^emy, heresy, venting corrupt and pernicious opinions, t^^t
destroy the foundation, open contempt of the word preached, profanation of the
Lord's day, disturbing the peaceable administration and exercise of the worship
and holy things of God, and the like, are to be restrained and punished by
civil authority. Deuteronomy. 13. 1 King. 20.28, 42. Dan. 3.29. Zech. 13.3. Neh.
13.31. 1 Timothy 2.2. Romans 13.4.

9. If any church, one or more shall grow schismatical, re^ng it self from the
communion of other churches, or shall walk incorrigibly or obstinately in any
corrupt way of their own, contrary to the rule of the word; in such case the
magistrate is to put forth hi^ co-ersive power, as the matter shall require.
The tribes on this side Jordan intended to make war against the other tribes,
for building the alter of witnes^, whom they suspected to have turned away
the^e^n from following of the LORD. Josh. 22.

APPENDIX.
Being some collections for the information of those that are not acquainted
with the principles and practices of the first and most eminent leaders, in the
churches of CHRIST in New England.

THE platform of church discipline, was agreed on and consented unto by many
great, learned and pious persons, from the four famous colonies in New England,
assembled in the synod at Cambridge, 1648. Something of which may be read in a
late print, entitled, A Testimony to the Order of the Gospel in the Churches of
New England.

The deservedly famous and reverend Mr. John Wilson pastor, and John Cotton
teacher of the first church of Christ in Boston, were two of those worthies
that composed the platform of church discipline.

The reverend Mr. John Norton, teacher of the said church in Boston, in his
election sermon, May 22, 1661, page 12, gives this advice, "Take care that the
order of the gospel may have a free passage in the churches; I mean that our
practice may effectually answer our doctrine, in that book, entitled, The
Platform of CHURCH DISCIPLINE."

And in his last sermon, preached on his weekly lecture, April 2, 1663, a
little before his death, page 37, "Remember that we have the pattern in the
mount, I mean we have the scripture as a rule, and you have the Platform of
Church Discipline given to you in way of council, as the Confession of our
Faith to this way of church government: You know in what manner it was that
which (for the substance of it) owns the cause congregational: If any are
departed from it let them look to it."

The reveerend Mr. John Davenport, in his catechism, printed Anno 1669, for the
use of the first church in Boston, of which he was then pastor, shows his
concurrence with the Platform of Church Discipline in matters relating to
church government.

The reverend Mr. John Oxenbridge, pastor of said church, by his practice
manifested his consent to the way of church government, as it is stated in the
Platform of Church Discipline: And in his election sermon in May 1671, declared
his agreement with the principles of purity and power of the churches.

The reverend Mr. James Allen, teacher of said church, in his election sermon,
May 28, 1679, page 10, 11. Having taken notice of the Platform of Church
Discipline, as manifesting the judgment of the ministers of New England,
asserting the authoritative rule of the elders, with the liberty of the
brethren, expresses himself thus, 'Though the judgment of the best should not
be looked upon as scripture Canons, nor bind any further than it is found
agreeing with the word of God, by which it ought to be tried; yet I think I may
safely say, that is a clearer judgment of the mind of God in the scripture, in
that matter, than can be expected in the next generation. It is true, in
improvements of natural light, that may be increased by industry, and those
that stand upon others shoulders may see further than they did upon whose
shoulders they stand, but it is not so in spiritual things, the further
knowledge of which depends upon revelation." Ephesians. 1.17. Psalm. 25.9.

The reverend and learned Mr. Urian Oaks, president of Harvard-college, and
pastor of the church of Christ in Cambridge, in his election sermon, May 7,
1673. p. 48. declared himself as follows, "I beg that we may keep the King's
high way, the way that Christ himself has cast up for us, and that our worthy
predecessors have traveled in before us, the way that has been stated, not in
the private models of some fanciful and conceited men, but in the Platform of
Church Discipline; the truest understanding of these things is from the
Platform deduced out of the word of GOD,"

At a SYNOD at Boston, New England, Sept. 10, 1679.
IT was put to vote, whether the assembly did approve of The Platform of Church
Discipline? And both elders and brethren did unanimously lift up their hands in
the affirmative, not one appearing when the vote was propounded, in the
negative; but it jointly passed in these words, "A Synod of the churches in the
province of the Massachusetts, being called by the honored general court to
convene at Boston, the 10th of September, 1679, having read and considered The
Platform of Church Discipline, agreed upon by the Synod assembled at Cambridge,
1648, do unanimously approve of the said Platform, for the substance of it,
desiring that the churches may continue steadfast in the order of the gospel,
according to what is therein declared from the word of GOD. In a print,
entitled, The necessity of reformation, etc."

At a general meeting of ministers in Boston, New England, May 27, 1697.
SUNDRY reverend and worthy ministers signed an instrument, where they declared
their full purpose, by the help of the Lord, to maintain in their several
places, the purity, and fellowship, and liberties of the churches, etc. In a
print, entitled, Thirty important questions resolved, etc.

Col. 2.6. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him.

Ephesians. 4. part of the 14th verse. Be no more children tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind of doctrine.

Gal. 5.1. Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free.

A CONFESSION OF FAITH, Owned and consented unto by the ELDERS AND MESSENGERS
Of the CHURCHES assembled at BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND, May 12, 1680. Being the
second Session of that SYNOD.

-- One Faith.

EPHESIANS. iv.5. Joying and beholding your Order, and the stedfastness of your Faith
in Christ.

COL. ii.5. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by JOHN BOYLES, in Marlborough-Street
MDCCLXXII

At a General Court held at BOSTON, May 19, 1680.
THIS court having taken into serious consideration the request that has been
presented by several of the reverend elders, in the name of the late SYNOD, do
approve thereof, and accordingly order, THE CONFESSION OF FAITH, agreed upon at
their second session, and, THE PLATFORM OF DISCIPLINE, consented unto by the
Synod at Cambridge, Anno 1648, to be printed, for the benefit of the churches
in present and after times.

EDWARD RAWSON, Sec'ry.

A PREFACE.
THE Lord Jesus Christ witnessed a good confession, at the time when he said,
To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should
bear witness unto the truth; and be takes notice of it, to the praise and high
commendation of the church in Pergamus, that they held fast his name, and had
not denied his Faith. Nor are they worthy the name of christians, who, though
the Lord by his Providence call them publicly to own the truth they have
professed, shall nevertheless refuse to declare what they believe, as to those
great and fundamental principles in the doctrine of Christ, the knowledge
whereof is necessary unto salvation. We find how ready the apostle was to make
A Confession of his Faith; though for that hope's sake he was accused and put
in chains. And the martyr's of Jesus, who have laid down their lives in bearing
witness to the truth, against the infidelity, idolatry, heresy, apostasy of the
world, when Pagan, Arian, or overspread with Popish darkness: Having their feet
shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace, were free and forward in
their testimony, confessing the truth, yea, sealing it with their blood. With
the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is
made unto salvation, Romans 10.10. Nor is there a greater evidence of being in a
state of salvation, than such a confession, if made in times or places where
men are exposed to utmost suffering upon that account. 1 John, 4.15. And if
Confession of faith be, in some cases, of such importance and necessity, as
has been expressed; it must needs be in itself, a work pleasing in the sight
of God, for his servants to declare unto the world, what those principles of
truth are, which they have received, and are (by the help of Christ) purposed
to live and die in the steadfast profession of. Some of the Lord's worthies have
been of renown among his people in this respect; especially Iraenius and
Athanasius of old, and of latter times Beza, all whose (not to mention others)
Confessions, with the advantage which the church of God has received thereby,
are famously known.

And it must needs tend much to the honor of the dear and blessed name of the
Lord Jesus, in case many churches do join together in their testimony. How
signally the Lord has owned the Confession of the four general Synods or
Councils for the suppression of the heresies of those times, needs not to be
said, since no man can be ignorant thereof, that has made it his concern to be
acquainted with things of this nature. The Confession of the Bohemians, of the
Waldenses, and of the reformed protestant churches abroad, (which also, to show
what harmony in respect of doctrine there is among all sincere professors of
the truth, have been published in one volume) all these have been of singular
use, not only to those that lived in the ages when these declarations were
emitted, but unto posterity, yea, unto this day.

There have been some who have reflected upon these New-English churches for
our defect in this matter, as if our principles were unknown; whereas it is
well-known, that as to matters of doctrine we agree with other r^formed
churches: Nor was it that, but what concerns worship and discipline, that
caused our fathers to come into the wilderness, while it was a land not sown,
that so they might have liberty to practice accordingly. And it is a ground of
holy rejoicing before the Lord, that now there is no advantage left for those
that may be dissaffected toward us, to object any thing of that nature against
us. For it has pleased the only wise God so to dispose in his Providence, as
that the elders and messengers of the churches in the colony of the
Massachusetts in New England, did, by the call and encouragement of the honored
General Court, meet together Sept. 10, 1679.

This synod at their 2d session, which was May 12, 1680, consulted and
considered of a Confession of Faith. That which was consented unto by the
elders and messengers of the congregational churches in England, who met at at
the Savoy, (being for the most part, some small variations excepted, the same
with that which was agreed upon first by the Assembly at Westminster, and was
approved of by the Synod at Cambridge in New England, Anno 1648, as also by a
General Assembly in Scotland) was twice publicly read, examined and approved
of: that little variation which we have made from the one, in compliance with
the other may be seen by those who please to compare them. But we have (for the
main) chosen to express ourselves in the words of those Reverend Assemblies,
that so we might not only with one heart, but with one mouth glorify God, and
our Lord Jesus Christ.

As to what concerns church government, we refer to the Platform of Discipline
agreed upon by the elders and messengers of these churches, Anno 1648, and
solemnly owned and confirmed by the late Synod.

What hours of temptation may overtake these churches, is not for us to say.
Only the Lord does many times so order things, that when his people have made a
good Confession, they shall be put upon the trial one way or other, to see
whether they have (or who among them has not) been sincere in what they have
done.

The LORD grant that the loins of our minds may be so girt about with truth,
that we may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand.

CHAP. I. Of the holy Scripture.
ALTHOUGH the light of nature, and the works of creation and providence, do so
far manifest the goodness, wisdom and power of God, as to leave men
unexcusable; yet are they not sufficient to give that knowledge of God and of
his will, which is necessary unto salvation: Therefore it pleased the Lord at
sundry times, and in diverse manners to reveal himself, and to declare that his
will unto his church; and afterward for the better preserving and propagating
of the truth, and for the more sure establishment and comfort of the church
against the corruption of the flesh, and the malice of satan and of the world,
to commit the same wholly to writing: Which makes the holy scripture to be
most necessary; those former ways of God's revealing his will unto his people
being now ceased.

2. Under the name of holy scripture, or the word of God written, are now
contained all the the books of the old and new testament, which are these:

Of the Old Testament.

Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, 1
Samuel, 2 Samuel, 1 Kings, 2 Kings, 1 Chronicles, 2 Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah,
Esther, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, The Song of Songs, Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Lamentations, Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah,
Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zachariah, Malachi.

Of the New Testament.

Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, the Acts of the apostles, Paul's epistle to the
Romans, 1 Corinthians, 2 Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians,
Colossians, 1 Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians, 1 to Timothy, 2 to Timothy, to
Titus, to Philemon, The epistle to the Hebrews, the epistle of James, the first
and second epistles of Peter, the first second and third epistles of John, the
epistle of Jude, the Revelation.

All which are given by the inspiration of God to be the rule of faith and life.

3. The books commonly called Apocrypha, not being of divine inspiration, are
no part of the canon of the scripture; and therefore are of no authority in the
church of God, nor to be any otherwise approved or made use of.

(...) ^re, for which it (...) ^deth not upon the testimony of any man or
church, but wholly upon God (who is truth it self) the author thereof; and
therefore it is to be received, because it is the word of God.

5. We may be moved and induced by the testimony of the church, to an high and
reverened esteem of the holy scripture. And the heavenliness of the matter, the
efficacy of the doctrine, the majesty of the style, the consent of all the
parts, the scope of the whole (which is, to give all glory to God) the full
discovery it makes of the only way of man's salvation, the many other
incomparable excellencies, and the entire perfection thereof, are arguments
whereby it does abundantly evidence it self to be the word of God; yet
notwithstanding, our full preswasion and assurance of the infallible truth and
divine authority thereof, is from the inward work of the holy spirit, bearing
witness by and with the word in our hearts.

6. The whole counsel of God concerning all things necessary for his own glory,
man's salvation, faith and and life, is either set down in scripture, or by
good and necessary consequence may be deduced from scripture; unto which
nothing at any time is to be added, whether by new revelations of the Spirit,
or traditions of men. Nevertheless we acknowledge the inward illumination of
the Spirit of God to be necessary for the saving understanding of such things
as are revealed in the world: And that there are some circumstances concerning
the worship of God and government of the church, common to human actions and
societies, which are to be ordered by the light of nature, and christian
prudence, according to the general rules of the word, which are always to be
observed.

7. All things in scripture are not alike plain in themselves, nor alike clear
unto all: Yet those things which are necessary to be known, believed and
observed for salvation, are so clearly propounded and opened in some place of
scripture or other, that not only the learned, but the unlearned, in a due use
of the ordinary means, may attain unto a sufficient understanding of them.

8. The old testament in Hebrew, (which was the native language of the people
of God of old) and the new testament in Greek, (which at the time of writing of
it was most generally known to the nations) being immediately inspired by God,
and by his singular care and providence kept pure in all ages, are therefore
authentical; so as in all controversies of religion, the church is finally to
appeal unto them. But because these original tongues are not known to all the
people of God, who have right unto and interest in the scriptures, and are
commanded in the fear of God to read and search them; therefore they are to be
translated into the vulgar language of every nation unto which they come, that
the word of God dwelling plentifully in all, they may worship him in an
acceptable manner, and through patience and comfort of the scriptures may have
hope.

9. The infallible rule of interpretation of scripture, is the scripture it
self; and therefore when there is a question about the true and full sense of
any scripture (which is not manifold, but one) it must be searched and known by
other places, that speak more clearly.

10. The supreme judge by which all controversies of religion are to be
determined, and all decrees of councils, opinions of ancient writers, doctrines
of men and private spirits, are to be examined, and in whose sentence we are to
rest, can be no other, but the holy scriptures delivered by the Spirit; into
which scripture so delivered, our faith is finally resolved.

CHAP. II. Of God, and of the Holy Trinity.
THERE is but one only living and true God; who is infinite in being and
perfection, a most pure Spirit, invisible, without body, parts, or passions,
immutable, immense, eternal, incomprehensible, almighty, most wise, most holy,
most free, most absolute, working all things according to the counsel of his
own immutable and most righteous will, for his own glory, most loving,
gracious, merciful, long-suffering, abundant in goodness and truth, forgiving
iniquity, transgression and sin, the rewarder of them that diligently seek him,
and withal, most just and terrible in his judgments, hating all sin, and who
will by no means clear the guilty.

2. God has all life, glory, goodness, blessedness, in, and of himself; and is
alone in, and unto himself, all-sufficient, not standing in need of any
creatures which he has made, nor deriving any glory from them, but only
manifesting his own glory in, by, unto and upon them. He is the alone fountain
of all being, of whom, through whom, and to whom are all things; and has most
sovreign dominion over them, to do by them, for them, or upon them, whatsoever
himself pleases: In his sight all things are open and manifest, his knowledge
is infinite, infallible and independent upon the creature, so as nothing is to
him contingent or uncertain. He is most holy in all his counsels, in all his
works, and in all his commands. To him is due from angels and men, and every
other creature, whatsoever worship, service or obedience, as creatures, they
owe unto the creator, and whatever he is further pleased to require of them.

3. In the unity of the Godhead there be three persons, of one substance,
power, and eternity, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost: The
Father is of none, neither begotten, nor proceeding: The Son is eternally
begotten of the Father: The Holy Ghost eternally proceeding from the Father and
the Son. Which doctrine of the Trinity is the foundation of all our communion
with God, and comfortable dependence upon him.

CHAP. III. Of God's eternal Decree.
GOD from all eternity did by the most wise and holy counsel of his own will,
freely and unchangably ordain whatsoever comes to pass: Yet so, as thereby
neither is God the author of sin, nor is violence offered to the will of the
creatures, nor is the liberty or contingency of second causes taken away, but
rather established.

2. Although God knows whatsoever may or can come to pass upon all supposed
conditions, yet has he not decreed any thing, because he foresaw it as future,
or as that which would come to pass upon such conditions.

3. By the decree of God for the manifestation of his glory, some men and
angels are predestined unto everlasting life, and others foreordained to
everlasting death.

4. These angels and men thus predestined, and foreordained, are
particularly and unchangeably designed, and their number is so certain and
definite, that it cannot be either increased or diminished.

5. Those of mankind that are predestined unto life, God before the
foundation of the world was laid, according to his eternal and immutable
purpose, and the secret counsel and good pleasure of his will, has chosen in
Christ unto everlasting glory, out of his mere free grace and love, without any
foresight of faith or good works, or perseverence in either of them, or any
other thing in the creature, as conditions or causes moving him thereunto, and
all to the praise of his glorious grace.

6. As God has appointed the elect unto glory, so has he by the eternal and
most free purpose of his will foreordained all the means thereunto: Wherefore
they who are elected, being fallen in Adam, are redeemed by Christ, are
effectually called unto faith in Christ by his Spirit working in due season,
are justified, adopted, sanctified, and kept by his power, through faith, unto
salvation. Neither are any other redeemed by Christ, or effectually called,
justified, adopted, sanctified and saved, but the elect only.

7. The rest of mankind God has pleased, according to the unsearchable counsel
of his own will, whereby h^ extends or withholds mercy, as he pleases,
for the glory of his sovereign power over his creatures, to pass by, and to
ordain them to dishonor and wrath for their sin, to the praise of his glorious
justice.

7. The doctrine of this high mystery of predestination, is to be handled with
special prudence and care, that men attending the will of God revealed in his
word, and yielding obedience thereunto, may from the certainty of their
effectual vocation, be assured of their eternal election. (...) shall this
doctrine afford matter of praise, reverence and admiration of God, and of
humility, diligence, and abundant consolation to all that sincerely obey the
gospel.

CHAP. IV. Of Creation.
IT pleased God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for the manifestation of the
glory of his eternal power, wisdom and goodness, in the beginning to create or
make of nothing the world, and all things therein, whether visible or
invisible, in the space of six days, and all very good.

2. After God had made all other creatures, he created man, male and female,
with reasonable and immortal souls, endued with knowledge, righteousness and
true holiness, after his own image, having the law of God written in their
heart, and power to fulfill it; and yet under a possibility of transgressing,
being left to the liberty of their own will, which was subject to change.
Besides this law written in their hearts, they received a command not to eat of
the tree of knowledge of good and evil; which while they kept, they were happy
in their communion with God, and had dominion over the creatures.

CHAP. V. Of Providence.
GOD the great creator of all things, does uphold, direct, dispose and govern
all creatures, actions, and things from the greatest even to the least, by his
most wise and holy Providence, according to his infallible foreknowledge, and
the free and immutable counsel of his own will, to the praise of the glory of
his wisdom, power, justice, goodness and mercy.

2. Although in relation to the foreknowledge and decree of God, the first
cause, all things come to pass immutably, and infallibly; yet by the same
Providence he orders them to fall out, according to the nature of second
causes, either necessarily, freely, or contingently.

3. God in his ordinary Providence makes use of means, yet is ^ree to work
without, above, and against them at his pleasure.

4. The almighty power, unsearchable wisdom and the infinite goodness of God,
so far manifest themselves in hi^ Providence, in that his determinate counsel
extend^th itself even to the first fall, and all other sins of angels and men,
(and that not by a bare permission) which also he most wisely and powerfully
boundeth, and otherwise orders and governs in a manifold dispensation, to
his own most holy ends, yet so as the sinfulness thereof proceeds only from
the creature, and not from God, who being most holy and righteous neither is,
nor can be the author or approver of sin.

5. The most wise, righteous and gracious God does oftentimes leave for a
season his own children to manifold temptations, and the corruption of their
own hearts, to chastise them for their former sins, or to discover unto them
the hidden strength of corruption, and deceitfulness of their hearts, that they
may be humbled, and to raise them to a more close and constant dependence for
their support upon himself, and to make them more watchful against all future
occasions of sin, and for sundry other just and holy ends.

6. As for those wicked and ungodly men, whom God as a righteous judge for
former sins, does blind and harden, from them he not only withholds his
grace, whereby they might have been enlightened in their understandings, and
wrought upon in their hearts; but sometimes also withdraws the gifts which
they had, and exposes them to such objects, as their corruption makes
occasions of sin; and withal gives them over to their own lusts, the
temptations of the world, and the power of Satan, whereby it comes to pass that
they harden themselves, even under those means which God uses for the softning
of others.

7. As the Providence of God does in general reach to all creatures, so after a
most special manner it takes care of his church, and disposes all things for
the good thereof.

CHAP. VI. Of the Fall of Man, of Sin, and of the Punishment thereof.
GOD having made a covenant of works and life thereupon, with our first
parents, and all their posterity in them, they being seduced by the subtilty
and temptation of satan, did wilfully transgress the law of their creation,
and break the covenant in eating the forbidden fruit.

2. By this sin they, and we in them, fell from original righteousness and
communion with God, and so became dead in sin, and wholly defiled in all the
faculties and parts of soul and body.

3. They being the root, and by God's appointment standing in the room and
stead of all mankind, the guilt of this sin imputed, and corrupted nature
conveyed to all their posterity descending from them by ordinary generation.

4. From this original corruption, whereby we are utterly indisposed, dis^bled
and made opposite to all good, and wholly inclined to all evil, do proceed all
actual transgressions.

5. This corruption of nature during this life, does remain in those that are
regenerated; and although it be through Christ pardoned and mortified, yet both
it self, and all the motions thereof are truly and properly sin.

6. Every sin, both original and actual, being a transgression of the righteous
law of God, and contrary thereunto, does in its own nature bring guilt upon the
sinner, whereby he is bound over to the wrath of God, and curse of the law, and
so made subject to death, with all miseries spiritual, temporal and eternal.

CHAP. VII. Of God's Covenant with Man.
THE distance between God and the creature is so great, that although
reasonable creatures, do owe obedience to him as their creator, yet they could
never have attained the reward of life, but by some voluntary condescension on
God's part, which he has been pleased to express by way of covenant.

2. The first covenant made with man, was a covenant of works, wherein life was
promised to Adam, and in him to his posterity, upon condition of perfect and
personal obedience.

3. Man by his fall having made himself incapable of life by that covenant, the
Lord was pleased to make a second, commonly called the covenant of grace;
wherein he freely offers unto sinners life and salvation by Jesus Christ,
requiring of them faith in him that they may be saved, end promising to give
unto all those that are ordained unto life, his holy Spirit to make them
willing and able to believe.

4. This covenant of grace is frequently set forth in scripture by the name of
a testament, in reference to the death of Jesus Christ the testato^, and to the
everlasting inheritance, with all things belonging to it therein bequeathed.

5. Although this covenant has been differently and variously administered in
respect of ordinances and institutions in the time of the law, and since the
coming of Christ in the flesh; yet for the substance and efficacy of it, to all
its spiritual and saving ends, it is one and the same; upon the account of
which various dispensations, it is called the old and new testament.

CHAP.VIII. Of Christ the Mediator.
IT pleased God in his eternal purpose, to choose and ordain the Lord Jesus his
only begotten Son, according to a covenant made between them both, to be the
mediator between God and man; the prophet, priest, and king, the head and
Savior of his church, the heir of all things, and judge of the world: Unto
whom he did from all eternity give a people to be his seed, and to be by him in
time redeemed, called, justified sanctified and glorified.

2. The Son of God, the second person in the Trinity, being very and eternal
God, of one substance, and equal with the Father, did, when the fullness of
time was come, take upon him man's nature, with all the essential properties and
common infirmities thereof, yet without sin, being conceived by the power of
the holy Ghost in the womb of the virgin Mary, of her substance: So that two
whole perfect and distinct natures, the godhead and the manhood* were
inseperably joined together in one person, without conversion, composition, or
confusion; which person, is very God and very man, yet one Christ, the only
mediator between God and man.

2. The Lord Jesus in his human nature, thus united to the divine in the person
of the Son; was sanctified and anointed with the holy Spirit above measure;
having in him all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, in whom it pleased the
Father that all fullness should dwell, to the end that being holy, harmless,
undefiled and full of grace and truth, he might be thoroughly furnished to
execute the office of a mediator and surety; which office he took not unto
himself, but was thereunto called by his Father, who also put all power and
judgment into his hand, and gave him commandment to execute the same.

4. This office the Lord Jesus Christ did most willingly undertake; which that
he might discharge, he was made under the law, and did perfectly fulfill it, and
un^e^ went the punishment due to us which we should have borne and suffered,
being made sin and a curse for us, enduring most grievous torments immediately
from God in his soul, and most painful sufferings in his body, was crucified,
and died, was buried and remained under the power of death, yet saw no
corruption, on the third day he arose from the dead with the same body in which
he suffered, with which also he ascended into heaven, and there sits at the
right hand of his Father, making intercession, and shall return to judge men
and angels at the end of the world.

5. The Lord Jesus by his perfect obedience and sacrifice of himself, which he
through the eternal Spirit once offered up unto God, has fully satisfied the
justice of God, and purchased not only reconciliation, but an everlasting
inheritance in the kingdom of heaven, for all those whom the Father has given
unto him.

6. Although the work of redemption was not actually by Christ till after his
incarnation, yet the virtue, efficacy and benefits thereof communicated to the
elect in all ages successively from the be beginning of the world, in and by
those promises, types and sacrifices wherein he was revealed and signified to
be the seed of the woman, which should bruise the serpents head, and the lamb
slain from the beginning of the world, being yesterday and to day the same, and
for ever.

7. Christ in the work of mediation acts according to both natures, by each
nature doing that which is proper to it self; yet by reason of the unity of the
person, that which is proper to one nature, is sometimes in scripture
attributed to the person denomin^^ed by the other nature.

8. To all those for whom Christ has purchased redemption, he does certainly
and effectually apply and communicate the same, making intercession for them,
and revealing unto them in and by the word mysteries of salvaon, effectually
persuading them by his Spirit to believe and obey, and governing their hearts
by his word and Spirit, overcoming all their enemies by his almighty power and
wisdom, in such manner and ways as are most consonant to his wonderful and
unsearchable dispensation.

CHAP. IX. Of Free Will.
GOD has endued the will of man with that natural liberty and power of acting
upon choice, that it is neither forced, nor by any absolute necessity of nature
determined to do good or evil.

2. Man in his state of innocence had freedom and power to will and to do that
which was good and well pleasing to God; but yet mutably, so that he might fall
from it.

3. Man by his fall into a state of sin, has wholly lost all ability of will
to any spiritual good accompanying salvation, so as a natural man being
altogether averse from that good, and dead in sin, is not able by his own
strength to convert himself, or to prepare himself thereunto.

4. When God converts a sinner, and translates him into a state of grace, he
freeth him from his natural bondage under sin, and by his grace alone enables
him freely to will and to do that which is spiritually good; yet so, as that by
reason of his remaining corruption, he does not perfectly nor only will that
which is good, but does also will that which is evil.

5. The will of man is made perfectly and immutably free to good alone in the
state of glory only.

CHAP. X. Of Effectual Calling.
ALL those whom God has predestined unto life, and those only, he is pleased
in his appointed and accepted time, effectually to call by his word and spirit,
out of that state of sin and death in which they are by nature, to grace and
salvation by Jesus Christ, enlightening their minds spiritually and savingly to
understand the things of God, taking away their heart of stone, and giving unto
them an heart of flesh, renewing their wills, and by his almighty power
determining them to that which is good, and effectually drawing them to Jesus
Christ: Yet so, as they come most freely, being made willing by his grace.

2. This effectual call is of God's free and special grace alone, not from any
thing at all foreseen in man, who is altogether passive therein, until being
quickened and renewed by the holy Spirit, he is thereby enabled to answer this
call, and to embrace the grace offered and conveyed in it.

3. Elect infants dying in infancy, are regenerated and saved by Christ, who
works when, and where, and how he pleases: So also are all other elect
persons who are incapable of being outwardly called by the ministry of the word.

4. Others not elected, although they may be called by the ministry of the
word, and may have some common operations of the Spirit, yet not being
effectually drawn by the Father, they neither do nor can come unto Christ, and
therefore cannot be saved; much less can men not professing the christian
religion, be saved in any other way whatsoever, be they never so diligent to
frame their lives according to the light of nature, and the law of that
religion they do profess: And to assert and maintain that they may, is very
pernicious, and to be detested.

CHAP. XI. Of Justification.
THOSE whom God effectually calls, he also freely justifies, not by infusing
righteousness into them, but by pardoning their sins, and by accounting and
accepting their persons as righteous, not for any thing wrought in them, or
done by them, but for Christ's sake alone; nor by imputing faith itself, the
act of believing, or any other evangelical obedience to them, as their
righteousness, but by imputing Christ's active obedience unto the whole law,
and passive obedience in his sufferings and death, for their whole and sole
righteousness, they receiving and resting on him and his righteousness by
faith; which faith they have not of themselves, it is the gift of God.

2. Faith thus receiving and resting on Christ and his righteousness, is the
alone instrument of justification; yet it is not alone in the person justified,
but is ever accompanied with all other saving graces, and is no dead faith, but
works by love.

3. Christ by his obedience and death did fully discharge the debt of all those
that are justified, and did by the sacrifice of himself, in the blood of his
cross, undergoing in their stead the penalty due unto them, make a proper, real
and full satisfaction to God's justice in their behalf: Yet inasmuch as he was
given by the Father for them, and his obedience and satisfaction accepted in
their stead, and both freely, not for any thing in them, their justification is
only of free grace, that both the exact justice and rich grace of God might be
glorified in the justification of sinners.

4. God did from all eternity decree to justify all the elect, and Christ did
in the fullness of time die for their sins and rise again for their
justification: Nevertheless, they are not justified personally, until the holy
Spirit does in due time actually apply Christ unto them.

5. God does continue to forgive the sins of those that are justified; and
although they can never fall from the state of justification, yet they may by
their sins fall under God's fatherly displeasure: And in that condition they
have not usually the light of his countenance restord unto them, until they
humble themselves, confess their sins, beg pardon, and renew their faith and
repentance.

6. The justification of believers under the old testament was in all these
respects one and the same with the justification of believers under the new
testament.

CHAP. XII. Of Adoption.
ALL those that are justified, God vouchsafes in and for his only Son Jesus
Christ to make partakers of the grace of adoption, by which they are taken into
the number, and enjoy the liberties and privileges of the children of God, have
his name put upon them, receive the spirit of adoption, have access to the
throne of grace with boldness, are enabled to cry abba father, are pitied,
protected, provided for and chastned by him as by a father, yet never cast off,
but sealed to the day of redemption, and inherit the promises as heirs of
everlasting salvation.

CHAP. XIII. Of Sanctification.
THEY that are effectually called and regenerated, being united to Christ,
having a new heart and a new spirit created in them, through the virtue of
Christ's death and resurrection, are also further sanctified really and
personally through the same virtue, by his word and spirit dwelling in them,
the dominion of the whole body of sin is destroyed, and the several lusts
thereof are more and more weakened and mortified, and they more and more
quickened, and strengthened in all saving graces, to the practice of all
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.

2. This sanctification is throughout in the whole man, yet imperfect in this
life, there abide still some remnants of corruption in every part, whence
arises a continual and irreconcilable war, the flesh lusting against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh.

3. In which war, although the remaining corruption for a time may much
prevail, yet through the continual supply of strength from the sanctifing
spirit of Christ, the regenerate part does overcome, and so the saints grow in
grace, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

CHAP, XIV. Of saving Faith.
THE grace of faith, whereby the elect are enabled to believe to the saving of
their souls, is the work of the Spirit of Christ in their hearts, and is
ordinarily wrought by the ministry of the word; by which also, and by the
administration of the seals, prayer, and other means, it is increased and
strengthened.

2. By this faith a christian believes to be true whatsoever is ravealed in
the word, for the authority of God himself speaking therein, and acts
differently upon that which each particular passage thereof contains,
yielding obedience to the commands, trembling at the threatenings, and embracing
the promises of God for this life, and that which is to come. But the principal
acts of saving faith are accepting, receiving, and resting upon Christ alone,
for justification, sanctification, and eternal life, by virtue of the covenant
of grace.

3. This faith, although it be different in degrees, and may be weak or strong,
yet it is in the least degree of it different in the kind or nature of it (as
is all other saving grace) from the faith and common grace of temporary
believers; and therefore, though it may be many times assailed and weakened, yet
it gets the victory, growing up in many to the attainment of a full assurance
through Christ, who is both the author and finisher of our faith.

CHAP. XV. Of Repentance unto Life and Salvation.
SUCH of the elect as are converted at riper years, having sometime lived in
the state of nature, and therein served diverse lusts and pleasures, God in
their effectual calling gives them repentance unto life.

2. Whereas there is none that does good, and sins not, and the best of men
may through the power and deceitfulness of their corruptions dwelling in them,
with the prevalency of temptation, fall into great sins and provocations; God
has in the covenant of grace mercifully provided that believers so sinning and
falling, be renewed through repentance unto salvation.

3. This saving repentance is an evangelical grace, whereby a person being by
the holy Ghost made sensible of the manifold evils of his sin, does by faith in
Christ humble himself for it with godly sorrow, detestation of it, and
self-abhorrency, praying for pardon and strength of grace, with a purpose and
endeavor by supplies of the Spirit, to walk before God unto all well-pleasing
in all things.

4. As repentance is to be continued through the whole course of our lives,
upon the account of the body of death, and the motions thereof; so it is every
man's duty to repent of his particular known sins, particularly.

5. Such is the provision which God has made through Christ in the covenant of
grace, for the preservation of believers unto salvation, that although there is
no sin so small, but it deserves damnation, yet there is no sin so great, that
it shall bring damnation on them who truly repent; which makes the constant
preaching of repentance necessary.

CHAP. XVI. Of good Works.
GOOD works are only such as God has commanded in his holy word, and not such
as without the warrant thereof are devised by men out of blind zeal, or upon
any pretense of good intentions.

2. These good works done in obedience to God's commandments, are the fruits
and evidences of a true and living faith, and by them believers manifest their
thankfulness, strengthen their assurance, edify their brethren, adorn the
profession of the gospel, stop the mouths of the adversaries, and glorify God,
whose workmanship they are, created in Christ Jesus thereunto, that having
their fruit unto holiness, they may have the end eternal life.

3. Their ability to do good works is not at all of themselves, but wholly from
the Spirit of Christ: And that they may be enabled thereunto, besides the
graces they have already received, there is required an actual influence of the
same holy Spirit to work in them to will and to do, of his good pleasure; yet
are they not hereupon to grow negligent, as if they were not bound to perform
any duty, unless upon a special motion of the Spirit, but they ought to be
diligent in stirring up the grace of God that is in them.

4. They who in their obedience attain to the greatest height which is possible
in this life, are so far from being able to supererogate, and to do more than
God requires, as that they fall short of much, which in duty they are bound to
do.

5. We cannot by our best works merit pardon of sin, or eternal life at the
hand of God, by reason of the great disproportion that is between them, and the
glory to come; and the infinite distance that is between us, and God, whom by
them we can neither profit, nor satisfy for the debt of our former sins; but
when we have done all we can, we have done but our duty, and are unprofitable
servants: And because as they are good, they proceed from his Spirit, and as
they are wrought by us, they are defiled and mixed with so much weakness and
imperfection, that they cannot endure the severity of God's judgment.

6. Yet notwithstanding, the persons of believers being accepted through
Christ, their good works also are accepted in him, not as though they were in
this life wholly unblameable and unreproveable in God's sight, but that he
looking upon them in his Son is pleased to accept and reward that which is
sincere, although accompanied with many ^^^tnesses and imperfections.

7. Works done by unregenerate men, although for the matter of them, they may
be things which God commands, and of good use both to themselves and others;
yet because they proceed not from an heart purified by faith, nor are done in a
right manner, according to the word, nor to a right end, the glory of God; they
are therefore sinful, and cannot please God, nor make a man meet to receive
grace from God; and yet their neglect of them is more sinful and displeasing to
God.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Perseverance of the Saints.
THEY whom God has accepted in his beloved, effectually called and sanctified
by his Spirit, can neither totally nor finally fall away from the state of
grace, but shall certainly persevere therein to the end, and be eternally saved.

2. This perseverance of the saints depends not upon their own free will, but
upon the immutability of the decree of election, from the free and unchangeable
love of God the Father, upon the efficacy of the merit and intercession of
Jesus Christ, and union with him, the oath of God, the abiding of his Spirit,
and the seed of God within them, and the nature of the covenant of grace, from
all which arises also the certainty and infallibility thereof.

3. And though they may through the temptation of Satan, and of the world, the
prevalency of corruption remaining in them, and the neglect of the means of
their preservation, fall into grievous sins, and for a time continue therein,
whereby they incur God's displeasure, and grieve his holy Spirit, come to have
their graces and comforts impaired, have their hearts hardened, and their
consciences wounded, hurt and scandalize others, and bring temporal judgments
upon themselves; yet they are and shall be kept by the power of God through
faith unto salvation.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Assurance of Grace and Salvation.
ALTHOUGH temporary believers, and other unregenerate men may vainly deceive
themselves with false hopes and carnal presumptions of being in the favor of
God, and state of salvation, which hope of theirs shall perish, yet such as
truly believe on the Lord Jesus, and love him in sincerity, endeavoring to walk
in all good conscience before him, may in this life be certainly assured that
they are in a state of grace, and may rejoice in the hope of the glory of God,
which hope shall never make them ashamed.

2. This certainty is not a bare conjectural and probable persuasion, grounded
upon a fallible hope, but an infallible assurance of faith, founded on the
blood and righteousness of Christ, revealed in the gospel, and also upon the
inward evidence of those graces, unto which promises are made, and on the
immediate witness of the Spirit, testifying our adoption, and as a fruit
thereof, leaving the heart more humble and holy.

3. This infallible assurance does not so belong to the essence of faith, but
that a true believer may wait long, and conflict with many difficulties before
he be partaker of it; yet being enabled by the Spirit to know the things which
are freely given him of God, he may without extraordinary revelation, in the
right use of ordinary means attain thereunto: And therefore it is the duty of
every one to give all diligence to make his calling and election sure, that
thereby his heart may be enlarged in peace and joy in the holy Ghost, in love
and thankfulness to God, and in strength and cheerfulness in the duties of
obedience, the proper fruits of this assurance; so far is it from inclining men
to looseness.

4. True believers may have the assurance of their salvation diverse ways
shaken, diminished and intermitted, (...) by negligence in preserving of it, by
falling into some special sin, which wounds the conscience, and grieveth the
spirit, by some sudden or vehement temptation, by God's withdrawing the light
of his countenance, suffering even such as fear him to walk in darkness, and to
have no light, yet are they neither utterly destitute of that seed of God, and
life of faith, that love of Christ and the brethren, that sincerity of heart
and conscience of duty, out of which by the operation of the Spirit, this
assurance may in due time be revived, and by the which in the mean time they
are supported from utter despair.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Law of God.
GOD gave to Adam a law of universal obedience written in his heart, and a
particular precept of not eating of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good
and evil, as a covenant of works, by which he bound him and all his posterity
to personal, entire, exact and perpetual obedience, promising life upon the
fulfilling, and threatened death upon the breach of it, and endued him with
power and ability to keep it.

2. This law so written in the heart, continued to be a perfect rule of
righteousness after the fall of man, and was delivered by God on mount Sinai in
ten commandments, and written in two tables, the first four commandments
containing our duty toward God, and the other six our duty to man.

3. Beside this law commonly called moral, God was pleased to give the people
of Israel, as a church under age, ceremonial laws, containing several typical
ordinances, partly of worship, prefiguring Christ, his graces, actions,
sufferings and benefits, and partly holding forth diver^ instructions of moral
duties: All which ceremonial laws being appointed only to the time of
reformation, are by Jesus Christ the true Messiah and only lawgiver, who was
furnished with power from the Father for that end, abrogated and taken away.

4. To them also he gave sundry judi^ial laws, which expired together with the
state of that people, not obliging any now by virtue of that institution, their
general equity only being still of moral use.

5. The moral law does for ever bind all, as well justified persons as others,
to the obedience thereof; and that not only in regard of the matter contained
in it, but also in respect of the authority of God the creator, who gave it:
Neither does Christ in the gospel any way dissolve, but much strengthen this
obligation.

6. Although true believers be not under the law, (...) a covenant of works, to
be thereby justified or condemned, yet it is of great use to them as well as to
others, in that, as a rule of life, informing them of the will of God, and
their duty, and directs and binds them to walk accordingly, discovering also
the sinful pollutions of their nature, hearts and lives, so as examining
themselves thereby, they may come to further conviction of, humiliation for,
and hatred against sin, together with a clearer sight of the need they have of
Christ, and the perfection of his obedience. It is likewise of use to the
regenerate, to restrain their corruption^, in that it forbids s^n, and the
threatenings of it serve to show what even their sins deserve, and what
afflictions in this life they may expect for them, although freed from the
curse thereof threatened in the law. The promises of it in like manner show
them God's approbation of obedience, and what blessings they may expect upon
the performance thereof, although not as due to them by the law, as a covenant of
works; so as a man's doing good, and refraining from evil, because the law
encourages to the one, and deterreth from the other, is no evidence of his
being under the law, and not under grace.

7. Neither are the forementioned uses of the law contrary to the grace of the
gospel, but do sweetly comply with it, the Spirit of Christ subduing and
enabling the will of man to do that freely and cheerfully which the will of God
revealed in the law required to be done.

CHAP. XX. Of the Gospel, and of the extent of the Grace thereof.
THE covenant of works being broken by sin, and made unprofitable unto life,
God was pleased to give unto the elect the promise of Christ, the seed of the
woman, as the means of calling them, and begetting in them faith and
repentance: In this promise, the gospel, as to the substance of it, was
revealed, and was therein effectual for the conversion and salvation of sinners.

2. This promise of Christ, and salvation by him, is revealed only in and by
the word of God; neither do the works of creation or providence, with the light
of nature, make discovery of Christ, or of grace by him, so much as in a
general or obscure way; much less that men destitute of the revelation of him
by the promise or gospel, should be enabled thereby to attain saving faith or
repentance.

3. The revelation of the gospel unto sinners made in diverse times, and by
sundry parts, with the addition of promises and precepts for the obedience
required therein, as to the nations and persons to whom it is granted, is
merely of the sovereign will and good pleasure of God, not being annexed by
virtue of any promise to the due improvement of men's natural abilities, by
virtue of common light received without it, which none ever did make, or can so
do: And therefore in all ages the preaching of the gospel has been granted
unto persons and nations, as to the extent or straitning of it, in great
variety, according to the counsel of the will of God.

4. Although the gospel be the only outward means of revealing Christ and
saving grace, and is, as such, abundantly suffi^ient thereunto; yet that men
who are dead in trespasses, may be born again, quickened or regenerated, there
is moreover necessary an effectual, irresistible work of the holy Ghost upon
the whole soul, for the producing in them a new spiritual life, without which
no other means are sufficient for their conversion unto God.

CHAP. XXI. Of Christian Liberty, and Liberty of Conscience.
THE liberty which Christ has purchased for believers under the gospel,
consists in their freedom from the gilt of sin, the condemning wrath of God,
the rigor and cu^^e of the law, and in their being delivered from this present
evil world, bondage to Satan, and dominion of sin, from the evil of
afflictions, the fear and sting of death, the victory of the grave, and
everlasting damnation, as also in their free ac^ess to God, and their yielding
od^dience unto him, not o^t of s^avish fear, but a child-like love and willing
mind: All which were common also to believers under the law, for the substance
of them, but under the new testament, the liberty of christians is further
enlarged in their freedom from the yoke of the ceremonial law, the whole legal
administration of the covenant of grace to which the Jewish church was
subjected, and in greater boldness of access to the throne of grace, and in
fuller communications of the free Spirit of God, than believers under the law
did ordinarily partake of.

2. God alone is Lord of the conscience, and has left it free from the
doctrines and commandments of men, which are in any thing contrary to his word,
or not contained in it; so that to believe such doctrines, or to obey such
commands out of consci^nce, is to betray true liberty of conscience, and the
requiring of an implicit faith, and an absolute and blind obedience, is to
destroy liberty of conscience, and reason also.

3. They who upon pretense of christian liberty do practice any sin, or cherish
any lust, as they do thereby pervert the main design of the grace of the gospel
to their own destruction, so they wholly destroy the end of christian liberty,
which is, that being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we might serve
the Lord without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of
our life.

CHAP. XXII. Of Religious Worship, and of the Sabbath Day.
THE light of nature shows that there is a God, who has a lordship and
sovereignty over all, is just, good, and does good unto all, and is therefore
to be feared, loved, praised, called upon, trusted in, and served with all the
heart, and all the soul, and with all the might: But the acceptable way of
worshipping the true God, i^ instituted by himself, and so limited by his own
revealed will, that he may not be worshipped according to the imaginations and
devices of (...) or the suggestions of satan, under any visible
representation^, or any other way not (...).

2. Religious worship is to God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and to him
alone; not to angels, saints, or any other creatures; and since the fall, not
without a mediator, nor in the mediation of any other but of Christ alone.

3. Prayer with thanksgiving, being one special part of natural worship, is by
God required of all men; but that it may be accepted, it is to be made in the
name of the Son, by the help of his Spirit, according to his will, with
understanding, reverence, humility, fervency, faith, love, and perseverence:
And when with others in a known tongue.

4. Prayer is to be made for things lawful, and for all sorts of men living, or
that shall live hereafter, but not for the dead, nor for those of whom it may
be known that they have sinned the sin unto death.

5. The reading of the scriptures, preaching and hearing of the word of God,
singing of psalms, as also the adminstration of baptism and the Lords supper,
are all parts of religious worship of God, to be performed in obedience unto
God, with understanding, faith, reverence and godly fear. Solemn humilations
with fastings, and thanksgiving upon special occasions, are in their several
times and seasons to be used in an holy and religious manner.

6. Neither prayer, nor any other part of religious worship, is now under the
gospel either tied unto, or made more acceptable by any place in which it is
preformed, or toward which it is directed: But God is to be worshipped every
where in spirit and in truth, as in private families daily, and in secret each
one by himself, so more solemnly in the public assemblies, which are not
carelessly nor wilfully to be neglected, or forsaken, when God by word or
providence calls thereunto.

7. As it is of the law of nature, that in general a proportion of time by Gods
appointment be set apart for the worship of God; so by his word in a positive,
moral and perpetual commandment, binding all men in all ages, he has
particularly appointed one day in seven for a sabbath to be kept holy unto him,
which from the beginning of the world to the resurrection of Christ, was the
last day of the week, and from the resurrection of Christ, was changed into the
first day of the week, which in scripture is called the Lord's day, and is to
be continued to the end of the world as the christian sabbath, the observation
of the last day of the week being abolished.

8. This sabbath is then kept holy unto the Lord, when men after a due
preparing of their hearts, and ordering their common affairs beforehand, do not
only observe an holy rest all the day from their own works, words, and thoughts
about their worldy employments and recreations, but also are taken up the whole
time in the public and private exercises of his worship, and in the duties of
necessity and mercy.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Lawful Oaths and Vows.
A Lawful oath is a part of religious worship, wherein the person swearing in
truth, righteousness and judgment, solemnly calls God to witness what he
asserteth or promises, and to judge him according to the truth and falsehood of
what he swears.

2. The name of God only is that by which men ought to swear, and therein it is
to be used with all holy fear and reverence: Therefore to swear vainly or
rashly by that glorious and dreadful name, or to swear at all by any other
thing, is sinful, and to be abhorred: Yet as in matters of weight and moment an
oath is warranted by the word of God, under the new testament, as well as under
the old; so a lawful oath, being imposed by lawful authority in such matters,
ought to be taken.

3. Whosoever takes an oath warranted by the word of God, ought duly to
consider the weightiness of so solemn an act, and therein to avouch nothing but
what he is fully persuaded is the truth: Neither may any man bind himself by
oath to any thing, but what is good and just, and what he believes so to be,
and what he is able and resolved to perform. Yet it is a sin to refuse an oath
touching any thing that is good and just, being lawfully imposed by authority.

4. An oath is to be taken in the plain and common sense of the words, without
equivocation, or mental reservation: It cannot oblige to sin, but in any thing
not sinful being taken, it binds to performance, although to a man's own hurt;
nor is it to be violated, although made to Heretics or Infidels.

5. A vow, which is not to be made to any creature, but God alone, is of the
like nature with a promissory oath, and ought to be made with the like
religious care, and to performed with the like faithfulness.

6. Popish monastical vows of perpetual single life, professed poverty, and
regular obedience, are so far from being degrees of higher perfection, that
they are superstitious and sinful snares, in which no christian may entangle
himself.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Civil Magistrate.
GOD the supreme Lord and king of all the world, has ordained civil
magistrates to be under him, over the people for his own glory and the public
good; and to this end has armed them with the power of his sword, for the
defense and encouragement of them that do good, and for the punishment of evil
doers.

2. It is lawful for christians to accept and execute the office of a
magistrate, when called thereunto: In the management whereof, as they ought
especially to maintain piety, justice and peace, according to the wholesome laws
of each commonwealth, so for that end they may lawfully now under the new
testament wage war upon just and necessary occasions.

3. They who upon pretense of christian liberty shall oppose any lawful power,
or the lawful exercises of it, resist the ordinance of God, and for their
publishing of such opinions, or maintaining of such practices as are contrary
to the light of nature, or to the known principles of christianity, whether
concerning faith, worship or conversation, or to the power of godliness, or
such erroneous opinions or practices, as either in their own nature, or in the
manner of publishing or maintaining them, are destructive to the external peace
and order which Christ has established in the church, they may lawfully be
called to account, and proceeded against by the censures of the church, and by
the power of the civil magistrate; yet in such differ^nces about the doctrines
of the gospel, or ways of the worship of God as may befall men exercising a good
conscience, manifesting it in their conversation, and holding the foundation,
and duly observing the rules of peace and order, there is no warrant for the
magistrate to abrige them of their liberty.

4. It is the duty of people to pray for magistrates, to honor their persons,
to pay them tribute and other dues, to obey their lawful commands, and to be
subject to their authority for conscience sake. Infidelity, or difference in
religion does not make void the magistrates just and legal authority, nor free
the people from their due obedience to him: From which ecclesiastical persons
are not exempted, much less has the Pope any power or jurisdiction over them
in their dominions, or over any of their people, and least of all to deprive
them of their dominions or lives, if he shall judge them to be heretics, or
upon any orher pretense whatsoever.

CHAP. XXV. Of Marriage.
MARRIAGE is to be between one man and one woman; neither is it lawful for any
man to have more than one wife, nor for any woman to have more than one husband
at the same time.

2. Marriage was ordained for the mutual help of husband and wife, for the
increase of mankind with a legitimate issue, and of the church with an holy
seed, and for preventing of uncleanness.

3. It is lawful for all sorts of people to marry, who are able with judgment
to give their consent. Yet it is the duty of christians to marry in the Lord,
and therefore such as profess the true reformed religion, should not marry with
infidels, papists, or other idolaters: Neither should such as are godly be
unequally yoked by marrying such as are wicked in their life, or maintain
damnable heresey.

4. Marriage ought not to be within the degrees of consanguinity or affinity
forbidden in the word, nor can such incestuous marriages ever be made lawful by
any law of man, or consent of parties, so as those persons may live together as
man and wife.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Church.
THE catholic or universal church, which is invisible, consists of the whole
number of the elect, that have been, are, or shall be gathered into one under
Christ the head thereof, and is the spouse, the body, the fullness of him that
fills all in all.

2. The whole body of men throughout the world, professing the faith of the
gospel, and obedience unto God by Christ according unto it, not destroying
their own profession by any errors everting the foundation, or unholiness of
conversation, they and their children with them are, and may be called the
visible catholic church of Christ, although as such it is not entrusted with
any officers to rule or govern over the whole body.

3. The purest churches under heaven are subject both to mixture and error, and
some have so degenerated as to become no churches of Christ, but synagogues of
Satan; nevertheless Christ always has had, and ever shall have a visible
kingdom in this world, to the end thereof, of such as believe in him, and make
profession of his name.

4. There is no other head of the church but the Lord Jesus Christ, nor can the
Pope of Rome in any sense be head thereof, but is that antichrist, that man of
sin, and son of perdition, that exalts himself in the church against Christ,
and all that is called God, whom the Lord shall destroy with the brightness of
his coming.

5. As the Lord in his care and love toward his church has in his infinite
wise providence, exercised it with great variety in all ages for the good of
them that love him, and his own glory; so according to his promise, we expect
that in the latter days, antichrist being destroyed, the Jews called, and the
adversaries of the kingdom of his dear Son broken, the churches of Christ being
enlarged and edified, through a free and plentiful communication of light and
grace, all enjoy in this world a more quiet, peaceable and glorious condition
than they have enjoyed.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Communion of Saints.
ALL saints that are united to Jesus Christ their head by his Spirit and faith,
although they are not made thereby one person with him, have fellowship in his
graces, sufferings, death, resurrection and glory: And being united to one
another in love, they have communion in each others gifts and graces, and are
obliged to the performance of such duties, public and private, as do conduce to
their mutual good, both in the inward and outward man.

2. All saints are bound to maintain an holy fellowship and communion in the
worship of God, and in performing such other spiritual services as tend to
their mutual edification, as also in relieving each other in outward things,
according to their several abilities and necessities: which communion, though
especially to be exercised by them in the relations wherein they stand, whether
in families or in churches, yet as God offers opportunity, is to be extended
unto all those who in every place call upon the name of the Lord Jesus.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Sacraments.
SACRAMENTS are holy signs and seals of the covenant of grace, immediately
instituted by Christ, to represent him and his benefits, and to confirm our
interest in him, and solemnly to engage us to the service of God in Christ,
according to his word.

2. There is in every sacrament a spiritual relation, or sacramental union
between the sign and the thing signified; whence it comes to pass, that the
names and effects of the one are attributed to the other.

3. The grace which is exhibited in or by the sacraments rightly used, is not
conferred by any power in them, neither does the efficacy of a sacrament depend
upon the piety or intention of him that does administer it; but upon the work
of the Spirit, and the word of institution, which contains together with a
precept authorizing the use thereof, a promise of benefit to worthy receivers.

4. There be only two sacraments ordained by Christ our Lord in the gospel,
that is to say, baptism and the Lord's supper; neither of which may be
dispensed by any but a minister of the word lawfully called.

5. The sacraments of the old testament, in regard of the spiritual things
thereby signified and exhibited, were for substance the same with those of the
new.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Baptism.
BAPTISM is a sacrament of the new testament, ordained by Jesus Christ, to be
unto the party baptized a sign and seal of the covenant of grace, of his
ingraffing into Christ, of regeneration, of remission of sins, and of his
giving up unto God through Jesus Christ, to walk in newness of life; which
ordinance is by Christ's own appointment to be continued in his church, until
the end of the world.

2. The outward element to be used in this ordinance is water, wherewith the
party is to be baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost, by a minister of the gospel lawfully called thereunto.

3. Dipping of the person into the water is not necessary, but baptism is
rightly administered by pouring or sprinkling water upon the person.

4. Not only those that do actually profess faith in and obedience unto Christ,
but also the infants of one or both believing parents are to be baptized, and
those only.

5. Although it be a great sin to contemn or neglect this ordinance, yet grace
and salvation are not so inseparably annexed to it, as that no person can be
regenerated or saved without it; or that all that are baptized are undoubtedly
regenerated.

6. The efficacy of baptism is not tied to that moment of time wherein it is
administered, yet not withstanding, by the right use of this ordinance, the
grace promised is not only offered, but really exhibited and conferred by the
holy Ghost to such (whether of age or infants) as that grace belongs unto,
according to the counsel of God's own will in his appointed time.

7. Baptism is but once to be administered to any person.

CHAP.XXX. Of the Lord's Supper.
OUR Lord Jesus in the night wherein he was betrayed, instituted the sacrament
of his body and blood, called the Lord's supper, to be observed in his churches
to the end of the world, for the perpetual remembrance, and showing forth of
the sacrifice of himself in his death, the sealing of all benefits thereof unto
true believers, their spiritual nourishment and growth in him, their further
engagement in and to all duties which they owe unto him, and to be a bond and
pledge of their communion with him, and with each other.

2. In this sacrament Christ is not offered up to his Father, nor any real
sacrifice made at all for remission of sin of the quick or dead, but only a
memorial of that one offering up of himself upon the cross once for all, and a
spiritual oblation of all possible praise unto God for the same; so that the
popish sacrifice of the mass (as they call it) is most abominable injurious to
Christ's own only sacrifice, the alone propitiation for all the sins of the
elect.

3. The Lord Jesus has in this ordinance appointed his ministers to declare
his word of institution to the people, to pray and bless the elements of bread
and wine, and thereby to set them apart from a common to an holy use, and to
take and brake the bread, to take the cup, and (they communicating also
themselves) to give both to the communicants, but to none who are not then
present in the congregation.

4. Private masses, or receiving the sacrament by a priest, or any other alone,
as likewise the denial of the cup to the people, worshipping the elements, the
lifting them up, or carrying them about for adoration, and the reserving them
for any pretended religious use, are all contrary to the nature of this
sacrament, and to the institution of Christ.

5. The outward elements in this sacrament duly set apart for the uses ordained
by Christ, have such relation to him crucified, as that truly, yet
sacramentally only, they are sometimes called by the name of the things they
represent, to wit, the body and blood of Christ; albeit in substance and nature
they still remain truly and only bread and wine as they were before.

6. That doctrine which maintains a change of the substance of bread and wine,
into the substance of Christ's body and blood (commonly called
transubstantiation) by consecration of a priest, or any other way, is repugnant
not to the scripture alone, but even to common sense and reason, overthrows
the nature of the sacrament, and has been, and is the cause of manifold
superstitions, yea, of gross idolatries.

7. Worthy receivers outwardly partaking of the visible elements in this
sacrament, do then also inwardly by faith, really and indeed, yet not carnally
and corporally, but spiritully, receive and feed upon Christ crucified, and all
benefits of his death; the body and blood of Christ being then not corporally
or ^^^nally in with, or under the bread and wine, yet as really, but
spiritually present to the faith of believers in that ordinance, as the
elements themselves are to their outward senses.

8. All ignorant and ungodly persons as they are unfit to enjoy communion with
Christ, so are they unworthy of the Lord's table, and cannot without great sin
against him, whilst they remain such, partake of these holy mysteries, or be
admitted thereunto; yea, whosoever shall receive unworthily, are guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord, eating and drinking judgment to themselves.

CHAP.XXXI. Of the State of Man after Death, and of the Resurrection of the
Dead.
THE bodies of men after death return to dust, and see ^orruption, but their
souls (which neither die nor sleep) having an immortal substance immediately
return to God* who gave them, the souls of the righteous being then made
perfect in holiness, are received into the highest heavens, where they behold
the face of God in light and glory, waiting for the full redemption of their
bodies: And the souls of the wicked are cast into hell, where they remain in
torment, and utter darkness, reserved to the judgment of the great day: Besides
these two places of souls separated from their bodies, the scripture
acknowledges none.

2. At the last day (...) as are found alive shall not die, but be changed, and
all the dead shall be raised up with the self-same bodies, and none other,
although with different qualities, which shall be united again to their souls
for ever.

3. The bodies of the unjust shall by the power of Christ be raised to
dishonor; the bodies of the just by his Spirit unto honor, and be made
conformable to his own glorious body.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the last Judgment.
GOD has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in righteousness by
JESUS CHRIST, to whom all power and judgment is given of the Father; in which
day, not only the apostate angels shall be judge^, but likewise all persons
that have lived upon earth, shall appear before the tribunal of Christ, to give
an account of their thoughts, words and deeds, and to receive according to what
they have done in the body, whether good or evil.

2. The end of God'^ appointing this day, is for the manifestation of the glory
of his mercy in the eternal salvation of the elect, and of his justice in the
damnation of the reprobate, who are wicked and disobedient: For then shall the
righteous go into everlasting life, and receive that fullness of joy and glory,
with everlasting reward in the presence of the LORD, but the wicked who know
not GOD, and obey not the gospel of JESUS CHRIST, shall be cast into eternal
torments, and be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
LORD, and from the glory of his power.

3. As Chirst would have us to be certainly persuaded that there shall be a
judgment, both to deter all men fromsin, and for the greater consolation of the
godly in their adversity; so will he have that day unknown to men, that they
may shake off all carnal security, and be always watchful, because they know
not at what hour the LORD will come, and may be ever prepared to say, Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly. AMEN

THE END.
SUBSCRIBERS NAMES
A
Names. Number. of Books. Abode. Mr. Benjamin Adams 2 Brookfield Mr. Seth Adams 2
Boston Mr. Stephen Adams 12 Nathaniel Appleton, A. M. 1 Boston John Appleton,
A. M. 1 Salem Mr. Eliakim Atherton 6 Bolton William Ayers, Esquire 4 Brookfield

B
Capt. Silas Bailey 6 Bolton Mr. Benjamin Babbit 6 Brookfield Mr. William Baker
1 Boston Rev. Isaac Backus 6 Middleborough Mr. William Bant 4 Boston Mr. Joseph
Baker 6 Westborough Mr. John Batchellor 12 Reading Rev. Benjamin Balch 1 Mendon
Rev. Thomas Balch 1 Dedham Mr. James Barrat 1 Concord Mr. Jalah Barnard 6
Deerfield Mr. Andrew Barclay 6 Boston Mr. Daniel Bell 1 Ditto Mr. Joseph
Belknap 1 Ditto Mr. Jeremiah Belknap 1 Ditto Mr. William Blodget 1 Providence
Mr. Victor Blair 1 Boston Joseph Bowditch, Esquire 1 Salem Mr. Daniel Boyer 1
Boston Deacon Wm. Boardman 4 Ditto Jabez Bowen, Esquire 1 Providence Capt. Thaddeus
Bowman 1 Lexington Mr. Philip Brown 1 Salem Benjamin Bradshaw, A. M. 12 Boston
Mr. Elisha Brown 1 Ditto Deacon Benja. Brown 1 Lexington Mr. Francis Brown 1
Ditto Mr. Paul Bridgham 6 Marlborough Mr. Moses Bulling 1 Medfield Rev. Mather
Byles, D. D. 1 Boston

C
Mr. Ebenezer Campbell 1 Newport Mr. William Capen 1 Charlestown Mr. Benjamin
Callender 1 Boston Mr. John Callender 1 Ditto Mr. Caleb Call 2 Charlestown Mr.
John Carter 1 Ditto Rev. Ebenezer Chaplin 36 Sutton Mr. Judah Clark 6 Harvard
Mr. James Clark 1 Newport Mr. Samuel Clap 1 Boston Mr. James Foster Condy 12
Ditto Mr. Theophilus Cossart 1 Newport Joseph Crosby, B. A. 1 Braintree Rev.
Robert Cutler 1 Greenwich Mr. Jacob Cushing 2 Rev. Manassah Cutler 1 Ipswich
Mr. John Cutter, jun. 1 Cambridge

D
Mr. William Dawes 100 Boston Major Thomas Dawes 2 Ditto Mr. William Dawes,
jun. 1 Ditto Dr. Nathaniel Dabney 1 Salem Rev. Nathan Davis 6 Dracut Deacon
Stephen Davis 1 Bedford Capt. Thomas Darrell 1 Marblehead Mr. John Deming 1
Boston Mr. Jacob Dodge 1 Beverly Mr. Ebenezer Dorr 5 Boston Dr. William
Dun^in^or 6 Lancaster

E
Rev. Joshua Eaton 1 Spencer Rev. Samuel Eaton 1 Harpswell Lieut. Elisha Eaton
1 Boston Mr. Nehemiah Easterbrook 1 Lexington Josiah Edson, Esquire 6 Bridgwater
Mr. John Eddy 6 Newton Mr. Samuel Elliot 2 Boston Rev. Edward Emerson 24
Concord Mr. Bulkley Emerson 36 Newbury Port Moses Everett, B. A. 1 Dedham

F
Mr. Ephraim Fairbank 100 Bolton Mr. Janathan Fairbanks 6 Lancaster Mr. Paul
Farmer 1 Boston Mr. John Fenno 1 Ditto Mr. Jonathan Fisk 1 Weston Mr. Samuel
Fisk 1 Watertown Mr. Benjamin Fisher 6 Mr. Samuel Flagg 1 Grafton Mr. Isaac
Foster 6 Billerica Mr. Benjamin Foster 1 Lunenbourgh Mr. James Foster 12 Boston
Mr. Philip Freeman 12 Ditto Mr. Samuel Freeman 6 Falmouth Jonathan French, B.
A. 2 Cambridge Abraham Fuller, Esquire 6 Newton Lieut. Thomas Furbush 1 Westborough
Mr. Daniel Furbush 1 Ditto

G
Rev. Caleb Gannet 1 Bridgewater Mr. John Gardner, 3d. 1 Salem Mr. Joseph
Gilbert 12 Brookfield Mr. Thomas Gilbert 12 Ditto Mr. Moses Gill 6 Boston Mr.
Richard Goldsmith 6 Harvard Mr. Caleb Godfrey 1 Mr. Nathaniel Gould 1 Salem Mr.
Elisha Goddard 6 Sutton Mr. Samuel Gore 1 Boston Mr. Samuel Goldsbury 1
Wrentham Rev. Ebenezer Grosvenor 1 Situate Mr. John Goff 1 Dorchester William
Greenleaf, Esquire 1 Boston Major Jeremiah Green 1 Ditto Mr. Benjamin Gray 1 Ditto
Mr. Nathaniel Greenough 2 Ditto Mr. Stephen Greenleaf 1 Ditto

H
Mr. Samuel Hall 12 Salem Mr. Thomas Hall 6 New Braintree Mr. James Haskell 6
Harvard Mr. Henry Harding 1 Medfield Mr. John Harris 1 Charlestown Mr. Daniel
Hayden 1 Grafton Mr. Jonathan Hall 1 Ditto Mr. John Harrington 1 Westborough
Joshua Henshaw, jun. M. A. 6 Boston John Hill, Esquire 1 Ditto Mr. Thomas Hitchborn
1 Ditto Hon. Robert Hooper, Esquire 2 Marblehead Rev. Elizur Holyoke 1 Boxford
Lieut. Abraham Holman 6 Bolton Mr. Israel Houghton 1 Petersham Mr. Edward
Holliday 1 Boston Mr. Daniel Howard, 3d. 1 Bridgewater Mr. Samuel Holbrook 1
Boston Capt. William Holmes 2 Ditto Mr. John Hotchkiss 1 New Haven Jed.
Huntingdon, Esquire 1 Norwich John Hubbard, Esquire 1 New Haven Mr. Thomas Hubbard 1
Concord Deacon Joseph Hubbard 2 Hol^

J
Mr. Peter Jayne 100 Marblehead Rev. Joseph Jackson 1 Brookline Deacon David
Jeffries 1 Boston Rev. Jedediah Jewett 1 Rowley Dummer Jewett, Esquire 1 Ipswich
David Ingersol, Esquire 1 Milford Mr. Samuel Jones 6 Bolton

K
Mr. Ebenezer Kimball 1 Salem Mr. Edward Kneeland 1 Boston Mr. John Kneeland,
jun. 1 Ditto

L
Mr. Jeremiah Laughton 6 Harvard Mr. Daniel Lampson 1 Athol Rev. Isaiah Lewis 1
Wellfleet Dr. Joseph Lee 12 Concord Mr. Samuel Lee 6 Manchester Dr. Joseph
Lemmon 1 Marblehead Ensign Robert Longley 6 Bolton Mr. Nathaniel Longley 6
Ditto Deacon Joseph Loring 2 Lexington Mr. James Lock, jun. 12 Ashby Dr. Joshua
Loring 1 Mr. Joshua Loring 3 Boston Mr. John Loring 1 Lancaster Mr. John Lucas
3 Boston

M
Col. Thomas Marshall 4 Boston Capt. Ephraim May 6 Ditto Isaac Mansfield, jun.
A. M. 1 Marblehead Mr. Jonas Mason 1 Lancaster Mr. John McCluer 1 Boston Rev.
Jonas Meriam 6 Newton Mr. Joseph Meriam 6 Graston Mr. William Moore 1 Boston

N
Mr. John Nazro 1 Boston Mr. Jonathan Nicholls 1 Mr. Edw^rd Norice 1 Salem Dr.
Samuel Nigh 1 Lincoln

O
Mr (...) ^liver, jun. 2 Boston

P
Mr. Thomas Pain 6 Eastham Mr. Samuel Page 1 Salem Mr. Solomon Parsons, jun. 6
Gloucester Mr. John Patch 1 Ipswich Benjamin Pemberton, Esquire 2 Roxbury Rev.
Daniel Perkins 1 Bridgewater Mr. Robert Peele, jun. 1 Salem Mr. James Penniman
1 Mr. Andrew Peter's 1 Mendon Mr. Joseph Phips 1 Charlestown Capt. Timothy
Pickering 6 Salem Mr. Abijah Pierce 6 Waltham Mr. John Pierce 6 Bolton Mr. John
Pitman 1 Boston Mr. Ebenezer Plummer 1 Glassenbury Mr. William Pollard 6 Bolton
Mr. Thorndike Procter 1 Salem Mr. Ezra Putnam 6 Middleton

Q
Norton Quincy, Esquire 2 Braintree Mr. Francis Quarly 1 Beverly

R
Mr. Isaac Rand, jun. 1 Boston Tapping Reeve, Esquire 1 Litchfield Capt. Jonathan
Reed 2 Littleton Mr. Nathaniel Richardson 1 Salem Mr. Thomas Riggs 6 N. Hamp.
Keen Mr. David Rice 6 Bolton Ebenezer Roby, Esquire 6 Sudbury Mr. Robert Roundey 1
Mr. John Rolstone 1 Boston Mr. Thomas Russell 6 Ditto

S
Hon. Thomas Saunders, Esquire 2 Gloucester Lieut. Elijah Sawyer 6 Bolton Mr.
Thomas Sawyer 6 Ditto Lieut. Ephraim Sawyer 6 Lancaster John Scollay, Esquire 4
Boston Capt. Samuel Sellon 1 Ditto Mr. George Searle 1 Newbury Port Joseph
Sherburne, Esquire 1 Boston Mr. Robert Shillaber 1 Danvers William Sherman, B. A. 1
New Haven Mr. Joseph Simons 1 Lexington Mr. Solomon Southack 2 Newport Rev.
Samuel Stillman 1 Boston Deacon Jonas Stone 1 Lexington Mr. David Stockbridge 1
Hanover Mr. William Stearnes 1 Lunenbourgh Mr. Joseph Stow 2 Brookfield Mr.
Alexander Steel 6 Boston Rev. Joseph Sumner 6 Shrewsbury

T
Lieut. Peter Talbot 1 Stoughton Mr. Hezekiah Tailor 1 Grafton Mr. Jedediah
Tayntor 6 Marlborough Mr. David Temple 1 Grafton Rev. Ebenezer Thayer 1 Rev.
Peter Thacher 1 Dr. William Thomas 6 Mr. Joshua Townsend 1 John Tudor, Esquire 1
Mr. Samuel Tufts 1 Mr. Joseph Tucker 1 Mr. Daniel Tyler 6 Mr. William Tyler 1
Mrs. Mary Tyler 1

W
Hon. Artemas Ward, Esquire Deacon Joshua Ward Capt. Josiah Waters Mr. Aaron Warren
2 Upton Mr. Obadiah Walker 1 Lunenbourgh Rev. Samuel Webster 1 Temple Mr.
Thomas Weeks 1 Greenwich Mr. William West 1 Salem Col. John Whitcomb 12 Bolton
William Whitwell, Esquire 2 Boston Mr. James Whipple 1 Grafton Mr. William Whitcomb
6 Bolton Mr. Isaiah Whitney 6 Harvard Capt. Ralph Wheelock 1 Sturbridge Mr.
Eleazer Wheelock 1 Medfield


