BOSTON, December 1, 1773.
At a Meeting of the PEOPLE of Boston, and the neighboring Towns, at
Faneuil-Hall, in said Boston, on Monday the 29th of November 1773, Nine
o'Clock, A. M. and continued by Adjournment to the next Day; for the Purpose of
consulting, advising and determining upon the most proper and effectual Method
to prevent the unloading, receiving or vending the detestable TEA sent out by
the East India Company, Part of which being just arrived in this Harbor:

IN Order to proceed with due Regularity, it was moved that a Moderator be
chosen, and JONATHAN WILLIAMS, Esquire Was then chosen Moderator of the Meeting.

A MOTION was made that as the Town of Boston had determined at a late Meeting
legally assembled, that they would to the utmost of their Power prevent the
landing of the Tea, the Question be put, Whether this Body are absolutely
determined that the Tea now arrived in Capt. Hall shall be returned to the
Place from whence it came at all Events. And the Question being accordingly
put, it passed in the Affirmative. Nem. Con.

It appearing that the Hall could not contain the People assembled, it was
Voted, that the Meeting be immediately Adjourned to the Old South
Meeting House, Leave having been obtained for this Purpose.

The People met at the Old South according to Adjournment.

A Motion was made, and the Question put, viz. Whether it is the firm
Resolution of this Body that the Tea shall not only be sent back, but that no
Duty shall be paid thereon; and passed in the Affirmative. Nem. Con.

It was moved, that in order to give Time to the Consignees to consider and
deliberate, before they sent in their Proposals to this Body, as they had given
Reason to expect would have been done at the opening of the Meeting, there
might be an Adjournment to Three o'Clock, P. M and the Meeting was accordingly
for that Purpose adjourned.

THREE o'Clock, P. M. met according to Adjournment.

A Motion was made, Whether the Tea now arrived in Captain Hall's Ship shall be
sent back in the same Bottom -- Passed in the Affirmative, Nem Con.

Mr Rotch the Owner of the Vessel being present, informed the Body that he
should enter his Protest against their Proceedings.

It was then moved and voted, nem. con. That Mr. Rotch be directed not to enter
this Tea; and that the Doing of it would be at his Peril.

Also Voted, That Captain Hall the Master of the Ship, be informed that at his
Peril he is not to suffer any of the Tea brought by him, to be landed.

A Motion was made, That in Order for the Security of Captain Hall's Ship and
Cargo, a Watch may be appointed -- and it was Voted that a Watch be accordingly
appointed to consist of 25 Men.

Capt. Edward Procter was appointed by the Body to be the Capt. of the Watch
for this Night, and the Names were given in to the Moderator, of the Townsmen
who were Volunteers on the Occasion.

It having been observed to the Body, that Governor Hutchinson had required the
Justices of the Peace in this Town to meet and use their Endeavors to suppress
any Routs or Riots, etc. of the People that might happen. -- It was Moved and
the Question put -- Whether it be not the Sense of this Meeting, that the
Governor's Conduct herein carries a designed Reflection upon the People here
met; and is solely calculated to serve the Views of Administration -- Passed in
the Affirmative, nem. con.

The People being informed by Col. Hancock, that Mr. Copley* Son-in Law to Mr.
Clarke, Sen. had acquainted him that the Tea Consignees did (...)

The Meeting out of great Tenderness to these Persons, and from a strong Desire
to bring this Matter to a Conclusion, notwithstanding the Time they had
hitherto expended upon them to no Purpose* were prevailed upon to adjourn to
the next Morning Nine o'Clock.

TUESDAY Morning Nine o'Clock, Met according to Adjournment.

THE long expected Proposals were at length brought into the Meeting, not
directed to the Moderator, but to John Scollay, Esquire one of the Selectmen -- It
was however voted that the same should be read, and they are as follow, viz.

Monday, Nov. 29 th, 1773. SIR,
WE are sorry that we could not return to the Town satisfactory Answers to
their two late Messages to us respecting the Teas; we beg Leave to acquaint the
Gentlemen Selectmen that we have since received our Orders from the Honorable
East India Company.

We still retain a Disposition to do all in our Power to give Satisfaction to
the Town, but as we understood from you and the other Gentlemen Selectmen at
Mess. Clerks Interview with you last Saturday, that this can be effected by
nothing less than our sending back the Teas, we beg Leave to say, that this is
utterly out of our Power to do, but we do now declare to you our Readiness to
Store the Teas until we shall have Opportunity of writing to our Constituents
and shall receive their further Orders respecting them; and we do most
sincerely wish that the Town considering the unexpected Difficulties devolved
upon us will be satisfied with what we now offer.

We are, SIR, Your most humble Servants, Tho. and Elisha Hutchinson,
Benja. Faneuil, jun. for Self and Joshua Winslow, Esquire
Rich'd Clarke and Sons.
John Scollay, Esquire


Mr. Sheriff Greenleaf came into the Meeting, and begged Leave of the Moderator
that a Letter he had received from the Governor, requiring him to read a
Proclamation to the People here assembled might be read, and it was accordingly
read.

Whereupon it was moved, and the Question put, Whether the Sheriff should be
permitted to read the Proclamation -- which passed in the Affirmative, nem. con.

The Proclamation is as follows, viz.

Massachusets-Bay. By the Governor. TO JONATHAN WILLIAMS, Esquire acting as
Moderator of an Assembly of People in the Town of Boston, and to the People so
assembled:
WHEREAS printed Notifications were on Monday the 29th Instant posted in diverse
Places in the Town of Boston and published in the Newspapers of that Day
calling upon the People to assemble together for certain unlawful Purposes in
such Notifications mentioned: And whereas great Numbers of People belonging to
the Town of Boston, and diverse others belonging to several other Towns in the
Province, did assemble in the said Town of Boston, on the said Day, and did
then and there proceed to choose a Moderator, and to consult, debate and resolve
upon Ways and Means for carrying such unlawful Purposes into Execution; openly
violating, defying and setting at naught the good and wholesome Laws of the
Province and the Constitution of Government under which they live: And whereas
the People thus assembled did vote or agree to adjourn or continue their
Meeting to this the 30th Instant, and great Numbers of them are again met or
assembled together for the like Purposes in the said Town of Boston,

IN Faithfulness to my Trust and as His (...) within the Province cease all
further unlawful Proceedings at your utmost Peril.

Given under my Hand at Milton in the Province aforesaid the 30th Day of
November 1773 and in the fourteenth Year of His Majesty's Reign. By His
Excellency's Command, T. Hutchinson.
THO'S FLUCKER, Secr'y.

And the same being read by the Sheriff, there was immediately after, a loud
and very general Hiss.

A Motion was then made, and the Question put, Whether the Assembly would
disperse and surcease all further Proceedings, according to the Governor's
Requirement -- It passed in the Negative, nem. con.

A Proposal of Mr. Copley was made, that in Case he could prevail with the
Mess. Clerks to come into this Meeting, the Question might now be put, Whether
they should be treated with Civility while in the Meeting, though they might be
of different Sentiments with this Body; and their Persons be safe until their
Return to the Place from whence they should come -- And the Quesstion being
accordingly put, passed in the Affirmative, Nem. Con.

Another Motion of Mr. Copley's was put, Whether two Hours shall be given him,
which also passed in the Affirmative.

Adjourned to Two o'Clock, P. M.

TWO o'Clock P. M. met according to Adjournment.

A Motion was made and passed, that Mr. Rotch and Capt. Hall be desired to give
their Attendance.

Mr. Rotch appeared, and upon a Motion made the Question was put, Whether it is
the firm Resolution of this Body, that the Tea brought by Capt. Hall shall be
returned by Mr. Rotch to England in the Bottom in which it came; and whether
they accordingly now require the same, which passed in the Affirmative, Nem.
Con.

Mr. Rotch then informed the Meeting that he should protest against the whole
Proceedings as he had done against the Proceedings on Yesterday, but that though
the returning the Tea is an involuntary Act in him, he yet considers himself as
under a Necessity to do it, and shall therefore comply with the Requirement of
this Body.

Capt. Hall being present was forbid to aid or assist in unloading the Tea at
his Peril, and ordered that if he continues Master of the Vessel, he carry the
same back to London; who replied he should comply with these Requirements.

Upon a Motion, Resolved, That John Row, Esquire Owner of Part of Capt. Bruce's
Ship expected with Tea, as also Mr. Timmins, Factor for Capt. Coffin's Brig, be
desired to attend.

Mr. Ezekiel Cheever was appointed Captain of the Watch for this Night, and a
sufficient Number of Volunteers gave in their Names for that Service.

VOTED, That the Captain of this Watch be desired to make out a List of the
Watch for the next Night, and so each Captain of the Watch for the following
Nights until the Vessels leave the Harbor.

Upon a Motion made, Voted, that in Case it should happen that the Watch should
be any Ways molested in the Night, while on Duty, they give the Alarm to the
Inhabitants by the tolling of the Bells -- and that if any Thing happens in the
Day Time, the Alarm be by ringing of the Bells.

VOTED, That six Persons be appointed to be in Readiness to give due Notice to
the Country Towns when they shall be required so to do, upon any important
Occasion. And six Persons were accordingly chosen for that Purpose.

John Row, Esquire attended, and was informed that Mr. Rotch had engaged that his
Vessel should carry back the Tea she bro't in the same Bottom, and that it was
the Expectation of this Body that he does the same by the Tea expected in Capt.
Bruce; whereupon he replied that the Ship was under the Care of the said
Master, but that he would use his utmost Endeavor, that it should go back as
required by this Body, and that he would give immediate Advice of the Arrival
of said Ship.

VOTED, That it is the Sense of this Body that Capt. Bruce shall on his Arrival
strictly conform to the Votes passed respecting Capt. Hall's Vessel, as though
they had been all passed in Referrence to Capt. Bruce's Ship.

Mr Timmins appeared and informed that Capt. (...)

It was then Voted, That what Mr. Row and Mr. Timmins had offered was
satisfactory to the Body.

Mr. Copley returned and acquainted the Body, that as he had been obliged to go
to the Castle, he hoped that if he had exceeded the Time allowed him they would
consider the Difficulty of a Passage by Water at this Season as his Apology: He
then further acquainted the Body, that he had seen all the Consignees, and though
he had convinced them that they might attend this Meeting with safety, and had
used his utmost Endeavors to prevail upon them to give Satisfaction to the
Body; they acquainted him, that believing nothing would be satisfactory short
of re-shipping the Tea, which was out of their Power, they thought it best not
to appear, but would renew their Proposal of storing the Tea, and submitting
the same to the Inspection of a Committee* and that they could do no further,
without incurring their own Ruin; but as they had not been active in
introducing the Tea, they should do nothing to obstruct the People in their
Procedure with the same.

It was then moved, and the Question put, Whether the return made by Mr. Copley
from the Consignees, be in the least Degree satisfactory to this Body, and
passed in the Negative. Nem. Con.

Whereas a Number of Merchants in this Province have inadvertently imported Tea
from Great Britain, while it is subject to the Payment of a Duty imposed upon
it by an Act of the British Parliament for the Purpose of raising a Revenue in
America, and appropriating the same without the Consent of those who are
required to pay it:

RESOLVED, That in thus importing said Tea, they have justly incurred the
Displeasure of our Brethren in the other Colonies.

And Resolved further, That if any Person or Persons shall hereafter import Tea
from Great Britain, or if any Master or Masters of any Vessel or Vessels in
Great Britain shall take the same on Board to be imported to this Place, until
the said unrighteous Act shall be repealed, he or they shall be deemed by this
Body, an Enemy to his Country; and we will prevent the Landing and Sale of the
same, and the Payment of any Duty thereon. And we will effect the Return
thereof to the Place from whence it shall come.

RESOLVED, That the foregoing Vote be printed and sent to England, and all the
Seaports in this Province.

Upon a Motion made, Voted, That fair Copies be taken of the whole Proceedings
of this Meeting, and transmitted to New York and Philadelphia, And that Mr.
SAMUEL ADAMS, Hon. JOHN HANCOCK, Esquire WILLIAM PHILLIPS, Esquire JOHN ROW, Esquire
JONATHAN WILLIAMS, Esquire


Be a Committee to transmit the same.

Voted, That it is the Determination of this Body, to carry their Votes and
Resolutions into Execution, at the Risque of their Lives and Property.

Voted, That the Committee of Correspondence for this Town, be desired to take
Care that every other Vessel with Tea that arrives in this Harbor, have a
proper Watch appointed for her -- Also Voted, That those Persons who are
desirous of making a Part of these Nightly Watches, be desired to give in their
Names at Messieurs Edes and Gill's Printing-Office.

Voted, That our Brethren in the Country be desired to afford their Assistance
upon the first Notice given; especially if such Notice be given upon the
Arrival of Captain Loring, in Messieurs Clarkes' Brigantine.

Voted, That those of this Body who belong to the Town of Boston do return
their Thanks to their Brethren who have come from the neighboring Towns, for
their Countenance and Union with this Body in this Exigence of our Affairs.

VOTED, That the Thanks of this Meeting be given to JONATHAN WILLIAMS, Esquire for
his good services as Moderator.

VOTED, That this Meeting be Dissolved -- And it was accordingly Dissolved.


