AN EPISTLE TO THE QUARTERLY and MONTHLY MEETINGS of Friends.
BELOVED FRIENDS,
FEELING at this time a renewed concern that the pure principle of Light and
Life, and the righteous fruits thereof may spread and prevail amongst mankind,
there is an engagement on my heart to labor with my brethren in religious
profession, that none of us may be a stumbling block in the way of others; but
may so walk that our conduct may reach the pure Witness in the hearts of such
who are not in profession with us.

And, dear Friends, while we publicly own that the Holy Spirit is our leader,
the profession is in itself weightty, and the weightiness thereof increases,
in proportion as we are noted among the professors of Truth, and active in
dealing with such who walk disorderly.

Many under our profession for want of due attention, and a perfect
resignation, to this Divine Teacher, have in some things manifested a deviation
from the purity of our religious principles, and these deviations having crept
in amongst us by little and little, and increasing from less to greater, have
been so far unnoticed, that some living in them, have been active in putting
discipline in practice with relation to others, whose conduct has appeared
more dishonorable in the world.

Now as my mind has been exercised before the Lord, I have seen, that the
discipline of the Church of Christ stands in that which is pure; that it is
the wisdom from above which gives authority to discipline, and that the
weightiness thereof stands not in any outward circumstances, but in the
authority of Christ who is the author of it; and where any walk after the
flesh, and not according to the purity of Truth, and at the same time are
active in putting discipline in practice, a veil is gradually drawn over the
purity of discipline, and over that holiness of life, which Christ leads those
into, in whom the love of God is verily perfected, 1 John ii. 5.

When we labor in true love with offenders, and they remain obstinate, it
sometimes is necessary to proceed as far as our Lord directed, Let him be to
thee as an heathen man, or a publican, Mat. xviii. 17.

Now when such are disowned, and they who act therein feel Christ made unto
them wisdom, and are preserved in his meek, restoring spirit, there is no just
cause of offense ministered to any; but when such who are active in dealing with
offenders indulge themselves in things which are contrary to the purity of
Truth, and yet judge others whose conduct appears more dishonorable than
their's, here the pure authority of discipline cease as to such offenders,
and a temptation is laid in their way to wrangle and contend; -- "Judge not,"
said our Lord, "that ye be not judged." Now this forbidding, alludes to man's
judgment, and points out the necessity of our humbly attending to that
sanctifying Power under which the Faithful experience the Lord to be "a spirit
of judgment to them," Isa. xxviii. 6. And as we feel his Holy Spirit to mortify
the deeds of the body in us, and can say, it is no more I that live, but Christ
that lives in me, here right judgment is known.

And while Divine Love prevails in our hearts, and Self in us is brought under
judgment, a preparation is felt to labor in a right manner with offenders; but
it we abide not in this love, our outward performance in dealing with others,
degenerates into formality; for "this is the love of God, that we keep his
commandments," John i.3.

How weighty are those instructions of our Redeemer concerning religious
duties, when he points out, that they who may, should be so obedient to the
teachings of the Holy Spirit, that humbly considing in his help, they may say,
"Thy name O Father be hallowed! Thy kingdom come! thy will be done on earth, as
it is in heaven!" -- In this awful state of mind is felt that worship which
stands in doing the will of God, on earth, as it is done in heaven, and keeping
the Holy Name sacred? To take a holy profession upon us is awful, nor can we
keep this Holy Name sacred, but by humbly abiding under the cross of Christ.
The apostle laid a heavy complaint against some who profaned this Holy Name by
their manner of living, "through you," he says, "the name of God is blasphemed
among the Gentiles," Romans ii. 24.

Some of our ancestors through many tribulations were gathered into the state
of true worshippers, and had fellowship in that which is pure, and as one was
inwardly moved to kneel down in their assemblies, and publicly call on the
name of the Lord, those in the harmony of united exercise then present, joined
in the prayer; I mention this in order that we of the present age, may look
unto the Rock from whence we were hewn, and remember that to unite in worship,
is a union in prayer, and that prayer acceptable to the Father is only in a
mind truly sanctified, where the sacred name is kept holy, and the heart
resigned to do his will on earth as it is done in heaven, "If ye abide in me,"
says Christ, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will in my name,
and it shall be done unto you. -- Now we know not what to pray for as we ought,
but as the Holy Spirit does open and direct our minds, and as we faithfully
yield to its influences, our prayers are in the will of our Heavenly Father,
who fails not to grant that which his own Spirit, through his Children, asks;
-- thus preservation from sin is known, and the fruits of righteousness are
brought forth by such who inwardly unite in prayer.

How weighty are our solemn meetings when the name of Christ is kept holy?

"How precious is that state in which the children of the Lord are so redeemed
from the love "of this world, that they are accepted and blessed in all that
they do." R. Barclay's Apology, p. 404.

How necessary is it that we who profess these principles, and are outwardly
active in supporting them, should faithfully abide in Divine Strength, that As
He who has called us, is holy, so we may be holy in all manner of conversation,
1 Pet. i. 15.

If one prosessing to be influenced by the Spirit of Christ, propose to unite
in a labor to promote rightcousness in the earth, and in time past he has
manifestly deviated from the path of equity, then to act consistent with this
principle, his first work is to make restitution so far as he may be enabled;
for if he attempts to contribute toward a work intended to promote
righteousness, while it appears that he neglects, or refuses to act
righteously himself, his conduct has a tendency to entangle the minds of those
who are weak in the faith, who behold these things, and to draw a veil over the
purity of righteousness, by carrying an appearance as though that was
righteousness which is not.

Again, if I propose to assist in supporting those doctrines wherein that
purity of life is held forth, in which customs proceeding from the spirit of
this world have no place, and at the same time strengthen others in those
customs by my example; the first step then in an orderly proceeding, is to
cease from those customs myself, and afterward to labor, as I may be enabled,
to promote the like disposition and conduct in others.

To be convinced of the pure principle of Truth, and diligently exercised in
walking answerable thereto, is necessary before I can consistently recommend
this principle to others. -- I often feel a labor in spirit, that we who are
active members in religious society may experience in ourselves the truth of
those expressions of the Holy One -- "I will be sanctisied in them that come
nigh me." Lev. x. 3. -- in this case, my mind has been often exercised when
alone, year after year, for many years, and in the renewings of Divine Love, a
tender care has been incited in me, that we who profess the inward principle
of light to be our teacher, may be a family united in that purity of worship,
which comprehends a holy life, and ministers instruction to others.

My mind is often drawn toward children in the Truth, who having a small share
of the things of this life, and coming to have families may be inwardly
exercised before the Lord to support them in a way agreeable to the purity of
Truth, in which they may feel his blessing upon them in their labors; the
thoughts of such being entangled with customs (contrary to pure wisdom)
conveyed to them through our hands, does often very tenderly, and movingly
affect my heart, and when I look toward, and think on the succeeding
generation, fervent desires are raised in me, that we by yielding to that Holy
Spirit which leads into all truth, may not do the work of the Lord deceitfully,
may not live contrary to the purity of the Divine Principle we profess; but
that as faithful laborers in our age, we may be instrumental in removing
stumbling blocks out of the way of those who may succeed us.

So great was the love of Christ, that he gave himself for the church, that he
might sanctify and cleanse it, that it should be holy, and without blemish, not
having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephesians. v. 25. and where any take the
name of Christ upon them, professing to be members of his church, and led by
his Holy Spirit, and yet manifestly deviate from the purity of Truth, they
herein act against the gracious design of his giving himself for them, and
minister cause for the continuance of his afflictions, viz. in his body the
church.

Christ suffered afflictions in a body of flesh prepared by the Father, but the
afflictions of his mystical body are yet unfinished; for they who are baptized
into Christ are baptized into his death, and as we humbly abide under his
sanctifying Power, and are brought forth into newness of life, we feel Christ
to live in us, who being the same yesterday, today, and forever, and always at
unity with himself, his Spirit in the hearts of his people leads to an inward
exercise for the salvation of mankind; and when under a travail of spirit, we
behold a visited people entangled by the spirit of this world with its
wickedness and customs, and thereby rendered incapable of being faithful
examples to others, sorrow and heaviness under a sense of these things, is
often experienced, and thus in some measure is filled up that which remains of
the afflictions of Christ.

Our Blessed Savior speaking concerning gifts offered in Divine Service, says,
If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has
ought against thee, leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way,
first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Mat. v.
23, 24. -- Now there is no true unity, but in that wherein the Father, and the
Son are united, nor can there be a perfect reconciliation but in ceasing from
that which ministers cause for the continuation of the afflictions of Christ;
and if any professing to bring their gift to the altar, do remember the
customary contradiction which some of their fruits bear to the pure, spiritual
worship, here it appears necessary to lay to heart this command, "leave thy
gift by the altar."

Christ graciously calls his people brethren, whosoever shall do the will of
God the same is my brother. Mark iii. 35. Now if we walk contrary to the Truth
as it is in Jesus, while we continue to profess it, we offend against Christ,
and if under this offense we bring our gift to the altar, our Redeemer does not
direct us to take back our gift, he does not discourage our proceeding in a
good work; but graciously points out the necessary means by which the gift may
be rendered acceptable, " leave, says he, thy gist by the altar, first go and
be reconciled to thy brother," cease from that which grieves the Holy Spirit,
cease from that which is against the Truth, as it is in Jesus, and then come,
and offer thy gift.

I feel, while I am writing, a tenderness to those who through Divine Favor
are preserved in a lively sense of the state of the churches, and at times may
be under discouragements with regard to proceeding in that pure way which
Christ by his Holy Spirit leads into: the depth of disorder and weakness, which
so much prevails, being opened, doubtings are apt to arise as to the
possibility of proceeding as an assembly of the Lord's people in the pure
council of Truth; and here I feel a concern to express in uprightness, that
which has been opened in my mind, under the power of the Cross of Christ,
relating to a visible gathered church, the members whereof are guided by the
Holy Spirit.

The church is called the body of Christ, Col. i. 24.

Christ is called the head of the church, Ephesians. i. 22.

The church is called the Pillar, and ground of Truth, 1 Timothy iii. 15.

Thus the church has a name that is sacred, and the necessity of keeping this
name holy, appears evident; for where a number of people unite in a profession
of being led by the Spirit of Christ, and publish their principles to the
world, the acts and proceedings of that people may in some measure be
considered as such which Christ is the author of.

Now while we stand in this station, if the pure light of life is not followed
and regarded in our proceedings, we are in the way of profaning the Holy Name,
and of going back toward that wilderness of sufferings and persecution, out of
which, through the tender mercies of God, a church has been gathered; Christ
lives in sanctified vessels, Gal. ii. 20. and where they behold his Holy Name
profanced, and the pure Gospel Light eclipsed through the unfaithfulness of any
who by their station appear to be standard bearers under the Prince of Peace,
the living members in the body of Christ in beholding these things, do in some
degree experience the fellowship of his sufferings, and as the wisdom of the
world more and more takes place in conducting the affairs of this visible
gathered church, and the pure leadings of the Holy Spirit less waited for and
followed, so the true suffering seed is more and more oppressed.

My mind is often affected with a sense of the condition of sincere hearted
people in some kingdoms, where liberty of conscience is not allowed, many of
whom being burdened in their minds with prevailing superstition joined with
oppressions, are often under sorrow, and where such have attended to that pure
Light which has in some degree opened their understandings, and for their
faithfulness thereto, have been brought to examination and trial, how heavy are
the persecutions which in diverse parts of the world are exercised upon them?
How mighty, as to the outward, is that power by which they are borne down, and
oppressed?

How deeply affecting is the condition of many upright hearted people who are
taken into the papal inquisition? What lamentable cruelties, in deep vaults, in
a private way, are exercised on many of them? and how lingering is that death
by a small slow fire, which they have frequently endured, who have been
faithful to the end?

How many tender-spirited protestants have been sentenced to spend the
remainder of their lives in a galley chained to oars, under hard-hearted
masters, while their young children are placed out for education, and taught
principles so contrary to the conscience of the parents, that by dissenting
from them, they have hazarded their liberty, lives, and all that was dear to
them of the things of this world?

There have been in time past severe persecutions under the English government,
and many sincere-hearted people have sussered death for the testimony of a good
conscience, whose faithfulness in their day has ministered encouragement to
others, and been a blessing to many who have succeeded them; thus from age to
age, the darkness being more and more removed, a channel at length, through the
tender mercies of God, has been opened for the exercise of the pure gift of
the gospel ministry, without interruption from outward power, a work, the like
of which is rare, and unknown in many parts of the world.

As these things are often fresh in my mind, and this great work of God going
on in the earth has been open before me, that liberty of conscience with which
we are favored, has appeared not as a light matter.

A trust is committed to us, a great and weighty trust, to which our diligent
attention is necessary, wherever the active members of this visible gathered
church use themselves to that which is contrary to the purity of our
principles, it appears to be a breach of this trust, and one step back toward
the wilderness, one step toward undoing what God in infinite love has done
through his faithful servants, in a work of several ages, and like laying the
foundation for future sufferings.

I feel a living invitation in my mind to such who are active in our religious
society, that we may lay to heart this matter, and consider the station in
which we stand; a place of outward liberty under the free exercise of our
conscience toward God, not obtained but through great and manifold afflictions
of those who lived before us. There is gratitude due from us to our Heavenly
Father, and justice to our posterity; can our hearts endure, or our hands be
strong, if we desert a cause so precious, if we turn aside from a work under
which so many have patiently labored?

May the deep sufferings of our Savior be so dear to us, that we nay never
trample underfoot the adorable Son of God, nor count the blood of the covenant
unholy!

May the faithfulness of the martyrs when the prospect of death by fire was
before them, be remembered! and may the patient constant sufferings of the
upright-hearted servants of God in latter ages be revived in our minds! and may
we so follow on to know the Lord, that neither the faithful in this age, nor
those in ages to come, may ever be brought under suffering, through our sliding
back from the work of reformation in the world!

While the active members in the visible gathered church stand upright, and the
asfairs thereof are carried on under the leadings of the Holy Spirit, although
disorders may arise among us, and cause many exercises to those who feel the
care of the churches upon them; yet while these continue under the weight of
the work, and labor in the meekness of wisdom for the help of others, the name
of Christ in the visible gathered church may be kept sacred; but while they who
are active in the affairs of this church, continue in a manifest opposition to
the purity of our principles, this as the prophet Isaiah x. 18. expresses it,
is like "as when a standard bearer faints," and thus the way opens to great,
and prevailing degeneracy, and to sufferings for such who through the power of
Divine Love, are separated to the gospel of Christ, and cannot unite with any
thing which stands in opposition to the purity of it.

The necessity of an inward stillness, has under these exercises appeared
clear to my mind; in true silence strength is renewed, the mind herein is
weaned from all things, but as they may be enjoyed in the Divine Will, and a
lowliness in outward living opposite to worldly honor, becomes truly
acceptable to us; -- in the desire after outward gain, the mind is prevented
from a perfect attention to the voice of Christ, but being weaned from all
things, but as they may be enjoyed in the Divine Will, the pure light shines
into the soul, and where the fruits of that spirit which is of this world, are
brought forth by many who profess to be lead by the Spirit of Truth, and
cloudiness is felt to be gathering over the visible gathered church, the
sincere in heart who abide in true stillness, and are exercised therein before
the Lord for his name sake, have a knowledge of Christ in the fellowship of his
sufferings, and inward thankfulness is felt at times, that through Divine Love,
our own wisdom is cast out, and that forward active part in us subjected, which
would rise and do something in the visible gathered church, without the pure
leadings of the Spirit of Christ.

While aught remains in us different from a perfect resignation of our wills,
it is like a seal to a book wherein is written that good, and acceptable, and
perfect will of God concerning us, Romans xii. 2. but when our minds entirely
yield to Christ, that silence is known, which follows the opening of the last
of the seals, Rev. viii. 1. in this silence we learn abiding in the Divine
Will, and there feel, that we have no cause to promote but that only in which
the light of life directs us in our proceedings, and that the alone way to be
useful in the church of Christ, is to abide faithfully under the leadings of
his Holy Spirit in all cases, and being preserved thereby in purity of heart,
and holiness of conversation, a testimony to the purity of his government may
be held forth through us, to others.

As my mind has been thus exercised, I have seen that to be active, and busy
in the visible gathered church, without the leadings of the Holy Spirit is not
only unprofitable, but tends to increase dimness, and where way is not opened
to proceed in the light of Truth, a stop is felt by those who humbly attend to
the Divine Leader, a stop which in relation to good order in the visible
gathered church, is of the greatest consequence to be observed; thus Robert
Barclay in his treatise on discipline holds forth, page 65, 68, 84. that the
judgment or conclusion of the church or congregation, is no further effectual
"as to the true end and design thereof, but as such judgment "or conclusion
proceeds from the Spirit of God operating on their minds who are sanctified in
Christ Jesus.

Now in this stop I have learned the necessity of waiting on the Lord in
humility, that the works of all may be brought to the light, and those to
judgment which are wrought in the wisdom of this world, and have also seen,
that in a mind thoroughly subjected to the power of the Cross, there is a
savor of life to be felt, which evidently tends to gather souls to God, while
the greatest works in the visible gathered church brought forth in man's
wisdom, remain to be unprofitable.

Where people are divinely gathered into a holy fellowship, and faithfully
abide under the influence of that Spirit which leads into all Truth, "they are
the light of the world," Mat. v. 14. Now holding this profession, to me has
appeared weighty, even beyond what I can fully express, and what our Blessed
Lord seemed to have in view, when he proposed the necessity of counting the
cost, before we begin to build.

I trust there are many who at times, under Divine visitation, feel an inward
enquiry after God, and when such in the simplicity of their hearts mark the
lives of a people who profess to walk by the leadings of his Spirit, of what
great concernment is it that our lights shine clear, that nothing of our
conduct carry a contradiction to the Truth as it is in Jesus, or be a means of
profaning his Holy Name, and be a stumbling block in the way of those sincere
enquirers.

When such seekers who wearied with empty forms, look toward uniting with us as
a people, and behold active members among us depart in their customary way of
living, from that purity of life, which under humbling exercises has been
opened before them, as the way of the Lord's people, how mournful and
discouraging is the prospect? and how strongly does such unfaithfulness operate
against the spreading of the peaceable, harmonious principle and testimony of
Truth amongst mankind?

In entering into that life, which is hid with Christ in God, we behold his
peaceable government, where the whole family are governed by the same spirit,
and the "doing to others as we would they should do unto us," grows up as
good fruit from a good tree, the peace, quietness, and harmonious walking in
this government is beheld with humble reverence to him who is the author of it,
and in partaking of the Spirit of Christ, we partake of that which labors, and
suffers for the increase of this peaceable government among the inhabitants of
the world; and I have felt a labor of long continuance that we who profess
this peaceable principle, may be faithful standard bearers under the Prince of
Peace, and that nothing of a defiling nature, tending to discord and wars, may
remain among us.

May each of us query with ourselves, have the treasures I possess, been
gathered in that wisdom which is from above, so far as has appeared to me?

Have none of my fellow creatures an equitable right to any part which is
called mine?

Have the gifts, and possessions received by me from others been conveyed in a
way free from all unrighteousness so far as I have seen?

The principle of peace in which our trust is only on the Lord, and our minds
weaned from a dependence on the strength of armies, has appeared to me very
precious, and I often feel strong desires, that we who profess this principle,
may so walk, as to give just cause for none of our fellow creatures to be
offended at us; that our lives may evidently manifest, that we are redeemed
from that spirit in which wars are: Our blessed Savior in pointing out the
danger of so leaning on man, as to neglect the leadings of his Holy Spirit,
said, Call no man your father upon the earth; for one is your father which is
in heaven, Mat. xxiii. 9. where the wisdom from above is faithfully followed,
and therein we are entrusted with substance, it is a treasure committed to our
care in the nature of an inheritance, as an inheritance from him, who formed,
and supports the world. Now in this condition the true enjoyment of the good
things of this life is understood, and that blessing felt, in which is real
safety; this is what I apprehend our blessed Lord had in view, when he
pronounced, Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.

Selfish worldly minded men may hold lands in the selfish spirit, and depending
on the strength of the outward power, be perplexed with secret uncasiness, lest
the injured should sometime overpower them, and that measure meted to them,
which they measure to others. -- Thus selfish men may possess the earth; but it
is the meek who inherit it, and enjoy it as an inheritance from the Heavenly
Father, free from all the desilements and perplexities of unrighteousness.

Where proceedings have been in that wisdom which is from beneath, and
inequitable gain gathered by a man, and left as a gift to his children, who
being entangled by the same worldly spirit, have not attained to that clearness
of light in which the channels of righteousness are opened, and justice done to
those who remain silent under injuries: here I have seen under humbling
exercise of mind, that the sins of the fathers are embraced by the children,
and become their sins, and thus in the days of tribulation, the iniquities of
the fathers are visited upon these children, who take hold of the
unrighteousness of their fathers, and live in that spirit in which those
iniquities were committed; to which agrees the prophesy of Moses, concerning a
rebellious people. They that are left of you shall pine away in their
iniquities, in your enemy's land, and in the iniquities of their fathers shall
they pine away. Lev. xxvi. 39. and our blessed Lord in beholding the hardness
of heart in that generation, and feeling in himself, that they lived in the
same spirit in which the prophets had been persecuted unto death, signisied,
that the blood of all the prophets which was shed from the foundation of the
world, should be required of that generation, from the blood of Abel, unto the
blood of Zacharias, who perished between the altar and the temple. Luke xi. 51.

Tender compassion fills my heart toward my fellow creatures estranged from the
harmonious government of the Prince of Peace, and a labor attends me, that
they may be gathered to this peaceable habitation.

In being inwardly prepared to suffer adversity for Christ's sake, and weaned
from a dependence on the arm of flesh, we feel, that there is a rest for the
people of God, and that it stands in a perfect resignation of ourselves to his
holy will; in this condition, all our wants and desires are bounded by pure
wisdom, and our minds wholly attentive to the council of Christ inwardly
communicated, which has appeared to me as a habitation of safety for the
Lord's people, in times of outward commotion and trouble, and desires from the
fountain of pure love, are opened in me, to invite my brethren and fellow
creatures to feel for, and seek after that which gathers the mind into it.

Mount-Holly, New Jersey, 4th Month, 1772. JOHN WOOLMAN.


