THE IMPOTENCY OF SINNERS, WITH RESPECT TO REPENTANCE AND FAITH, NO EXCUSE:
ILLUSTRATED IN A SERMON, By STEPHEN WEST, A. M. Pastor of the Church in
STOCKBRIDGE.

HARTFORD: Printed by E. WATSON, near the Great-Bridge.

THE IMPOTENCY OF SINNERS, etc, JOHN vi. 44. No man can come to me, except the
Father which has sent me, draw him.


OUR SAVIOR, in the preceding parts of the chapter, had represented himself
as the bread of life; and said: He that comes to me shall never hunger, and he
that believes on me shall never thirst. This representation gave umbrage to
the Jews because it insinuated the insufficiency of the rites and sacrifices of
their law, to purge the conscience; and contained a tacit reprehension of them,
for the undue confidence they had placed in the Mosaic offerings and
institutions. The manna, the bread which Moses gave them in the wilderness,
they considered as a testimony from Heaven that their religion was from GOD;
and, that a careful compliance with the forms and modes of their worship, was
sufficient to bring them into the divine favor, and secure to them eternal
life. And this testimony in favor of their religion, in feeding the whole
congregation of the Jews, not only once but forty years, they viewed as more
convincing and irrefragable, than any of the miracles which had been wrought by
CHRIST. Our LORD lets them know, that whatever they might think of the manna
that was rained down in the wilderness, HE was the true bread which came down
from Heaven: And although, from a vain and proud confidence in their
conformities to the Jewish ritual, they might reject him; yet all that the
Father gave him should come to him and believe on him, and he would give them
eternal life. This brought into view the sovreignty of GOD, in the salvation of
sinners, and therefore more effectually stung the pride of the Jews* upon which
they immediately fell to murmuring, upon hearing him represent himself in the
light of so much importance. The clearness of our Savior's reasonings, the
excellency of his doctrine, together with the mighty miracles which he wrought,
being insufficient to convince the obstinate Jews, naturally brought into view
the necessity of divine, almighty power, in order to bring men cordially to
embrace him, and believe on him. Therefore he says, murmur not among
yourselves. No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me draw
him. They were to know that the salvation which he offered, was all of GOD:
That, as the salvation itself was of GOD, so also was the heart to comply with
the offers and proposals of it: That, it was not of man nor in man to receive
and embrace him, unless it were given him of GOD. This seems to be the import
of our Savior's reasoning, and this the true import of the text.

BUT, as the terms which are here used to denote the necessity and importance
of special divine influence, in order to bring men to believe on CHRIST, and
embrace him, imply some kind of impotency in men with respect to coming and
believing; many find it difficult to reconcile them with other parts of
scripture, which represent impenitence and infidelity as the greatest of sins.
If, no man can come to CHRIST except the FATHER draw him, people cannot discern
the criminality of remaining unbelievers.

THE design of the present discourse is to obviate this seeming difficulty; and
to show, that the impotency there is in natural MEN to believe on CHRIST, is
altogether consistent with the infinite criminality of unbelief.

IN order to illustrate the subject, it will be necessary to enquire, I. WHAT
That impotency is in sinners, with respect to coming to CHRIST, which is
expressed by the terms no man can come to me, etc. II. WHETHER this impotency
affords any reasonable excuse to the sinner, for remaining in impenitency and
unbelief. III. WHENCE arises the necessity of divine and almighty power, the
special influences of the spirit of GOD, in order to bring men to repent, and
believe on the LORD JESUS CHRIST.


I. WE are to enquire what that impotency is, in sinners, with respect to
coming to CHRIST, which is expressed by the terms, no man can come, etc.

IN order to right apprehensions of the nature of that impotency, which is in
fallen men, to that holy obedience to which men are universally called in the
word of GOD; it may be proper for us to examine into the meaning of the terms
can and cannot, and enquire in what sense they are generally used, both in the
holy scriptures and in common language.

THESE terms are sometimes used in common language, and I apprehend also in the
sacred writings, to denote only natural consistency and possibility in the
nature of things, or the reverse. Thus we say an effect cannot exist without
its cause; a part cannot be greater than the whole; nor the whole greater than
all its parts. In a sense similar to this, are the terms often used in
scripture. Thus Bildad says, Can the rush grow up without mire? Can the flag
grow without water? Job viii. 11
Our Savior also says, " No man can serve two masters." Matt ^i 24
So James says, Can the fig tree, my brethren, bear olive berries, either a
vine figs? So can no fountain both yield salt water and fresh. James iii. 12.
In like manner, it is unquestionably true, that the sinner's coming to Christ
is an effect which can arise from no other cause than the drawings of the
Father; and it is in vain to look to any other source for such an effect.

BUT the terms can and cannot, in such an application of them, have no
reference to moral characters and actions, in determining them to be either
virtuous or vicious. Because a man cannot serve two masters, it does not from
thence follow that he ought not to serve one: Because no fountain can both
yield salt water and fresh, and virtuous and vicious actions cannot proceed
from the same principle; it by no means from thence follows, that men are not
obliged to holy and virtuous action. And, because coming to Christ is the
effect of no other cause than the drawings of the Father, it would be very odd
from thence to infer, that no man is under obligation to come to him. Such
reasoning as this would, at once, annul the whole law and gospel; and, suppose
that moral obligation lies upon no Being but God. It would suppose that the
necessary dependence of creatures, on the Creator, was inconsistent with moral
obligation, and destroyed it.

The terms can and cannot therefore, in this use and import of them, having no
reference to moral characters and qualities, in determining them to be either
good or bad; we have no further concern with them in the present discourse; the
design of which is to show that the impotency there is in mankind, with respect
to coming to Christ, and believing on him, affords no one any reasonable excuse
for neglecting it.

Our business now, therefore is, to enquire into the use which is made of these
terms, both in the holy scriptures, and in common language, as far as they
respect the characters of men; and, wherein they relate to those powers of
moral beings which are essential to virtue and vice, praise and blame.

And, here let it be observed,

1. That the terms can and cannot, often refer to the natural abilities,
strength or opportunity any man has, for doing or performing any action that
is proposed to him. We say men can or cannot perform any action, or do any
deed, according as they have, or have not strength, talents, or oppo^^^^^^y for
it. Thus men cannot soar above the clouds, nor overturn the mountains. So, the
blind cannot see, nor the deaf hear. Men cannot bind the sweet influences of
Pleiades, nor loose the bands of Orion. Job xxxviii. 31.
Men have not an arm like God, nor can they thunder with a voice like him. Job
xl. 9.
So, men cannot reason with the power and strength of angels, nor can any
creature comprehend God. Some things it may be said men cannot perform, only
for want of opportunity. Thus many cannot understand the sciences and arts, the
reasonings of Newton, or the demonstrations of Euclid, because they have not
had opportunity to study and acquaint themselves with them. To denote such a
kind of impotency as this is the term cannot often used in the sacred
scriptures. Thus we are told that When Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, so
that he could not see, he called Esau, his eldest son, etc. Genesis xxvii. 1.
And that when Eli was laid down in his place, and his eyes began to wax dim,
that he could not see 1 Samuel iii. 2.
So, in the storm which befell the ship in which Jonah was, when he fled from
the presence of the Lord, after the sailors had cast lots, and it had fallen
upon Jonah; it is said The men rowed hard to bring the ship to land, but they
could not. Jonah i. 3.
And the prophet Daniel, tacitly blames the king Nebuchadnezzar for requiring
it of the magicians and astrologers to reveal his dreams to him, and says, The
secret which the king has demanded, cannot the wise men, the astrologers, the
magicians, the soothsayers show unto the king? Dan. ii. 27.


SUCH a kind of impotency to any thing as this, is always supposed to excuse
from the performance: This sort of cannot, is inconsistent with every idea of
moral obligation. Moral obligation lies upon that which is, not upon that which
is not. Therefore Paul says, If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted
according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not. 2 Cor.
viii 12.
Neither Isaac nor Eli were criminal for not being able to see; nor the
sailors; because they could not reach the shore; nor the astrologers and
magicians, because they could not reveal the king's secret. And, if this was
the nature of the impotency brought upon mankind by the fall, they could not be
deemed criminal for not performing those actions, and that service, which
otherwise might have been expected and required of them. To relieve the mind
under the uneasy apprehensions which naturally possess it upon a conviction of
having neglected mercy, and the love of God; this notion of the impotency
derived to men by the fall, has however been invented and applied to mankind in
their present depraved state. This is one of those idle excuses with which the
fertile inventions of men have furnished the sinner's conscience. And, so long
as the sinner imagines that he can avail himself of it, every attempt to
disturb that repose which he takes in impenitency and unbelief, will be in
vain. You may as easily convince the sinner's conscience of criminality in the
sight of the just God, for not taming the wild beasts of the desert, as for not
curbing his own lusts, and taming the ferosity of his own heart; so long as he
thinks his impotency to the latter, is the same as it is to the former. And, so
long as we can excuse ourselves to our own consciences, so long we shall
undoubtedly think ourselves excusable in the sight of God.

2. The terms can and cannot, as they are often used, both in the sacred
scriptures, and in common language, refer to internal, mental dispositions, the
affections of the heart. We frequently use the term cannot, to denote
unwillingness or backwardness of disposition; and, to express a high degree of
unwillingness, a strong aversion of the mind, we often say we cannot. When we
say we cannot comply with proposals that are made to us, we often mean no more
than that our minds are exceedingly a verse from it. Thus we often hear peasons
say they cannot be willing -- they cannot agree -- they connot consent, etc.
when we take them to mean nothing more than that their dispositions, their
wills are strongly averse, and exceedingly indisposed to certain objects or
proposals. Innumerable instances of such an application and use of the terms
can and cannot occur in common life.

Nor, is such an use of the terms uncommon in the word of GOD. Thus the DEITY
himself says, to express the strong abhorrence which he had of the hypocrisy
of the Jews; Bring no more vain oblations; incense is an abomination unto me;
the new moons and Sabbaths, the calling of assemblies I cannot away with; Isai.
i. 13.
and, to express the strength of parental affection, it is said: Can a woman
forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her
womb? Isai. xlix 15.
To denote a similar kind of impotency, the prophet says; Can a maid forget her
ornaments, or a bride her attire? (...) ii, 32.
In a like sense our Savior used the term, when he said to the Jews, Can the
children of the bride chamber fast while the bridegroom is with them, Mark. ii,
19.
and again; O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things?
Matt. xi, 34.
So likewise; How can ye believe, which receive honor one of another? John v.
44.
Therefore the Apostle Paul, to express the purity of his disposition, and the
strength of his love to the truth, says: For we can do nothing against the
truth, but for the truth. 2 Cor. xiii, 8.
The reverse of this disposition in Paul, we often express by the terms, prone
to evil, and backward to that which is good.

ACCORDINGLY it is said, 1 John, iii, 9. Whosoever is born of GOD does not
commit sin; for his seed remains in him; and he cannot sin, because he is
born of GOD. There is the same reason for considering it as no virtue in those
who are born of GOD, that they cannot sin; as, no vice in those who are not
born of GOD, that they cannot come to CHRIST and believe on him.

NO one imagines that it was no virtue in the Deity that he could not away with
the hypocritical services of the Jews; nor, in Paul, that he could do nothing
against the truth. And yet both these may be imagined, with as much reason, as,
that it is no vice in the sins that he cannot come to CHRIST and believe on
him. That fame cannot which is consistent with the being and nature of virtue,
is likewise consistent with the being and nature of vice. That same kind of
impotency with respect to evil which denotes height of virtue and strength of
goodness; with respect to good must, by a parity of reason, be considered as
denoting a proportionably high degree of vice and strength of wickedness. If it
denotes the perfection of virtue and goodness in GOD, that He cannot away with
wickedness; with equal reason must it denote the entire, perfect wickedness of
the devil, that he cannot away with the exercises and displays of righteousness
and goodness. So, if it was a virtue in Paul that he could not oppose the
truth; it must be a vice in the sinner that he cannot embrace it. He must put a
very odd construction upon language, who understands the term cannot in one
case as designed to heighten the idea and description of the goodness; and, in
the other, to diminish the apprehension of the wickedness. For, if impotency as
to opposition to the truth, is praiseworthy; impotency to embrace and promote
it, must, for the same reason, be criminal. If the strength of disposition to
goodness be such in any one, as that it may, with propriety be said that he
cannot do evil; the strength of disposition to evil in men, may be such as
that, with equal propriety, it may be said they cannot do good. And, by the
same rule whereby the terms, in one case, imply a high degree of virtue; in the
other, they imply a high degree of vice.

THAT the words of our text are to be taken in this latter sense of the terms
can and cannot, is evident from various considerations. Such as,

1 OUR SAVIOR says to the unbelieving Jews: Ye will not come to me that ye
might have life. John v, 40.
And, in the next breath, How can ye believe which receive honor one of
another, and seek not the honor that comes from GOD only? John v, 44.
Their cannot consisted in the obstinacy and opposition of their wills -- their
pride, and love of the praises of men. The impotency in mankind to repent and
believe the gospel, may justly be said to consist in the obstinacy and
opposition of the will, because the language of the gospel is Ho! every one
that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money: Come ye, buy
and eat, yea, come, buy wine and milk, without money, and without price. Isa.
lv. 1.
And, The spirit and the bride say come, and let him that is athirst come, and
whosoever will, let him take of the waters of life freely. Rev. xxii. 1^.
And was there any other impotency or cannot in the sinner, with respect to
embracing CHRIST and believing on him; we could see no consistency in punishing
men for rejecting the offers of the gospel, and treating them as though
impenitency and unbelief were criminal and faulty.

2. ALL the sinner's impotency, with respect to coming to CHRIST and believing
on him, vanishes and is gone, upon his being willing to come, and loving and
approving the character and work of CHRIST. The impotency of the sinner with
respect to receiving and embracing CHRIST, must be supposed to consist in
something which is really an obstacle in the way of his closing cordially with
him. And, when every thing is removed which lies as an obstacle in the way of
CHRIST's being embraced by the sinner; all that wherein consists the impotency
of the sinner in regard to his coming to him, must also, certainly be removed;
-- unless any one should say that the sinner's impotence to come to CHRIST,
consists in something which is no obstacle in the way of his coming.

AND, it is abundantly manifest, that when the sinner feels his heart friendly
to the character and work of JESUS CHRIST, there is no remaining difficulty in
the way of his coming to him and embracing him. The sinner is not called upon
to ascend up into Heaven to bring CHRIST down from above, nor to descend into
the deep, to bring him up again from the dead. Romans x, 6.7.
Was this the condition upon which he might hope for the benefits of his
atonement and intercession, whatever might be the affections of his heart
toward the person and character of CHRIST; there would still remain in him, an
utter impotency and inability to come to him and embrace him. But, this is far
from being the case; for, when the truth concerning the person, offices and
character of CHRIST, is known and understood, and the approbation of the heart
is gained; the salvation of the gospel becomes certain, and is immediately the
object of a sure promise; without the removal of any other obstacle or
inability whatever. The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth and in thy heart:
-- that if thou shall confess with thy mouth the LORD JESUS, and shall believe
in thine heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved.
Romans x, 8 9.
If, indeed, we were called either to ascend or descend in order to bring
CHRIST to us, after all opposition of will and disaffection of heart to his
person and character are removed; there would then really exist a cannot in
regard to coming to him, beside the aversion of the will, the disaffection of
the heart. But, when the salvation itself of the gospel, is connected by a
divine promise, with the belief of the heart and the confession of the mouth;
no impotency in the sinner, with respect to coming to CHRIST, can be conceived
of, after a person is disposed in heart to believe, and with the mouth to
confess him.

3. THAT the impotency of the sinner, with respect to coming to CHRIST,
consists in disaffection of heart, and, that there is no other cannot in the
sinner, in regard to his coming, beside a very strong aversion of will; as
evident from the promises of the gospel. GOD promises all good to asking; and,
there is nothing more than asking required of us, as a condition of receiving.
Thus the promises run, Ask and it shall be given you: Seek and ye shall find:
Knock and it shall be opened unto you. For every one that asks, receives;
and he that seeks, finds: And to him that knocks, it shall be opened.
Mat. vii, 7, 8.
And this we find to be the general tenor of the promises, the invariable
language of the gospel. Passages of the like tenor are too numerous to be
particularly mentioned; and, the point too plain and obvious to require it.
And, we know that there is no obstacle in the way of asking, seeking, etc.
after the mind is become friendly to the salvation of the gospel, and the heart
disposed to receive it. It is easy to see that persons may be so indisposed to
certain objects and things, as that they cannot desire, or seek them; but, when
this disaffection of heart, this aversion of the will to the proposed object,
is removed; every one will readily confess that the person's impotency, his
cannot with respect to desiring, asking and seeking it, is, also, effectually
removed. When any object or good is proposed, and promised to us upon asking;
it is abundantly manifest that there is no impotency in us, with respect to
obtaining it, beside the dislike of the heart, the disapprobation of the will.
There can be no impotency is us, with respect to obtaining the possession of
any good which is promised to every one that asks, beside the heart's
disrelish of the good proposed: And all the cannot which is to be found in us,
in regard to our obtaining it, is the exceeding aversion of our wills from it.
We use the word cannot to denote this sort of impotency, only when the aversion
of the will is very great and exceedingly strong. When the will preponderates
but in a low and small degree, against any object or proposal, we say we are
not willing, we do not choose to comply. But when this preponderancy is great
and strong, and the mind is entirely and exceedingly averse from a compliance;
we then adopt a term which implies a certain kind of impossibility, and say we
cannot comply. It is abundantly evident, therefore, that when any object or
good is promised to us by HIM who connot lie, merely upon our asking; there is,
in reality, no impotency in us in regard to obtaining it, beside a strong
disaffection of heart, and aversion of will, to the nature and qualities of the
proposed object. This being the case, it is manifest that the cannot spoken of
in the text, denotes no other impotency in the sinner, with respect to his
coming to CHRIST, than the exceeding disaffection of his heart, and aversion of
his will, to his character and work.

4. IT is evident, from the scriptures that all the power which GOD puts forth
in drawing men to CHRIST is exerted upon the will and exercised in making men
willing: Therefore, the impotency in sinners, to come to CHRIST, consists in
the aversion of their wills, from coming to him. In this light David considers
the matter, when he says: Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power.
Psa. cx, 3.
So, the Deity says, by the Prophet, concerning Israel, Behold the days come,
says the LORD that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and
with the house of Judah. This is the covenant that I will make with the house
of Israel, after those days, says the LORD, I will put my law in their inward
parts, and write it in their hearts. Jerem. xxxi, ^1. ^^
And again, I will give them one heart, and will put a new spirit within you;
and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart
of flesh, that they may walk in my statutes, and keep mine ordinances and do
them. (...) ^9, ^0.
Nothing farther is necessary to bring men to walk in the ways of the LORD and
keep his statutes and judgments, than a new heart, a heart of flesh, and this
new heart, this heart of flesh, consists wholly in love, true, benevolent
affections. Therefore the power of GOD which is exercised in the conversion of
a sinner, is exerted only upon his will; bowing and subduing that to submission
and love.

WE hear nothing, in the Bible, where it treats of the new creation, of any new
truths revealed to the understanding, or, of any enlargement of the natural
powers or faculties of the soul. The impotency in sinners who are educated
under the light of the gospel, does not consist in want of reason and
understanding, or defect of natural capacities and powers; if it did, a new
heart and a new spirit, that is, new affections and dispositions of mind, would
not of themselves be sufficient, with all that objective light which is held up
in the word of GOD, to bring men to walk in GOD's ways, and be obedient to his
will.

GOD has sufficiently exhibited the character of CHRIST, in his word and works;
and has given us sufficiency of reason and understanding to see and become
acquainted with it. And, we are so framed as that our judgment approves of the
character and work of CHRIST, our consciences tell us that his proposals are
right and reasonable.

THE Deity has, also, so constituted and formed our natures, as that we do
invariably exercise affections toward objects thus brought into our view. What
other powers, or abilities, can possibly be necessary in order to our being
under real obligation to love the LORD JESUS in sincerity; or, in order to
render our disaffection of heart, to him, infinitely criminal and inexcuseable?
No one, it may be presumed, can frame an idea of any powers whatever existing
in human nature, which would render it more suitable, or agreeable to the
dictates of common reason, that men should be under obligation to love GOD.

WE now proceed to enquire,

II. WHETHER this impotency affords any reasonable excuse to the sinner, for
continuing in impenitency and unbelief.

THIS impotency, it is to be kept in mind, consists in a real aversion of the
will from the law of GOD, from holiness, from the character of the LORD JESUS.
It does not consist in such a want of affection and love as is to be found in
inanimate nature, or in the brutal creation: Nor does it consist in such a want
of love, as we often express by the term indifference. Many times the state and
disposition of the mind is such, respecting certain objects and things, as that
it is difficult to determine which way it preponderates, and whether the mind
be pleased or displeased with them; if there is a preponderancy of the
affections, it is, nevertheless, so small as to be scarcely discernable.

SUCH a state of mind as this, is never, in common language, expressed by the
term cannot; but, to denote such an indifferency as this, we always use some
more soft and gentle term -- some word or epithet which denotes a state of mind
considerably removed from every thing to which the ideas of impotency are wont
to be affixed by mankind.

BUT, when the aversion of the will is such that no arts of persuasion will
overcome it, and no motives or reasons will subdue and conquer it; then common
language affords a term which denotes a certain kind of impossibility; and, to
express this exceeding strength of opposition in the will, common sense adopts
it, and, we say we cannot comply with such precepts or proposals.

IT being then remembered that the impotency spoken of in our text, denoted by
the terms no man can come to me, etc. implies a real and exceedingly strong
aversion of the will, in the sinner, from coming unto CHRIST; it is to be
enquired whether this impotency with respect to his coming, affords him any
reasonable excuse for neglecting it.

1. IN human affairs this sort of impotency is never esteemed any excuse. The
parent never excuses his child, nor the master his servant, nor the prince his
subject, upon saying that he cannot submit to his righteous authority, and
government. For the child to say that he could not love his parents or his
brethren, nor could submit to the wholesome rules and regulations of his
family; would be so far from suggesting a reason for disobedience, that it
would manifest its peculiar aggravation. Good and wholesome rules of family and
government, are impracticable only to the obstinacy and perverseness of the
child, or the servant. And obstinacy and perverseness, according to all the
dictates of reason and common sense, and all the methods of human
administration and government, the higher they rise, are the more censurable
and inexcusable. For the child to say that he cannot love and honor his
parents, is so far from suggesting an excuse for his undutifulness, that, above
all things, it shows his need of chastisement and correction, and much more so
does the like plea for undutifulness to GOD: For, our obligations of love and
duty to the supreme GOD, arising from the infinite perfection and purity of his
nature, and the relation which we stand in to him, are infinitely superior to
those of filial duty and affection: And, therefore, a perverseness, an
obstinacy of will in this case, which arises to such a height as to authorize
the use of the term cannot for denoting and expressing it, must surely highly
merit the just judgment and righteous indignation of GOD.

2. GOD himself does not excuse sinners from the obligations of love, on
account of such an impotency as this. The command of GOD to fallen man is, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind. Matt. xxii. 37.
And the law curses every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the law to do them. Gal. iii. 10.
Here we have the judgment of HIM who always judges righteous judgment -- who
weighs every thing in an even balance. Accordingly, we find our Savior
dooming men to eternal destruction, for impenitency and unbelief. Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Luke xiii, 3
If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins John viii, 24.
He that believes not, shall he damned! Mark xvi. 16.
Upon this ground it was that our LORD considered the cities wherein most of
his mighty works had been done, as exposed to a more aggravated condemnation,
at the day of judgment, for their impenitency and unbelief, than Tire and
Sidon, or even Sodom itself. The impotency in the inhabitants of Chorazin,
Bethsaida and Capernaum, to repent and believe, was the same as that which, in
our day, takes place in the sinner's heart. And this impotency, in our
Savior's view, is so far from excusing their infidelity, that it is its
peculiar aggravation. This impotency was much more strong in them, than was
ever manifested or existed in the inhabitants of Tire or Sodom, and therefore
it was that our LORD said; For if the mighty works which have been done in
thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained unto this day. ^


BUT, had it been the sense of HIM in whom are hid the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, who is perfectly acquainted with our frame, and knowing to all the
imperfections and frailties of our nature; that there was any impotency in
fallen man, which rendered the performance of true spiritual service, not a
matter of real duty and obligation; surely, we never should have heard him
dooming those to everlasting ruin for their impenitency and unbelief, who
labored under that same impotency with respect to coming to him, and believing
on him, which is urged by sinners, in our day, as an excuse for their
abominable neglect. Much less, should we find him considering the strength and
greatness of this impotency, as rendering those who labored under it, worthy
of a peculiarly aggravated destruction. The impotency of the inhabitants of
Sodom to repent, really never rose to the height to which it did, in the
inhabitants of Chorazin, Capernaum, etc. And yet, the impenitency of the
latter, was far more criminal than that of the former. Therefore, in the view
of infinite wisdom and justice, that impotency in sinners of mankind, with
respect to holy spiritual service, whereby they cannot come to CHRIST, is so
far from excusing their wickedness, that it is its peculiar aggravation. AND,
to this representation of the matter, the reason of men perfectly corresponds.
For, when a child does not love a wise and tender parent, he is universally
judged to be criminal: But, when his aversion from his parent has arisen to
such a height, that all means and methods to bring him to a sense of his duty,
prove ineffectual, and he plainly declares that he cannot love him, his
wickedness is universally judged to be exceedingly great.

3. It would be very absurd to suppose that disaffection of heart to the true
character of the LORD JHSUS, is excuseable on account of its strength and
greatness. It has been already observed that the term cannot, as it is often
used in scripture, and the phrase no man can, as used in our text, as far as it
relates to the character of the subject, is designed to express an exceeding
strength of opposition of will, to certain objects or proposals. That degree of
disaffection and dislike, which is so weak and low, as not to admit of the term
cannot for expressing it; and which does not generally suggest the idea of any
sort of impossibility; by the common consent of mankind, is universally thought
to partake of the nature of either virtue or vice, according to the several
natures and qualities of its object. And, if such a low degree of backwardness
with respect to coming to CHRIST, as we should not express by a term that
suggested any impossibility in the case, yet, according to the dictates of
common reason, and by the universal consent of mankind is deemed criminal: it
would be very remarkable that this same backwardness of heart with respect to
coming, when it has arisen to such height, and existeth in such strength, as
that, according to the common use of language, it may with propriety be said
thta the subject of it cannot come; should then be deemed innocent and
excuseable. Such a method of reasoning and infering as this, at once confounds
all human rules of computation respecting different degrees of vice, and the
several alleviations or aggravations of crimes. If a low degree of disaffection
to CHRIST is criminal, a higher degree of it must be proportionably more so;
and when the disaffection arises to such a height as to render it impracticable
for the subject of it to come to him, and is of such a strength and malignity
as to require the term cannot fully and properly to express it; neither the
dictates of scripture, nor of common reason, would hesitate a moment to
pronounce it far more vile and criminal. When the disaffection of any one, to
CHRIST, is such as that he cannot come to him, and believe on him, was not his
conscience amazingly stupid and blind, instead of drawing any excuse from this
impotency, he would feel it to be his own wickedness, and that it constituted
the very essence of it, and would, in his conscience, condemn himself to an
everlasting hell for it, when he is endued with reason and understanding to
discern the fitnesses of things; when the infinitely excellent character of the
LORD JESUS is exhibited sensibly to his observation and view; when his judgment
and conscience approve, and pronounce it excellent and perfect in every part:
Then to feel such strength of aversion of will from CHRIST, as that he cannot
come to him and embrace him in his proper character; the sinner would at once
know, was an impotency of a most horrid nature, a crime of the deepest dye,
which of itself rendered him a vessel of wrath fit for nothing but destruction.

IT is, indeed, nothing but abominable stupidity of conscience, and of heart,
that ever suggested that impotency in the sinner with respect to coming to
CHRIST, which is meant to be expressed by the terms, no man can come unto me,
etc. as an excuse for not repenting and believing on the LORD JESUS. And this
excuse, as well as every other that can be invented, the sinner may assuredly
know, like the thin cloud and vapor, before the beams of the rising sun, will
immediately vanish and slay before the clear, full sight which will break in
upon his conscience at the last day.

4. IF this impotency, in the sinner, with respect to coming to CHRIST, affords
any excuse for his impenitency and unbelief, it must be because aversion of
will from the LORD JESUS, and disaffection to his true and real character, are
not sinful. For any one to say this, is the same as to say that it is not in
itself sinful for us to feel heartily opposed to the character and work of
CHRIST, to exercise voluntary opposition to the true GOD.

THERE is, in fact, no impotency in sinners under the Gospel, to repentance and
faith, (which at all affects their moral characters, or has any relation to
their praise worthiness, or criminality) beside what is voluntary and consists
essentially in the opposition of their wills. And to plead this impotency as an
excuse, is to plead wickedness itself as its own excuse.

IF voluntary opposition to GOD is sinful; the sinner's impotence to repent and
believe is sinful; because the very impotence itself consists in voluntary
opposition. And, if voluntary opposition to GOD is sinful, the point of
controversy is certainly determined; for sinfulness itself cannot be excuseable.

THE sinner who pleads this impotency, when the duty and obligation of
repentance and faith are urged upon him, it may be presumed, is not yet become
sensible that he is an enemy to GOD: He is not yet convinced that the feelings,
the voluntary affection of his own heart toward GOD are sinful, or such as
deserve censure and blame. Was the sinner once effectually convinced of this,
his conscience would at once feel the real obligation of repentance; and, this
conviction must immediately disarm him of every excuse. For,

5. IF, voluntary opposition to GOD is not sinful; if real, actual
unwillingness to come to CHRIST, is not criminal, it must be because we are not
in reason answerable to GOD -- because he has no right to command our wills,
and call upon us to love him. To say that we are not blameable for persisting
in impenitency, because GOD does not give us a heart, a will to repent; is the
same as to say, that GOD has no right to command us to repent of sin and love
him, unless at the same time he gives us hearts to comply. And this, every one
must see, is the same as to say, that GOD's commands are not binding upon any
but those to whom he gives hearts to obey. According to such reasoning as this,
it is very obvious, that impenitent sinners cannot righteously be commanded to
repent and believe on the LORD JESUS. And this indeed is the grand object which
the sinner has in view; the darling point to which all his pleas and excuses
tend.

IF the sinner is absolved from the obligation of repentance and faith, by the
consideration that GOD has not given him a heart to repent and believe the
gospel, it is then manifest, of course, that all impenitent sinners are freed
from moral obligation. And, if this is a consideration that dissolves moral
obligation; it must be because GOD has no right to enjoin any thing upon the
creature, beside what he is disposed and has a heart to perform. But, was this
the truth, it would be obvious that the disposition and will of the creature,
must be the only rule and measure of the divine commands; and therefore the
only rule and measure of his duty. This every one may see, is a rule and method
of reasoning* which at once cancels all moral obligation; making the will of
the creature his own and only law; and denying all authority which the Deity
has over men. Such reasonings as these are the suggestions of a heart
impatient of every restraint, and fruitful in inventions for easing the
conscience from every sense of moral obligation.

IF the sinner is indeed under obligations of repentance toward GOD, and faith
toward our LORD JESUS CHRIST, it is utterly in vain to urge any consideration
whatever in excuse of impenitence and unbelief. If GOD, who judges righteous
judgment, considers a rejection of CHRIST as being blameworthy and criminal; it
is plain that* in his view, there is no cannot in the sinner, with respect to
his coming to him, that takes off the obligation of it. The sinner ought to
feel and know therefore, that all his excuses for remaining impenitent, betray
his impatience of the obligation of the divine law; and, undoubtedly have their
origin in a real disposition of heart to annul the judgments of GOD, and break
his bands asunder.

6. TO urge that there cannot be obligation on a creature to love GOD, unless
where the DEITY gives a heart, or disposition to comply with the precepts of
love, is the same as to say that we cannot consent to be creatures, dependent
on GOD, and yet accountable to him. To urge an indisposition of mind to comply
with divine precepts, as an excuse for opposition to them; is to deny the
mutual consistency of dependence and moral obligation. To lay the blame of an
indisposition to obedience, at GOD's door, because a heart or disposition to
obey, is only from GOD; is to urge the consideration of the dependence of the
creature on GOD, as an argument against the obligation of obedience. For, if
the ideas of entire dependence, and of moral obligation, are no ways
inconsistent with each other; the consideration of our being creatures
absolutely dependent on GOD, is certainly no manner of excuse for our being and
continuing enemies to him.

THE excuse, therefore, of cannot, so often urged by the sinner, and so
difficultly yielded up, when the duty of repenting and believing the gospel is
brought into view, really terminates here; and betrays the secret desire, the
latent wishes of his heart, after independence on God. Would we consent to be
creatures, and, in the dispositions and affections of our minds, take our place
accordingly; every difficulty in the way of our coming to CHRIST, would at once
subside, and be removed; and we should then find no cannot with respect to
coming that would be any bar in the way of it, or, for a moment, keep us at a
distance from him.

IT is of the utmost importance, therefore, that the sinner should know and
feel that this excuse is most perfectly insignificant, and infinitely vain:
and, that we should all be effectually persuaded and convinced that our
impotency to love so exalted and glorious a character, is so far from excusing
us, that it is the very thing which constitutes our wickedness, and renders us
so infinitely vile and odious in the pure eyes of the holy GOD. This impotency
is so far from being a reason why the impenitent sinner should not be damned;
that it is the very thing, above all others, on account of which he deserves
everlasting burnings. However the powers and faculties of the human mind may be
supposed to be impaired by the fall; or, whatever debility and weakness may be
derived to mankind from Adam; still, there can be no reasonable objection to
our employing all the powers and faculties which remain, in the service of GOD:
However our powers may be impaired, the duty and obligation of a faithful
improvement of those which are left us, remain still in full force. And, when
we are assured, that if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according
to that a man has, and not according to that which he has not; 2 Cor. viii.
12.
we have, certainly, no reason to complain if we are condemned and punished for
misimproving and abusing the powers and talents of which we are actually
possessed. While we have reason to discern and apprehend the character of the
LORD JESUS, as it is exhibited in his wonderful and glorious work; and judgment
and conscience to approve and decide wholly in its favor; it is, in the nature
of things, impossible that we should not be under obligation to love him with
all our hearts, with all the powers and affections we have; and no impotency,
in the sinner, to this, can possibly exist, beside a disaffection of heart and
will to so pure and holy a character: which, by the terms, is the very reverse
of duty (what is duty for the sinner) and therefore is the very essence of his
wickedness -- the thing itself for which he deserves the eternal displeasure of
the infinite GOD.

THIS brings us to enquire,

III. WHENCE arises the necessity of divine and almighty power, the special
influences of the spirit of God, in order to bring men to repent, and believe
on the Lord JESUS CHRIST. Our text says, "No man can come to me, except the
Father which has sent me draw him." In order to understand the true ground of
the necessity of special divine influences in bringing men to CHRIST, we may
observe the following things. Such as,

1. No effect ever takes place without some sufficient and adequate cause. It
is an acknowledged maxim, that every effect requires a cause; and that such an
one as is adequate to it, and sufficient for the production of it. If this
point be given up, almost all principles of reasoning are, at once unhinged;
and we are set at loose from all certainty respecting the most important and
acknowledged truths. All created existence is the effect of divine and almighty
power; an effect to the production of which nothing short of omnipotence is
adequate. It is the prerogative of GOD, proper and peculiar to him, to create
and, out of nothing produce existence. So that wherever we behold created
existence, we have an infallible, never failing proof of divine almighty power.
No existence, either in whole or in part, creates itself. In this sense every
thing, every effect, requires almighty power.

2. The sinner's coming to CHRIST is an effect to which nothing is adequate, as
a cause, beside the drawings of the FATHER: This is an effect only of the
special influences of the spirit of GOD. That divine power whereby GOD
effects mere creation -- whereby he produced the material system, our natural
world into existence: is wholly inadequate to such an effect. Yea, that divine
power whereby GOD alone forms moral nature, brings men into being and upholds
them in existence, is not a cause equal to the production of holiness in a
sinner's heart. This power alone, in however high a measure it is exerted will
not bring a sinner to repent, and believe on the LORD JESUS. The peculiar glory
even of the power of GOD, appears in the new creation: And, this new creation
never takes place otherwise than as an effect of the special influences of the
spirit of GOD. Therefore, they who receive CHRIST and believe on him, are
represented as being born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of
the will of man, but of GOD. John i. 13. And our SAVIOR says that except a
man be born of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of GOD.
John iii, 5. GOD, in bringing men to CHRIST, draws them with the cords of a
man, with bands of love. Hosea xi. 4. And it is not in the heart of man to come
to CHRIST, unless he is thus drawn of GOD.

3. That, on the sinner's part, which alone renders the special influences of
the spirit of GOD, necessary and essential to his coming to CHRIST, is
obstinacy of will and disaffection of heart. When we speak of the necessity of
the exertion of some special influence on a creature who is every way furnished
with abilities and powers for moral action, in order to bring him to a
compliance with the dictates of reason and right; with duty and obligation; it
naturally awakens an apprehension of something in the sinner himself, lying as
an obstacle or bar in the way of his compliance with his duty. There is nothing
in the sinner, which lies as a bar in the way of his repenting and believing
the gospel, beside this enmity and obstinacy of will. Enmity of heart,
therefore, against GOD, opposite of will to the LORD JESUS, to his character
and work; are what alone, on the sinner's part, render special, divine,
spiritual influences necessay to his being brought to repentance toward GOD,
and faith toward our LORD JESUS CHRIST. Such is the enmity and wickedness of
the hearts of sinners, as that it is not in them to come to CHRIST unless the
Father draws them.

GOD, by his almighty power, continually upholds every one of us in being: He
gives us reason and judgment to see and understand, and know that we ought to
love him; but we will not. Therefore his almighty, spiritual power must be put
forth in order to bring us to it. For this reason it is that no man can come to
CHRIST, except the Father draw him. Man has such an aversion of will from
coming, that it is not in him to come. And when our SAVIOR says that no man
can come, etc. he is so far from designing to furnish the sinner with an excuse
for impenitency and unbelief, that his words are excellently calculated to
bring the wickedness of the impenitent sinner very fully and sensibly into his
view. Nothing gives us so striking a view of the exceeding strength of
opposition there is, in sinners hearts, to CHRIST, as to hear it represented by
him who is the true and faithful witness, as being such that, according to the
common use of terms, it may properly be said that he cannot come unto him: For
this teaches us, that there is not only some degree of opposition, but an
exceeding strength of enmity, in the carnal heart against the LORD JESUS CHRIST.

IMPROVEMENT.
1. WHAT has been said on this subject, teaches us, that converting grace,
when first bestowed upon a sinner, is always both an unsought and an unpromised
favor. What is said respecting the Gentile world, is also equally true of
every one whom divine grace overtakes, and whom GOD brings home into his
kingdom, that he is sought of them that asked not for him, that he is found of
them that sought him not. Isaiah lxv, 1.

IN a person who is so opposed to CHRIST as that he cannot come to him, it is
in vain to expect any asking or seeking after him. We never ask or seek after
that which is wholly disagreeable to us; much less, if possible, after that
which is freely offered to us without money and without price, to which we have
such an exceeding strength of aversion and opposition of will, as that we
cannot accept and embrace it. To teach and exhort, therefore, impenitent
sinners, to seek and pray for converting, regenerating grace, under an
apprehension that they are rather inclined to comply with such directions, than
actually to repent and believe the gospel, must certainly arise from a wrong
apprehension of the nature of that impotency there is in sinners respecting
repentance and faith. And not only so, but such kind of directions must also,
exceedingly tend to blind the sinner both with respect to his own character and
duty, and keep out of view the real opposition and enmity of his heart against
GOD.

TO encourage sinners to hope that there are any promises in the word of GOD,
to any askings or seekings which are not of faith, is to encourage them to
trust in a refuge of lies: For, when we are directed to ask, we are, at the
same time, directed to ask in faith, nothing wavering, and told that he that
wavereth, is like a wave of the sea, driven with the wind and tossed* And then,
to let us know how vain all such asking is, the Apostle adds, let not that man
think that he shall receive any thing of the LORD. James i. 6, 7.

2. WE see, in what has been said on this subject, a reason why the divine law
should loose none of its demands on sinners; and why there should be no
relaxation of its binding force and authority. If the circumstances and
impotency of sinners were such as that reason would plead a relaxation of its
demands upon us since the fall, and common sense dictate the propriety and
importance of it; it would be exceedingly difficult for us to discern the
necessity or wisdom of the atonement; or, see it to be even consistent for
CHRIST to come to magnify the law and make it honorable: For, on the other
hand, this design of the coming of CHRIST directly combats the principle which
urges the reasonableness of a relaxation, in the demands of the law, on
account of the impotency there is in fallen men to comply with them.

If the demands of the divine law were above what in reason, could be required
of fallen creatures; the essential righteousness and goodness of GOD, would
have been sufficient security for all reasonable abatements, without the death
of CHRIST, or any price paid as a ransom from the power of too severe and rigid
a law. But, now all the original demands of the law upon mankind are kept up,
because we have lost no powers of obedience, which can, in the least measure,
excuse us from the obligations of it.

SOME seem to imagine that the right which the Deity has to bind us to real
holiness and the perfection of it according to our measure, in our present
fallen state, arises from the consideration of the sufficiency of powers with
which human nature was originally endowed, without any regard to the nature and
extent of the present powers of mankind. Accordingly we often hear it said,
that GOD has not lost his right to command, though man has his power to obey;
than the which few sentences have ever been invented that were more directly
calculated to relieve and stupify the conscience of the secure sinner. For, in
the first place, though reason teaches us that for any one voluntarily to
deprive himself of his original powers of obedience, is in itself criminal, and
deserving of punishment; yet this is a crime which, on the present supposition,
is chargeable on no one of mankind except the first of the race. This therefore
is a crime from which every one of the fallen race of men are taught, by the
sentence under consideration, to consider themselves as entirely free. And, in
the second place, it is utterly impracticable, even by all the arts of subtilty
of which the most practiced critic is possessed, ever to convict the conscience
of sin, for not exerting and employing powers of which the person was never in
any meassure possessed. For, reason teaches us that the servant is not criminal
for neglecting to run, at the master's command after he has dislocated his
joints or broken his bones; though he may be for his carelessness, or violence
offered to himself, in breaking his legs. And, although, in the third place,
the sinner should be persuaded to believe that, by some certain law or
constitution of government, he is holden to punishment for not exerting powers
of which he never was possessed, and of which Adam alone, was guilty of the
crime of depriving him; yet, he never will feel himself deserving of it: And,
his consciousness of innocence will be as balm to the soul, molifying and
healing every wound that is inflicted on him.

IS it possible for any one who considers this as the ground of his
exposedenesss to future punishment, to feel his need of an infinite atonement,
and be brought to look only to boundless mercy, and sovereign grace, for
relief? Is this that sense of sin and conviction of guilt, which prepares the
mind for discerning the excellency of the gospel, and the glory of the
mediatorial work and character? And are these the doctrines adapted by infinite
wisdom, and awaken the consciences of sinners, and bring their own characters,
in all their pollution and deformity, into their view? Certainly no: But, on
this supposition, the gospel can only be, as it was heretofore to the Jews, a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks, foolishness. Under the influence of such
instructions and apprehensions as these, it will be utterly impracticable for
the sinner ever to attain to such a sense of sin as is altogether necessary to
his heartily embracing the gospel.

GOD's law, and his right to command, remain in full force because nothing is
now required of us but what it is infinitely fit and reasonable that we should
perform. This, and this only, is the true ground and criterion of right, on
GOD's part, and obligation on our's. The Deity now requires nothing more than a
rational, faithful improvement of the powers, opportunities and talents which
we actually have; and all this was required of Adam. And the whole difference,
in a moral view, between Adam in innocence, and his fallen race is, that the
former was disposed to this proper improvement of his talents and powers, but
the latter are not. By an unwillingness to obey, every consideration concurs to
evince, that GOD does not lose his right to command; much less, if possible,
when the opposition of the will to obedience, arises to such a height as to
authorize the use of the term cannot in order fully and properly to express it.

However the natural force and vigor of the human mind may be abated by the
fall, no reason can be given why we should not be required to love the LORD our
GOD with all our heart, and soul, and strength and mind. No reasonable
objection can be made against the law which requires us to love the DEITY in
proportion to the views under which he is actually exhibited to our
understandings, and the dictates of our own consciences respecting his
worthiness of love. And this is all that the divine law now requires, or that
it did originally require of man, nor is it to be supposed that any one,
without this conviction of his own obligation, and his real criminality for
neglecting to comply with it, can ever discern the glory of the gospel, or
behold the beauty, and relish the character of the LORD JESUS CHRIST. And that
person, whoever he is, that is settled down in a hope of his own good estate,
and yet never has been convinced that even now, in his fallen state, he is
under all imaginable obligation actually to love GOD with his whole soul; and,
that the real criminality and sinfulness of every exercise of his own affection
and heart which is, in its nature and tendency, opposed to such a love,
requires an infinite atonement to make it consistent for even goodness itself
to forgive him, has only the hope of he hypocrite, which will soon perish; and
all his religion will vanish before the light of eternity, like the thin cloud
and vapor before the beams of the rising sun.

3. IF the sinner's impotency to holy duty consists in the obstinacy of his
will, the aversion of his heart from the commands of the word of GOD, it is
manifest that there is no reason why he should not be called to immediate
repentance and faith. When there is no other reason of the sinner's
impenitence, than his voluntary opposition to it, there can, surely, be no
reason why the calls, invitations and directions of the gospel, should
terminate on any thing short of true, hearty submission and repentance. And,
for the Deity to give directions to any thing short of repentence and faith, as
a term or medium whereby to obtain his favor and his farther gracious
assistance, in consideration of human impotency to real repentance and faith,
would be at least a tacit acknowledgment of the validity and justice of the
hardened, obstinate sinner's plea; and would therefore suppose it an
unrighteous thing for sinners to be damned for impenitency and unbelief.

WHEN we see the righteous commands of a parent disregarded by the rebellious
child, and hear the fond mother, in order to save appearances, and preserve at
least the air of authority, lowering her demands till she brings them down to a
level with the perverse disposition and inclination of the child; it fills us
with a just indignation. And what better or more honorable do they think of the
DEITY who imagine that his original demands of true and supreme love, are
abated, on account of the perverse disposition and inclinations of the sinner,
and his calls and directions now softened and lowered down to the level of the
sinner's present disposition; so that GOD now, immediately requires nothing of
the impenitent sinner but what it may comport with his impenitent disposition
to perform. Nothing is more grateful to the impenitent sinner, than to hear
himself directed to some exercises and doings short of real repentence as a
means or condition of finding favor with GOD; because he feels that every such
direction evidently justifies the excuse which he makes for remaining
impenitent, drawn from his impotence respecting true repentence: And it
incourages him to hope for peace of conscience upon such doings and
performances as may comport with his present utter indisposition to the love of
GOD, and aversion from it. And, if peace of conscience, and hope of security,
are to be obtained at so easy a rate as this; the sinner will naturally think
that the urgency of the case is not very great and pressing; but, even these
doings and performances may be deferred to some more convenient opportunity.
And yet, how often do we hear impenitent sinners directed to a tedious round of
ungracious doings and duties, as the prescribed means of conversion, and the
condition of GOD's bestowing converting grace upon them: while the reason
alleged for such directions, is the present weak and impotent state of human
nature with respect to truly gracious exercises and holy duties.

WHAT can be more reproachful to the holy and just GOD, than to suppose either
that he required an infinite price paid to him, before he would suffer himself
to be prevailed on to abate any thing of those demands which nevertheless,
could not with reason be kept up upon depraved, fallen men, on account of their
impotence to comply with them; or, that the influence of the atonement upon the
divine mind was such, as to dispose the DEITY to yield a little in his demands,
on account of the extreme backwardness and indisposition of the sinner to obey?
And, yet, it is abundantly evident that either the one or the other of these
suppositions, or something similar to them, is certainly implied in the opinion
that any of the directions of the word of GOD to sinners, have, for their
object, any thing short of true, genuine, cordial love.

4. WE may infer, from what has been said on this subject, that the sinner who
feels, and is really convinced that this impotency to come to CHRIST, is his
own fault, his crime, will never mention it as an excuse. People are never wont
to mention the crime itself as it is own excuse: Such sort of pleas are
proscribed by common sense, and the universal consent of mankind. When we plead
an excuse of a crime, it is something distinct from the crime itself. If the
sinner's impotency to come to CHRIST is his own wickedness, it is an affront to
the great GOD, to his law, and to his son, JESUS CHRIST, for him to mention it
in any other view than as condemning himself for it. What would the parent
think of the child who should say that he could not submit to the wholesome
rules and regulations of the family -- that he could not be subject to parental
authority? He would be so far from considering this as any tolerable excuse,
that he would infer from it, the child's need of severe discipline and
correction. What, then, must the DEITY, the just and holy GOD, think of the
sinner, when he hears him say that he cannot repent of his sins, and cannot
love the LORD JESUS? For the sinner to say that he cannot repent of his sins,
is to express the exceeding strength of his love to sin, and the amazing
attachment of his own heart to his lusts. And to say that he cannot love the
LORD JESUS CHRIST, it to express the strong, unconquerable aversion of his mind
and will from him.

DID sinners themselves view the matter in this light, (as they certainly would
do, were not their consciences exceedingly stupid and blind) we never should
hear them hold such a language as this, or talk in a strain so exceedingly
daring and provoking. To say that we cannot repent of our sins, and cannot come
to CHRIST; and plead this at the same time, as an excuse for not repenting and
believing; is directly to fly in the face of the GREAT GOD, of his law, and of
the glorious SAVIOR of sinners. He that can talk in such a strain as this, and
derive peace and quiet from this excuse, we may rely upon it, has never yet
been convinced, even in conscience, that he is a sinner. For, if it is not our
own fault, our wickedness, that we do not repent and believe the gospel, where
can wickedness be found? If it is not our own fault that we do not repent and
believe, we are certainly not sinful, on account of impenitence and unbelief:
that is, our impenitence and unbelief are not our sin. And, if we are not
sinners in this respect, certainly we are not in any other. And it cannot be
that in this respect we are sinners, if that impotency with respect to
repentence and faith, which is usually expressed by the term cannot, be a
reasonable excuse for impenitence and unbelief.

THUS does this excuse of cannot, so often in the sinner's mouth, instead of
manifesting any degree of awakening, respecting the things of religion, or any
just apprehensions of things, discover the exceeding stupidity of his
conscience, and a very high degree of carnal ease and security. The danger of
such, and the wretchedness of their condition, is greater and more dreadful
than can be imagined. And, unless it shall please GOD to strike such light and
conviction into their deluded minds, their blinded consciences, as shall make
them feel and know that this cannot, with respect to their repenting and
believing, is their own sin and infinite wickedness; and, in this way,
effectually shut their mouths, so that they dare not open them in such an
excuse, they will infallibly perish, and be sealed over to eternal destruction.

HOW must the sinner appear in the eyes of that GOD who weighs every thing in
an even balance, whose commandments are all holy and just and good, when HE
requires him to love that which is, in itself, infinitely lovely and excellent,
and most perfectly worthy of our love; yet freely declaring and protesting that
he cannot love him, that it is not in his power to do it; and urging this
cannot, at the same time, as an excuse for remaining an enemy to God!
Certainly, such wickedness as this can be equalled by nothing but the patience
and goodness of GOD, on the other hand, in sparing, forgiving and saving
sinners.

5. FOR sinners to be directed to any thing short of repentance toward GOD, and
faith toward our Lord JESUS CHRIST; or any thing to be done, or duty to be
performed, any otherwise than in the exercise of a humble, penitent and broken
heart; evidently encourages his vain confidence, and manifestly implies that
his impotency affords him some degree of reasonable excuse. Paul considers all
mankind as being without excuse for not glorifying GOD as GOD. He says, that
the invisible things of Him, from the creation of the world, are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
godhead; so that they are without excuse. Romans i. 20. Paul was, by no means,
unacquainted with the impotency of human nature, and, no man was more deeply
and effectually convinced of the necessity of special, divine and almighty
power, in order to bring sinners to repent and believe the gospel; and yet we
find that he considers even the heathen themselves as being without excuse in
their opposition to GOD. Accordingly, in his preaching, we find no directions
to any thing short of real hatred to sin, and love to CHRIST; or, which can be
complied with, without the exercise of supreme love to GOD.

WHENEVER sinners find themselves directed to any thing which may be performed
in the exercise of their present impenitent tempers, they immediately loose
sight of the obligation of repentence and faith. And, when any doings or
performances short of repenting and believing, are directed to as the appointed
way and means of obtaining God's favor; the direction naturally diminishes the
importance of repentence and faith; and makes the sinner less sensible of the
obligation and necessity of true, cordial submission to a sovereign GOD.

FOR a sinner to be advised and directed to any thing, as a means of obtaining
GOD's favor, or converting grace, or any thing with which the favor of GOD is
connected, short of a hearty turning from sin to GOD; will naturally give him
to think that he is excused from the obligation of immediate repentance and
turning unto GOD: He must, in such a case, surely, think himself excused from
the obligation of repenting, until he has done something else, And, when, or
where such directions will land him upon the duty of immediate repentance, is
extremely uncertain. The sinner will naturally conclude that his adviser does
not consider real repentance as his present duty, or matter of present
obligation, if he does, why does he advise, direct or exhort to something else,
-- something entirely short of it, and of a quite different nature from it? If
there were any such directions as these, in the bible, sinners would naturally
and necessarily feel themselves encouraged and countenanced in present
impenitence; and be strengthened in their apprehensions of the reasonableness
of urging their impotency to repent and believe, as an excuse. Whenever,
therefore, the preachers of the gospel give such directions as have for their
object something short of a hearty repentance and turning to GOD, they really
countenance and encourage the vain and idle excuses of the sinner; and so long
as any thing short of cordial submission and love, is pointed out as the way of
duty; and an appointed means of the recovery and salvation of the sinner; it
will be impossible for the sinner to find his own way on every side hedged up,
and himself absolutely dependent on a sovereign GOD. Nothing can more directly
tend to keep the true and real character, both of the DEITY, and of the sinner,
out of view, than such kind of directions and exhortations as these. They
naturally represent the holy GOD as considering it but a fit and reasonable
thing that some kind of allowance should be made on account of the impotency
and weakness under which mankind labor since the fall; and his mercy to be of
such a nature and quality, as to incline him to look with a favorable eye,
upon those doings, exercises and strivings of the sinner, which are wholly
destitute of every degree of love, and wholly void of every thing that
partakes, even in the lowest measure, of any submission to GOD, or concern for
his honor and glory. Thus is the grace of GOD made an excuse for continuing in
sin. And not only so, but they also teach the sinner to consider himself as
complying with present obligation, and fulfilling it, without hearty repentance
and turning to GOD. And, so long as a person views himself in this favorable
point of light, how is it possible he should see himself a lost, miserable,
undone sinner? Under the influence of such doctrines and directions as these,
how is it possible that sinners should ever be convinced of their voluntary
enmity against GOD, and opposition of heart to the proposals and invitations of
the gospel.

HOW can the sinner under an apprehension that he complieth with his present
duty, by something short of repentance and a hearty turning to GOD, because of
the impotence brought upon him by the fall, ever embrace the sacrifice of
CHRIST in any other view than as an atonement for that impotence, and not, for
his own personal sin and wickedness. And, were this in fact the case, (which
such kind of exhortations and directions as are now under consideration, are
admirably adapted to encourage the sinner to hope and believe that it is) what
a view would it exhibit of the nature of the law and government of GOD, of the
character of the sinner, and of the design and end of the death and sufferings
of CHRIST! a view shocking indeed to every friend to CHRIST, and infinitely
dangerous and hazardous to the sinner.

6. WE may infer, from what has been said on this subject, the great
importance of sinner's being effectually convinced that their impotency to
repent and believe the gospel, is really their own fault, their wickedness.
When this impotency is alleged by sinners as an objection against their being
urged and called upon to real holiness and nothing else, it is obvious that
they are not convinced that it is any crime in them to be totally impotent as
to holy, spiritual love. And, so long as this impotence to repent is considered
only in the light of a calamity, not as a crime, it is abundantly manifest,
that the sinner can never feel himself deserving of eternal damnation for his
impenitency; or, that it would be a just and equitable thing in GOD, eternally
to damn him for his impenitence and unbelief. So long, therefore, as this is
the view he entertains of the matter, he will necessarily feel his heart
opposed to that GOD, whose fixed purpose it is eternally to punish sinners for
impenitency and unbelief.

UNDER such views as these, and in such a state of mind as this, how unprepared
is the sinner to embrace the gospel, or to behold its glory! How unprepared to
trust in the mercy of GOD, and that through a Savior who came not to destroy
the law, but to fulfill. Very low and degrading must the sinner's apprehension
be of the divine mercy, while he entertains such views as these: and very
dishonorable and shocking, of the nature and end of the undertaking and coming
of CHRIST. To such are most applicable the words of our blessed LORD, to the
proud, self righteous Pharisees; They that are whole have no need of a
physician, but they that are sick; I came not to call the righteous but sinner
to repentance. Mark ii. 17. If their eyes are not opened to see themselves to
be sinners in a very different manner from what they now do, they have no
relief to expect for themselves, from the LORD JESUS CHRIST. Duty, therefore,
to GOD, a concern for the prosperity and glory of the Redeemer's kingdom, and
love to the souls of men, all concur to urge the vast importance and
obligation, of pressing continually and incessantly upon the sinner, the
indispensible and absolute necessity of repentance toward GOD, and faith toward
our LORD JESUS CHRIST, as the only term or condition upon which the word of GOD
gives him the least encouragement to hope for GOD's favorable notice and
regards.

7. IS it so, indeed, that nothing but divine and almighty power ever does, or
can, bring the sinner to repent and believe the gospel; hence let impenitent
sinners see the dreadful, undone state and condition in which they are really
involved. You are, in every respect under that divine law which requires you
immediately and perpetually to love the LORD your GOD with all your heart; and
that on pain of eternal damnation. The obligation of this law is perpetually
binding upon you, and incessantly urging and pressing and pursuing you, and
this with the whole weight of the authority of the GREAT GOD -- with all the
binding force and obligation that the authority of JEHOVAH himself can give it:
And you, at the same time, under the power of such an invincible obstinacy,
such an unconquerable aversion of will, from even the least degree of
compliance, as nothing but divine power itself, can subdue and overcome! O
sinner, how dreadfully wretched and dangerous indeed is your condition! How
inexpressibly evil and odious is your character in the sight of GOD! Surely you
are in the hands of an absolutely sovereign GOD. On his pleasure alone is your
eternal state suspended: And on him alone does it depend, whether you shall be
brought to dwell with him, in Heaven; or, be sent to an eternal hell. His
decree, his pleasure, will fix your fate for eternity. Oh! that you might see
and feel this; as until then, there can be no hope of you! Come, then, and bow
to his glorious sovereign; acknowledge your own offense, and seek his face. Do
not any longer, justify yourselves and quarrel with GOD: But kiss the son lest
he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a
little: Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

The END.

