THE SOVEREIGN DECREES OF GOD, SET IN A SCRIPTURAL LIGHT, AND Vindicated
against the Blasphemy contained in a late Paper, entitled, On Traditionary Zeal.

In a LETTER to a FRIEND.

SHALL HE THAT CONTENDETH WITH THE ALMIGHTY, INSTRUCT HIM?

HE THAT REPROVES GOD, LET HIM ANSWER IT!

JOB XL. 2. BOSTON: Printed by J. KNEELAND, in Milk-Street, for PHILIP FREEMAN,
in Union-Street. MDCCLXXIII.

A Vindication of the sovereign Decrees of God.
Beloved Friend,
ALTHOUGH we should endeavor to avoid all needless contention, yet the faith
once delivered to the saints, is sometimes treated in such a manner, as to make
it our incumbent duty, earnestly and publicly to contend for it. Such a case I
think is presented before us, by means of a printed paper lately spread in
Providence, and towns adjacent, which you have requested me to make some
remarks upon. It begins in this manner.

On Traditionary Zeal. Some good christian pastors will not scruple to tell
you, that they could find no joy in their own state, no strength or comfort in
their labors of love toward their flocks, but because they know, and are
assured, from St. Paul, that God never had, nor ever will have, mercy upon all
men; but that an unknown multitude of them are, through all ages of the world,
inevitably decreed to the eternal fire and damnation of hell: and that an
unknown number of others are elected to a certain, irresistible salvation.
Wonder not, my friends, if the inquisition has its pious defenders: For
inquisition cruelty, and every barbarity that must have an end, is mere mercy,
if compared with this reprobation doctrine. And to be in love with it, to draw
sweet comfort from it, and to wish it God-speed, is a love that absolutely
forbids the loving our neighbor as ourselves, and makes the scripture-wish,
that all men might be saved, no less than a rebellion against God.

This writer's evident design, is against the doctrine of particular election,
and efficacious grace in our salvation, and against those who preach it: And he
takes the same method that the heathen persecutors did with the primitive
christians, viz. To cover them with skins of wild beasts, in order that they
might be devoured by dogs, or if not, yet that they might be hated and avoided
by all men. He asserts that some christian pestors tell their people such a
story as he has here related; if he can find any man upon earth that teaches
so, he is welcome to correct him as much as he deserves; but till he exhibits
his proof, he ought to be accounted a blasphemer of God's sovereignty, and a
false-accuser of Christ's ministers. Yea, out of his own mouth he is condemned;
for as short as his paper is, he has not been able to keep to one consistent
story, but the same preachers that he accuses of rejoicing that God never will
have mercy upon all men, when he comes to give us their own language, it is, "O
the sweetness of God's election!" And neither the devil nor any of his
children, will ever be able to make a rejoicing in God's everlasting love to a
chosen number, to be the same thing, as it would be to rejoice in the
destruction of the rest.

Our Lord says, Every one that does evil, bateth the light; but he that does
truth, comes to the light; and let the reader judge which of these characters
suits the conduct of the writer before us. He casts out these horrid
accusations against some good christian pastors, without naming any one, while
his evident aim is against all that profess a sweetness in sovereign election;
at the same time (like the Savages) he tries to keep himself and his principles
hid. -- Though it fares with him as it did with the old enemies of the sure
foundation which God has laid in Zion; whose bed was shorter than that a man
could stretch himself upon it, and the covering narrower than that he could
wrap himself in it, Isa. 28. For though by the title of his piece he would have
people esteem him, as a bold champion against tradition, and a friend to Paul,
and the sacred writings; yet he does not so much as attempt to prove, that
sovereign decrees, and irresistible grace, are not fully taught by them. No,
instead of confuting us, or desending himself, by the sacred oracles, he, like
those who prophesied out of the deceit of their own hearts, first makes his
address to men's passions, and exerts all his art to bring up the horrid ideas,
of an inevitable decreeing of multitudes to hell fire; of cruelty vastly worse
than the inquisition; of God's sacrifysing of myriads of his creatures to the
devil, etc. and having done his utmost thus to raise a tempest in the souls of
(...) he winds up by asserting that, The only possible way of avoiding every
prevailing error, and of finding every saving truth, is to listen, solemnly,
attentively to listen, agreeable to the written word, to the still small voice
within you.

This is just like the old serpent, who with malicious reflections upon God's
government, and lying pretenses of friendship to man, drew him into rebellion
against God's revealed will, and to gratify his own heart's lusts. Yet from
that day to this, when the tempter thinks it will serve his turn, he is very
ready to catch at some scripture words, to entice people into violations of the
truth which is therein taught.

Let the pretended advocate for truth now before us, mean what he will by the
voice within, yet when he or any others are brought solemnly and attentively to
listen, either to reason, conscience, or the Spirit of God, they will teach
them, that the way to avoid error, and to find the truth in any case, is not
first to inflame our passions before our judgments are well informed. No, for a
gift will blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous;
therefore we must have our eye single, or else our whole body will be full of
darkness. Hence appears the necessity of the holy Spirit, to renew us in the
spirit of our minds, and to guide our souls into all truth.

The grand contest ever since sin entered into the world, has been between the
will of the Creator, and the will of the creature; but as it is too shocking
for human nature to have it openly appear in that light, God's enemies in all
ages, have made lies their refuge, and under falsehood have hid themselves. And
in the controversy before us, we may take notice of the following refuges of
lies, which the enemies of sovereign grace try to hide themselves in.

1. As the sacred writers often appealed to men's reason and conscience, and
exhorted the saints to regard the teachings of the holy Spirit in their souls,
above all human authority on earth, deceivers of various denominations have
caught at, and perverted that sacred custom, as a plea for setting up a
standard in themselves to decide every case, so as not to admit any thing for
truth that does not agree with their inward test. But it is well known in our
nation, that in order for us to enjoy our just rights and liberties, rulers as
well as subjects must be governed by known laws and established rules; and that
for judges to assume a discretionary power to dispense with old laws, or to
make new ones as occasion served, would introduce arbitrary government, or
rather a cruel tynanny. And were not people deluded with the religious names,
and great swelling words of deceivers, all their attempts to set up a voice
within, which speaks in any respects contrary to God's written word, would
appear as arbitrary and tyrannical as any such proceedings of earthly judges
can be. Those holy men whom God employed to write his word, had their authority
so to do confirmed by diverse miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost; and woe to
that man who presumes either to add to, or take from those holy oracles.

2. The advocates for their own free will in opposition to sovereign grace,
have determined that the doctrine of fixed decrees in the divine mind
concerning the future state of men, is inconsistent with the liberty of their
own wills, and with the proper influence of precepts and promises, rewards and
punishments; and having quoted a number of precepts, with considerations to
enforce them, (of which the Bible is full) they boast that they have gained
their argument, when in truth they have never touched the point in debate. We
know and as firmly hold as any free-willer on earth, that all men are under
moral government, where precepts and promises, exhortations, warnings, etc.
have their proper place, and ought to influence us in all our conduct; and I
believe from the bottom of my heart, that God never did nor ever will punish
any but the guilty, and that he will finally reward every man according to his
works. But in the present controversy, the true state of the question is this,
viz. Whether the whole plan of God's government, and the final issue of every
action through the universe, has not been known and fixed in his counsels from
the beginning, so that nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it?
Eccl. 3.14. Or whether many events are not held in suspense and uncertainty in
his infinite mind, till they are decidedby the free will power of men? We hold
the first, they the last side of this question. But instead of attending to the
true state of the controversy, and instead of referring the decision of it to
the divine oracles, tradition and corruption has carried them into the way
which this writer persues, of representing our doctrine to be, that God decrees
some men to misery in the same manner that he does others to happiness; yea
this slanderer, in imitation of those who have gone before him, sets
reprobation foremost, and would have people believe that we hold, God's first
design to be the damnation of multitudes, and then secondly, the irresistible
salvation of a number! Hoping no doubt by these horrid colorings, to guard
people sufficiently against all the gospel weapons, which are appointed to pull
down the strong holds that are raised against the knowledge of God, and to cast
down the imaginations which keep men's thoughts too high to yield their all to a
meek and lowly Jesus, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Many in latter ages have carried their
imaginations so high on this subject, as,

3. To assume a dignity to themselves, that they will not allow to the eternal
God; for they claim a selfdetermining power in their own wills, while they deny
it to the Most High; and insist upon it, that his choice of some men to
salvation rather than others, is from either a foresight, or aftersight, of
good dispositions and good doings in them more than others; so making that to
be the cause of his choice, which he declares is the effect of it, and
representing that God is influenced in his works by motives without himself, at
the same time that they hold to a power to determine all their own actions
within themselves. Can any imaginations ever be entertained, more absurd, or
more contrary to holy writ, than these are! See Mat. 11.25 -- 28. Romans 8.29,
30. Ephesians. 1.4, 5. 1 Pet. 1.2. 1 John 4.19.

The people we are now speaking of commonly deny the doctrine of man's universal
depravity, but if to claim a sovereignty to their own wills, while they deny it
to God, does not prove them to be rebels against heaven, I know not what can do
it.

Nebuchadnezzar made trial how it would do to ascribe all his atchievments to
himself; but after he had grazed among the beasts of the field till seven times
had passed over him, he declares that, All the inhabitants of the earth are
reputed as nothing (before the Most High) and he does according to HIS WILL in
the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay
his hand, or say unto him, what do thou? Dan. 4.35. Thus it appears that the
hearts of kings are in the hand of the Lord, so that as rivers of water he
turns them whithersoever he will. i. e. to act voluntarily as he designs to
have them. From whence it appears evident, that there is no inconsistency in
holding God's decrees to be immutable, and yet that men act as voluntarily as
if it were not so. And the great reasoners on the other side cannot avoid this
consequence, if they would once own that the will of man is always determined
in it is choice by motive, or by what they at present prefer and think to be
best; for that person must be stupid indeed who cannot see, that HE in whom we
live, move and have our being, can at any time set things in such a view before
our minds, as to make us think it best to chose one way of acting rather than
another. Though Balaam was so madly set after the wages of unrighteousness,
that he would not be (...) even by the reproof of a dumb ass, yet when the Lord
opened his eyes to see the angel with a drawn sword before him, he at once
choose to fall to the earth, or to turn back, rather than run upon it. Number.
22.31, etc. In order therefore to keep up their conceit that fixed decrees
interfere with men's (...), some of their great doctors have,

4. Tried to shelter themselves in such a miserable refuge as to pretend, that
they have a power in their (...) to act (...) motive or against motive, just as
the will please^. But I suppose it is as great a piece of nonsense, in itself,
to hold that a rational soul can act voluntarily in any case, without of
against motive, as (...) would be to (...). There can be a rational action
without any influence of reason in it! Thus professing themselves to be wise
they become fools; for as Mr. Lock (...) observes, even (...) persons are
influenced by reason, (...) reason from wrong (...). As when (...) man imagines
that he is all made of glass, he is (...) to act with the caution that would be
necessary if the case were so; and the (...) may be said of other imaginations;
and persons must be idiots, and not reason at all, or esse reason and motive,
will always Influence their choice and conduct. Evil imaginations and thoughts,
always move men to act wickedly, Gen 6.5. and 8.21 -- (...) when any are
brought to know the truth, it makes (...) free from sin, so as to become
Jervants of righteousness, Joh. 8.32. Romans 6.18.

Hence it appears evident, that they and not we, would exclude the the
usefulness of means; for if the liberty of man lay in acting against motive or
with motive, just as they pleased, where could there be any proper use for
means? For the very design of gospel means, is to turn souls from evil, to
follow that which is good; and if their liberty consisted in not being moved
and governed by means and motives, there would be no sense in using of them;
but like smoke and vapor men must be left to act just that way the wind
happens to blow. In short, the main objections I ever heard against sovereign
election, and certain salvation by free grace alone, appear to me to spring
from this root, viz. Man who was flattered with the notion of being as gods,
still conceits that he has a power in himself to do as he pleases, let that
pleasure be to comply with, or to disappoint God's designs; and therefore if
they are not disposed at present to engage in his service, that he must wait
their leisure, and be ready whenever they set about the work in good earnest,
to grant them the assistance of his grace, and if they improve it well unto the
end, then to receive them to his glory. But for my part I have no more notion
of worshipping a deity that can possibly be mistaken or disappointed in any one
event, than I have of worshipping Baal, who could not defend either his altar
or grove, when his votaries were asleep, Judges 6.31.

Those who are determined to believe nothing but what they can comprehend, are
determined to be idolators; for it is certain that any thing which can be
comprehended by a finite mind, cannot be the infinite Jehovah; whose wisdom,
knowledge and judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out; of
whom, through whom, and to whom are all things; to whom be glory for ever,
amen. Romans 11.33 -- 36. Thus to believe, adore and obey, is not as many would
have it, a sacrificing of reason to tradition and blind devotion, but the
contrary. As for instance, should any man conceit that he could not know
whether or not there was light in the sun, or warmth in the fire, without
looking through the one and running into the other, and should try the
experiment till he became blind and burnt; he could not from thence convince me
that I had lost both my sight and feeling, because I still professed to enjoy
great comfort in the cautious improvement of those blessings. Now the
perfections of the deity are compared both to the sun and the fire, to teach us
the importance of receiving his grace freely, of acting toward him uprightly,
and serving of him with reverence and godly fear, Psalm. 84. (...) 1. Heb.
12.28, 29.

Some serious persons are afraid to give in to the doctrine of immutable
decrees, lest they should make God the author of sin; but Mr. Norton, one of
the fathers of this country, justly replied to this objection, That sin is a
defect, and God is the author of all efficiency, but not of any defect at all.
An illegitimate child is the creature of God, but its illegitimacy is wholly
from its parents. It was their losts which caused the defect or want of its
being lawfully begotten; yet the child is God's creature, and if he please he
makes it a subject of his grace. The heat of the sun that attracts the secret
virtues of the earth, is not the cause of the stink of the dughill. And though
carnal reasoners try to persuade people, that to hold every event to be certain
in the divide councils, takes away the guilt of evil actions, and the virtue of
good ones, yet the word of truth abundantly shows the contrary. It shows that
Joseph's brethren were as verily guilty in their actings against him, as if
they could have frustrated God's design; and yet that he overtuled their wrath
and cruelty toward their brother, for his own praise, Psalm 76.10.
and to make Joseph much more of a public and extensive blessing, than they
could have made him in Canaan, if they had tried their uttermost for it. At the
same time the sacred story clearly shows, that they acted quite voluntarily,
both in their wretched abuses to their brother, and in humbly prostrating
themselves before him afterward. -- They acted by motive; when they first saw
Joseph coming to them, they felt so that they thought they would slay him: But
upon another view murder appeared so shocking that they thought it best to
gratify themselves another way, which moved them to choose that way. On the
other hand, when Joseph was tempted by his wicked mistress, though men were
absent, yet God to whom be was under infinite obligation, was present to his
thoughts, and that proved a sufficient motive to make him choose any suffering
rather than to sin against such a glorious being.

The inquiry and pursuit of all men is after good, and the believer finds it
only in God, who is good, and is always doing good, and this causes his soul to
be in earnest to learn his statutes, Psalm. 4.6, 7, and 119.68. Others do not
like to retain the true God in their knowledge; neither his nature nor his
government appear good to their carnal minds, therefore they worship and serve
the creature instead of the Creator; setting up gain, honor or pleasure, as
their chief good. Yet to appear nakedly irreligious, is too shocking to
multitudes, who at the same time are very far from desiring to set the Lord
always before them, so as to be influenced by him in all their conduct;
therefore they choose their idol shepherds that will prophecy smooth things to
them, rather than faithful watchmen who represent the true character of the
holy One of Israel before them, Jsa. 30.8, -- 11. Zech. 11.17.

A darling topic with the carnal reasoners of our world is this; they say,
That either men are able to obey and serve God, or else if they cannot do it,
they are not (...) blame for neglecting of it, until God is pleased to convert
them. But the truth is, the natural man cannot serve God because he does love
and serve an idol: And the soul before it is slain by the law, cannot be
married to Christ, because it is wedded to its own doings, Mat. 6.24. Romans 7.
Yet this inability is so far from being any just excuse, that the more unable
they are to love God, or to believe in Christ, the greater is their
condemnation, Joh. 3.16, -- 19. And it is a most wicked device in the writer of
the paper now in hand, to use the word inevitable concerning the reprobate, and
irresistible concerning the elect, in such a manner as to exclude the idea of
their own choice; whereas the vessels of wrath say, We WILL walk after our own
devices; and EVERY ONE that does evil, HATES THE LIGHT, Jer. 18. 12. Joh.
3.20. And vessels of mercy pursue the same ways, till God works in them to will
and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. Tit. 3.3, -- 5. -- Therefore though
the final event is as certain to the one as the other, yet the manner of its
accomplishment is vastly different. The vessels of wrath, after their hard and
impenitent heart, treasure up wrath TO THEMSELVES; while God endures with much
long suffering with them. But he makes known the riches of his glory, in
effectually calling the vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared unto
glory. Romans 2 5. and 9.22, -- 24. And renewed souls are so far from assuming to
themselves a power to be God's counselors, or venturing to act upon secret
things which belong to him, that where he has told them of his designs
concerning any future event, they have not made the design of the great Ruler,
but the laws he has given to his subjects, the rule of their conduct; and the
difference between subjects and rebels is discovered by this. As for instance,
God let David know that he designed to remove Saul, and to make him king in his
stead. Yet David refused to smite Saul when he had opportunity, but lest it
with God to remove him in his own way, 1 Samuel 24.12, 13. Whereas when the Jews
heard Caiphas prophecy concerning the death of Jesus, from that day forth, they
took counsel together for to put him to death, Joh. 11.49, 53. And God's
accomplishing his infallible decrees in that great event, while the Jews were
inexcusably guilty in their actings about it, are strongly asserted by the
inspired apostle. Him, being delivered by the DETERMINATE COUNSEL and
foreknowledge of God, ye have taken and by WICKED HANDS have crucified and
slain, Act. 2.23.

They acted most wickedly in conspiring against our Savior, who was perfectly
holy and harmless, and constantly went about doing good; yet God's purposes and
promises were thereby exactly accomplished, in bestowing infinite and eternal
mercies upon guilty and miserable men. Pharaoh used great subtilty and cruelty
in order to keep Israel in bondage, and set up his will at the highest rate
against releasing of them; yet God in his providence caused things to appear so
to him and his subjects, that they voluntarily furnished Israel with silver and
gold, and Egypt was glad when they departed, Psalm. 105 37, 38. and that on the
self same day which God had told Abraham of above four hundred years before,
Ezod. 12.41.

These and many other instances of men's voluntary actions the Lord declared
with a perfect exactness before they came to pass, because he knew that with a
brazen obstinacy, and wilful treachery, they would rather give this glory to
their idol than to him, Isai. 48.3, -- 8. But the firm faith of the saints in
every age, in the certain accomplishment of God's promises, has made them the
more watchful and active in the rational choice and use of the best means that
he furnished them with for attaining the desired end. Jacob wrestled and
prevailed with God, yet that did not make him neglect means, but he wisely
improved the best that he had in his power, to calm his angry brother, and it
had the desired effect. Paul believed God that the lives of all those who were
with him in the ship should be saved; yet when the men who were killed in
managing the ship were about to leave it, he said to the centurion, and to the
soldiers, Except these abide in the ship, ye CANNOT be saved, Acts 27.25, 31.
Here was a certainty of the event, and yet it is expressed conditionally, while
both were true; it was true that all should be saved, and it was as true that
the mariners must be instrumental of it.

Thus my dear friend, I have endeavored in as plain and brief a manner as I
could, in the little time I had for it, opened and vindicated the great
scripture doctrine of God's sovereign decrees, against a malicious attempt
which has been made to vilify the same. It may well seem surprising to those
who are acquainted with the 17th article of the church of England, to hear that
a minister who has solemnly engaged to maintain the truth therein expressed,
should have a great hand in spreading this blasphemous paper which is
diametrically contrary thereto, as has evidently been the case. But I leave him
and all others in the hand of a righteous and gracious God, and rest,

Yours, etc.


