FOrasmuch as I have lately seen two Letters under the hand of the late Lord
Bishop of Couentrie. and Lichfield, and now Lord Bishop elect of Norwich; the
one dated 22. Septembris 1617. and the other 6. Nouembris following, directed
to the several Archdeacons, Ministers, and Churchwardens of the same Diocese
for supplying of the wants and defects of Bibles of the new and last
translation, being of the greatest letter and larger volume, as also Books of
common prayer, in such Parishes as they were Wanting. In which business his
Lordship was pleased to employ this bearer William Bramsgroue, who has already
taken much pains therein. And for that I have received credible information,
that many parishes within the said Diocese, are yet unfurnished of the said
Books, notwithstanding strict order by me given, in the late Metropoliticall
Visitation, holden there for the now Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and since
that also by the late Lord Bishop of Couentrie and Lichfield, for the providing
thereof. I therefore as Vicar general to the said Lord Archbishop, being
Custos spiritualitatis sede vacant, for the better service of Almighty God,
and edification of the people, have thought meet to provide for the perfecting
of that good work so well begun, and to that purpose do hereby will and
require you to make diligent inquiry, in every parish within the said
Diocese, of the defect and want of the said Books; and once more to admonish
the Minister and Churchwardens of every parish, to provide the same with all
convenient speed, which if they shall refuse or defer so to do, then forth
with to return their names unto me, that if by my ordinary Jurisdiction, they
will not be brought to supply that defect and abuse, that then by power of the
Commissioners Ecclesiastical or otherwise, they may be enforced thereunto;
wherein, God willing, I will not fail to take a strict course, betwixt this
and the beginning of Michaelmasse Term next. And for that I find by
experience, that the people for the most part within that Diocese, are grown
into extremes, that is to say, some so profane or otherwise so backward in
religion, that they have no regard of coming to Church, to hear divine
Service and Sermons on Saboath days and Holy days; some others so precisely
curious, that they will bar his Majesty's Subjects from all lawful recreation
on those days, though it be after Evening Service and Sermon ended, it shall
not be amiss as you travel for the dispatch of your other business, that you
deliver to such Churchwardens of every parish, within that Diocese for their
better direction in this behalf, this small Treatise; ( Containing his
Majesty's declaration to his Subjects concerning lawful sports to be used) as
shall be willing to receive the same. And I require you to make return of the
due execution hereof, at or before the beginning of Michaelmasse Term next.

Given at London this 5. of June, 1618. THO. RIDLEY.

To William Bramsgroue of the City of Litchfield Yeoman, an Officer to the
Prerogative Court of Canterbury, being by me specially sent to view and furnish
the defective Churches and Chapels, with such books as are commanded by
public authority; and to certify accordingly.

