To the right Reverend and right Honorable the Lords spiritual and temporal
assembled in the upper House of this most high and honorable Session of
Parliament. An Abstract of the grieuances and oppressions done by Sir Arthur
Ingram Knight and his agents, to Griswell Rogers widow and her poor Orphans.
Griswell Rogers her title,
Most humbly shows,

Heygrane in Somerset, with all the lands therein, parcel of the ioynture of
the Lady Jane late Queen of England, of 5 l. 9 s. per annum Rent were granted
to Best and Britton, 44. Eliz. by Letters pattents under the great Seal, which
lands (by conveyances) are since come to the hands of Burch, Suayne and Rogers,
to each a third part.

These lands were formerly granted out in Copie-holds to several Tenants for
term of life, no greater Rent being reserved or paid to the Crown at the time
of the Grant, or for 60 years before, then 5 l. 9 s. per annum, as appears
upon record.

A special Act of Parliament did confirm this Grant, begun 43. Eliz. ended
19. December. following, in which Act many provisions were made for avoiding
future questions, and fortisying the titles of all who had or should purchase
lands of the said Queen Eliz. from the 25 year of her reign until the
expiration of one whole year after the dissoluing of that Sessions, ended the
19 of December. and for the confirming and establishing the said lands to the
purchasers, against her Highness, her heirs and successors for ever.

Sir Arthur Ingrams claim.
Whitmore purchased Bridgewater Castrum, 8. Iacobi, every particular parcel
being expressed in the Grant, with the several annual rents thereof, which in
all made the just yearly value they were purchased at; the lands in Heygraue
being excepted in the said Grant by express words.

His Majesty about the same time granted the 5 l. 9 s. per annum the
Fee-simple rent reserved upon the lands in Heygraue, to Eldred and Whitmore.

From these two grants Sir Arthur Ingram makes his claim to Heygraue, only for
that they bound and border one upon the other: for in nine years continual
suites by such agents as were maintained by Sir Arthur Ingram against Rogers,
he never showed any evidence to make good his claim to himself, or ever
recovered any part of the premises.

Rogers her grieuances.
One Allen an agent for Sir Arthur Ingram with 6 or 7 irregular persons in the
night time did break down the doors and walls of Rogers tenement in Heygraue
called Ioyners, and wounding one Osmond her servant, threw him out of his
peaceable possession, to which being restored by a legal course, Osmonds death
was sought by poison, which not taking effect, Allens wife and Paul Allens
servant so wounded Osmond, that shortly afterward he died.

Allen in the behalf of Sir Arthur Ingram took the profits of loyners
tenement for the space of six years, felled down the timber, defaced and
ruined the Tenement, impounded Rogers cattle near 30 several times, which
she being enforced to repleavie, he never proceeds to trial, and almost 20
several actions he and his combinants have commenced against Rogers her
servants and Tenants causlesly and of mere vexation, arresting and imprisoning
them, and many times not declaring against them.

Rogers brought an eiectment in Osmonds name against Vrsula Euens for Ioyners
Tenement, to try the title of the whole, which was followed against her by Sir
Arthur Ingram; whereupon a special verdict was found at the Assizes in
Somersetshire, wherein the grant made 44 Eliz. to Best and Britton, the Act of
Parliament made for confirmation of the said Grant as aforesaid was likewise
found, the lands were found to he in Heygraue, and to be pa^ the ioynture of
the Lady Jane Queen of England, and the rent reserved to be 5 l. 9 s. and no
more at the time of the said Grant, and for ^^ years before, they also found
Whitmores grant and the said several parcels therein, and the lands in
Heygraue especially excepted in the said grant.

To recover the mean profits of Ioyners Tenement, Rogers commenced 3 actions
against Allen, Parsons and Fenner Sir Arthur Ingram; agents; Counsel retained
and the causes ready for hearing at the Assizes, letters were directed from the
Commons house of Parliament to the Judges to stay the trial until the last
Parliament ended, for that Sir William Whitmore a Parliament man claimed title
to the lands in question, who neither then had nor ever since challenged any
interest therein.

The Copie-hold Tenants (seduced by Allen) refuse to pay Rogers their customary
Rents, have felled down the timber, destroyed the woods, cut up the quickset
fences, and let fall the buildings on the premises, the spoils whereof amount
near to the value of the lands; for which wastes, forfeitures and non paiments
of the rents, Rogers two years since entered upon two other tenements, but
Allen (the Tenants being dead or fled) with other beggarly people entered upon
her possessions, and before the corn was ripe, reaped, spoiled and carried away
the same, it being sown by Mistress Rogers, to her great loss and the public
hurt, affirming they did it for Sir Arthur Ingram.

Allen brought diverse actions against Rogers for these two Tenements,
pretending Sir Arthur Ingram had good title thereto, one of them was tried at
the Kings Bench bar for both the Tenements, and a verdict thereupon given for
Rogers, yet Allen perscueres to take the profits, notwithstanding they were
sequestered in the Star Chamber by the Lord Keeper, and one of the Tenements
settled upon Rogers by a writ of Re-restitution out of the Kings Bench.

Allen and others Sir Arthur Ingrams agents, besides these and other continual
vexations, procured his Majesty's Justices (abused by their false informations)
to certify against the said Mistress Rogers, the said Justices neither knowing
her not understanding the cause aright.

Sir Arthur Ingram failing by these indirect ways, has procured his Majesty's
Attorney general to exhibit an information of intrusion against Rogers, Burch
and Swayne in the Exchequer, intitling his Majesty to the lands in Heygraue,
but proceeds only against Rogers, which argues Sir Arthur Ingram has
compounded with Burch and Swain for their two parts, or at least they are all
combined to persecute Rogers, Swain having preferred a bil in Chancerie
against her for a third part of the profits of the Tenements recovered, and
Burch threatens to do the like, the profits recovered not amounting to the
hundredth part of what she has laid out in defense and recovery of the
premises, of which they of right ought to allow an equal share, yet Rogers for
1500 l laid out, has not had above 70 l of both of them.

The motives why Rogers flies to this most honorable Court for relief.
These lands were sold by Qu. Eliz. for payment of her debts, maintenance of
her wars, and the public good, purchased at 30 years purchase, it being in
lease for lives, the Queen receiving in hand for the lands passed in the same
Grant 2320 l. 15 s.. 11 d.

This Grant was confirmed by Act of Parliament to the purchasers, against the
Queen, her heirs and successors, with the consent of the Lords spiritual and
temporal, and Commons then assembled in this most honorable House where your
Honors now sit.

And both the Act and Grant found by special verdict, and that often argued at
the Kings Bench bar, where judgment was given for Rogers as aforesaid, and
another judgment upon a verdict was likewise given for her at the Kings Bench
bar.

Notwithstanding all these former iniust molestations, wherein she has wasted
her estate, and spent her childrens portions, to defend their rights against
the usurping claim of greatness, who calls all his, which lies near his
reach, Sir Arthur Ingram vowed to make her spend 500 l or the value of the
land: to effect which, he has caused the information aforesaid to be preferred
against Rogers, contrary to the Act of Parliament formerly recited.

Rogers is already so disabled by these suites, as she can no longer defend the
goodness of her cause against so strong a persecutor as Sir Arthur Ingram: for
although she has recovered in all her trials for the title, yet she has lost
her charges, for that Sir Arthur Ingram kept his person out of action,
employing beggars, non residents and fugitives, who were conveyed away, and not
to be found, or of whom nothing was to be had.

Lastly, Rogers humbly presumes it imports not her alone, but all your Honors
in general, and most of you in particular, there being few or none sitting in
this most honorable House, but hold lands by the same or like grant. And if
lands purchased upon so valuable considerations, confirmed by so high and
honorable a Court, shall be subject to the censure of subordinate inferior
Courts; and assurances grounded upon such strength, shall lie open to every
nice point and cavil in law, found by litigious spirits, what estate under the
Sun can be firm or secure? For which respects, Rogers humbly appeals to
yours Honors, as the principal pillars that supports equity and the public
good.

The poor Widow and the Orphans prayer,
That your Lordships will be humbly pleased (by decree of this most honorable
Court) to settle Rogers her right and title to Heygraue and the lands therein
upon her and her posterity (to whom of right it appertains) according to her
grant and the Act of Parliament aforesaid, that she may peaceably enjoy them
without further litigious suites, and they shall beseech the Lord of all Lord
to crown you all with eternal glory in the great Parliament of Heaven.


