CHRIST AND THE DOVES HEAVENLY SALUTATIONS, With their Pleasant CONFERENCE
together:

OR A SERMON BEFORE THE COMMUNION IN ANWOTH. Anno 1630.

By that Flour of the CHVRCH, Mr. Samuel Rutherfurd.

THE TEXT.
Canticles 2. Chap. 14. 15, 16, 17. Verses. O my Dove that art in the Clefts of
the Rock, in the Secret Places of the Stairs, let me see thy Countenance, let
me hear thy Voice; for Sweet is thy Voice, and thy Countenance is Comely, etc.
IN the 14. Verse, there is (1:) A Style given to the Kirk. (2.) A Suit made.
(3.) A Doubt answered. In the 15. Verse, A New Doubt answered, and a Suit made;
He calls her His Dove, He rewes nothing that He said, He bides by His Word, He
calls her His Love, His Fair One, His Undefiled, Now He avoues it, He bides by
it; You are even My Dove: Yet He is not Flattering her. If ye be Christ's, He
will give you all your Styles of Honor; He will speak much Good of you, both
behind your Back, and before your Face: She is termed Christ's Dove.

First, Because the Dove is a fearful Bird and soon scarred, Hosea 11. 11.
They shall tremble like a Dove out of Assyria. Any thing, the smallest Noise or
Dinn that can be, frights and chases these Timorous Birds in their Dove-house
into CHRIST. It is an happy Rain that chases CHRIST's Doves in to himself; For
all the Devils Wit he is soon beguiled. The Storm that arises against the Ship
where CHRIST and his Disciples are, makes them to Awaken and Pray.

Secondly, The Dove is a Mournful Bird; So are the Doves of CHRIST Mourning,
and in Tears, Zek. 16. They that Escape of them shall be like Doves of the
Mountains; Like Doves in the Valleys, all of them Mourning: Every one of them
for their Iniquities. If ye be GODs Doves, ye will have many a Sorrowful Day
in the World: There is Bloody Weirs betwixt the Kirk and the World; Keep the
Dove from the Nest, and she Mourns without; Keep the Kirk from CHRIST, and she
will break her Heart.

Thirdly, She is not a Revengefull Bird, she has no other Armor against the
Ravens and Vultures, but her Wings to flee away. GODs Childrens best Armor
when they are wronged is, by Faith in Prayer to mount up to GOD; They must be
like CHRIST. He went out of the World with many a Wrong, and they are not yet
Revenged, his Blood is keeping to the Last Court Day. CHRIST sits with many a
Wrong in Heaven; He has not gotten amends of these that Spate in his Face.
Many a time the Kirk and her Husband CHRIST will be here wronged, albeit it be
seen betwixt them. Cant. 5. She shuts him to the Door, and lets him Lodge all
Night in the Rainie Fields.

And then Fourthly, The Kirk is like a Dove Mourning without a Marrow; for that
Fowl cannot want a Marrow: If ye be GOD's Doves, Woe will ye be when your
Marrow CHRIST flies away. She falls aswoon and her heart flies out of her when
CHRIST flies away.

Fifthly, The Dove is an Innocent Harmless Bird. she cannot offend. So is the
Kirk; the Meek Spouse of CHRIST, will not Marrow with a Malicious House.

Sixthly, The Dove is a Silly, Weak, Tender Fowl, and if they be compared to
the rest of the Birds, they are but counted the tenth of flying Fowls; Surely
GODs Kirk in her Self is but a Weak Bird and Tender Woman, compared in Rev. 12.
to a Woman with Child lately Delivered, and little betwixt her Death and her
Life, if she be not Carefully attended. A Christian is a Tender Thing; an
Jewel in the Hand of CHRIST. If He let us fall we are soon broken in pieces: We
should pray that CHRIST may handle us softly, and not let us be Tempted above
our Strength. The Kirk is called, Micah 4. and 6. a Cripple Woman that goes
only upon her one Side. So surely we had need to come out of the Wilderness
Leaning on our Beloved, Cant. 8. Chap.

Seventhly, And for their Number they are but an Handful, Isaiah 1. The Tein
or Remnant GODs Part is but the Tenth, and the Devil has all the Stock; often
GOD has one and the Devil nine; Great need have we to labor to be of GODs
tenth. My Dove that Dwells in the Holes of the Rock; We need not to go far off
to seek the Exposition of these Words, for CHRIST is the Rock upon which the
Kirk is builded. Matthew 16. 28. Upon this Rock will I Build my Church, says
CHRIST. And Psalms 18. 2. The LORD is my Rock and Fortress. And GOD is also the
Secret Place of the Stairs, where the Kirk hides her from the Storm. So David
calls GOD his Secret Place, his Hiding Place. Psalms 32. 7. Thou art a Secret
Place to me from Distress, Thou will Preserve me, Psalms 91. And because in all
this Song we must ever hold up the Line and String of the Allegory of
Marriage, and consider the Kirk as the Spouse of CHRIST: The Rock is CHRIST in
whom the Kirk dwells by Faith, and CHRIST dwells in her Heart, Ephesians 3. 17.
Abide in Me, and I in you John 15. 4: Abide in Me as Branches Imped into the
Vine: Now the Imp is ingrafted in a cutted Stock; CHRIST was Hagged, Hewed and
Cutted on the Cross, the Stock wherein we are Ingrafted. So that the Holes of
the Rock, may well be exponed (as Bernard says) to be the Wounds of CHRIST: So
that the Meaning is, O O My Dove that by Faith has thy abode in the Wounds and
the Holes made in the Hands and Sides of Crucified JESUS: Or, O my Dove that
believes and that by Faith has thy abode in the Wounds and abides in CHRIST as
an Imp ingrafted in a Tree, in CHRIST when Dead; and so Man flee into CHRIST
all Wounded, and Holled for thy Sin, flee into CHRIST thy Rock; and so into
GOD: Psalms 18. 2. Hence we see what a Savior the Kirk believes in; a Savior
that is GOD and Man, as Man to be a Sufferer, and as GOD to be a Supporter,
which there was great Necessity of these Two Natures; GOD would not seek
Payment of our Debt off His Son as GOD; for by the Law He could not answer, for
He was the Creditor, and so could not be the Debtor: And therefore, for the
better Understanding of this, I would have you with me to consider, how our
Nature, and GODs Nature works to others hands in the Work of our Redemption. A
Sinner cannot Dwell in CHRIST as GOD only. There is no Holes nor Chambers for a
Sinner to Dwell in GOD; and therefore CHRIST behoved to be Man, that we might
find fair Chambers in the Wounds of JESUS, wherein the Doves of JESUS might
Dwell; And if He had been only Man, He could not have been an House upon a
Rock, and so could not have born the Weight of all the Doves: For there be some
Questions in the Work of our Redemption that only Man can answer. Man has
sinned, and Man must Die, says GODs Justice, be it so says CHRIST. Man sinned,
and I the Man CHRIST shall Die. (2.) Man took on the Debt, therefore an other
cannot pay for him; Be it so says CHRIST, I the Man shall pay the Ransom. (3.)
Man behoved to make amends, because Man did the Fault: Let it be so said
CHRIST, I the Man CHRIST shall make amends again.

Secondly, If CHRIST had not been our Rock, there had been no Dwelling in him,
he would not have kept Wind and Weather off us: Therefore the Divine Nature
was a Pillar on which the Humane Nature did hing, and this is the Cause why
CHRIST-man leans to the Divine Nature, as his Warrant in all that he does. For
if ye will consider in this Work, there is Three Bargains, or Covenants to
speak so.

First, GOD and Man bargained together, ye shall believe, that is your Part. I
shall give you Life Eternal, that is my Part says GOD. Now Man dare not promise
this of himself without Christ's Bond to Relieve him, that is to Enable him
throw his Grace to believe.

Secondly, GOD Bargains with his Son, Isaiah 53. 10. Son, if Thou shall lay
down Thy Life, Thou shall see Thy Seed, and Prolong Thy Days, and have many
fair Children, Psalms 2. Ye shall have the Heathen to Serve You. Heb. 1. I will
be Your Father, and Ye shall be My Son. CHRIST is content, but he cannot do
this alone; he must borrow Flesh and Blood from Man, and in it Suffer.

Thirdly, The Man CHRIST Bargains with the Divine Nature. The Humane Nature
says, I Love Man, and I will Die for him: The Divine Nature says, now I shall
hold Thee up under Thy Sufferings, and Thou shall overcome Death. The Man
Christ without the Back-bond (to speak so) durst not for Ten Thousand Worlds
have ventured to Yoke in the Fields with the Justice of GOD, and Death, and
Hell, and Sin, and the Devil, except he had the Divine Nature in a Personal
Union to bear him up under his Sufferings: Therefore CHRIST when he looks upon
his Sufferings, looks also upon his Warrant, Isaiah 56. I gave My Back to the
Smiters, and My Checks to them that pulled off the Hair. These be the Words of
the Man CHRIST.

Now because it might have been said a Man will Suffer all that his alone; But
here he looks to his Warrant, Verse 7. and says, I have my Warrant with Me, The
LORD GOD will help Me, I shall not be confounded. I have GODs Warrant who is
united to Me in a Personal Union to bear Me up. Even Sick-like CHRIST goes down
to the Grave, Psalms 16. 10. Thou will not leave My Soul in Hell, (or the
Grave,) neither will Thou suffer Thy Holy One to see Corruption. As if Christ
would say, I am sure LORD Thou will be as Good as Thy Word, and make Good Thy
Bargain, and will Warrant Me against Death: See then how it goes; The Man
Christ takes Man by the Hand to bring him out from under GODs Wrath. So
Beloved, Be Glad in such a Savior, come all into the Rock, for God, Christ,
and Man, all these Three are linked together as in a Chain, and Christ in the
middle link of the Chain. Now let all the Kings of the Earth that boast of Fair
Houses and Stately Palaces, come and see if they can compare with the Dove that
Dwells in the Holes of the Rock. Nebuchadnezer said, Is not this Great Babylon
that I have built, etc. Surely Men are to be rebuked that are careful for
Houses and settling in the World, and has no Assurance of this Lodging.
Worldlings are but Ravens that big in the Wild Mountains. The Kirk is only at
Home biging in Faith: These be indeed Dear Chambers, being built by Christ
Himself. GOD has made Holes and Windows in Christ that his Doves may flee into,
and make their Nest in his Heart. O Dear and Precious Dwelling; The Lodging
cost us Nothing, yet we are desired to Dwell in it. Now what is Christ's
Petition? Cause Me to hear thy Voice. It Is ordinary for Man to beg from GOD,
for we be but his Beggars; But it is a Miracle to see GOD beg at Man; Yet here
is the Potter begging from the Clay; the Savior seeking from Sinners. What is
his Suit? It must be some Great Thing; it is even a Sight of his Bride; He is
even saying to her, my dear Spouse be kind to Me, let me see thy Face, be not
Blaite and Wavering, be plain with me your Husband, tell me all your mind in
Prayer, I delight to hear your lisping and hisping and speaking to me in
Prayer: Ye may see all the Wooing comes on Christ's Side of it; She cannot hold
up her Face, or let one Love-blink on Christ, but as He commands her, and
wakens her up; She is a Sour Bride of her self, if she Laugh, it is He that
makes her Rejoice by the Holy Spirit that is given to her, Romans 5. 5. She
keeps her Chamber and is ashamed to go forth; He bides her be kind and show her
Face. We cannot Love Him, while he first Love us, 1 John 4. 19. We run because
he draws us, Canticles 1. 2. John 6. 44. We apprehend Christ, but we are first
gripped of him, Philippians 3. 12. Beloved, there is great skill in wooing
Christ, every Bride has not the gate of it, but he must teach us.

In all other Matches ye will find Two Things that are not here.

First, In other Matches the Bride makes some Wooing of her own sort; but here
Men cannot move, but as Christ's Spirit wooes in us, and teaches us. In other
Contracts the Bride and her Friends are bound for their Part, the Bride has
some Toocher of her own, or she may be an Heretrix, she may have all, and he
Nothing: But here the Bridegroom in this Contract is obliged for all, he give
his Name for himself and his Wife, Ezekel 36. 27. I will put My Spirit in you,
and cause you to Walk in my Judgments. Here the Kirk has no Toocher of her
own, and yet she has not the Good Manners to look up to her LORD, but as he
commands and holds up her Head: All the Toocher is Christ's, and the
Inheritance is Christ's; the Kirk has Nothing, he has the Houses, John 14. He
has the Land, Romans 8. The Fine Gold, Revelation 3. and buys the Spousing
Clothes of the Religion that came in with her Savior Christ, and that is the
best Religion in the World; for it gives most to GOD and least to Man. I will
tell you who are meet for Christ, even these that are out of themselves, and
lays all upon Christ. The best Scholars that Christ gets are Publicans and
Sinners, Whores, Harlots, Blind, Lame, Criples, and such like, and such as
feels themselves Sinners. Look how much ye trust in your selves, and rest upon
the World, and Loves your Lusts, as far ye are from Christ; and when ye are all
out of your selves, and changed into GOD's Image from Glory to Glory, as by the
Spirit of the LORD, 2 Corinthians 3: 18: then ye are meet for Christ, begging
Poor Sinners are our LORDs Scholars. The Lintel-stone of our LORDs School-door
is a Low-stone, ye must stoup Low and Lout; Ye will be on your Knees with it or
ye can win in; Ye must be very humble, else that Stone will take your head and
ding you back, and ye will not win in; than be Fools that Christ may be your
Wisdom, 1 Corinthians 1: 30: There is as much merit in Christ as will buy a
Thousand Heavens. Now if our Wooer Christ were not Kind, and sought our
Kindness, even Words of us, and brought the Love. Tokens, the Friendship
betwixt Christ and us would soon wear out of Date, and grow Cold; Christ ay
blows at the Coal ere it wear out: Christ would win a Friend, yea a Foe to be
kind to him; He is ay thriping and claiming Kindness of us, as if he were the
Beggar and the Poor-man, and we the King. O he claims Kindness to us. Then
surely we need not think shame of our Friend. Would ye ken for whom Christ
Died, and Paid, even for Dyvours, such as Swore themselves bare, and came out
of Prison upon Caution, or a Cessiobonorum. Poor-men that has been upon the
Dyvours-stone, and are far from Payment by the Dyvour-bill, when there is not a
finger in all your hand fastened upon your self, then ye are meet for Christ:
For who are better met and yoaked than a Poor Sick Dying-man and a skillfull
Physician; Who is better yoaked than a crying Begging-sinner and a Rich Christ?
But oh it is ofttimes not so! for Christ would give us more nor we will
receive: He scatters his Gold, we Proud Beggars will not bow our back, and lout
down and gather: He would fain Sell, we will not Buy, so there will be no
blocking. Let Me see thy Countenance. An Allusion to Israel that was to present
themselves before the LORD Thrice a Year in the Tabernacle; The meaning is,
Walk before me. It is not enough that thou believe, and so dwell by Faith in
the Holes of the Rock; but thou must also show thy Faith by Good Works and
Prayers, and Worshipping of GOD. Christ loves not Professors that never wan or
Love to Pray, and such as hates not the World: But you will see they are
Believers by their Holy Living, Matthew 13: The Word of GOD is Seed sown that
brings forth Thirty, Sixty, and an Hundred Fold; Ilk Boll brings out Thirty;
Ilk Sermon, ilk Communion should bring out an Hundred Good Works (Beloved)
GOD's Land is Set at an High-price; he is a Master that will have all his own
from his Tennents; and as the Song says, Every one of GODs Sheep brings out
Twins, Hebrews 7: 8: There is a Ground that drinks in Rain from Heaven, and yet
brings forth Briers and Thorns, it is near a Curse: Bring forth Fruit, or else
ye will make GOD say, my Curse, and GODs Mallison be upon thy Heart, thou hears
much, and brings forth no Fruit: Therefore beware (Beloved) a Tree that once
gets a dadd with GODs Ax, it will never do well again: Ye shall become like the
Girdle, Jeremiah 13: 17: which he did hide at the River Euphrates; it was
profitable for nothing, it was marred, it shall never go about GODs Wast again.
Beware then that ye be not Blasted Professors and Fruitless Christians; but be
ye always in his Sight: For there be some that comes never in GODs Sight, they
are GODs Dyvours: They are aughting so much that they dar not come to GOD, and
Count and Pay, Outlaws and Borderers that comes not, or keeps not Christ's
Kingdom; but runs like Wild Asses and Drumadaries up and down the Mountains,
and snuffs up the Wind at their Pleasure: I compare their Life to those that
rides Post. Many a Horse has Satan in his Stable; and when these Outlaws has
wearied their Greediness after Sin, and has gotten they know not what, they
mount upon a Fresh-horse; Some upon Pride, and they ride once out of GODs
Sight, they run while they be in Hell in the end: For the Devil is upon the
Horse and the Rider. GOD seeks Dear, and for his Money ye must give him more
than Ten in the Hunder; For Five Talents, he must have Ten again, he must have
double Stock. Look what Grace ye receive by Weight, render to him his own in
Weight and more: If his Gold want an Ounce, he will cast it to you again: For
one Bolls sowing, ye must give him Thirty again: GOD would have his Servants ay
keeping his Chamber, if they go their own length from him he misses them; Ye
must not be GODs Chamber-pages, and steal out of his Presence, and give the
Devil a Baggadge-yoaking; nay he must ay see your Face, and hear your Voice.
There be many that would serve GOD, and be in Christ's School; but they are like
Trowands that takes the Play, and runs to Play, sometimes with the World, and
the Devil, and loves to sport themselves with the World and the Devil; But GODs
Scholars may not take the Play. Let me see thy Face. The Kirk might have said,
Dear LORD, my Face; Oh does Thou desire to see my Face, it is very Black, I am
Sunburned, Sin has made me deformed; and for my Voice, it is both Harsh and
Mistuned. What then says Christ? I think not so my Dear Spouse; I think it is a
Fair Face; I think ye have a Sweet Voice. It is Great Comfort for GODs Children
when they rise many times off their Knees from Prayer with a woe heart,
thinking, because they have no Heart, nor Feeling, nor Sense, that GOD is
offended with their Prayers, and thinks little of their Works; when as their
Prayers, and Tears, and Works are accepted before GOD. Ye think nothing of one
Tear, yet GOD puts it in his Bottle; and nothing of one Sigh, but GOD gathers
it in his Treasure. If GOD thought of us as the World does, and as we think of
our Selves, oftentimes woeful would our Case be; But GOD has not a Pleasanter
Sight in the World, nor the Face of a Child of GOD: No Music Delights Him more
nor the Sighs and Tears, Complaints and Prayers of his Children. See ye not the
Spirit of GOD bringing in Christ longing for a Sight of his Wife, longing for a
Word of her, Proverbs 8. 31. Christ Rejoiceth and Sports, and Plays in the
Habitable Parts of the Earth, and his Delight is with the Sons of Men. Ye will
see more of this upon the last words of this Song.

Take us the Foxes. It Is a Speech of Christ to take the Kirk, to take,
Convince, Censure, Rebuke, Cut off, and Excommunicat all Inordinate Livers and
Offenders in the LORDs Vineyard, Ezekiel 13. 4. O Israel, thy Prophets are like
Foxes in the Deserts. Jeremiah 12. 10. Many Pastors have Corrupted My Vineyard.
O what can there be upon the Earth to make a Kirk Happy, But it is here. To
hear a Kirk Sick of Love for Christ, and here Christ Sick of Love for his Kirk:
Christ's Left Hand is under Her Head, and His Right Hand does Embrace Her: She
is His Fair One, His Love, His Dove, His Undefiled: She Dwells in the Wounds of
Her Lord by Faith. Yet for all this, His Kirk is a Vineyard that has many Foxes
in it to Destroy the Vines. Then we see, so long as GOD has a Vineyard, there
will be Foxes in it to Destroy the Vines; That is, Crafty-men, False-Teachers,
Deceitfull-Workers, Transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, 2
Corinthians 1. 13. Paul Planted a Church in Ephesus, Acts 20. 28. yet after his
Departure, Grievous Wolves entered in not Sparing the Flock. Surely in this Life
Marches are not redd betwixt GOD and the Devil; The Devil Fyles the Score, and
comes over the March upon GODs Bounds. Matthew 13. GOD Sows his Wheat, and the
Devil steals up the Rigg, and with Hot-furr he Sows his Tares. 1 Kings 22. In
Achab's Court there is never a Honest-Man till he be Tried: The False-Knave and
Truth are Door-Neighbours. 1 Kings 22. In Achab's Court there is an Honest-Man
that tells the King the Truth; But there is Four Hundred False-Knaves that says
against him, and Poor-Man he must to Prison, and they get leave to keep the
Court; for the Thief is ever the Honest-Man till he be Tried; The False-Knave
and the Truth are Door-Neighbours, and almost Twins born at one Time; howbeit
Truth be Eldest and Firstborn Isaiah Complains Chapter 46. Of Dumb Dogs that
could never have enough. Jeremiah 10. He Complains of many Pastors that
Corrupted the Vineyard. Ezekiel Complains of Foxes. Zachariah 11. Of
Idol-Shepherds. Hymineus and Philetus spoke against Paul. The Sadducees in
Christ's Days Denied the Resurrection: And not only is there False Teachers in
our Days, but in the Best Kirks were, and are many Foxes; for all is not Fish
that comes in the Net: And if ye be GODs Sheep, ye must not think to want Foxes
to Nibble, and to Work under the Earth to Destroy you; Ye may not look that
Christ is Master of the Fields without Blood: Ye will not be long in Prosperity
in the World. There be a Number of Foolish People wonders that GOD brings such
a Good Husband that should not hold out the Foxes from his own Vineyard; They
would have a Christ of Gold, and a Kirk of Velvet, or of Fair White Paper; They
think Christ's Bride should be Clade in Purple and Scarlet as the Whore of Rome
is, or does Wear.

I will show you how Christ and his Kirk meets when the Bridegroom Wooed his
Kirk; Many a Black Stroke got He both of GOD and Man. He was the Vine, GOD and
Man struck at him with Axes; he Bought him Dear; it cost him Blood ere he got
her: And think ye she has Fair Weather when she Wooes him? Nay, many a Cuffe
gets she from the World; This Fox, and that Fox pulls the Skin off her: She is
hardly handled in this Wooing, there be Strokes on both Sides: For fain would
the Devil have the Contract Cancelled, and the Marriage going back. And let me
speak to you that are GODs Young Vine, make you for it, the Foxes of the World
will Peel the Bark off you; If there be Grace in you, they will do what they
can to eat it up in the bud; Hold your hands about the Grace of GOD, be not
Robbed; And ye give them their Will, they would pull the Skin off your Face.

Secondly, Ye see Christ has gotten out Letters of Caption against all his
Foxes: Here is a Commission obtained in Christ's Court, that all that hurts
Christ's Vineyard should be Apprehended and laid fast: But alas! the
Commissioners, the Pastors, the Judges over-sees them: But here a Comfort for
you, who are the LORDs Vines, that are troubled with Foxes, I assure you, that
the Kirk has Law against all her Enemies: Be not casten down, because the World
Hates you; Twenty six Hunder years syn Christ has given out a Decree against
all his Enemies, and Yours, to take them. Here ye have Assurance; Your Enemies
are Rebels, and all of them under Caption, Psalms 110. 6. He shall fill the
Places with Dead Bodies. He shall Wound the Head over them, even in many
Countries. Ye that Complain of your Predominant Sin, and thinks ye are hardened
with them (for these be also Foxes that do Harm the LORDs Vineyard) fight
against them, for Christ has given out a Decree against those that they shall
be taken.

My Beloved is Mine. These be the Words of the Contract of Marriage; For there
is a Covenant betwixt Christ and his Kirk, Ezekiel 36. I will be Their GOD, and
They shall be My People. But here an Doubt to be answered by these Words: It
would seem Christ and his Kirk are Two Different Parties in the Contract;
Christ upon the one side, and the Kirk upon the other: Is not Christ upon the
Kirks Side, and obliges for his Wife? I Answer, Christ having Two Natures, has
Two Contrary Considerations, and yet he is one Party, and we another, and so
Promises to us Life Eternal; and we Promise by his Grace to Believe.

Secondly, Christ is considered as Mediator, GOD and Man, and so he is upon our
Side; for the Promise is made to Him and His; And he as Principal-Contractor
binds for Us, and we are his Assigneys; So Jesus skips betwixt both the Sides,
because he is a Friend to both: But it is certain these very Words proves him
to be on our Side of the Covenant, because our Beloved is Ours, and we are His;
He is our Mediator and Cautioner bound for Us. The very Words of the Covenant
are spoken to Christ, Psalms 87. 27. I will make Him My Firstborn Higher then
the Kings of the Earth: But he said, Verse 26. He shall cry to Me, Thou art My
Father, My GOD, and the Rock of My Salvation: My Mercy will I keep for Him for
evermore, and My Covenant shall stand Fast with Him. The Enemies of Grace would
have Christ a GOD folding his Fingers, and a Looker on, and beholding Fair
Play. Liars, he is more than Half-play master. The Devil will not get his Name
out of the Contract: And Beloved, see ye not but it is a Sweet Thing to have
any thing to do with Christ. His Chafe is better than other Men's Corn; If ye
have any fastening with Christ the Cause is Won; Now hold you be Christ, it is a
shame for him that ye fall out of the Covenant, because he is Cautioner; as ye
know, it is a shame for a Nobleman that his Poor Friend be cast in Prison for
the Debt that he is obliged to pay: Christ is now obliged that He fulfill the
Covenant, and make Good both your Part, and his Part: Boast not of your Selves,
or of your own Strength; be not Proud of your Selves, but ye shall have full
Liberty to boast your Self of Christ, Crac enough of Christ; be Proud of
Christ's Merits, ye cannot err there; The Debt of Faith and Obedience that we
are aughting to GOD now to speak so) is not our Debt but Christ's, and he is
Cautioner for us: It were a shame that a Poor Friend should be Imprisoned for
his Chiefs Debt, especially since he is a Rich-man and able to pay.

Now let us consider the Mutual Interest, Christ and the Kirk, has every one of
another: He is Mine, and I am His; He is my Husband, and I am His Wife; He is
my Head, and I am His Body; He is my King, and I am His People; He is my Rich
Cautioner, and I am His Dyvour.

Now let us see what claim Christ has in the Kirk, and what claim the Kirk has
in Christ. Now to hold upon the Comparison of this Song betwixt a Husband and a
Wife; for the Husband and the Wife has no Sundry Goods; if he be a King, she is
a Queen; If he have a fair Inheritance, it is hers also, as long as he Lives;
If they Live ever together, it is ever hers: Then when she says, he is mine, I
am his, CHRIST is mine, and I am his, and all his, his Flesh, and his Blood;
his Death and Merits; his Glory; his Kingdom; his Court and Credit, and all is
Mine; and all Mine is His, my Soul and Body, my Sins, my Trouble, my Cross,
they are all His. Christ and She is (to speak so) carded throw other, John 15.
Abide in Me, and I in You: Cursed be he that says not Amen to that; John 17.
21. That they also may be one, as Thou Father art in Me, and I in Thee, that
they also may be one in Us: I in them, and they in Me. But we will labor to
Reduce them, the Particulars to a certain Number. There be these Things Common
to us betwixt Christ and Us.

First, There is a Sibness of Nature betwixt Christ and us. There be Pawns
given and received betwixt both Sides; He has a Pawn of Ours, Our Flesh, and he
took that Pawn with him to heaven, and he is never minded to give it again; but
we have as Good a Pawn of him, his Spirit; We were of that Flesh and Blood.
Hebrews 2. 14. Let us keep Christ's Pawn as long as he keeps Ours; Let him not
be to the fore with Us: Now he keeps our Pawn for ever; He will never lay down
our Flesh; We are never minded to lose the Pawn, let him keep it for ever; Long
may he keep it: Let us keep his Spirit; For it is not his Will to loose that
Pawn; Let him keep it for ever, Hebrews 4. 2. Christ would also be a Bairn and
Partaker of Flesh and Blood. Would to GOD ye would all strive to get his Pawn,
and to keep it well; Seek his Spirit, and keep it well. Worldly Men, Ye have
little claim to Jesus; GOD help you, there is no Borrowing nor Lending betwixt
You and Christ.

Secondly, Community; We got all his Good, and he gets all our Ill, that is a
Good Cooss for Us; He took our Curses, we took his Blessings; He our Shame, We
his Glory; He our Sins, We his Righteousness: He is the Kirks, and the Kirk is
Christ's; That Day GOD laid upon Christ, he was shifted our from under GODs
Wrath, and GOD struck the Kirk's Head, to let the Members go free. When Christ
was in blocking to buy his Kirk, he knew the Faults in the Wares; he kend well
enough that Curse of GOD, and Wrath of GOD, and Hell, and Sin, and many Ills
followed the Kirk: Yet Christ wad not rue in time; He said freely I will take
her, and all the Ills that follow her, how beit she be Blind, Lame, yea, a
Cursed Bride; Yet I will make her my Wife. Would to GOD we could take Christ
and all the faults that follow Him. There be Men that will not Cooss with
Christ; but will keep their Will, their Lust: GOD was about to strike Us, and
had lifted (to speak so) his Wand to bring a Stroke of his Wrath upon Us; and
Christ came in, and held his Hand, and laid down himself, and bade his Father
lay upon Him: Yea never saw such a Suitor as Christ, he prays Us to Cooss for
the better; He cries to you for GODs Sake give me your Dross, and ye shall get
my Gold; Give me your Sins, and I give you My Righteousness. Is it not an hard
matter? Men will not give their Ill to Christ, and transfer and give over their
Sins to Christ. He says to you, Give Me your Lust that I may Crucify it, and I
will give you Love for it: Give Me your Anger, and I will give you My Zeal for
it. Then make a Cooss and take him at his Word, ilk day be making New Blocks
with Christ; Deny your Folly, and give it to him to Crucify; And seek ye his
Wisdom, you must do this ever while all Nature be away and done, and nothing in
you but Grace.

Thirdly, There is a Community of Gifts and Graces betwixt Christ and Us. Not a
Grace we get from GOD, but it comes throw Christ's hands to us: So that Christ
keeps the Pawns betwixt GOD and Us: GOD gives Grace to his Kirk, but where is
it? It is in Jesus. Grace is laid in Pledge in the Hands of Jesus, and it was
made a running over Fountain: For as we see in a Race, the Wages, or the
Garland is not in the Hand of the Runners, but some Friends keeps the Staikes
for both: So Christ keeps the Wage for the Father and Us. Christ indeed is the
Fountain. John 1. I4 We beheld His Glory, as the Glory of the Only begotten
Son. Some Friend keeps the Staikes for both; There the Well running over, But
for what End? Verse 16. That out of His Fullness we might all Receive, even
Grace for Grace. So GOD gives us Life Eternal. But who has this Life in Pledge?
Even Jesus Christ, 1 John 5. 11. And this is the Witness that GOD has given
us, even Eternal Life; and this Life is in His Son* LORD send us part of this
consigned Grace. Again ye send not up a Sigh to GOD; but first it must be laid
down in the hand of him that keeps the Pawns, Revelation 8. 12. Be the Way I
shall give the Use with every Article of the Doctrine; Try thy Light, try thy
Grace, try thy Honor, and Credit, Riches, and all the Blessings that ye have;
The Silver, and the Gold, whether these Blessings be Impawned in Christ's Hand
or ye get them; If ye get them not in Christ, they are Unchristened Blessings,
and they want the Fashion. Woe be to these Blessings that came never throw
Christ's Holy Hands. Again, try your Prayers, Sighs and Desires, and your
Service, if ye offer them to GOD in CHRIST: Many Unchristened Prayers goes to
Heaven that are never Welcomed of GOD. Ye must take your Communion out of GODs
Hand at the nearest; but out of CHRIST's Hand there should be nothing done
betwixt GOD and Us; but CHRIST should be at it.

Fourthly, There is a Community of Sufferings betwixt CHRIST and Us. Poor would
we be, if his Sufferings were not Ours; and Woe would be our Case if his
Sufferings were not Ours: But this Way it goes, he is that Apple Tree Excellent
above all the Trees of the Forest, and we do Rest under the Tree, now when the
Shower of Rain falls, it lights first on the Tree, and the Stroke of it is
broken, and it does not great Harm to these that are under the Tree. Ilk New
Shot at the Kirk, lights first on the Head of Christ, and he breaks the Point
of the Arrow. If ye be Ill-spoken off, so was He; If ye be Hated of the World,
so was He; If your Blood be shed, and your Face Deformed, so was his fair Face
Deformed and Marred, Isa. 52. 14. be content to Drink with Christ. Woe be to
them that are not in Christ, and yet are in Trouble: The Arrow with the Sharp
Point comes upon them, and goes to their Heart, and Slays them. Try if your
Troubles be Christened-Troubles, that lights first upon CHRIST the Head, and
then upon you as the Members. Try if by Faith ye have an Union with him. Now
here by the way a Great Comfort in Trouble: Those that are Dear to you Dies,
and ye Mourn: Christ Mourned and Groaned in Spirit for Dead Lazarus: Ye Weep,
so he Weeped. Are ye Poor, and ay at the Borrowing; So was Christ at the
Borrowing Trade all his Days: Should ye not then with Good Will Drink off the
Cup that He Drank off before you* when ye Murmr, and will not Drink
Willingly, ye Refuse to Pledge Christ: But ye must Pledge Him, and Drink with
GOD's Blessing, and with Joy, He will not Poison you. They are none of Christ's
Friends that will not Pledge Him, Matthew. 20: 21.

Fifthly, There is a Community of Glory betwixt Christ and Us: The Heaven that
the Mediator Christ Enjoys, is our Heaven; Our Heaven is to the Man Christ in a
Conquest: Heaven was bought with Blood to Him and Us, and to make you Rejoice:
None of GOD's Children gets a Heaven properly of their own; Why? We got a share
and part of Christ's Inheritance, He is the Principal Heir, Romans 8. We are
the Conjunct-heirs: Sweet is that Word which He speaks to his Children, Luke
22. 29. And I appoint unto You a Kingdom, as My Father has appointed unto Me,
that ye may Eat and Drink at My Table in My Kingdom, Sitting on Thrones,
Judging the Twelve Tribes of Israel. The Meaning is, My Father has made a
Disposition to Me of the Kingdom of GOD, it is Mine and My Dear Children. I
will think Heaven uncouth if ye be not with Me. Here I make a Disposition and
Resignation of that Kingdom to you; Ye shall Sit at my Table in My Kingdom: Up
your Heart, howbeit ye be not Lords in Earth, ye shall be Lords in Heaven; I
and Ye shall part Kingdoms and Thrones together.

Secondly, Rejoice in this ye that are in Christ and see your Condition, ye and
Christ are Halfers together of Heaven and Glory, O if GOD's Children be in a
Sweet Case as long as Christ is in Heaven and keeps the Inheritance, as long
shall we keep our Right; And who can cause him Flit? The Devil has made these
Enemies of the Grace of GOD to Misken all our communion with Christ, they have
put Christ and the Elect together, as a Man in an Inns for a Night, and to go
away to Morrow; They have yoaked Christ and us together, as if He were one and
we another; as if He were His own, and We were our own; as if Christ had no Law
and Right to Us, and We had no Law and Right to Christ, but met at a Venture,
and sundered at a Venture; as if We had one heaven, and He had another; As if
he had his Portion by himself alone, and that he keeps for ever; and that We
had our Share be our alone too, to Sell when We pleased. Sells if we Dispone
Heaven, We Dispone not Christ's Heaven. In the Fighting he fights all the
Battles his alone, We but look on: But when it comes to the Dividing of the
Spoil, We get a Rich Share of the Spoil, Yet he gave the Whole Sum for the
Inheritance, and We Nothing; yet we are set at his Elbow in a Throne with him,
Now seeing our Right is also Good, slip not from them: Do not as some Unworthy
Heir, who having a Good Right slips from it for a feckless composition after
Drink, quites all, howbeit he should Beg: Indeed the Wicked does this. The
Devil drinks them Blankfull, and fills them with Worldly Pleasures, and garrs
them Subscrive a Resignation, and gives them an unworthy composition, some
present Pleasure. Compone not with the Devil to go to the Law with him, let
Christ be your Advocat, Subscrive not a Submission with the Devil, come never
in Trysting Terms with him* hold you aback from the World, and the Lusts of it,
it is the Devil's Arles that he gives to Silly Drunken Heirs, when they cry
Hills and Mountains fall on Us: They would fain give back the Arles and Rue,
but it is out of time.

And I am His. This Property of the covenant is Mutual, as she says and
acknowledges that he is hers, and so Christ is bound to her by his Promise: So
she acknowledges that she is bound to him, and is his by Right, Multitudes of
the World would play fast and loose with him: They would have Christ fast, and
themselves loose: They devise a covenant of their own, and says, Christ Died
for All, and GOD is Merciful to All, and GOD will Relieve All Christian Souls
from Hell, and they think GOD and CHRIST fast enough to them: But in the mean
time they are loose, and Lives like Dogs and Swine in their Filthiness: These
Men would have Christ as a Child in making of the covenant, and exceeding
Silly: should Christ give himself for you, and will ye neither give Life nor
Goods for him? Christ came to save you, Matthew. 20. 28. And will ye be his
Master? Are ye not obliged to Serve him? This is to make a Gospel of your own:
Too many Obeys the Gospel as long as it Flatters them. As long as it tells them
Christ's Parts, and that he shed his Blood, and came to save Sinners freely:
That is the best Chapter in all the Bible: But when the Gospel begins to tell
them what is their Part, and that they must Deny Themselves, Crucify their
Lusts, to Take up Christ's Heavy Cross, they start aback: These are
Tender-footed-Christians that Walks in the Law, and in the Gospel, so long as
they go softly on it as a Bed of Roses, and Hurts not their Feet: But when a
Thorn of the Command touches them, they stand aback. Ye may not half GOD's Law,
and take as much of it as serves you. As Christ gave himself to be Yours, and
has Subscrived the Contract; So give your Selves to Him, and Subscrive your
Part of the Contract to be his, as he is Yours; Take therefore the Law and this
Sweet Savior both together, bind your Selves to him to be his, as he is bound
to be Yours.

He Feeds among the Lillies. To prove that Christ does Esteem her as his Kirk
and Flock, his Wife, his Beloved: She says, He Feeds her amongst the Lillies,
that is, the Pure and Uncorrupted Word of GOD, or the Lillies are the Fruits of
the Spirit, opposed to Stinking Roots, and Bitter Roots that grow in the Kirk:
When Judgment is like Hemlock, or Wormwood: Or the Lillies, the Saints of GOD,
that are Lillies amongst Thorns.

Fifthly, However it be, it is certain the LORD feeds his Kirk with as much
Spiritual Food as holds in their Life in the Way to Heaven, while their Day of
Marriage come, Romans 8. 23. We receive here the first Fruits. When a Man has
shorn a stouk of his corn-field, that puts him in assurance of the whole croop.
GOD would have Israel to Taste of the Vine Grapes of Canaan, to assure them
they should get the Land it self, 2 Chronicles 1. 22 GOD has sealed us and
given us the Earnest of his Spirit in our Hearts. There be Two Words.

First, GOD does with his Children in this Life as a Merchant does with his
Wares he has bought, because he cannot Transport them presently, he puts a Seal
or Mark upon them, and then it may be Sold to no other Body, and his Children
stricks hands, he writes his Name, and his Arms; the Image of GOD in their
Soul; and then when the Devil comes throw the Market to buy, for he offers ay
Money in hand, Pleasure, Lusts, Honors: Ye have an Answer to give him; Tell
him, your Soul is sealed already; You have blocked with an Honest Merchant;
Christ and he has put his Mark upon you that ye may not Sell; and it were a
pity to beguile him. And therefore bid that Deceiving Loun go seek his Market
in another place; ye are not his Merchant. The Devil will promise them as fair
as GOD: he will not prig with them: he will not care to promise much more than
Heaven. She shall be like GOD: But he pays not so well as GOD does: Agree not
with him: Block not with him.

There is another Sweet Word used, that GOD gives to his Children, The Earnest
of His Spirit in this Life; He gives them Arles, Faith, Hope, Joy, these be
like Six or Seven Shillings to warrant that; Ye shall get the Principal
(Beloved) had GOD blocked with you, and given you Arles, he would therefore
that the Bargain hold. Will ye not then take GODs Arles, and block with the
Devil? By GOD's Arles ye have Assurance of this, GOD will come and Loose his
Arles; Rue not of the block, never any Man had cause to Rue the block with
Jesus Christ. There is another Word used, John 16. Christ is going to Heaven to
Leave His Disciples; He promised to come again to them to see them: How Sorry
were they to want him, and blyth were they of that word that he said, he will
come again: Therefore in Sign and Token that he would come again; he promised
them a Pawn, that was His Holy Spirit. Ye know Christ and We are contracted in
this Life; We will be Married again at the Day he comes to Judge the World. Now
all the Wooing-Time, there goes Love Tokens betwixt Them, and Missive-Letters.
Tell me when ye got a Letter last from Christ; There will be Messengers going
betwixt You. The same Word is a Messenger, the Sacraments are Love Tokens that
our Wooer has left to assure us that he is contracted with Us. I pray you take
no Gifts from the Devil; away with Ill-Conquest: Away with Lusts, and the Love
of the World. I hope ye are not minded to Marry with Sin; if ye do, ye are
ashamed then for all your Days: Ye are come off GOD's House, and are his Image:
Fie, it is a shame to hear tell of it, to Marry with a Base Slave the Devil: I
allow you here to be Wife and Prudent in your Marriage; Marry not for Gear,
keep your self to be a Good Match. There be a sort of Indifferent-men, that ye
call Harmless-meu, they have neither Good nor Ill, they Love not Falsehood, they
Love not Popery, and yet they will not Burn for the Truth; They are like
Blank-paper, as it is thought, neither GOD nor the Devil has blocked with them:
But has not GOD given you Arles, nor no Pawn? Satan will get you: But do this
first, hold your self with Christ, and then ye have an Answer to give other
Lovers, the World and the Devil: Ye may Laugh and say, ye are too long in
coming; I have promised my Self away to another Husband, and therefore I cannot
have you also; for I will not have Two Husbands, 1 Cor. 6. 19. The Apostle
takes a Reason to Prove that the Body should not be given to an Harlot; it is
the Temple of the Holy Ghost. Set the House of your Soul to GOD, and then for
shame ye cannot win off him to cause him Flit. Ye are bought with a Price,;
Married Folk has not many Wooers: The Devil is busy to seek them that are
Virgins, and Love not Christ to be their Husband.

While the Day Dawn. That is, The Marriage-day; and in Hebrew called Your Day
for Excellency. To say the Truth, it is a Day, and called the Day of Christ,
the Day of Redemption, 2 Timothy 1. 2. It is called the Day for these Causes.
It is the Day when Christ is Perfect in his Members. Now Christ's Body is
Mangled, Arms, and Legs, and Hands, in sundry places; Some not Born, some Born:
But in the Devils Service, some Rotten in the Earth, and casten in the Sea.
Christ is Bleeding in his Members; There is many a Wound in the Mystical-Body
of Christ this Day; all will be gathered in that he gets: His Bride he enters
in Peaceable Possession of Her.

Secondly, That Day Christ shall give in his Accounts, and all his Fathers
Generally; he shall Render an Account of all that he took by the Hand, and
shall put up his Sword, and never Draw it again; And as the Chief- Shepherd, he
shall make an Account of all his Lambs, and tell his Father, these be all My
Silly- Sheep; They have win away with their Life. I went throw Woods, and
Waters, and Briers, and Thorns to Gather them in, and My Feet was Pricked, and
My Hands and My Side Pierced ere I could get a grip of them; but now here they
are. Good Cause shall the LORD have to Clap Christ's Head that Day: And judge
ye if ye will have a Blyth Heart, to hear Christ and his Father to Count
together, when we shall be all standing under the broad Scarlet Robe of
Christ's Righteousness, and as many Glorified Angels looking on.

Thirdly, And every Soldier that Day shall show his Wounds to his LORD,
saying, LORD, I have losed this and this for Thee, and GOD shall clap our Head,
and take us benn to his Chamber of Presence, all Glorious Tapestry there, LORD,
make you Ready for that Day.

And the Shadow flee away, or Mist. This Life is all but a Night, because of
the Ignorance and Darkness of our Mind; We see but the Portrait of the Kingdom
in the Glass of the Word and Sacraments. Then when that Day Dawns, we shall see
Him Face to Face. So long as the Night is, we do Nothing, but by the use of
Candle; When the Sun rises, the Candle is blown out, lest we should burn
Daylight. The Gospel is GODs Candle to let us see the Way to Heaven: But when
it is Daylight, and Christ Lighted to us from Heaven, then shall come Light
and Heat from Him, Clear Light and Knowledge that shall endure for ever. Our
Soul here is like a House in the Night, when Doors and Windows are closed. In
that Day the Doors and Windows shall cast up, that the Sun may shine for ever
upon us: We shall not need to seek Communions; The Lamb of GOD shall be present
with you for evermore, Rev. 21. I saw no Temple there, for the Lord God
Almighty is their Light. We get but here the Parings of GODs Bread, and a Four
Hours Drink, to speak so. There the Board shall be Covered, and the Great Loaf
set upon it, and all shall Eat, and all be Welcome, and the Table shall never
be Drawn. Ye shall have your fill of CHRIST; Ye shall Drink, and Drink at the
Wells Head, the Cup of Salvation for evermore.

Secondly, One Night here: But we know not what we are, Marches are not redd
betwixt GOD and Satan here: We are but Silly Bodies here, Earthen Vessels often
in Trouble, I Corinthians 1. and yet Kings Sons, 1 John 3. 2. Behold now we are
the Sons of GOD, and it does not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that
when He does appear, we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is. A
Friend from a Foe cannot be known in the Night: Care not what the World think
of you, it is Night, they cannot well see you.

Thirdly, It is Night, because of Great Trouble which besets us, Luke 3. 1, 2:
Let us be content with an hard Bed, the Morn will be a Good Day, and think ye
what a Comfort it will be to you, when GOD puts up his own Holy Hands to your
Face, and to your Watery Eyes, and shall Dry them with the Napkin of his
Consolation.

Now this Short Night ly still in Peace and Sleep by Faith in GOD. Be content
to ly down in your Grave for a Night or Two; for your Husband Christ shall be
at your Bedside soon in the Morning.

Turn My Beloved, and be thou like a Roe or a Young Heart upon the Mountains of
Bether. As Psalms 71. 21. Thou did turn about and comfort me. Turn about and
come to me, as swiftly as a Roe or a Young Heart upon the Mountains of Bether,
or Bithven. The Mountains of Division or Separation: Mount Gilead severed or
parted from the rest of the Land of Judea by the River of Jordan. In the which
Mountains, there was Pleasant Hanting; here She Desires his Presence, either in
the Last Judgment, or in his Incarnation, or by the Comfort of his Holy
Spirit, and prays that he as Roes and Hearts are not Hindered any Whit by any
Craigs or Down-falls of the Rocks to Descend and Meet one with another. So
CHRIST would be Kind to His Love, and count Mountains as Valleys, and let no
Craigie-way Hinder the LORD JESUS to come. She can never get Her Fill of
CHRIST; She is so Browden on CHRIST, that She ever would be at an Union with
him; There is Kissing, Verse 7. The Place where he Dwells, Chapter 2. under his
Shadow in his Wine-Celler; We cannot be far enough on in going to CHRIST: We
can never be near enough hand him. Cry ye to him, come; For he cries to you,
come; and then ye will Meet. Ill-Gate will not Hinder our Bridegroom to come,
he cares not for a Shower of Rain, or a Dark Night. He Loups over Hills to be
at his Kirk. Give ye him a Meeting. Amen.

Let us Pray.

