THE ACTIS AND CONstitutiounis of the Realm of Scotland maid in Parliamentis
haldin be the rycht excellent, hie and mychtie Princeis Kingis James the First,
Secund, third, Feird, Fyft, and in time of Marie now Queen of Scottis, viseit,
correctit, and extractit forth of the Registers be the Lordis depute be her
Maiesteis special commissioun thairto.

Anno. Do. 1566.

blazon or coat of arms

THE QVENIS GRACE PRIVILEGE GRANTIT for Imprenting of her Maiesteis Lawis and
actis of Parliamentis.
MARIE be the grace of God Queen of Scottis to all and sindrie our liegis and
subiectis, quhome it effeiris, quhais knawlege their our letters sall cum,
greting. WIT E US to have geuin, grantit, and be their our letters geuis, and
grantis to our weilbelouit Clerk Edward Henryson Doctor in the Lawis. etc. and
his assignayis allanerlie, full powar and license to Imprent, or cause Imprent,
and sell the Lawis and actis of Parliament of our Realm, That is to say, the
bukis of Law callit Regiam Maiestatem, and the remanent auld Lawis and actis of
Parliament, co^sequentlie maid be progres of time unto the dait of their
presentis, vis^it, sychtit, and correctit be the Lordis Commissaris specially
depute to the said viseting, sychting, and correeting thairof, and that for the
space of ten eiris nixt tocum. And dischairgeis and reuokis all other
privilege, and license grantit of befoir to any vthers for Imprenting of our
saidis Lawis and actis.

Quhairfoir we charge straightly and commandis ow all and sindrie our liegis and
subiectis foirsaidis, That nane of ow tak vpone hand to Imprent or cause
Imprent the saidis Lawis and actis in this our Realm or outwith the samm, or
to sell the same within this our Realm, under the pane of escheting of the
saidis bukis to our said wellbelouit Clerk, and als under the pane of paying to
him the sowme of two hundredth pundis money of our Realm, als often as this our
privilege and license beis contraueuit and brokin be ow or any of ow, during
the said space of ten eiris.

Geuin under our privy Seill, At Edinburgh the First day of Iunii, the eir of
God ane thousand five hundredth three scoir sax eiris, and of our Regne the
twenty four eir.
commissioun YOUR SOVERANE LADYIS COMMISSIOVN for viseing, correcting, and
Imprenting of the Lawis and actis of Parliamentis.
MARIE Be the grace of God Queen of Scottis, to all our liegis and subditis,
quhais knawlege their present letters fall cum, greting. WIT E US mouit of greit
eill of Justice to retene the haill subiectis within this our Realm and
dominiounis in good ordoure, and obedience toward us, and mutual society
amang them selfis, according to the good Lawis, constitutiounis, ordinances
and actis maid be us, and our may Nobill progenitouris of good memory,
considdering, that be the misknawlege and Ignorance of the same Lawis, all
misordour, inobedience, tumult, and troubling of the commoun weill proceidis:
And because sindrie Lawis, constitutiounis and ordinances hes been maid be
diverse our predecessouris, that certane leirnit, wise and expert men, quhilkis
best knawis the Lawis sold be chosin to see and examinat the bu^is of the Law,
and set them forth to the knawlege of our subiectis: Thairfoir we for the
weill and instructioun of our ^aidis liegis in the Lawis of this our Realm,
according to our eill of Justice and intentioun often times had of befoir, with
a^ise of the Lordis of our secreit counsall, to make, constitute, and or and be
their presentis our rycht traist cousingis and counsalouris George Earl of
Huntlie Lord Gordoun and Badenach our Chancellar, Arch^bald Earl of Ergyle Lord
Campbell and Lorne, James Earl of Murray Lord Abirnethy, James Earl Bothuile
Lord Hailis Chr^ichtoun and Liddisdaill, Iohne Earl of Athole, Lord Baluany,
Williame Earl Marchell, Lord K^ith, Iohne Earl of Mar Lord Erskin, Reverend
Fathers in God Iohne Bischop of Ros, Commendatour of our Abbay of Lundoris,
Alexander Bischop of Gallaway, Commendatour of Inchaffray, Adame Bischop of
Orknay, Schir Richard Maitland of Lethingtoun Knycht, keipar of our privy
Seill, Schir James Balfour of Pettindreich Knycht, Clerk of our Register, Schir
Iohne Bellenden of A^chinnoull Knycht, Clerk of our Iusticiciare, Master
Williame Baillie Lord Prouand, Master Iohne Spens of Condie, and Robert
Chreich^oun of Eliok our Aduocatis, Master David Chalmer Chaucellar of Ros,
and Master Edward Henryson doctor in the Lawis our Commissaris in that part:
Geuand, grantand and co^mittand to them or any sax of them, co^iunctlie (as
persounis of quhais science and experience in the Lawis of our Realm, we
specially dois confide, and is assurit of their industry and true diligence
in executing and perfyting of our command and chargeis) full powar and
au^oritie, express command, and charge in our name and behalf to visie, sycht
and correct the Lawis of this our Realm maid be us, and our may Nobill
progenitouris, be the auise of the three Estatis in Parliament haldin be them,
begiun and at the b^kis of the Law callit Regiam Maiestatem and Quoniam
Attachiamenta. And swa consequently following be progres o^ time unto the dait
of this our commissioun. Swa that na vthers bot the saidis Lawis sychrit,
mendit, and correctit be our saidis traist counsalouris and Commissaris, or any
sax of them, coniunctlie salbe be our privilege be Imprentit, or have place,
faith or authority, to be allegeit and reheirsit afoir any our Iugeis and
Justices quhatsumeuer in Judgment and outwith. And generally all and sindrie
other things to do, exerce, and use, that in the premissis or anent the samin
salbe necessare, or any manner of way, oportune. Firm, and stabill, haldand and
for to hald, all and quhatsmeuer our said counsalouris and Commissaris in that
part, or any sax of them coniunctlie in the premissis rychteouslie leidis to
be done. Attour we promit to cause this our present Commissioun, with all and
quhatsumeuer thingis, quhilkis out saidis counsalouris and Commissaris be
vertew heirof sall happin to do, perform, accomplische, and determinat, be
ratifeit, appreuit, and perpetually confirmit, be the auise of our three
Estatis in our nixt Parliament.

In witness of the quhilk thing, we have causit our greit Seill be put to their
presentis, At Edinburgh the First day of Maij, the eir of God ane thousand five
hundredth three scoir sax eiris, and of our Regne the twenty four eir.
Preface
The Preface to the Redar.
IT is may certane, that na thing is swa eirnistlie to be socht and straightly
keipit, as the knawlege of the Lawis and their authority. Because the Lawis
rychtlie disponis, and ordouris to the best both godly, and manly effairis,
and banisis thairout all iniquity. They ar the gift of God, the statute and
decreit of wise men, the amending and rychting of forthoct, and suddane
faultis, the commoun promeis, band, and obligatioun of the Realm, and of ilk
member thairof to other, after the quhilk it appertenis all the saidis members
to leid their life, gif they will not only leif, bot als manerlie, weill, and
godly leif. And like as ilk man aucht and sold seik the understanding of the
Lawis, that they may cast them with all their intent to observe, and keip the
samin: Rychtswa it is the office of the Souerane powar, and of the Magistratis,
and Officiaris constitute under the samin, to cause publis and make patent the
Lawis, to the effect foirsaid, as we see the Israelitis, Athenienis, the
Romany, and vthers pepill and Impyris lauchfullie reulit, and thairby lang
lestand, and continewand in prosperity, had their starutis and ordinancis
ingraifit, or writtin in Tabillis, and fixit in the may public and patent
placis, or inrollit, bukit, and solempnitlie red to all the pepill. And als all
weill maid constitutioun contenis in the self ane prouisioun, that it be
proclamit and publist. Misknawlege is ane manner and kind of excusatioun to
money men of their fault, albeit the Law sayis, their is, nor sold be na
excusatioun to the man pretenand Ignorance of the Law. Quhairfoir? Because the
Lord is understand to be notifeit, and publist to all man, and they sold seik
to the knawlege thairof. Thairfoir our Souerane Lady seeing the Lawis, and actis
of her may Nobill progenltouris to be for the may part vnknawn, bot to the
Iugeis, and men of Law, and it the samin to be throuch Ignorance of the
copistis confusit and full of errouris, hes may commendablie and
conveniently to her Royal estate and Majesty, and may graciously for the
weill of her subiectis, geuin commissioun to certane Nobill and leirnit Lordis,
her traist counsalouris, to sycht, considder, correct and cause publis in prent
the haill body of the Lawis of this her Realm. In the undertaking of the
quhilk charge and work the saidis Lordis thocht it may expedient for the
present, to begin at the mending, and furthsetting of the actis of Parliamentis
haldin be Kingis James the First, Secund, Third, Feird, Fyft, and be her
Maiesteis powar haua^d, and her self, and thairefter in all gudlie diligence to
reik a extend their cure to the emendatioun and publicatioun of the precedent
and mair ancient Lawis, the quhilkis, as they ar mair difficill to be decernit
on: Swa they require langar time to their dew correctioun. And albeit nane of
all the Lordis Commissaris can be praisit aneuch, and proportionallie to their
worthynes for the travel and diligence takin be them in this present editioun
and outset, it in special with all mennis fauouris, two of the saidis Lordis
ar to be rememb^^r and commendit: They ar to say, ane Reverend Father in God
Iohne Bischop of Ros Lord of our Soueranis Secreit counsall and of her College
of Justice, for his suggestioun to our Souerane of this notabill purpose,
eirnistfull performing of the said commissioun and cure in conuening of my
Lordis Commissaris his colligis, and liberality in the furthsetting of this
Imprenting: And Schit James Balfour of Pettindreith Knycht Clerk of the
Register. etc. For his sinceir, a^ald and glaid concurrance to perfyte this
wark, and exhibitioun of the originallis out of the Register, and making of
them patent at all times, on na wayis regardand his awin particulare outher
proffeit or gloir, bot only the commoun weill of the Realm. It restis to
exhort all our Souerane Ladyis liegis to diligently mark and considder their
awin dewtie and office expressit in this Law buke, and to express and manifest
the samin be leiding of their lyte conform thairto in word and deid, sercheand
heirout doctrine of treuth and obedience to the Princeis, their Magistratis,
and Officiaris of Justice: Off honest life, of abstinence fra iniuring and
hurring ane a other: Off giving to ilk persoun his awin: Off lauchfull
conquesing, keiping, and annalying of landis, gudis and geir: And als to thank
our Souerane of her directioun and commissioun, and the Lordis for the travel
takin be them thairin: Finally to accept and embrace this haill laubour with
sic benevolence and gentill heart, that occasioun be geuin e^terwart, that the
rest of the auld Lawis of Scotland be brocht to lycht, and put in the liegis
handis to be commounlie red and understand with greit fruit and pleasure to the
honor of God, true obedience to our Soueranis, and to the weill particular of
ilk persoun, and commoun of the haill Realm.

ED. HENRISON

The tabill of the actis.
THE TABILL OF THE ACTIS OF PARLIAMENT HALDIN BE King James the First.
For the honor of God and halie Kirk. Ca. j. For the observing of sicker peax
within the Realm. Ca. ij. That na man rebel agane the Kingis persoun. Ca.
iij. Off en^orsing maid vpone Rebellis agane the Kingis persoun. Ca. iiij. Off
the number of rydand men and fute men throw the cuntrie. Ca. v. Off the
Ministers of Law within the Realm. Ca. vj. That na companyis ouerly husband
men. Ca. vij. That all custume remane with the King till his leising. Ca. viij.
Off landis and rentis that war our Souerane Lord the Kingis predecessouris. Ca.
ix. Off finance to be maid for the Kingis costage in Ingland. Ca. x. Off the
manner of taxatioun to be maid in the Realm. Ca. xj. Off slaying of Salmound in
forbodin time. Ca. xij. That all cruuis and airis be destroyit. Ca. xiij. Off
the mine of gold and silver. Ca. xiiij. That na Clerkis pas over sey, but the
Kingis license. Ca. xv. That na Clerkis purches benefice pensiounis of
beneficis within the Realm. Ca. xvj. That na man have out of the Realm gold
nor silver. Ca. xvij. Off strangearis that takis money for their Merchandice.
Ca. xviij. That na man play at the fute ball. Ca. xix. That ilk man busk them
to be archaris. Ca. xx. Off bigging of Rukis in treis. Ca. xxj. Off mure
birning. Ca. xxij. Off custume of horse, nolt, scheip and hering had out of the
Realm. Ca. xxiij. Off custume of mertrik skinnis and other furringis. Ca.
xxiiij. [] Off reformatioun and mending of the money. Ca. xxv. Off hostillaris
in Burrowis and throuch fairis. Ca. xxvj. Off the reule of beggaris. Ca. xxvij.
Ane complaint with inhibitioun vpone pensiounis purchesing. Ca. xxviij. Off the
fredome of halie Kirk. Ca. xxix. Anent hospitallis. Ca. xxx. Off Heretickis and
Lollardis. Ca. xxxj. Anent the keiping of the statutis maid in the first
Parliament. Ca. xxxij. Anent liggis and bandis. Ca. xxxiij. [] Off selling of
horse. Ca. xxxiiij. Anent Taulch. Ca. xxxv. The statute anent Indictment. Ca.
xxxvj. Off stollin wod. Ca. xxxvij. The statute anent salmound. Ca. xxxviij.
Anent stalkaris that slayis Deir. Ca. xxxix. Off ressettouris of Rebellis. Ca.
xl. The statute of Merchandis. Ca. xlj. Off men of craft. Ca. xlij. Anent the
ordinance of processiounis. Ca. xliij. (^) Off the custom of wollin claith.
Ca. xliiij. The statute anent land men. Ca. xlv. Anent all beggaris. Ca. xlvj.
The statute anent lesingmakaris. Ca. xlvij. Off wappinschawingis. Ca. xlviij.
Anent complaintis to be decydit befoir the Judge Ordinar. Ca. xlix. [*] Anent
remissiounis to be geuin. Ca. l. Off halie Kirk. Ca. lj. Anent harnes to be
brocht hame be Merchandis. Ca. lij. That all the Kingis liegis leif and be
gouernit be the Lawis of the Realm. Ca. liij. Anent the schawing of Charters
and new infeftmentis. Ca. liiij. For the halding of the money within the
Realm. Ca. lv. That na persounis that Indictis men to the Justice Air be on
their assyse. Ca. lvj Off forthochtfellony. Ca lvij. That all Barronis and
Frehalders sall compeir personally in the Parliament. Ca. lviij. Anent
attornayis in the Justice Airis, that they be honest persounis. Ca. lix. (*)
Off persounis to be chosin to examine the buikis of Law, and reform them. Ca.
lx. Anent hostillaris in Burrowis and throuch fairis. Ca. lxj. Off prayar and
Processioun to be maid for the King and the Queen be the Clergy. Ca. lxij.
Anent mesouris. Ca. lxiij. Off wechtis. C. lxiiij. Off watter mettis. Ca. lxv.
[*] Anent ferryaris and baitmen. Ca. lxvj. Off the wappinschawing. Ca. lxvij.
Anent the Merchandis and saillaris passand to Ireland. Ca. lxviij. Off
Schipmen. Ca. lxix. Anent Ireland men cummand in Scottis Schippis. Ca. lxx. The
statute anent Ireland men. Ca. lxxj. Off the Sessiounis to be haldin. Ca.
lxxij. The first Sessioun. Ca. lxxiij. The Secund Sessioun. Ca. lxxiiij. (*)
The third Sessioun. Ca. lxxv. That every man that hes not of his awin, sall
laubour for his leuing. Ca. lxxvj. Anent the executioun of the actis of
Parliament maid of befoir. Ca. lxxvij. Anent the mesoure of the elne. Ca.
lxxviij. Quhat the stane sall contene. Ca. lxxix. Off the deuisioun of the
boll, and the mesoure of the fyrlot and the boll. Ca. lxxx. Anent vnlawis for
birning. Ca. lxxxj. Off hay and stray to be sauld. Ca. lxxxij. That certane
ledders be fundin ay reddie in the Burgh for happinning of fire. Ca. lxxxiij.
Off commoun women. Ca. lxxxiiij. Off fire and the panis thairof. Ca. lxxxv.
Anent the custume of salmound and other fische. Ca. lxxxvj. Off Dekinnis of
craft. Ca. lxxxvij. Off the price and feis of craftismen. Ca. lxxxviij. Off
wark men. Ca. lxxxix. [] Off wrychtis and masounis. Ca. lxxxx. Off land men.
Ca. lxxxxj. Anent the bigging of Castellis in the North. Ca. lxxxxij. That
Iugeis salbe sworn to determine all causis after their cunning. Ca. lxxxxiij.
Anent the finance of Clerkis. Ca. lxxxxiiij. Anent hostillaris. Ca. lxxxxv. (*)
Off down putting of Dekinnis of craftis. Ca. lxxxxvj. That every man be
summound be the Ordinar or his Official to spiritual courtis. Ca. lxxxxvij.
That in ilk Arbitrie be chosin ane od persoun. Ca. lxxxxviij. That the cause of
all Merchandis deid outwith the Realm, be decydit within. Ca. lxxxxix. Anent
slauchter. Ca. c. Off fugitouris fra the Law. Ca. cj. [*] Off slauchter in the
Barrony. Ca. cij. Off slauchter in Burgh. Ca. ciij. Off slauchter in Regalitie,
and the Officiaris thairof. Ca. ciiij. Off the Lord of the Regalitie. Ca. cv.
Off inquisitioun of forthochtfellony. Ca. cvj. Off the fugitoure in
forthochtfellony. Ca. cvij. Anent assouerance taken betuix persounis discordand.
Ca. cviij. Anent fugitouris. Ca. cix. That Mairis and Seriandis have wandis and
hornis. Ca. cx. (*) Off them hauand Merchandice out of the Realm vncustumit.
Ca. cxj. That small Barronis and frehalders neidis not to cum to Parliament.
Ca. cxij. Off craftismen within Burrowis. Ca. cxiij. Off beggaris. Ca. cxiiij.
Off wolf birdis. Ca. cxv. Off cruuis in watters. Ca. cxvj. [*] The leif to
Merchandis to fure their gudis. Ca. cxvij. Anent Lipper folk. Ca. cxviij. Anent
the passage of Clerkis out of the Realm. Ca. cxix. That na man pas to courtis
with gaddering. Ca. cxx. That nane interpreit the Kingis statutis. Ca. cxxj.
Off wild foulis. Ca. cxxij. [] Off the aith to be maid to the Queen be the
Clergy and the Barronis. Ca. cxxiij. Anent fugitouris fra the Kingis Lawis. Ca.
cxxiiij. That husband men sold remane for a eir with their takkis. Ca. cxxv.
Off Mairis of fee. Ca. cxxvj. Anent Officiaris that makis any summounding. Ca.
cxxvij. Anent exceptiounis to be maid aganis the Kingis breuis. Ca. cxxviij.
Off essoneis to be maid in court. Ca. cxxix. Anent ane Borgh to be fundin in
court. Ca. cxxx. Off the domes falsing. Ca. cxxxj. [*] That na recounter be
hard in court and the party absent them. Ca. cxxxij. Anent the persounis that
sall weir claithis of silk and furringis. Ca. cxxxiij. Anent the persounis that
salbe haill harnest and weill horsit. Ca. cxxxiiij. Anent the grathing of emen
for weir. Ca. cxxxv. That ever ilk Barrone within him self ordand his men to be
grathit as is befoir writtin. Ca. cxxxvj. Off ilk Burges man hauand fyftie
pundis in gudis. Ca. cxxxvij. (*) Anent Schippis that brekis in this Realm.
Ca. cxxxviij. That Aduocattis and foirlpeikaris in temporal courtis sall
sweir. Ca. cxxxix. Off Barronis and Lordis hauand landis on the west sey. Ca.
cxl. Off the nature of the brief of inqueist and sesing. Ca. cxlj. Off
persounis remanand in Ingland without the Kingis leif, Ca. cxlij. Off souertie
as kit be any party of vthers. Ca. cxliij. Anent the serving of Inqueistis and
Retouris. Ca. cxliiij. Anent salmound fische. Ca. cxlv. For the resisting of
Rebellis in the North. Ca. cxlvj. (*) Anent the selling of salmound out of the
Realm. Ca. cxlvij. That the Governor of the Realm indurand his time mycht
not annalie na landis, that fell to the Crown. Ca. cxlviij. Anent the breking
of the Kingis protectioun. Ca. cxlix. Off the brief of aquae ductu. Ca. cl. Off
mandementis to execute the actis of Parliament. Ca. clj. [*] Off the forfaltour
of the Erldome of March. Ca. clij. Off letters of fidelity promittit to our
Lady the Queen. Ca. cliij. Off selling of theifis. Ca. cliiij. That assysaris
sall sweir. Ca. clv. Off Crownaris. Ca. clvj. Anent Mairis and Seriandis. Ca.
clvij. [*] Off Inglismen. Ca. clviij. Off the stanching of theifis and
trespassouris. Ca. clix. Off inbringing of Buleoun. Ca. clx. (*) That nane be
fundin in Tauernis after nine houris. Ca. clxj. The statute anent Inglis
claith. Ca. clxij. Tuiching the selling of salmound till Inglismen. Ca. clxiij.
That nane by wine fra Flemingis of the Dam. Ca. clxiiij. That the Law be haldin
quhair the trespass is done. Ca. clxv. That nane have out of Scotland gold,
silver, na Iowellis. Ca. clxvj.
THE TABILL OF THE ACTIS OF PARLIAMENT HALDIN BE King James the Secund.
Off the Coronatioun of our Souerane Lord. Ca. j. Off the reuocatioun of
landis. Ca. ij. Off halding of Sessiounis eirlie. Ca. iij. [*] Anent
Rebellouris and vnressonabill men, being resset and haldin within Castellis.
Ca. iiij. Off halie Kirk. Off the halding of Justice Airis in all placis. Ca.
v. () Off remeid and punitioun of diverse crimes. Ca. vj. The supply and
defense of halie Kirk. Ca. vij. Tuiching all and sindrie landis and
possessiounis quhilkis our Souerane Lordis Father had in his hand the day of
his deceis. Ca. viij. The punitioun of slauchter of Salmound. Ca. ix. Off oppin
reifsis and spuleis. Ca. x. That the Officiaris and Lordis of Regallis sall
execute and fulfill this foirsaid act. Ca. xj. () Off letters of captioun to be
geuin be the King. Ca. xij. The proclamatioun of general peax. Ca. xiij. That
nane Rebel aganis the Kingis persoun na his authority. Ca. xiiij. Off the
keiping of trewis on the Bordowris. Ca. xv. Off punitioun of Officiaris
trespassand in their office wilfully. Ca. xvj. Off the remaning of pure
commounis in their takkis and malingis. Ca. xvij. Off wedsetting of landis. Ca.
xviij. For the restorance of spoliatioun. Ca. xix. That the Justice,
Chalmerlane, Crownaris and all other Officiaris ride in competent and esy
number. Ca. xx. [*] Off the away putting of Sornaris. Ca. xxj. Off the
examining of actis of Parliament and general counsall. Ca. xxij. For the
eschewing of derth within the cuntrie. Ca. xxiij. That na Burgessis na other
persoun hald mair victual than will sustene him. Ca. xxiiij. That na man do
tresoun to the Kingis Majesty. Ca. xxv. That the Regaliteis being in the
Kingis handis salbe Iustifeit be the Kingis Justice. Ca. xxvj. (*) For
eschewing of maisterfull thift and reif. Ca. xxvij. Anent Justice Clerkis, that
they reuele na mannis actioun. Ca. xxviij. For the bigging of Towris and
Fortalices. Ca. xxix. Off money and strykaris thairof. Ca. xxx. Anent the
summounding of any persounis. Ca. xxxj. That na man of this Realm bring hame
poison under the pane of treson. xxxij. That na strangear bring hame poison.
Ca. xxxiij. The auisement of the Deputis of the three Estatis tuiching the matter
of the money. Ca. xxxiiij. That na man have out of the Realm gold, silver, na
Buleoun. Ca. xxxv. That na cattle be sauld in Ingland, bot for reddy gold or
silver. Ca. xxxvj. Anent the outquyting of wedsettis. Ca. xxxvij. Anent dettis
and obligatiounis. Ca. xxxviij. Off victual Ca. xxxix. [*] That na man hald
mair victual than will sustene him self. Ca. xl. Anent the keiping and
executioun of Justice. Ca. xlj. That inbringaris of victuallis be favorably
treitit. Ca. xlij. (*) The annexatioun of landis to the Crown. Ca. xliij. That
nane resset James sumtyme Earl of Douglas. Ca. xliiij. That their be na
wardanis on the Bordowris maid in fee and heritage. Ca. xlv. That all
Regaliteis being in the Kingis handis, be annexit to the Ryaltie. Ca. xlvj.
That na office be geuin in fee and heritage in time tocum. Ca. xlvij. Quha
bringis ane falls cuineoure to the King sall have. x. pund. Ca. xlviij. (*) Off
Sornaris. Ca. xlix. That their be. xij. persounis vpone the secreit counsall of
Burrowis. Ca. l. Off ane Ambaxat to the Pape. Ca. lj. The manner of arraymentis
for the Parliament. Ca. lij. The manner of taikning for bailis making. Ca. liij.
Off persounis sclanderit or suspect of treson. Ca. liiij. [*] That nane pas in
Ingland the time of weir. Ca. lv. That na Inglisman cum in Scotland without
conduct. Ca. lvj. That na Scottisman supply Berwick or Roxburgh. Ca. lvij.
That na man reif na manner of gudis, nor presonar. Ca. lviij. That nane raise
affray in the hoist wilfully. Ca. lix. The King sall tak inquisitioun of all
Sornaris and oppressouris of his liegis. Ca. lx. (*) Off garnisounis to be laid
vpone the Bordowris. Ca. lxj. Statutis belangand weir and the defense of the
Realm. Ca. lxij. The reule for the pestilence. Ca. lxiij. The money and the
gold cryit heichar. Ca. lxiiij. Off ministering of Justice and Sessiounis
halding. Ca. lxv. Off Fairis. Ca. lxvj. Off the down laying of Constabill
feis. Ca. lxvij. Off Sessiounis haldin, and the Schiref to be neir thairby. Ca.
lxviij. Quhat powar the Lordis of Sessioun sall have. Ca. lxix. [*] The manner
how the cause salbe brocht befoir the Lordis. Ca. lxx. Off wappinschawing. Ca.
lxxj. The prouisioun for the money. Ca. lxxij. Off falls goldsmythis. Ca.
lxxiij. That na Litstar by claith to sell. Ca. lxxiiij. That na persoun saill
without three Serplaith of gudis. Ca. lxxv. The habitis for Lordis of Sessioun
and men of Law. Ca. lxxvj. Persounis chosin for the reformatioun of
hospitallis. Ca. lxxvij. Off coistlie cleithing, and that na woman cum to the
Kirk mussallit. Ca. lxxviij. A Lord, Prelate, Barrone and frehalder may set in
fewferme. Ca. lxxix. That the fredomes of Regallis be keipit, and nane abusit
in prejudice of the Kingis Lawis. Ca. lxxx. That na persounis be tholit to beg
betuix.xiiij. and.lxx. eris Ca. lxxxj. (*) Ane universal mesoure to be maid
and a standart. Ca. lxxxij. Off remissiounis gif the party be not content. Ca.
lxxxiij. Off Chalmerlane Airis. Ca. lxxxiiij. That na frehalder be constreineit
to the Parliament, bot he be of twenty pund worth of land. Ca. lxxxv. Off the
taking of stressis be the Constabill. Ca. lxxxvj. The punitioun of negligent
Officiaris. Ca. lxxxvij. [*] That na liggis nor bandis be maid within Burrowis
na manrent. Ca. lxxxviij. Off them that occupyis Lordis landis agane their
willis. Ca. lxxxix. The Justice to tak inquisitioun of Sornaris, bairdis,
feineit fulis, and maisterfull beggaris in all Justice Airis. Ca. lxxxx. To
saw brom and make hedgeis. Ca. lxxxxj. Off sawing of quheit, peis and beinis.
Ca. lxxxxij. That na man cum to courtis bot in sober wise. Ca. lxxxxiij. Off
airdis, hedgeis and wild foulis, and to destroy foulis of reiff. Ca.
lxxxxiiij. To destroy Ruikis, Crawis, and other foulis of reiff. Ca. lxxxxv.
Off the slauchter of reid fische. Ca. lxxxxvj. (*) That nane set creillis in
watters. Ca. lxxxxvij. To see for the destructioun of wolsis. Ca. lxxxxviij.
Anent the slayaris of Hartis, and destroyaris of Cuningis. Ca. lxxxxix. Off
lesingmakaris and tellaris of them. Ca. c. Off mure burn. Ca. cj. That all
the actis be copyit fra the Clerk of the Registre and proclamit. Ca. cij.
THE TABILL OF THE ACTIS OF PARLIAMENT HALDIN BE King James the Third.
For the observing of the honor of halie Kirk. Ca. j. Anent the marriage of our
Souerane Lord. Ca. ij. Anent the Quenis Dowarie. Ca. iij. [*] That na Commendis
be purchest. Ca. iiij. That na pensioun of benefice be takin. Ca. v. The pane
of breking of lawborrois. Ca. vj. That summoundis be maid of. xxi. dayis. Ca.
vij. Anent barnis to be put in fee of landis, and their answeris. Ca. viij.
That na Inglisman have benefice within Scotland. Ca. ix. That na persounis have
money out of the Realm, under the pane of escheit thairof. Ca. x. For the
inbringing of money within the Realm. Ca. xj. Off the money and blak
ferdingis. Ca. xij. Anent the reformatioun of hospitallis. Ca. xiij. That name
pas in Merchandice out of the Realm bot fre men. Ca. xiiij. That na man of
craft use Merchandice. Ca. xv. [] That na man saill in Merchandice without half
a last of gudis. Ca. xvj. That na Schip be frauchtit without a Charterpartie.
Ca. xvij. That na Schip saill with stapill gudis fra Symonis day and Jude,
quhill Candilmes. Ca. xviij. That na Merchandis sall pas to Brugis as stapill.
Ca. xix. License to Merchandis to pas to Middilburgli with their gudis. Ca. xx.
That Merchandis saill to the Rochell, Burdeous and France. Ca. xxj. The
proclamation of the money heichar up. Ca. xxij. The manner of dettis and
contractis paying. Ca. xxiij. That ferryaris make briggis under the pane of
tinsall of their baittis. Ca. xxiiij. [] The propositioun of the Clergy and
Burrowis. Ca. xxv. The crying up of certane money. Ca. xxvj. The inbringing of
Buleoun appreuit. Ca. xxvij. The Chalmerlane to see for mettis and mesouris.
Ca. xxviij. Anent the money to have ane universal course. Ca. xxix. Anent
setting of Sessiounis. Ca. xxx. The statute of nolt and scheip sauld. Ca. xxxj.
That their be two Sessiounis. Ca. xxxij. The setting and authorizing of Justice
Airis, and falsing of domes. Ca. xxxiij. [*] Off Schirefsis and Iugeis
Ordinaris. Ca. xxxiiij. Off landis selling under reuersioun, to cum agane to
the first sellar. Ca. xxxv. Off obligatiounis to be followit within. xl. eir or
else preseriue. Ca. xxxvj. Tuiching the electioun of Officiaris within Burrowis.
Ca. xxxvij. Off Notaris and Tabelliouns making be the King. Ca. xxxviij. That
wollin claith be met be the rig. Ca. xxxix. (*) Off the indorsing of the Kingis
breuis and letters. Ca. xl. That the extorsionis of the Kingis liegis be not
taken in fairis. Ca. xlj. That poynding on Martymes and wit sunday be dilay it
to the feird day. Ca. xlij Off slauchter of forthochtfellony and suddaintie,
and fleing to gyrth. Ca. xliij. That the pure tennentis sall pay na ferrar,
than their termis maill for their Lordis det be the brief of distres. Ca.
xliiij. Off sische, salmound, girsillis, trowtis, and nettis in watters. Ca.
xlv. [*] The Parliament, Justice Airis, nor Chalmerlane Airis neidis not be
continewit fra day to day. Ca. xlvj. The setterday and other Vigillis to be
halie day, fra euinsang to euinsang. Ca. xlvij. Anent the reduction of
hospitallis. Ca. xlviij. (*) That serryaris make briggis. Ca. xlix. That the
Kingis Rollis and Registre be put in bukis. Ca. l. That na Deneiris of France,
Cortis, nor maleis be taken, nor brocht hame. Ca. lj. Anent breuis pleidabill.
Ca. lij. Anent the stanching of slauchter with additioun. Ca. liij. That na
Clerkis purches benefice, or office of Collectourie at the court of Rome, the
quhilk was not their at befoir. Ca. liiij. Off Cartis of weir to be maid. Ca.
lv. The lenth of speiris, and that eme^ have targeis, and of wappinschawi^g Ca.
lvj. That nane weir silkis within ane hundredth pundis worth of land. Ca. lvij.
(*) Anent the money, and crying down of the allay it grot to. vj. d. Ca.
lviij. For the eschewing of manswering of falls assysis or inqueistis. Ca. lix.
That Lordis, Barronis, and Burrowis gar make Schippis, Buschis, and greit Pink
boitis with nettis. Ca. lx. The party that tynis his actioun salbe in ane
unlaw of.xl.s. Ca. lxj. Off the fredome of halie Kirk Ane Ambaxat in Ingland
for the redressis of the Barge. Ca. lxij. Off the money and Buleoun Ca. lxiij.
[*] Off the brief of tutorie. Ca. lxiiij. Off Arreistmentis. Ca. lxv. Anent
airschip of mouabill gudis of Barronis. Ca. lxvj. Off obligatiounis. Ca. lxvij.
The answer of the Retour. Ca. lxviij. That all complaintis first persew their
Judge Ordinar. Ca. lxix. That four of the auld counsall be chosin to the new.
Ca. lxx. Anent over lordis, that will not enter to their landis. Ca. lxxj. That
persounis arreist it to the Justice Air enter within bar. Ca. lxxii. (*) The
unlaw of steiling of halkis, hundis, pertrikis, and duikis. Ca. lxxiij. Off
Dais and Raise, hunting of Deir, and taking of cuningis. Ca. lxxiiij. That
ferryaris make briggis. Ca. lxxv. Off the fredome of halie Kirk. That the
Justice set his Airis twyse in the eir. Ca. lxxvj. That all complaintis first
persew to their Judge Ordinar. Ca. lxxvij. [*] Anent falls assyse or inqueistis,
and the pane thairof. Ca. lxxviij. Anent the marriage of our Souerne Lordis
sister. Ca. lxxix. Anent the inbringing of Buleoun. Ca. lxxx. That nouther
silver nor gold be put to the fire. Ca. lxxxj. Anent the brief of Idiotrie and
furiositie. Ca. lxxxij. That the money and gold be cry it up hiear. Ca.
lxxxiij. (*) Off the payment of the dettour and creditour. Ca. lxxxiiij. That
na courtis of guerra be haldin. Ca. lxxxv. Off our Souerane Lordis reuocatioun.
Ca. lxxxvj. The annexatioun of the Erldome of Ros. Ca. lxxxvij. Off halie Kirk.
Off slauchter. Ca. lxxxviij. [*] Off the money. Ca. lxxxix. Ane Ambaxat to the
Duke of Burgunie. Ca. lxxxx. Off victuallis. Ca. lxxxxj. Anent cruuis. Ca.
lxxxxij. Anent ferryaris that rasis fraucht. Ca. lxxxiij. Anent mureburne. Ca.
lxxxxiiij. Off the bind of salmound. Ca. lxxxxv. Off b^ggaris and Sornaris. Ca.
lxxxxvj. Off schoing of horse in the quick be smythis. Ca. lxxxxvij. (*) Off
speiris and their lenth and lakkis. Ca. lxxxxviij. Off persounis cummand to the
hoist. Ca. lxxxxix. Off wappinschawing and abilementis for weir, contenand their
heidis. Ca. c. Furnessing of Castellis. Aganis the reuar Edward. The Kingis
promeis for ministratioun of Justice and good reule. The manner of reddynes to
resist the reuar Edward. Off Currouris and their horsing. For the resisting of
James of Douglas. [*] The vphalding of Berwick, and garnisounis to be laid on
the Bordowris upon the expensis of the three Estatis. Waigeis. Contrare the
fauouraris of James of Douglas. Ane Ambaxat to the King of France. Anent the
reuocatioun maid be ane woman, hauand coniunct feftment after her husbandis
deceis. Ca. cj. (*) Anent the Indult grantit to the Archibischop of
Sanctandros. Ca. cij. That our Souerane Lord present to beneficis all times the
sege vaca^d. Ca. ciij. Contrare the purchessaris of beneficis aganis the Kingis
privilege. Ca. ciiij. For treitting of strangearis inbring and victuallis. Ca.
cv. Off wappinschawing and reddynes in weir. Ca. cvj. Recovering of Dumbar
Castle. [*] Aganis Alexander Duke of Albany. The denying of remissiounis and
respectis. Off impetratioun of beneficis the sege vacand. Ca. cvij. Off the
money. Ca. cviij. Ane Ambaxat to King Richard. Off the fische garth. Ca. cix.
() Off remissiounis and respectis. Ca. cx. Ane Ambaxat to the Pape, contenand
their heidis. Ca. cxj. Instructiounis. Off Barratouris. For confirmatioun of
auld, and impetratioun of new priuilegeis. Off ferryaris that takis dowbill
fraucht. Ca. cxij. [*] That chair be ane Dekin and serchour of goldsmythis. Ca.
cxiij. The crying down of the new plakis. Ca. cxiiij. Off talloun and salt
hydis. Ca. cxv. Refuse of remissiounis and respectis. Ca. cxvj. Off sustieis
generallis to be maid. Ca. cxvij. For inbringing of trespassouris and defending
of them at the bar. Ca. cxviij. [*) Off Crownaris. Ca. cxix. Off slauchter
with additioun. Ca. cxx. Off the keiping of arreistit trespassouris. Ca. cxxj.
(*) Off Schirefis and Crownaris. Ca. cxxij. Off cumming to courtis in sober
wise. Ca. cxxiij. That all actiounis first persew their Judge Ordinar. Ca.
cxxiiij. The desyris of Burrowis. Ca. cxxv. Ambaxat to the King of Romany for
undoing of ane letter of Marque. Ca. cxxvj. Off sailaris to have half ane last
of gudis. Ca. cxxvij. That craftismen vsand Merchandice renunce their craft.
Ca. cxxviij. Off chesing of Officiaris in Burrowis. Ca. cxxix. [*] Off
frauchting of Schippis and the panis thairof. Ca. cxxx. The bind of Salmound
and mesoure thairof. Ca. cxxxj. That Commissaris of Burrowis compeir togidder
at anis in the eir in Innerkething. Ca. cxxxij. Off fisching and making of
hering at the west sey. Ca. cxxxiij. That nane attempt contrare the annexatioun
of the Pryorie of Coldinghame to the Chapel Royal. Ca. cxxxiiij.
THE TABILL OF THE ACTIS OF PARLIAMENT HALDIN BE King James the Fourt.
Off the freedom of halie Kirk. Ca. j. Off our Souerane Lordis marriage. Ca.
ij. (*) Off landis and gudis takin befoir the field of Striuiling. Ca. iij.
That Burgessis and vnlandit men, that any gudis was takin fra be restorit
agane. Ca. iiij. That all Officiaris being in the field of Striuiling be
suspendit fra their officis for three eiris. Ca. v. Anent the enter of the airis
of them that deceissit at the field of Striuiling. vj. The forth putting of
Justice. Ca. vij. Anent the stanching of thift, reif, and other enormiteis. Ca.
viij. [] Off Burrowis repledgeand their nychtbouris fra the Justice. Ca. ix.
That a fine penny of gold and ane other of silver be strikin. Ca. x. That
Schippis cum to fre Burrowis. Ca. xj. Off Clerkis that purchessis beneficis at
the court of Rome. Ca. xij. Off Clerkis that purchessis beneficis co^trare the
Kingis presentatioun. Ca. xiij. The propositioun of the debait of the field of
Striuiling, Ca. xiiij. (*) Anent cruuis. Ca. xv. The keiping of the Castle of
Edinburgh, and destroying of the Castle of Dumbar. Ca. xvj. The reuocatioun
maid at Scone. Ca. xvij. That the airis be not hurt be their predecessouris.
Ca. xviij. Off the fredome of halie Kirk. Off Justice Airis. Ca. xix. [*] Off
universal concord amangis the liegis. Ca. xx. For inbringing of the taxatioun
and undoing of the Kingis discharge of any part thairof. Ca. xxj. For
Instructiounis making to renew confederatioun and alliance. Ca. xxij. Ane
Ambaxat to Denmark. Ca. xxiij. The Kingis reuocatioun and inbringing of his
property. Ca. xxiiij. The prouisiou^ for the Duke of Rose and Earl of Mar, and
brii^ngi^g of their re^tis xxv. (*) The namis of the Lordis. The keiping of the
dayis of trewis. Ca. xxvj Auditouris of our Souerane Lordis comptis. Ca. xxvij.
Off the Kingis secerit counsall and houshald. Ca. xxviij. Off goldsmythis. Ca.
xxix. Anent the sailling of Merchandis. Ca. xxx. Anent ferryaris that takis
dowbill fraucht. Ca. xxxj. (*) Anent cruuis and fische airis. Ca. xxxij. Anent
the tennentis that haldis of the Duke of Rothesay, and Stewart of Scotland. Ca.
xxxiij. Off the money. Ca. xxxiiij. Off undoing of Caupis in Gallaway. Ca.
xxxv. Off Caupis in Carrick. Ca. xxxvj. The process of recovering of annuell
rentis. Ca. xxxvij. Off tennentis inhabitantis the Kingis proper landis. Ca.
xxxviij. The change of the Castle of the Glowme to be callit Campbell. Ca.
xxxix. Off Halkarstoun to be callit the Tempill. Ca. xl. [*] Off our Souerane
Lordis reuocatioun. Ca. xlj. The remit of them that was in Dounbartane with
the Lord Lyle. Ca. xlij. Off the fredome of the halie Kirk. Ca. xliij. The
alliance and confederatioun of France to be confirmit. Ca. xliiij. Ambaxat for
our Souerane Lordis marriage. Ca. xlv. Ane Ambaxat to Denmark. Ca. xlvj. (*)
Anent breuis and landis falland in waird. Ca. xlvij. Off landis falland in
waird or vtherwayis alterit, that the tennentis sall remane thairwith, quhill
the nixt witsonday. Ca. xlviij. Anent finding of Lawborrois. Ca. xlix. Anent
slauchter or demembring. Ca. l. That Justice Airis be haldin twyse in the eir.
Ca. lj. The party that tynis his actioun sall pay his parteis coistis, and ane
unlaw of xl.s. Ca. lij. [*] Off wappinschawing. Ca. liij. Off the keiping of
the dayis of trewis. Ca. liiij. Off mettis, mesouris and wechtis. Ca. lv. The
setting of the Sessiounis. Ca. lvj. Off conuocatioun and gaddering in Burrowis.
Ca. lvij. Off Summoundis of error. Ca. lviij. (*) Anent the commoun good of
all Burrowis. Ca. lix. Anent the copying of the actis and proclamatioun of the
samin. Ca. lx. Off refusing of gold that is crackit. Ca. lxj. Off the halie
Kirk. Ca. lxij. Off dispositioun of beneficis the sege vacand. Ca. lxiij. That
beneficis of auld vsit to be disponit within the Realm, be disponit within the
samin. Ca. lxiiij. [*) The bull anent the promotioun to beneficis elective to
be obseruit and keipit. Ca. lxv. That na Legate be ressaisit within the Realm,
bot gif he be ane Cardinal or native borne of it. Ca. lxvj Off the Indult
grantit to Sanctandros and Glasgow, for reformatioun of the electiounis to
Abbaceis. Ca. lxvij. Off the pleyis betuix the Bischoppis of Sanctandros and
Glasgow. Ca. lxviij. The Kingis Oratouris to charge all vthers to ceis their
pleyis. Ca. lxix. Off taxatioun of beneficis to be maid after the auld
taxatioun. Ca. lxx. The troubill of the money and it be crackit Ca. lxxj. (*)
Ambaxat for the Kingis marriage. Ca. lxxij. That strangearis Merchandis, that
cummis with Schippis cum to the principal town. Ca. lxxiij. That na Cordonar,
nor other craftisman tak na custumis of vthers. Ca. lxxiiij. Putting down of
Dekinnis of craftis, and that na masounis nor wrychtis tak payment for halie
dayis. Ca. lxxv. Anent the taking of multur of flower that cu^mis forth of
other landis. Ca. lxxvj. That the Justice Clerk tak forth all the statutis,
that hes pane of dictay in them. Ca. lxxvij. [*] That na custumaris tak mair
taxatioun than is statute. Ca. lxxviij. Off mureburne. Ca. lxxix. That nane
destroy herone sewis for three eiris. Ca. lxxx. Anent the making of Schippis and
Buschis. Ca. lxxxj. Off giftis and alienatiounis maid be our Souerane Lordis
Father. Ca. lxxxij. That airis may revoke at their lauchfull age, and of our
Souerane Lordis reuocatio^ Ca. lxxxiii. Off the bind of salmound. Ca. lxxxiiij.
The fredome of halie Kirk. Ca. lxxxv. (*) That na persounis pas forth of the
Realm to purches any beneficis without leif of our Souerane Lord. Ca. lxxxvj.
That all Barronis and frehalders, that are of substance put their eldest sonnis
and airis to the sculis. Ca. lxxxvij. Off the money and Buleoun. Ca. lxxxviij.
Off the price, gudnes and fynes of victuallis, and all other manner of stuff
wrocht. Ca. lxxxix. That all summoundis of error be rasit and persewit within
the space of three eiris. Ca. lxxxx. Off the fredome of halie Kirk. Ca. lxxxxj.
[*] Off the daily counsall. Ca. lxxxxij. That Justice and Schireffis be maid
for the Ilis. Ca. lxxxxiij. Off the Justice Airis of Ergyle, Lorne, Bute, and
they partis. Ca. lxxxxiiij. Off Schireffis to be maid in Ros and Cathnes. Ca.
lxxxxv. That the gretest crime be specifeit in the remissioun. Ca. lxxxxvj.
That na remissioun salbe geuin for slauchter vpone forthochtfellony. lxxxxvij.
[*] Off the correctioun and examinatioun of Notaris. Ca. lxxxxviij. That
summou^dis vpone recent spulie may be maid upon. xv. dayis. Ca. lxxxxix. Anent
the expensis of Schireffis for their office. Ca. c. Off the expensis of process.
Ca. cj. For keiping of money within the Realm. Ca. cij. Anent steillaris of
pykis, brekaris of airdis and dowcattis. Ca. ciij. [*] Anent beggaris. Ca.
ciiij. Anent the making of schippis for fisching. Ca. cv. Off the unlaw of
grene wod and mureburne. Ca. cvj. Off slauchter of reid fische. Ca. cvij. Off
the diuisiounis of Schirefdomes. Ca. cviij. That hedgeis, parkis, and
dowcattis, and cuninghairis be maid. Ca. cix. Off eirlie wappinschawing to be
maid. Ca. cx. (*) That the hernouris and airis may be followit at the eiris end
after the deceis of their foirbearis. Ca. cxj. Anent the exceptiounis proponit
anent wedowis in hindering of them of their teircis. Ca. cxij. That all
fiehalders within ane hundredth merk of extent send their procuratouris to the
Parliament. Ca. cxiij. That all our Souer^ne Lordis liegis be reulit be his
Lawis. Ca. cxiiij. That all Officiaris within Burgh be changeit eirhe. Ca. cxv.
That na Merchand persew ane other in partis beond sey befoir any Judge bot the
Conseruatour. Ca. cxvj. [*] That the Conseruatour of Scotland cum hame eirlie,
or send his procuratour. Ca. cxvij. That na market nor fairis be haldin vpone
halie dayis, nor in Kirkis, nor in Kirk airdis. Ca. cxviij. That Merchandis and
Burrowis bruke their priuilegeis. Ca. cxix. That Commissaris and herdismen of
Burrowis be warnit of taxatiounis of the Realm. Ca. cxx. That na B^rges be
maid without consent of the greit counsall of the town. cxxj. That the au^d
act anent saill^^s be put to executioun. That na nychbour usurp agane the
Officiaris in Burgh, Ca. cxxij. That nane house woll, skin, nor hydis in ^ei^h.
Ca. cxxiij. That all Schireffis and Officiaris write the day, that they gif
seizing to any man in their court buke. Ca. cxxiiij. That it be leiffull to our
Souerane Lord to set all his landis in few. Ca. cxxv. [*] That it salbe
leiffull to every man ba^th spiritual and temporal to set their landis in
few. Ca. cxxvj. That the maltmakaris present their malt to the market. Ca.
cxxvij. That the inhabita^^s of annexit and vn^e landis to other Barronageis
sall answer to the Justice Airis, Schiref courtis, quhair the landis lyis. Ca.
cxxviij. Off exceptiounis to be proponit agane the brief of inqueist. Ca.
cxxix. Off the p^oces of the brief of rycht. Ca. cxxx. That all mesouris and
wechtis be of ane quantity, quhilk salbe statute in Edinburgh be the
Chalmerlane. Ca. cxxxj. (*) Off the hamebringing of Puleoun the auld act to be
obseruit. Ca. cxxxij. That all money have course in the Realm it being crakit
or flawit Ca. cxxxiij. That na Schiref nor Officiar distreinie or poynd any
thing belangand the pleuch in time of teiling. Ca. cxxxiiij. That the wordis of
falsing of domes be changeit. Ca. cxxxv. Off the fredome of the halie Kirk. Ca.
cxxxvj. Anent the diuisiounis of Schirefdomes. Ca. cxxxvij. Ane act maid be our
Souerane Lord King James the Feird, anent the waird, releif and marriage of the
airis of them that deceissis in the army. Ca. cxxxviij.
THE TABILL OF THE ACTIS OF PARLIAMENT HALDIN BE King James the Fyft.
Off the fredome of halie Kirk. Ca j. Punitioun of thift and stouthreif, and
masters or sustenaris of theifis. Ca. ij. Anent the waird, releif and marriage
of the airis of them, that deis in the hoist mouit contrare Inglismen, or the
tratouris of the Realm. Ca. iij. Anent the takkis and sterdingis of them,
that are slane, as said is. Ca. iiij. [*] The Institutioun of the College of
Justice., contenand their heidis. Ca. vj. The Cha^cellar and President to
ressaif the aithis of the Lordis absent The Chancellar, Paesident, and Lordis
of the Sessioun to make the ordour how it salbe proceidit in their Sessioun. The
diuisioun of the Realm quarterlie. That all summoundis priuilegeit be callit
on monounday oulklie quhilk followis, and horning all times. That all the
commoun matters be callit on all the dayis of the oulk, except Friday for the
Kingis matters, and strangearis, and the Quenis matters. (*) That all
continuatiounis be callit at the dayis assignit thairto. Anentis deliverance of
cognitioun to Schireffis. The counsalhous to be reparrellit. That all the
Lordis enter in the Tolbuith at. viij. houris. That the counsalhous be ischeit
after the entry of the Lordis. That na man pley bot parteis and their
procuratouris. [*] That billis be first red and continuatiounis, and syne the
Tabill. For examinatioun of witness. That all matters be callit be the ordour of
the Tabill. That silence be had in the counsalhous. Off the giving of voittis
and ordour thairof. That ten Lordis sall remane with the President. (*)
Executioun of sentence to be maid be Heraldis, Purseuantis and Massaris. Off
the Clerkis of the Signet. Anent payment for billis of complaint and Kingis
letters. Anent the delivering of billis. That Massaris keip counsall. Quhat
Massaris sall tak for their laubouris. [*] The number of Aduocatis and their
namis. Aduocatis to be sworn. That all Aduocatis pas forth of the cou^salhous,
quhe^ the Lordis passis to disputation Anent exceptiounis dilatouris. The
Kingis good mind anent the Lordis of the Sessioun. Off the liberty and
fredome of halie Kirk. Aganis them that sustenis the process of cursing abone
the space of forty dayis. Ca. ix. For planting of woddis, forestis and
orchardis. Ca. x. The papis of the destroyaris of woddis, and makaris of
mureburne in forbodin time. Ca. xj. For keiping of forestis. Ca. xij. For
brekaris of dowcatis, cuninghairis, parkis and stankis. Ca. xiij. (*) For
brekaris of airdis and orchardis. Ca. xiiij. Off slaying of hairis. Ca. xv. The
remeid for destructioun of housis, manner placis, woddis, forestis, orchardis,
airdis, and haning of landis fallin in waird. Ca. xvj. Off reid sische, smoltis
and of slaying of salmound in forbodin time. Ca. xvij. Off cruuis and airis.
Ca. xviij. Off Buschis for fisching. Ca. xix. [] For hostillaris and
trauellaris in the cuntrie. Ca. xx. Off studis and stude placis. Ca. xxj. That
na man sell nolt, nor scheip to Inglismen, nor send victuallis, fische, nor
salt in Ingland. Ca. xxij. Foirstallaris. Ca. xxiij. For the stanching of
maisterfull beggaris with additioun, Ca. xxiiij. The remeid for delivering of
them, that sleis to gyrth. Ca. xxv. Priuilegeis of Burrowis. Ca. xxvj. Anentis
Merchandis, that saillis incontrare the actis maid of befoir. Ca. xxvij. That
na Schip saill with stapill gudis fra Symonis day and Jude, quhill Candilmes.
Ca. xxviij. (*) Off the chesing of Officiaris in Burgh, and bringing of the
comptis of their commoun gudis eirlie in the Checkar. Ca. xxix. That na man
troubill nor molest Prouest, Aldermen, Baillies, and Officiaris within Burgh^^
Ca. xxx. That na man ride bot in sober manner. Ca. xxxj. For malt makaris. Ca.
xxxij. Off craftismen, broustaris, sellaris of salt, and victual within Burgh.
Ca. xxxiij. That na man saill in Flanders bot twyse in the eir. Ca. xxxiiij.
[*] The declaratioun of the pley betuix the Lairdis of Blairquhan and Gylstoun.
Ca. xxxv. Anentis Justice Airis, and particular diettis for certane special
crimes. Ca. xxxvj. The additioun of the act of cursing. Ca. xxxvij.
Declaratioun of Parliament, gif the Kingis grace hes actioun or not, aganis the
airis of them, that committis crimes of lose majesty. Ca. xxxviij.
Ratificatioun and pronunciatioun of the actis of the last Parliament. Ca.
xxxix. [*] The Kingis grace reuocatioun. Ca. xl. That all Schireffis and vthers
Officiaris be present personally at the three heid courtis eirlie. Ca. xlj. Off
the setting of temporal courtis. Ca. xlij. Off Deputis to Schireffis and
vthers Officiaris. Ca. xliij. Anentis the indorsing of letters and preceptis.
Ca. xliiij. The ordour of summounding of all persounis in civil actiounis. Ca.
xlv. The electioun of Notaris. Ca. xlvj. The giving of sesingis. Ca. xlvij. Off
the admissioun of Notaris. Ca. xlviij. That the protocollis of all sesingis be
presentit eirlie in the Checkar. Ca. xlix. Off falls Notaris and witness. Ca. l.
Off Notaris Ordinar in the Schiref court, or vtherwayis. Ca. lj. (*) For giving
of commissiounis in prejudice of the Ordinar. Ca. lij. Off lesingmakaris. Ca.
liij. The act of annexatioun of landis to the Crown. Ca. liiij.
Wappinschawingis to be twyse in the eir. Ca. lv. That the army of Scotland be
vnhorsit except greit Barronis. Ca. lvj. The manner of harnes, wappinnis and
armoure. Ca. lvij. [*] Off armoure conform to every mannis rent and
substance. Ca. lviij. That all persounis present in wappinschawing be writtin
with the manner of their armor. Ca. lix. The premunitioun of wappinschawingis.
Ca. lx. The chesing of Capitanis in every parochin. Ca. lxj. Ane general
remissioun grantit be the Kingis grace to all his liegis. Ca. lxij. For the
honor of halie Kirk. Ca. lxiij. (*) Ratificatioun of the Institutioun of the
College of Justice. Ca. lxxij. Hagbutis and other small Artaillierie to be
furneist within the Realm. ca. lxxiij. For hamebringing of hagbutis. Ca.
lxxiiij. For inbringing of the Kingis grace property and casualiteis. Ca.
lxxv. Anentis committaris of slauchter, mutilatioun, and resset of the Kingis
Rebellis. Ca. lxxvj. For stanching of stouth, thift and reif. Ca. lxxvij. [*]
For eschewing of derth of victuallis slesche and fische. Ca. lxxviij. Tuiching
the Crown of wecht. Ca. lxxix. For stanching of death of wine, salt and
tymmer. Ca. lxxx. Tuiching the hospetallis. Ca. lxxxj. For policy in
Edinburgh. Ca. lxxxij. Anent the meill market of Edinburgh. Ca. lxxxiij. [*)
The panis of Iugeis that dois wrang. Ca. lxxxiiij. Prouisioun and panis of
them committand fraud in the alienatioun or vtherwayis. Ca. lxxxv. The remeid
aganis them, that lyis out of their landis and will not enter, in defraude of
their creditouris. Ca. lxxxvj. Anent the privilege of Burrowis. Ca. lxxxvij.
Off packing and peiling. Ca. lxxxviij. Anent forth having of money of the
Realm. Ca. lxxxix. Off mesouris of fische. Ca. lxxxx. The panis of them that
tynis the pley. Ca. lxxxxj. Anentis conductioun of craftismen. Ca. lxxxxij. [*]
For drawaris of claith. Ca. lxxxxiij. For foirstallaris. Ca. lxxxxiiij. Anentis
wechtis. Ca. lxxxxv. Annexatioun of landis to the Crown. Ca. lxxxxvj. The
dissolutioun of the union for setting of fowis. Ca. lxxxxvij. That na faith be
geuin to euidentis seilit, without subscriptioun of the principal or Notar.
Ca. lxxxxviij. Anentis birning of cornis, rasing of fire, and reuysing of
weme^. Ca. lxxxxix. Anentis them, that brekis or passis contrare the Kingis
grace priuilegeis grantit to him be the sat of Rome. Ca. c. The nerrest of the
kin, to have the gudis of them, that deis vntestat, without prejudice of the
Quot. Ca. cj. That na Legate be ressaisit in this Realm. Ca. cij. Three market
dayis for selling of breid in Edinburgh. Ca. ciij. Three market dayis for
selling of flesche. Ca. ciiij. [*] For ^alloun. Ca. cv. Off them, that
countersatis the Kingis money. Ca. cvj. Anentis them that takis placis of
Bischoppis and Abbais after their deceis. Ca. cvij The Kingis grace ordinance
for Imprenting of his actis of Parliament. Ca. cviij.
THE TABILL OF THE ACTIS OF PARLIAMENT OF OUR SOVERANE Lady, haldin be ane
mychtie Prince James Earl of Arrane, Lord Hammiltoun. etc. and Governor of the
Realm.
Passing of signatouris throw the seilis, after the Kingis deceis. Ca. j.
Ratificatioun of the Institutioun of the College of Justice. Ca. ij. Anent the
laying forth of tennentis. Ca. iiij. Monktoun Hall co^prehendand the heidis and
actis following. Anent Kirkmen. Ca. v. (*) Anent the waird, releif and marriage.
Anent possessiounis. Aganis them that sustenis the process of cursing, for the
space of ane eir, or co^municatis, being excommunicat. Ca. vj. Anent fauouraris
of declairit tratouris, or beiraris of feid for slauchter committit vpone
them. Ca. vij. Anent them that schutis with gunnis at Deir and wild foulis.
Ca. viij. The act maid anent the annuellis of landis brint be our auld Inimeis
of Ingland within Burrowis. Ca. ix. Anent the prices of wynis. Ca. x. Off the
prices of wild and tame meitis. Ca. xj. [*] The articlis and punctis concludit
vpone assurit Scottismen with Ingland. Ca. xij. The secund article vpone
assurit persounis. Ca. xiij. The third article vpone assurit persounis. Ca.
xiiij. The declaratioun of my Lord Anguse. Ca. xv. The act anentis them, that
sweiris abominabill aithis. Ca. xvj. Anent them that perturbis the Kirk the
time of divine service. Ca. xvij. [*] Anent them that knawis them selfis
under process of cursing. Ca. xviij. Anent cursit persounis, that co^pellis
preistis to say Mess in their presence. Ca. xix. Anent them, that maryis two
wyfis or husbandis. Ca. xx. Anent adulteraris. Ca. xxj. Anent malt makaris. Ca.
xxij. Anent ferryaris. Ca. xxiij. Anent the slauchter of Lambs and Lapronis.
Ca. xxiiij. (*) Anent beggaris. Ca. xxv. Anent falls Notaris. Ca. xxvj. Anent
craftismen. Ca. xxvij. Anent the examinatioun of Notaris. Ca. xxviij. Anent
slaying of Hairis. Ca. xxix. Anent slaying of Dais and Raise. Ca. xxx. (*) Anent
the ordouring of every mannis house. Ca. xxxj. Anent paking and peiling. Ca.
xxxij. Anent foirstallaris. Ca. xxiij. Anent the having of quhite fische forth
of the Realm. Ca. xxxiiij. Anent Prentaris. Ca. xxxv. Anent Monsieure Dosell.
Ca. xxxvj. Ratificatioun of the contract maid betuix my Lord Governor and
Schir lames Hammiltoun. Ca. xxxvij. Ratificatioun of the act maid betuix the
Quenis grace and my Lord Governor. Ca. xxxviij.
THE TABILL OF THE ACTIS OF PARLIAMENT OF OUR SOVERANE Lady, haldin be ane
Nobill Princes MARIE Queen Dowrear Mother to our said Souerane Lady and Regent
of the Realm.
Anent the liberty of halie Kirk. Ca. j. Anent the making and delivering of
reuersiounis. Ca. ij. Anent warning fra redemit landis, and the pane for non
removing. Ca. iij. Anent the additioun maid to the act of slauchters. Ca. iiij.
Anent process to be had aganis persounis passand forth of the Realm. Ca. v. The
ordour for summounding of parteis to compeir befoir the Justice or vthers
Iugeis. Ca. vj. (*) Anent the giving of sesingis. Ca. vij. Anent the ordour for
giving of curatouris to minouris. Ca. viij. Anent eitting of flesche in
Lentrene and vthers dayis forbiddin. Ca. ix. Anent redemptioun of landis. Ca.
x. Anentis resignatiounis ad perpetuam remanentiam. Ca. xj. Anent the warning
of tennentis. Ca. xij. [*] The act maid anentis the slauchthers of parteis in
persute and defense of their actiounis and causis. Ca. xiij. Anent the having
of talloun, victuallis and flesche forth of this Realm. Ca. xiiij. Anent the
cu^ming to the bar for defense or persute in criminal causis. Ca. xv. Anentis
nulliteis. Ca. xvj. Anentis liggis and bandis. Ca. xvij. [*] Anentis Notaris.
Ca. xviij. Anentis woll, and other stapill gudis custumabill. Ca. xix. Anentis
all mesouris and wechtis. Ca. xx. Anentis the giving of sesingis vpone
preceptis not past forth of the Chancellarie. Ca. xxj. Anent punischement of
falls witness. Ca. xxij. Anent the wod of Falkland. Ca. xxiij. (*) Anentis the
liberteis and priuilegeis of Burrowis. Ca. xxiiij. Anent the slaying of wild
beistis, wyld foulis, halking and hunting. Ca. xxv. Anent the dischargeing of
Dekinnis, and chesing of Visitouris. Ca. xxvj. Anentis the commoun passage of
Burrowis. Ca. xxvij. Anent Burrowis of the west cuntrie. Ca. xxviij. Anentis
horning vpone Kirkmen for taxt. Ca. xxix. Anentis Lambis. Ca. xxx. Anentis
ferryaris. Ca. xxxj. Anentis the slauchter of powtis, pertrikis. etc. Ca.
xxxij. [*] Anentis planting of woddis, parkis, forestis, and orchardis. Ca.
xxxiij. Anentis goldsmythis, makaris of gold, and silver warkis. Ca. xxxiiij.
Anent the dispositioun of wine, salt and tymmer. Ca. xxxv. Anentis steiling of
Halkis, Hundis, Pertrikis, Dukis, and slauchter of Dais, Raise, hunting of Deir,
taking of Cuningis and foulis. Ca. xxxvj. Anentis liberty of Merchandis at the
west seyis. Ca. xxxvij. Anentis beggaris. Ca. xxxviij. (*) Anentis the speiking
evil of the Quenis grace or frenchemen. Ca. xxxix. Anentis Robert Hude and
Abbot of vnressoun. Ca. xl.
THE TABILL OF THE ACTIS OF THE TVA PARLIAMENTIS LAST baldin be our Souerane
Lady Queen MARIE.
The act of Obliuioun. Ca. j. Anentis cruuis and airis. Ca. ij. Anentis the
carrying and having of gold and silver forth of the Realm. Ca. iij. [*] Anentis
the hamebringing of falls cuinie, gold, silver, layit money, or other money
quhatsumeuer, and using of the samin within this Realm. And als anentis
forgearis and makaris thairof within the samin. Ca. iiij. For eschewing of
derth of viuers and victuallis. Ca. v. Anentis the making of salt within this
Realm. Ca. vj. Anentis gleibis and mansis. Ca. vij. (*) Anentis Vitcheraftis.
Ca. viij. Anentis adultery. Ca. ix. Anentis the rasing of bandis of men of
weir. Ca. x. Anentis the reparelling and vphalding of paroche Kirkis, and of
Kirk airdis of the samin, for burial of the deid. Ca. xj. Anent tennentis and
other lauchfull possessouris of Kirk landis, and setting of fewis of the samin
Kirk landis for the space of three eiris heirefter. Ca. xij. [*] Anentis
mesouris and wechtis. Ca. xiij. Anentis schuting at wild beistis and wild
foulis. Ca. xiiij. Anent the admissioun of Notaris, and prorogatioun of the
samin. Ca. xv. Anent giving of sesingis. Ca. xvj. Anent resignatiounis maid ad
perpetuam remanentiam. Ca. xvij. That five or sax of the principal Burrowis be
warnit for concluding of weir, peax, or taxatiounis. Ca. xviij. [*] Anent the
stanching of tumultis within Burrowis. Ca. xix. That na coilis be had forth of
the Realm. Ca. xx. That beif and muttoun cum to the market with skin and
birne. Ca. xxj. The ratificatioun of the priuilegeis of Burrowis. Ca. xxij.
Anent the letters of Marque. Ca. xxiij. Ane prouisioun to be maid for the
Instructioun of the outh. Ca. xxiiij. For sending of Ambaxatour to the King of
Denmark. Ca. xxv. Anent the confirmatioun of fewis. Ca. j.
FINIS TABVLAE.
ACTA PARLIAMENTI IACOBI PRIMI REGIS SCOTORVM TENTI APVD PERTH XXVI Die Menlis
Maij Anno Domini Millesimo Quadringent^simo viges^mo quarto (...) Su^ xix.
Conuocatis tribus Regni Statibus Ibidem congregatis electae ^uerunt certae
personae ad articulos datos per Dominum Regem determmandos data caeteris
licentia recedendi.
For The honor of God and halie KirK. Capitulo. j.
IN THE first to the honor of God and halie Kirk. That the halie Kirk tois and
bruk and the ministeris of it, their auld preuilegeis and fredomes. And that na
man let thaim to set their landis and teindis, under the pane that may follow
be sprituall law or temporal.

For the observing of sickir peax within the Realm. Ca. ij.
ITEM That firm and sicker peax be keipit, and haldin throw all the Realm,
and amang all and sindrie liegis and subiectis to our SOVERAN Lord the King,
and that na man tak on hand, in time to cum, to move or make weir agane other,
under all pane that may follow be course of comoun law.

That na man rebel agane the Kingis person. Ca. iij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit that na man opinlie or notourlie rebel aganis
the Kingis person, under the pain of torfalting of life land and gudis.

Of enforsing maid vpone rebellis agane the Kingis person. Ca. iiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit that gif any dissobeis till enforce the King
aganis notour rebellaus, aganis his person qu^en they be requirit, be the King
and commandit, they salbe chalangir be the King, as fautouris of sic rebellars
bot gif they have for them reasonable excusatioun.

Of the number of rydand men and fute men throw the cuntre. Ca. v.
ITEM It is statute that na man of quhat estate, degree or eo^ditio^ he be of,
rydand or ga^gand in the cuntre, leid nor have ma personis with him nor may
suffice him or till his estate, and for quhaine he will make radie payment. And
gif any co^playnt be of sic rydaris or ga^garis, the King co^mandis his
officiaris of the la^d, that quhair they happei to be, till arrest thaim, and
put them under sicker borrowis quhil the King be cert^^ot thairo^, and send
his will quhat salbe done of sic trespassouris.

Of the ministeris of law within the Realm. Ca. vj.
ITEM It is ordanit that their be maid officiaris and ministeris of law, throw
all the realm, that can or may hald the law to the Kingis commonis, and sic as
hes sufficiently of their awin: quhair throw they may be punishit gif they
trespass. And gif any be infeft of sic officis of befoir and are not sufficient
to minister thairin in propir person, that vtheris be ordanit in their stedis,
for the quhilk they that hes sic officis of the King in fee be haldin to answer
to him gif they trespass

That na Cumpaneis outely husband men. Ca. vij.
ITEM The parliament statutis, and the King forbiddis: that na cu^panies pas in
the country, to ly vpone any the Kingis liegis: or thig or soiorne horse outher
on kirkme^ or husbandis of the land. And gif any complaint be maid of sic
trespassouris to the schiref of the la^d, that he arreist sic folk and chalange
them, and taxt the Kingis skaith vpone them, and gif they be convict of sic
trespass that they be punist and find borrowis till assyth the King and the
party comple^and. And gif sic personis takis any skaith in the arreisting of
them, it salbe impute to them self, and in cais that na complaint be maid to
the schiref, the schiref sal inquire at ilk heid court that he haldis, gif any
sic faltouris be within his schirefdome. And gif any beis sundin, that they be
punishit, as is befoir writtin.

That all Custume remain with the King till his leuing. Ca. viij.
ITEM It is consentit be the hail parliament, that all the greit and small
custumes and burrowmailles of the Realm abide and remain with the King till
his leuing. And gif any perso^e makis any clame til any part of the said
custumes, that he schaw to the King quhat he hes for him, and the King sall make
him answer with auisment of his counsall.

OF landis and Kentis that war our Souerane Lord the Kingis predecessouris. Ca.
ix.
ITEM As anent la^dis and rentis the quhilk war of befoir time our Soueran Lord
the Kingis antecessouris, it is seen speidful that y^ King charge all and
sindrie schireffis of his Realm to gari^quire be y^ best eldest and worthiest
of their Bailliereis, quhat lands possessio^is or annual rentis pertenis to
the King or hes pertenit in his antecessouris times of good memory David,
Robert and Robert, his progenitouris and in quhais handis they now be, and that
ilk schiref gar retour be inqueis^ under his seill, and their seillis that beis
vpone it: and gif it lykis the King, he may gar summond all and sindrie his
tenentis at lauchfull day and place to schaw thaire charteris and euidentis
and, swa be their haldingis he may persawe, quhat pertenis till him.

Of finance to be maid for the Kingis costage in Ingland Ca. x.
ITEM It was co^sentit throw the estatis and Parliament, that for the fynance
and payment to be maid in Ingland for our Souerane Lordis costage, and
delyuering of his hostageis being in England, their salbe rasit ane eild or
maa, gif it misteris, throw the haill Kynrik: alsweill throw the regalyteis as
throw other landis, for it were grievous and greit charge on the co^monis to raise
the hail finance at anis. It is accordit that a eild be rasit. That is to
say.xij. d. of ilk pund and that the landis rentis, maillis and gudis of
lordis, within their proper domanis both Corn and Catell, bot for the extent
of theproper domanis they sall not pay drawin Oxin riddin Horse and vtensillis
of hows alanerlie and outtaking the Burgessis in like manner of their gudis and
rentis.

Of the manner of taxatioun to be maid in the Realm. Ca. xj.
ITEM Their ar taxis ordanit throw the counsall of Parliament vpone the Cattle
and Corn to be rasit to the Kingis finance to be maid in Ingland. In the first
eild now concludit the boll of quheit is taxit to ij.s. Alswa the boll of rye
beir and peis to xvi d. the boll of aittis vj. d. And this of all Corn that is
now in Hows or in stak, the Lordis puruiance to their howshald alanerlie
owttane: and the grene Corn, that is now upon the Erd growand, sall remain un
taxit, quhil it cume of the Erd, alswa the beistis ar taxit one this manner. The
Kow and her followar, oftwa eir auld to vj.s. viij. d. Item ane ^odder or ane
owe ilk ane to xij. d. Item Gymmer Dummund and Gattis ilk ane to xij. d. Item
ane drawin Ox of three eir auld or elder to vj.s. viij d. Alswa the wild Meir
with her followar of three eir to x.s. A Colt of three eir auld or elder, to ane
mark. This is the manner that, landis and gudis fall be taxit. That ilk schiref
within his schirefdome sall gar call before him all the Barronis and fre
haldarris of the King and with counsall of tham, he sall cheis leill men and
discreit and sic as he will answer for, y^ quhilks sall abyd knawlege before the
King, gif they have done their deuoir at y^ end of the taxation, and yt als
money persons as may sufficiently extent the cuntre and na ma for eschewing of
cost, and that all schirefis be sworn to the King or his deputis that they
sa^ lelely and trewly gar this extent be fulfillit of all the landis and gudis
(...) form as is abone written, and that the extentouris sall be sworn befoir
y^ Barronis of the schirefdome, that they sall do their full power to the said
extent, and they sall have with thaim the paroche Priest, and that he be
chargit be his Bischop till inform thaim lelely of all the gudis of the
parochin and that their be maid a buke of the said extent co^tenand the names
of t^k town in special, and the names of ilk person (...) in they towins,
and chair gudis followand their ^ames. And that (...) buik^s be pres^^^ to the
Kingis (...), the day (...) thairto, that is to say the xij. day of Iulii nixt
to cum. Alswa (...) their is ane greit schire^dome their be (...) of the
Baronis (...) and discreit men to ke^p them. Alswa that all the land^ of the
(...) after as they ar of auale now, and that but ^raude or gyle. Alswa that
all gudis be taxt: and (...) of the mouey that now is. Alswa that n^ excepttoun
be maid in this taxatioun to na man, (...) nor of male. Bot all the gudis (...)
they be fun^in to pay the (...) eild after the taxatioun, (...), Baronis and
(...). Alswa it is (...) speidfull, that all taxato^^is, the time of their
(...) warn all manner of man, that of all their gudis that are taret bai^t of
(...), corn and other gudis (...) nixt (...) following the taxt, the payment
(...) as is befoir writtin. And gif at the end of the said x^. dayis the
payment be not reddy, the (...) man that warnis payment, a (...) for v.s. a ow
or a ^^dder for xij. d. a Gait, a Gimmer, or a ^^^^und for viij. d. A wild
(...) and her follower for x.s.: A Colt of th^^ eit (...) or mair of (...)
xiij. (...) d.: A doll of quheit xij. d. a boil of Rye or Peis viij. d. a
b^llot of Airtis (...). d. And gif the Schiref takis their gudis he fall gar the
Lord of the la^d ^if he may be go^tia, pay the taxt to the King, and deliver
the gudis till him. And gif he will not, the Schirefe fall gar sell the gudis
a^ the (...) markat day, or send them to the King on the Kingis (...), quhair
the King, till his Deputis ordanis.

ITEM It is ordanit and seen speidfull, that the Prela^is gar tart their Rentis
and Kirkis in this manner. That is to say, ilk Bishope in ilk Denrie of h^s
Diocie gar his Official and his (...) Salmound all the Tennentis and
fr^halders befoir him, and (...), and charge them in manner and form as is
befoir (...), to the foiois day and place assignit to the Baronis: and taxt
ba^^h Kirkis and landis, and bring their taxt in manner and form as is befoir
writtin to the laidis day and place. And gif the Schiref sendis any man on the
Baronis behalf: that he be resauit with them and se their taxatioun. And that
the official gar warn the Schiref quhen he will cheis his taxatouris and make
taxatioun of Kirkis, landis, gudis and Rentis befoir said.

And quhair a Kirk man payis the haill valor of his Beneficis that all the
fruits of his Kirk of the eir follow and befre. Alswa anent the Taxatioun of
Burgesses gudis and Rentis, it is seen speidfull that ilk Alderman and Baillies
of Bur^owis, call befoir them the Burgess^s and gar cheis leill and true men,
in manner as is befoir la^d, takand with them the Curat of the town chargeit
be the greit aith throw the Bischop. And that the Schiref send als on the
Barronis behalf, a lele man to beir lele witness to their taxt: to the quhilk he
salbe sworn lelylie with them. And that they warn the Schiref to send that
man to the day, that they cheis their taxatouris. Alswa the Prelatis, the
Schireffis, the Aldermen of townis sall taxt and ordane the coistis of all
Officiatis, that sall laubour about this eild rasing be their lautie, that they
aucht to the King: and their coistis to be taken of the haill taxt. Alswa the
eild rasit to the King mot be allowit to them in the eild foirsaid. Alswa that
their be ordanit in ilk Schirefdome, and chosin be the Schireffis and the
Barronis good, lele and discreit men, to taxt the foirsaid rentis and gudis.
And that with the Clerkis their be ordanit lawit men be the Schireffis: and
with lawit men Clerkis be the Clergy, to see and beir witness, that all thingis
be leylie done, and rychtswa within Regalyis. And that ilk cuntrie relief
other. Alswa that the Schiref depute certane men, to be with the Baillies and
taxatouris of the Burrowis, to see that all manner of gudis, alsweill corn,
cattle, as vthers gudis, be lelylie taxt and presentit to the auditouris
ordanit thairto: till appeir at Perth, the.xij. day of Iulij nixt tocum, of the
quhilkis auditouris their ar the namis, the Bischoppis of Dunkeldin, Dumblane,
the Abbottis of Balmerinach, Sanet Columbis Inche, Master Iohne Scheues, the
Earl of Athole, Schir Patrik of Dumbar, Williame Borthwick, Patrik Ogilwy,
James of Douglas of Balwany, and Williame of Erskin of Kinnoull.

Of slaying of Salmound in forbodin time. Ca. xij.
ITEM Quha sa ever be convict of slauchter of Salmound, in time forbodin be the
Law, he sall pay.xl.s. for the unlaw. And at the third time, gif he be convict
of sic trespass he sall tyne his life or tha^ by it. And gif any man be infeft
to fische in forbodin time all sic priuilegeis sall ceis for three eiris tocum.
And gif any dois the co^trare he sall tyne ane hundredth.s. for the unlaw befoir
the Justice. Vpone the quhilk trespass the Justice Clerk sall inquyre at the
ressauing of the indictmentis, as of other punctis belangand his office.

That all cruuis and airis be destroyit. Ca. xiij.
ITEM That al cruuis and airis set in fresche watters, quhair the soy fillis
and ebbis, the quhilk destroyis the fry of all sischeis, be destroyit and put
away for ever mair: Not agane standing any privilege and fredome geuin in the
contrare, under the pane of ane hundredth.s. And they that hes cruuis in fresche
watters, yt they gar keip the Lawis anentis the setterdayis slop: and suffer
them not to stand in forbodin time under the said pane And that ilk heck of
the foirsaidis cruuis be three inche wide, as the auld statute requyris.

Of the mine of gold and silver. Ca. xiiij.
ITEM Gif any mine of gold or silver be fundin in any Lordis landis of the
Realm, and it may be preuit that three half pennyis of silver may be fynit out
of the pund of leid: The Lordis of Parliament consentis, that sic mine be the
Kingis, as is usual of other Realms.

That na Clerkis pas over say but the Kingis license. Ca. xv.
ITEM It is statute be the haill Parliament, and be the King forbiddin, that na
Clerk pas nor send procuratour for him over sey, but leif of our Lord the King
askit and obtenit.

That na Clerkis purches pensiounis of beneficis within the Realm. Ca. xvi.
ITEM In likewise it is statute be the haill Parliament and the King forbiddis,
that any Clerk of his Realm in time to cum purches any pensioun out of any
benefice seculare or religious, under all pane that he may tyne aganis his
Majesty, or raise any pensioun grautit in time bygane in any manner of wayis,
under the panis foirsaid.

That na man have out of the Realm gold nor silver. Ca. xvij.
ITEM It is ordanit, that na man have out of the Realm gold nor silver, bot he
pay.xl. d. of ilk pund of custume to the King, under the pane of tinsall of all
gold and silver that beis fundin with him, and.x. pund to the King for the
unlaw.

Of strangearis that takis money for their Merchandice. Ca. xviij.
ITEM Quhat strangearis that sellis Merchandice in the Realm, and takis money
thairfoir, he sall have witness of the hoist of his Innis, that he outher wait
all sic money for penny worthis of this land, or else pay the custum foirsaid,
under the pane befoir writin.

That na man play at the fute ball. Ca. xix.
ITEM It is statute and the King forbiddis, that na man play at the fute ball
under the pane of.xl.s. to be rasit to the Lord of the land, als often as he be
taintit, or to the Schiref of the land or his ministers gif the Lordis will not
punis sic trespassouris.

That ilk man busk them to be archaris. Ca. xx.
ITEM That al men busk them to be archaris fra they be xii. eiris of age, and
that ilk.x. pundis worth of land their be maid bow markis, and specially neir
paroche Kirkis, quhairu vpone halie dayis men may cum and at the leist schute
thryse about and have usage of archarie, and quha sa vsis not the said archarie
the Lord of the land sall raise of him a wedder, and gif the Lord rasis not
the said pane the Kingis Schiref or his ministers sall raise it to the King.

Of bigging of Ruikis in Treis. Ca. xxj.
ITEM For thy that me^ considderis that Ruikis biggand in Kirkis, airdis,
Orchardis, or Treis, dois greit skaith apone Cornis, It is ordanit, that they,
that sic Treis pertenis to, lat them to big and suffer on na wise, that their
Birdis fle away. And quhair it be taintit that they big, and the Birdis be
flowin, and the Nest be fundin in the Treis at Beltane, the Treis sal be
foirfaltit to the King (bot gif they be redemit, fra him throw them that they
first pertenit to) and hewin down, and v.s. to the Kingis unlaw.

Of Mure birning. Ca. xxij.
ITEM It is ordanit, that na man make Mure birning, after the month of March,
quhill all Cornis be schorne, under the pain of xl.s. to be rasit to the Lord
of the land of the birnar. And gif he hes not to pay, that he be presonit xl.
dayis. And gif the Lords of the land rasis not sic pane, na punissis not sic
trespassouris, as is befoir said, the Justice Clerk be the indytement sall gat
sic Trespassouris be correckit befoir the Justice, and punist as said is.

Of Custume of Horse, Nolt, Scheip, and Haring had out of the Realm. Ca. xxiij.
ALSVA for thy that money thingis passis out of the Realm withouttin Custume,
it is ordanit and decretit, that of all Nolt, Horse, and Scheip had out of the
Realm, their be payit to the King xij. d. for Custume of ilk pund, of the
price of the said gudis. And of all Haring that are taken within his Realm, that
is to say, of ilk thousand of fresche Haring sauld, of the Sellar j. d. and of
ilk last of Haring taken be Scottismen barrellit iiij.s. of ilk last be
strangearis takin vj.s. And of ilk thousand reid Hering maid in the Realm.
iiij. d.

Of Custume of mertrik Skinnis and other Furringis. Ca. xxiiij.
ITEM It is ordanit that na man have mertrik Skinnis forth of the Realm, and
gif he dois that, he pay to the King ij.s. for the Custume of ilk skin, and for
x. Fowmartis skinnis callit Fithowis x. d. Item of ane hundredth Cuning skinnis
xij. d. Item of ilk daker of Otter skinnis and Tod skinnis vj. d. Item for ilk
daker of Heart and Hynde skinnis xij. d. Item of ilk x. Dais and Raise skinnis
iiij. d.

Of Reformatioun and mending of the money. Ca. xxv.
ITEM The Parliament hes determinit and ordanit that our Lord the King gat mend
his money, and gar stryke it in like wecht and fynes to the money of Ingland.
And this money rinnand now, to have course quhill the King forbid it. And that
the King sall gat stryke new money quhen him lykis and thinkis it speidfull and
profitable for the Realm.

Of Hostillaris in Burrowis and Throuchfaris. Ca. xxvj.
ITEM It is ordanit that in all Burrow Townis of the Realm, and throuchfaris
quhair commoun passages ar, that their be ordanit Hostillaris and resettis,
hauand stablis and chalmers. And that men find with them bread and aill, and
all other fude, alsweill to horse as men, for reasonable price, after the chapis
of the country.

Of the reull of Beggars. Ca. xxvij.
THE King hes statute be consent of his haill Parliament, ryplie auisit, that
na Thiggaris be tholit to beg, nouther to Burgh nor to Landwart, betuix xiiii.
and lxx. eiris, bot they be seen be the counsall of the Townis or of the land,
that they may not win their leuing other wayis. And they that sal be tholit to
beg, sall have a certane takin on them to landwart of the Schiref, and in the
Burrowis they sall have takin of the Alderman or of the Baillies. And all other
personis hauand na takinnis, nouther of land na of Burgh, sal be chargit be
opin proclamatioun to labor and pas to Craftis, for winning of their leuing,
under the pane of birning on the Cheik, and banishing of the country.

Ane Complaint with Inhibition vpone Pensionis purchesing. Ca. xxviij.
ITEM Anent the Complaint that Master Nicol Cumnok maid vpone Master Ingrame
Lindsay, that he purchest in the Court of Rome ane Pensioun, out of the Denrie
of Aberdene, in till dismembring of his Benefice, in greit hindering of him:
for thy the Parliament thinkis, that sic purchessing of Pensiounis and
dismembring of Beneficis, ar agane the course of common Law, and rycht
inconvenient to be tholit in the Kinryk, and that the King gif inhibitioun and
commandment to the Bishope of Sanctandros, the quhilk is Judge Delegat in this
cause, that he suspend his process, quhil the King may counsall the Pape in
this matter. The quhilk inhibition our Lord the King maid to the Bishope, in the
Parliament. And the King gave bidding to the said Master Ingrame Lindsay, that
he soulde not proceid na further in this matter.

In the Parliament of our Souerane Lord James be The grace of God, King of
Scottis, haldin in the Town of Perth the xii. day of March, the eir of God a
thousand four hundredth xxiiij. eiris. And of his Kinryke the.xix. eir, to the
three Estatis of the Realm, their gatherit, war proponit sindrie Articlis, for
the quiet and good governance of the Realm, to the quhilk was answerit in
manner as after followis.

Of the fredome of Halie Kirk. Ca. xxix.
IN THE First to the honor of God, that the fredome of halie Kirk, be keipit
throw all the Realm: And gif any landis or possessionis of halie Kirk be
wrangously annalyit, they sold be restorit agane be lauchfull process of Law.

Anent Hospitallis. Ca. xxx.
ITEM Anent Hospitallis that are fundat of Almous deidis, throw the Kingis to be
vphaldin to pure folk and seik, to be vesyit be the Chancellar, as they have
been in the Kingis progenitouris times. And they that are fundat be Bishoppis or
other Lordis, Spiritual or Temporal, to be vesyit be the Bishope and
Ordinaris, quhome it effeiris to, and reduce and reform them to the effect of
their first fundatioun.

Of Heretickis and Lollardis. Ca. xxxi.
ITEM Anentis Heretickis and Lorllardis, that ilk Bishope sall gar inquyre to
the Inquisitioun of Heresy, quhair any sic beis fundin, and at they be punisit
as Law of halie Kirk requyris. And gif it misters, that Secular power be callit
in supporte and helping of halie Kirk.

Anent the keiping of the statutis maid in the first Parliament. Ca. xxxij.
ITEM That it be inquyrit be the Kingis Ministers, gif the statutis maid in his
first Parliament be keipit. And gif they be brokin in any of their punctis,
that the brekaris of them be punist after the form and ordinance of the said
Parliament.

Anent Liggis and bandis. Ca. xxxiij.
ITEM It is decretit be the haill Parliament, and forbiddin be our Souerane
Lord the King, that any liggis or bandis be maid amangis his liegis in the
Realm. And gif any hes been maid in time bygane, that they be not keipit nor
haldin in time to cum.

Of selling of Horse. Ca. xxxiiij.
ITEM It is ordanit that na Horse be sauld out of the Realm, quhill at the
leist they be three eir auld ou^gane, under the pane of escheit of them to the
King.

Anent Taulch. Ca. xxxv.
ITEM It is ordanit, that na Taulch be had out of the Realm, under the pane of
escheit of it to the King.

The statute anent Indictment. Ca. xxxvj.
ITEM It is ordanit, that the Justice Clerkis, inquyre at the ressauing of the
Indictmentis, of them that be nycht steillis grene wod, or pelis the Bark of
the Treis, distroyand woddis. And quha sa be convict befoir the Justice of sic
trespass, they sall pay xl.s. to the King for the unlaw, and assyth the party
skaihit. And als the said Clerk sall inquyre of the breking of mennis
Orchardes, steillaris of fruit, distroyaris of Cuningharis and Dowcatis, the
quhilkis sal be punist, as it is ordanit of the steillaris of wod.

Of stollin wod. Ca. xxxvij.
ITEM It is ordanit, gif any man findis his stollin wod in other Lordis landis,
he sall gar arreist both the wod and the steillaris of it, and gat them
suffer Law in his Court, that the wod was stollin fra, and in nane vthers.

The statute anent Salmound. Ca. xxxviij.
ITEM It is ordanit be the Parliament, and forbiddin be the King, that any
Salmound be slain fra the Feist of the Assumptioun of our Lady, quhill the
Feist of Sanctandrow in winter, nouther with Nettis na Cruvis, na nane other
wayis, under the pane put vpone slayaris of Reid Fische, quhilk alswa the
Justice Clerk sall gar inquyre.

Anent stalkaris, that slayis Deir. Ca. xxxix.
ITEM It is ordanit, that the Justice Clerk sall inquyre of Stalkaris, that
slayis Deir, that is to say, Heart, Hynde, Daa, and Raa, and the halders and
mantenaris of them. And Alssone as any Stalkar may be convict of slauchter of
Deir, he sall pay to the king xl.s. And the halders and mantenaris of them
sall pay ten pundis.

Of Resettouris of Rebellis. Ca. xl.
ITEM It is decretit and statute, that na man wilfully sall resset, mantene or
do favor, to oppin and manifest Rebellouris aganis the Kingis Majesty and
the common Law, under the pane of Forfaltoure.

The statute of Merchandis. Ca. xlj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that na Merchand of the Realm pas over the Sea in Merchandice, bot he have of his awin proper good, or at the leist
committit till his governance three Serplathis of woll, or the valu of them in
other Merchandice, quhilk sal be kend, or he pas, be ane inqueist of his
nychthouris, under the pane of ten pund to the King.

Of men of Craft. xlij.
ITEM It is ordanit, that in ilk Town of the Realm, of ilk sindrie Craft vsit
thairin, be chosin a wise man of that Craft, be the laif of that Craft, and be
consent of the officiar of the Town, the quhilk sal be haldin Dekyn or Master
man ower the laif for the time, to govern and assay all warkis, that beis
maid, befoir the Craftis men of that Craft: swa that the Kingis liegis be not
defraudit and skaithit in time to cum, as they have been in time bygane, throw
untrue men of Craftis.

Anent the ordinance of Processiounis. Ca. xliij.
ITEM It is ordanit, that ilk Bishope gif bidding be his letters patent to his
Clergy, to make processiounis and spiritual prayers, for the weilfair and the
hailfull estate of our Lord the King, and our Lady the Queen, and their
barnetyme.

Of the Custume of wollin Claith. Ca. xliiij.
ITEM It is ordanit, that of ilk pundis worth of wollin Claith had out of the
Realm, the King sall have of the outhauat for Custume ij.s. And of ilk pundis
worth of Salmound bocht be strangearis, and had out of the Realm. xxx d. And
of ilk pundes worth of Inglis gudis brocht in the Realm. xxx. d.

The statute anent land* Men. Ca. xlv.
ITEM It is ordanit, that ilk man of Simple estate, that sold be of ressoun
laborers, have outher half ane Ox in the Pleuch, or else delwe ilk day vij.
fute of lenth, and vij. on bread, under the paue of ane Ox to the King.

Anent all Beggaris. Ca. xlvj.
ITEM It is ordanit, that na Thiggar be tholit to beg, nouther to Burgh nor
Land, betuix xiiii. and lxx. eiris, bot they be seen be the Counsall of the
Commounis of the country, that they may not win their leuing other wayis. And
they that sa beis fundin, have a certane takin to Landwart of the Schireffis,
and in Burrowis of Aldermen and Bailleis, and that under the pane of birning on
the Cheik, and banyssing of the country. And that in every Burgh out throw
the Realm the Chalmerlane sall inquyre in his Air eirlie, gif the Aldermen
and Baillies hes keipit the Act and the form of the statute. And gif they have
brokin it, they sal be in l.s. to the King.

Item the Schireffis faileing of the keiping of the said act to be punist in
likewise.

The statute Anent Lesingmakaris. Ca. xlvij.
ITEM It is ordanit be the King and the haill Parliament, that all
Lesingmakaris and tellaris of them, quhilk may ingenner discord betuix the
King and his people, quhair ever they may be gottin, sal be ohalangir be them,
that power hes, and tyne life and gudis to the King.

Of wapinschawingis. Ca. xlviij.
ITEM It is ordanit, that in ilk Schirefdome of the Realm, be maid
Vapinschawingis four times in the eir.

Anent complaintis to be decydit befoir the Judge Ordinare. Ca. xlix.
ITEM As anent Billis of Complaint, quhilkis may not be determinit be the
Parliament, for diverse causis belanging the co^moun proffet of the Realm, it
is ordanit, that they billis of complaint be execute and determinit be the
Iugeis and Officiaris of the Courtis, to quhome they pertene of Law, outher
Justice, Chalmerlane, Schireffis, Baillies of Burrowis, Barronis, or other
spiritual Iuges, gif it effeiris to them. To the quhilkis Iugeis all and
sindrie, the King sall gif strait commandment, alsweill within Regaliteis as
outwith, under all pane and charge, that may follow, that alsweill to pure as
to rich, but fraud or gyle, they do full Law and Justice. And gif their be
any pure creature, for fault of cunning or dispensis, that can not nor may not
follow his cause, the King for the lufe of God sall ordane the Judge, befoir
quhame the cause sulde be determinit, purway and get a leill and a wise Aduocat
to follow sic pure creaturis causis.

And gif sic causis be obtenit, the wrangar sall assyth both the party
skaithit, and the Aduocatis costis and travel. And gif the Judge refusis to do
the Law eninly, as is befoir said, the party compleineand sall have recourse
to the King, quha sall se rigorously punist sic Iugeis, that it sall be
ensampill till all vthers.

Anent Remissiounis to be geuin. Ca. l.
ITEM It is ordanit be the Parliament, that quhair the King, geuis remissiounis
till any man, with conditioun till assyth the party skaithit and compleineand,
That consideratioun be had of the Hieland men, the quhilkis befoir the Kingis
hame cumming, commounly rest and slew ilk ane vtheris. Of the quhilkis their
may not be maid full assyth till vthers, bot in the law lands, quhair the
skaithis done may be kend, and the Trespassour be of power to make amendis of
all, or of pairt. That their be chosin good men and leill sworn thairto, to
modifie amendis after the quality and quantity of the person, and of the
skaithis, gif the parteis can not concord be them self, of the quhilkis
modificatiounis both the parteis sall hald them content.

In the Parliament of our Souerane Lord James be The Grace of God, King of
Scottis, haldin at Perth the xj. day of the Month of March, with
co^tinewatioun of dayis in times followand. The eir of God ane thousand four
hundredth twenty five eiris. And of his Kinrik the xx. eir. To the A^^^ulis put
be the King to the Prelatis, Mychtie Lordis of Parliament, Erlis and Barronis
to be decernit be certane persounis thairto chosin be the three Estatis. It was
ordanit, answerit, statute, and detretit in manner that after followis.

Of Halie Kirk. Ca. lj.
IN THE First, that the honor and worship of God. Almychtie and halie Kirk, and
the Ministers of it loys their auld preuilegis and fredomes, and that na man
lat them to set their landis and their teindis, under all pane, that may
follow be spiritual Law or temporal.

Anent Harnes to be broucht hame be Merchandis. Ca. lij.
ITEM It is ordanit be the King and the Parliament, that all Merchandis of the
Realm, passand over see for Merchandice bring hame, as he may gudly thole,
after the quantity of his Merchandice, Harnes and Armouris, with Speir,
Schaftis, Bowis and Stauis. And that be done be ilk ane of them als often, as it
happinnis them to pass over see in Merchandice.

That all the Kingis Liegis leif and be gouernis be the Lawis of the Realm.
Ca. liij.
ITEM It is ordanit be the King, be consent and deliverance of the three
Estatis, that all and sindrie the Kingis liegis of the Realm, leif and be
gouernit under the Kingis Lawis and statutes of the Realm allanerly, and under
na particular Lawis, na special preuilege, na be na Lawis of other countries
nor Realms.

Anent the shawing of Charters and new Infeftmentis. Ca. liiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be the King and his Parliament, that all and
sindrie, both men and women of his Realm, to quhame he hes grantit any
letters of new Infeftmentis, Confirmatiounis, or protectiounis specially under
his haill greit Seill, fra the time of his cumming hame in his Realm out of
the Realm of Ingland to this day, present their letters to the King or his
Deputis thairfoir ordanit, within the space of four Monethis nixto cum, that
they may be put in the Kingis Register into perpetual memory. And quha sa
presentis not their letteris within the said four Monethis, fra thine forth
their letters sal be to them of nane avail, force nor effect.

For the halding of the money within the Realm. Ca. lvj.
ITEM It is ordanit for the halding of the money within the Realm, that na man
have out of the Realm Gold nor Silver, bot he pay xl. d. of ilk pund to the
King for Custume under the pain of tinsall of all Gold and silver, that beis
fundin with him, and x. pund to the King for the unlaw. And quhat stranger,
that bringis Merchandice in the Realm to sell, and takis money thairfoir, he
sall have witnessing of the Host of his Iunis, that he wair all s^c money for
pennyworthis of this Realm, or else pay the Custume foirsaid to the King, under
the pane befoir writtin. And for the keiping of this statute, that the Kingis
Chalmerlane Depute or him self gar ordane in ilk Town, quhair sic strangearis
repairis, two sufficient men both to se the entry of them of sic gudis, and
to heir the rekning of them, and to ressaue the Kingis Custume, and other
thingis, that langis thairto, and to make Rekning and gif count thairof at the
Kingis Checker.

That na persounis that Indictis men to the Justice Air be on their Assyse.
Ca. lvj.
ITEM It is statute, ordanit, and forbiddin, that any man, that is Officiar of
any country, or any man, that Indictis ane other for any actioun, be on his
assyse, that sall thole the Law, under the pane of ten pund to the King.

Of Forthoche felony. Ca. lvij.
ITEM It is statute for the keiping of the Kingis peax, and addit to the Act
and statute maid of befoir, that als sone as any complaint be maid throw any
personnis to Iusticis, Schireffis, Baillies in Burrowis, or on land till any
other Officiar of the Law, quhat ever he be, that it effeiris or pertenis to,
sall in all gudlie haiste gar Summound both the parteis befoir him, and
inquyre deligentlie but any sauoure, gif the deid was done vpone Forthocht
Felfony, or throw suddane Chaudmella: And gif it be fundin forthocht felony,
the party salbe chalangit incontinent of the Kingis pear breki^g be the
Officiaris of Law, quhilkis sall gar the party, hurt be fullelie assythit
after the quantity of the skaith, that he hes sustenit. And their after the
life and the gudis of the trespassoure to be in the Kingis will, to quhais
presoun he sal be had incontment. And gif the trespass be done of suddane
Chaudmella, the party skaithit sall follow, and the party trespassand defend,
after the course of the auld Lawis of the Realm.

That all Barronis and Frehaldaris sall compeir personally in the Parliament.
Ca. lviij.
ITEM It is ordanit and statute, that all Prelatis, Erlis, Barronis and
Frehaldaris of the King within the Realm, sen they ar haldin to gif presence
in the Kingis Parliament, and General Counsall, fra thine forth be haldin to
compeir in proper persoun, and not be a Procuratoure, bot gif the Procuratoure
allege their and prove a lauchfull cause of their absence.

Anent Attornayis in the Justice Airis, that they be honest persounis. Ca. lix.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that na man be admittit to be Attornay in the
Justice Air, bot gif he be ane honest and sufficient persoun of discretioun
for that office, the quhilk salbe knawin be the Justice and the Barronis than
present, gif any dout be thairof.

Of persounis to be chosin to examine the Buikis of Law, and reform them. Ca.
lx.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that sex wise men and discreit of ilk ane of
the three Estatis, quhilk knawis the Lawis best, sal be chosin (sen fraud and
gyle aucht to help na man) that sall se and examine the Buikis of Law, that is
to say, Regiam Maiestatem, and Quoniam Attachiamenta. And mend the Lawis, that
neidis mendiment. And ordanis als, that all lauchfull exceptiounis of the Law
be admittit in Judgment, and all Friuolus and fraudfull exceptiounis be
repellit, and not admittit be na Judge, swa that the causis litigious and pleis
be not wrangously prolongit in skaith and prejudice of the party, and in
fraud of the Law.

Anent Hostillaris in Barrowis and Throuchfaris. Ca. lxj.
ITEM In the way, that Hostillaris in Burrowis and throuchfaris, menis them to
the King, that his liegis trauelland in the Realm, quhen they cum to Burrowis
and Throuchfaris, herbreis them not in Hostillaris, bot with their acquentance
and freindis: The King of deliverance of counsall, and consent of the three
Estatis forbiddis, that only leigeman of his Realm, trawelland throw the
country on horse or on fute fra time; that the commoun Hostillaris be maid,
herbrie or luge them in any other place, bot in the Hostillaris foirsaid, bot
gif it be the persounis that leidis money with them in company, that sall have
fredome to herbrie with their freindis. Swa that their horse and their meine be
harbreit and lugeit in the commoun Hostillaris. And als it is ordanit, that na
Burges indwelland in burgh or in Throuchfair ressaue or admit any sic
trauellouris or strangearis, bot allanerlie commoun Hostillaris, under the pane
of xl.s. to the King for the unlaw.

OF Prayer and Processioun to be maid for the King and the Queen be the Clergy.
Ca. lxij.
ITEM Sen befoir time the statute of Clergy of the Realm, wilfully grantit to
gar be maid certane Orisounis throw all that subiectis for our Lord the King,
our Lady the Queen, and the Children cumand betuix them, thairfoir now
considderit the greit fauouris, gracious eill, and mantenance, that our Lord
the King beiris and schawis to halie Kirk, and ministers of it, the haill state
of Clergy hes wilfully grantit, that ilk Bishope of the Realm sall in the nixt
Scine gar ordane and statute, that ilk Priest, alsweill Religious, as Secular
of his Diocy als often, as he sayis Mess, sall say a certane Collet for the
prosperity of our said Lord the King, our Lady the Queen, and their Children,
under certane pane penitenciar and censure of haly Kirk: And that they sall make
in their nixt General Counsall of Clergy a general statute principally
thairupone.

Anent Mesouris. Ca. lxiij.
ITEM It is ordanit, that their be maid certane Mesouris of Boll, Fyrlot, half
Fyrlot, Peck, and Gallowne, the quhilk sall be generally vsit throw all the
Realm, in all partis, the quhilk salbe geuin forth at Edinburgh at the Ishie
of this Parliament thidder continewit. And they Mesouris salbe geuin to be vsit
at the first day of the Month of September nixt tocum. And fra thine forth the
King forbiddis any other Mesouris to be vsit in the Realm, under the pane that
may follow.

Of weichtis. Ca. lxiiij.
ITEM It is ordanit, that their be maid a stane for gudis sauld and bocht be
weicht, the quhilk sall wey xv. leill trois pundis, and that stane to be
deuidit in xvj. leill scottis pundis, and of it their salbe ordanit half a
stane, a quarter, a half quarter, a pund, half a pund, and other les weichtis
according thairto, with the quhilk all byaris and sellaris of gudis within the
Realm sall by and sell with, and with nane other weichtis fra witsonday nixt
tocum, and fra thine forth their foirsaid weichtis sall have course.

Of watter mettis. Ca. lxv.
ITEM It is ordanit, that the watter mettis, that now ar, sall remain and be
vsit throw the Realm in time tocum, and in ilk place, and Town, quhair the
gudis ar sauld and met be the watter, their be ordanit, be the Alderman, and
the Baillies, a leill man sworn to met all gudis sellabill be the watter met,
alsweill collis as other gudis, and that the sellaris or nane of their behalf
intromet them in the metting of sic gudis.

Anent Ferriaris and Baitmen. Ca. lxvj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that all baitmen and ferryaris, quhair horse ar
ferryit, sall have for ilk bait a trene brig, quhairwith they may ressaue
within their baittis, trauellouris horse throw the Realm, unhurt and
vnskaithit, under the pane of xl.s. of ilk bait, fra witsonday forth nixt tocum.

Of the wapinschawing. Ca. lxvij.
ITEM It was ordanit in the Secound Parliament of our Souerane Lord the King,
that ilk Schiref of the Realm sold gar wapinshawing be maid four times ilk
eir, in als money placis as war speidfull, within his Baillierie, bot the manner
how wapinshawingis sold be ressauit was not appoyntit: Heirfoir our Lord the
King throw the haill ordinance of his Parliament statutes, that ilk gentilman,
hauand ten pundis worth of land or mair, be sufficiently harnest and Anarmit
with basnet, haill leg harnes, sword, speir, and dagar, and gentilmen hauand
les extentis of landis, or na landis, salbe Inarmit at their gudlie power,
after the sycht and discretioun of the Schireffis, bot all other emen of the
Realm, betuix, sextene and sextie eir salbe sufficiently bowit and schaftit
with sword, bucklar, and knyfe: And that all the Burgesses and indwellaris
within the Burrowtownis of the Realm in like manner be Anarmit and harnest, and
make wapinshawingis within the Burrowis of the Realm in like manner, four times
in the eir, and that be the Alderman and baillies, upon the quhilk the
Chalmerlane and his Deputis sall know and execute the said thingis. And that
all men Secularis of the Realm be weill puruait of the said harnes and
wappinnis be the Feist of the Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ nixt tocum,
under the panis followand, That is to say, of ilk gentilman that defaltis at
the first wapinshawing.xl.s. and at the the other default.xl.s. and at the thride
default.x. pund, and alsmekle als oftymes as he defaultis efterwart: And of ilk
bowman at the first fault x.s. at the the other default x.s. and at the thride
xl.s. And swa forth als oftymes, as he beis fundin faultise efterwart.

Anent the Merchandis and salars passand to Ireland. Ca. lxviij.
ITEM As to the passage betuix Scotland and Ireland, it is seen speidfull be
the Kingis Counsall, that bidding be geuin be the King to all the Lordis,
Schireffis, and all other Officiaris, vpone the Fronters of Scotland, lyand
aganis Ireland, that na Schippis, na Galayis, na na man pas out of this land to
Ireland, without special leif of the Kingis Deputis, that salbe ordanit to ilk
Heauin: And for two causis and principally, sen the Kingis notoure Rebelloucis
ar resset in Erishrie in Ireland, and for that cause Passingers passa^d fra
thine, mycht do prejudice to this Realm, ane other cause is, yt the me^ that are under Erischrie subject to the King of Ingland, mycht espy the priuities of
this Realm, and do greit skaith, as is befoir writtin.

Of Schipmen. Ca. lxix.
ITEM It is seen speidfull, that gif any Schipman of Scotland passis with
letters of the Kingis Depute in Ireland, that he ressaue na man into his Schip
to bring with him to the Realm of Scotland, bot gif that man have ane letter
or certanetie of the Lord of that land, quhair he schippis, for quhat cause he
cummis in this Realm.

Anent Ireland men climand in Scottis Schippis. Ca. lxx.
ITEM That quhen he cummis in any Heauin of Scotland, that he ride on ankar,
and hald within shipbuird all men, that he bringis with him, quhill he send for
the Kingis baillie, or a Depute of the Town of the Heauin, that he cummis in,
that than men may examyne and se of the Kingis behalf their persounis, and
quhat charge they have be letter or other way, quhether it be proffeit or
prejudice to the King or the Kinrik: and gif any prejudice of deid be fundin,
they salbe arreistit and presentit to the Schireffis presoun, quhill the King
have done his will on them.

The statute anent Ireland men. Ca. lxxj.
ITEM That it be maid manifest be the Kingis Deputis upon the Fronters, that is
not done for hatrent, na breking of the auld freindship betuix the King of
Scotland and his liegis, and the good auld freindis of Erischerie of Ireland,
bot allanerly to eschew the perrell foirsaid. And gif any man attemptis in the
contrary of this, his gudis salbe escheit to the King, and his body at the
Kingis will.

Of the Sessiounis to be haldin. Ca. lxxij.
ITEM Our Souerane Lord the King with consent of his Parliament hes ordanit,
that his Chancellar and with him certane discreit persounis of the three
Estatis, to be chosin and depute be our Souerane Lord the King, sal sit fra
thine forth three times in the eir, quhair the King lykes to command them,
quhilk sall know, examyne, conclude, and finally ditermyn, all and sindrie
complaints, causis, and quarrellis, that may be determinit befoir the King and
his Counsall. The quhilkis persounis sall have their expensis of the parteis
fundin faultise, and of their vnlawis, or vtherwayis, as is plesand to our
Souerane Lord the King.

The first Sessioun Ca. lxxiij.
ITEM The first of the three termis, beginnand on the morn nixt after the Feist
of Sanct Michaell the Archangell, that is to say, the last day of the Month of
September nixt tocum, with continewatioun of dayis followand, as is speidfull.

The Secound Sessioun. Ca. lxxiiij.
ITEM The Secound day and term beginnand on the monounday the first haill oulk
of Lentrene with like continewatioun of terms.

The Thride Sessioun. Ca. lxxv.
ITEM The thride term beginnand on the Morn nixt after the Feist of Sanct
Iohne the Baptist, with like continewatioun of dayis and termis, as is foirsaid.

That every man that hes nocht of his awin sall labor for his leuing. Ca.
lxxvj.
ITEM The King with consent of his Parliament, hes statute and ordanit, that
ilk Schiref of the Realm within his Baillierie inquyre deligently, gif any
idill men, that hes not to live of their awin, be resset within his boundis,
after the quhilk inquisitioun the Schiref sall gar arreist sic idill men, and
gar keip them in festnance quhill it be knawin, quhairon they leif. And at the
country salbe vnskaithit of them, thairupone the Schiref sall ressaue good
and sicker Borrowis. After the quhilk Borrowis fundin, the Schiref sall assign
xl. dayis to sic idil men to get them Masters, or to festin them to lefull
Craftis. And they xl. dayis beand gane, gif they be fundin mair idil, the
Schiref sall arreist them again, and send them to the Kingis presoun to bide
and be punist at the Kingis will. And that this be done alsweill in Burrowis,
as on land throw all the Realm.

Anent the executioun of the Actis of Parliament maid ofbefoir. Ca. lxxvij.
ITEM The King with consent of his three estatis of the Real me hes ordanit,
that all statutis and ordinances of this Parliament, and of the two
Parliamentis proceidand be Registrate in the Kings Register, and geuin to the
Schireffis, quhilkis statutis and ordinances, ilk Schiref be haldin to publict
opinlie in the chief place of his Schirefdome, and vthers notabill placis, and
als to gif the copyis of them both to Prelatis, Barronis, and Burrowis of his
vaillierie, vpone the expensis of the askaris: And that ilk Schiref gar be
keipit the tennoure of this Act, under the pane of depriuatioun of his office.
And that ilk Schiref gif opin bidding to the pepill of his baillierie both to
land and to Burgh, to keip and fulfill all statutis and ordinances maid in the
saidis three Parliame^tis, under the pane co^tenit in the Acts of them, swa
that nane have cause till pretend or allege any ignorance.

ASSISA REGIS IACOBI DE PONDERIBVS ET MENSVRIS PER TOTVM REGNVM SCOTIAE
GENERALITER CONstituendis, facta apud Perth in Parliamento tento ibidem
vndecimo die Mensis Martij. Anno Regni sui vigesimo primo per consensum and
assensum trium Regni statuum ibidem existentium.

Anent the Mesoure of the Elne. Ca. lxxviij.
IN THE First they ordanit and deliuerit, that the Elne sall contene xxxvij.
inche, as is contenit in the statute of King David the First maid thairupone.

Quhat the stane sall contene. Ca. lxxix.
ITEM They ordanit and statute the stane to wey Irin, woll, and other
Merchandice with, to contene xv. pund trois, ilk trois pund to contene xvj.
ounce, and that stane to be deuidit in half stane, quarter, half quarter, pund,
half pund, and other smallar.

Of the Deuisioun of the boll and the mesoure of the Fyrlot and the boll. Ca.
lxxx.
ITEM They ordanit the boll to met victual with, to be deuidit in four
partis, videlicet, four Fyrlottis to contene a boll, and that Fyrlot not to be
maid after the first Mesoure, na after the Mesoure now vsit, bot in middill
Mesoure betuix the two.

ITEM The boll sall contene in breid xxix. inchis within the buirdis, and above
xxvij. inchis and a half euin ouerthort, and in deipnes xix inchis. Item the
Fyrlot sall contene in breid euin ouerthort xvj. inchis under and abone within
the buirdis, the thicknes of both the buirdis sall contene ane inche and ane
half, and in deipnes it sall contene ix. inche, the half Fyrlot, and the peck
thairefter followand, as effeiris. The Fyrlot sall contene two gallownis and a
pynt, and ilk pynt sall contene be weicht of cleir watter of Tay xlj. ounce,
that is to say, two pundis and ix. ounce trois. Swa weyis the gallowne xx. pund
and viij. ounce. Swa weyis the Fyrlor xlj. pundis, and the boll contenand four
Fyrlotis, weyis viij scoir iiij. pund. The auld boll first maid be King David,
contenit a Sexterne, a Sexterne contenit xij. gallownis of the auld met, and
ilk gallowne weyit x. pund trois, and four ounce of diverse watters. Swa weyit
the boll vj. scoir three pundis, swa weyis this boll new maid mair, than the
auld boll xlj. pund, quhilk makis two gallownis and a half, and a chopin of the
auld met, and of the new met ordanit, ix. pyntis and three Muchkinnis.

Anent Vnlawis for birning. Ca. lxxxj.
ITEM As anentis fire, it is seen speidfull that in ilk Burgh, or greit Heaum
town, and Throuchfair that is greit, that the Alderman, Baillies, or the
Gouernaris of they townis, se and gif bidding within their Townis, that na
Hemp, Lint, Stray, Hay, Hedder, na Brom be put neir the Fire, nor above the
Low in Fire Howsis. And this be them self or men under them, be ilk Month
se^e, and quha sa after forbidding maid till him, be fundin faltise, sall pay
ane unlaw as faltis in Burgh, als often times as he is fundin faltise and
vnforgeuin, and gif the Alderman, Baillies or Gouernouris, of the Townis be
negligent in the execution thairof, they sal be in xl.s. to the King.

Of Hay and Stray to be sauld. Ca. lxxxij.
ITEM That Sellaris of Hay or Fodder, in Burgh, cum not to their Hay hows with
Candill but Lantrene, under the pane of the samin unlaw, als often as he beis
fundin faltise.

That certane Ledders be fundin ay reddie in the Burgh for happinning of Fire.
Ca. lxxxiij.
ITEM That in ilk Burgh their be ordanit of the commoun Co^st, vj. vij or viij.
Ledders, after the quantity of the Burgh, xx. fute the ledder, and at they be
keipit in a reddie place of the Town, and to that use and nane other, under
the pane of the foirsaid unlaw. And of the samin wise their be ordanit three or
four Says to the commoun use, and vj. or may Cleikis of Irin to draw down
Timber and Ruiffis that are fyrit.

Of Commoun women. Ca. lxxxiiij.
ITEM That Commoun women be put at the outmest endis of the Town, quhair leist
perrell of Fire is, and that na man set them howsis in the heart of the Town,
under the pane of ane unlaw, or it resset them under the samin pane.

Of Fire and the panis thairof. Ca. lxxxv.
ITEM Gif Birning happinnis in any town, fra the Fire be stanchit, the
Alderman, Baillies, and Gouernoures of the Town, incontinent sall inquyre
quhome throw, and how the Fire happinnit, and it be fundin on purpois deid,
forfaltoure sal be punitioun to them, and gif it happinnis of misgouernance,
and not of set purpois, gif it be ane seruand, and that seruand have gudis, he
sall be punist in his gudis, be the sycht of the Gouernouris of the Town, and
geuin to the man that tholis the skaith, and syne banist the fredome for three
eiris: And gif the seruand hes na gudis, he salbe doungin oppinlie at the
market Cross, and throw the Town, and syne banist that fredome for vij. eir.

ITEM Gif it be a man that awe the hows, and birnis it reklesly, or his wife or
his awin bairnis, quhether his nychtbouris takis skaith or nane, attoure the
skaith and schame that he tholis, he or they salbe banist that Town for three
eiris. And gif it be ane man that mailis the hows and birnis it reklesly, he
sall amend the skaith after his power, and be banist the Town for three eiris.
And gif he be a strangear or a travel loure, he salbe arreistit, gif he be of
power to amend the skaith, and gif he be not of power, he sall bide in
sickernes at the Kingis will.

ITEM Gif the Baillies and Gouernouris of the Town findis na man in wit, bot
of suddane caise that may not be foirsene, as wild fire, rattounis, or foulis,
or sic liknes, the Law leuis it vnpunist.

ITEM Gif the Gouernouris of the Town be negligent in the executioun of their
office, and this ordinance foirsaid in any punct, we leif them in ten pund to
the King of unlaw.

ITEM That na Fire be fetchit fra ane hows till ane other within the Town, bot
within couerit weshell or lantern, under the pane of ane unlaw.

ITEM Gif Fire happinnis in husband Townis of Barronis, we leif them to be
punist be their Lordis, in like manner as Baillies and Gouernouris dois in Burgh.

THEIR Ar the Articulis, Punctis, and causis, tretit and determinit be our
Souerane Lord James be the grace of God King of Scottis, and certane Lordis,
Prelatis, Banrentis, Barronis, Frehaldaris and wise men chosin thairto, of the
haill Counsall of the three estatis of the Realm, in the parliament beginning
at Perth the xvj. day of March, the eir of God ane thousand fourehundreth and
xxv. eiris, first contine wit to Edinburgh to the xij. day of Maij of the eir
of grace ane thousand four hundredth xxvj. eiris, and fra thine co^tine wit to
the Town of Perth, and to the last day of the Month of September of the samin
eir, with co^tinewatioun of dayis and times as in the Actis maid thairupone is
mair cleirly contenit.

Anent the Custume of Salmound and other Fische. Ca. lxxxvj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that Custume be payit to the King, alsweil of
indwellaris within the Realm, as of fremmit men, in any Burrowis of the
Realm. And as of strangearis and vnfre men, of all Salmound and fische sauld
and bocht, and had outwith the Realm, out of any Burgh of the Realm.

Of Dekinnis of Craft. Ca. lxxxvij.
ITEM The King of deliverance of Parliament hes ordanit, that the Dekinnis of
Craftis in Burrowis, stand to the nixt Parliament, in the manner as after
followis, that is to say, that the Dekin of ilk Craft, sall have na correctioun
of the Craft, na of na man thairof, bot allanerly to se that the wark men be
cunnand, and the warke sufficient, the quhilk he sall assay and examine euerilk
xv. dayis anis.

Of the price and feis of Craftismen. Ca. lxxxviij.
ITEM It is ordanit, that the Alderman and the Counsall of ilk Town sworn,
sall se and pryse the matter and the coist and the rrauell of the wark man, and
thairefter pryse the maid wark how it salbe saulde, and that price make knawin
to the Kingis commounis and be oppin cryit.

Of wark men. Ca. lxxxix.
ITEM It is ordanit, that the Counsall of the Town sall se and ordane, quhat
fee warkmen sall have for their handlyne of their Craft, that wirkis other
mennis warkis, as wrichtes, Mesounis, and other siclyke.

Of wrichtis and Mesounis. Ca. xc.
ITEM For quhy, that it is complenit to the King and his Counsall, that
wrichtis and Mesounis takis atams on hand money warkis, quhilkis they may not,
nor will not fulfill at the time they hecht, throw the quhilk the Kingis liegis
arskaithit, and the honor and proffeit of the land lettit. Thairfoir it is
ordanit be the King and the Parliament, that it be cryit in ilk Town oppinly,
that na warkman tak mair work on hand than he may gudlie fulfill after his
cunnand, under the pane of tinsall of the price of samekle wark that he takis
on hand, than he may gudlie fulfill to the King, and of the fulfilling of the
wark that he takis on hand, vpone his awin coist. And alswa quhair a warkman,
outher wilfully or vnrichteously, lettis to fulfill the wark that he hes taken
on hand, that ane other man of that ilk Craft refuse not to tak that on hand
for ressonabill free, under the pane of punissing of him at the Kingis will,
swa that he be ane warkman knawin, and hes than nane other wark on hand.

Of Land men. Ca. xcj.
ITEM The said day our Souerane Lord the King, with consent of the haill
Parliament ordanit, that throw all the Realm, ilk man teiland with a pleuch of
viij. Oxin, sall saw at the leist ilk eir a fyrlot of quheit, half a fyrlot of
peis, and xl. beims, under the pane of x.s. to the Barroun of the land that he
dwellis in, gi^ he sawis it not, and als often as he beis fundin faultise. And
gif the Barrone sawis not the said corn in like manner in his Domanis, he sall
pay to the King xl.s. And gif the Barrone be fundin negligent in the rasing of
the said pane on his husbandis, their salbe rasit on him xl.s. als often times as
he defaultis, without Remissioun.

Anent the bigging of Castellis in the North. Ca. xcij.
ITEM It is ordanit, that euerilk Lord hauand land beond the Month, in the
quhilkis landis in auld times their was Castellis, Fortalices and manner places,
big, reparrell, and reform their Castellis and maneris, and dwell in them be
them self, or ane of their freindis, for the gracious gouernall of their
landis be good policy, and to expend the fruit of they landis in the country
quhair the landis lyis.

PARLIAMENTVM TENTVM APVD PERTH DIE MARTIS PRIMO DIE MENsis Iulij Anno Domini
Millesimo, Quadringentesimo, Vicesimo sexto Et Regni Domini nostri Regis IACOBI
vicesimo secundo, summonitis and vocatis more solito and debito Episcopis,
Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus, and alijs regni liberetene^tibus
qui de dicto Domino Nostro Rege tenent in capite et de quo libet Burgo regni
certis Burgensibus qui ad hoc summoniti fuerunt, comparentibus omnibus illis
qui debuerunt and voluerunt commode interesse, Absentibus quibusdam alijs,
quorum quidem aliqui ligitime excusati fuerunt, alij vero quasi por contumaciam
se absentauerunt, quorum nomina patent in rotulis sectarum, quorum quisque
adiudicabatur in amerciamento december librarum.

That Iuges salbe sworn to determine all causis after their cunning. Ca. xciij.
EODEM Die Rex per modum statuti ordinauit, quod de hinc o^nes and singuli ad
quascunque causas and querelas terminan das in quocunque futuro Parliamento
eligendi, iurabunt ad Sancta dei Euangelia, vt omes and singulas causas and
querelas coram eis proponendas and terminandas absque fauore vel odio, fraud
seu color aliquo iuxta sua^ scientias, fideliter and iuridice terminabunt.

Anent the Finance of Clerkis. Ca. xciiij.
DIE Lune septimo mensis Iulij Anni supradicti Rex ex consensu totius
Parliamenti statuit and ordinauit quod omnes and singuli clerici regni sui ad
parts vltramarimas quacunque de c^nsa nauigantes seu se transferentes faciant
ca^bia sua de moneta pro eorum expensis extra regnum faciendis cum campsoribus
infra regnum constituris, vel saltem cum mercatoribus infra regnum, de quo
cambio suo, and cum quo campsore vel mercatore facta fuerint, certificent
Ca^cellarium domini nostri regis pro tempore existentem, and de transitu suo
extra regnu^. Laicus vero quicunque ad parts vltramarinas se transferens
teneatur cosimiliter facere cambia sua infra regnum, vt premittitur, super quo
certificet Camcrariu^ Scotiae per sufficientia documenta, and de causa
transitus sui sub pena viginti librarum vsibus domini nostri regis
applicandarum.

Anent Hostillaris. Ca. xcv.
ITEM Eodem die Rex mandauit vniuersaliter omnibus Burgensibus de regno, quod
faciant sieri host ellaria seu hospitia publica in Burgis, honesta and
competentia more aliorum regnorum, ad recipiendum omnes and singulos hospites
tam pedestres, quam equestres per regnum laborantes, sub pena super hoc in Acto
Parliamenti constituta.

Of down putting of Dekinnis of Craftis. Ca. xcvj.
DIE Veneris, videlicet, vndecimo mensis supradicti, quia ordinationes factae
in Parliamentis precedentibus super artificum decanis in Burgis regni tendebant
ad noxam and commune totius regni dispendium, Rex ex trium regni statuum
deliberatione ipsas ordinationes reuocauit, and illas totaliter annullauit,
inhibendo de cetero, ne tales decani in aliquibus regni burgis inter artifices
eligantur, nec etiam alias electi, vlterius exerceant officia decanorum, nec
faciant suas congregationes consuetas, quae conspirationes sapere presumuntur.

That every man be Summound be the ordinar or his Official to spiritual
Courtis. Ca. xcvij.
ITEM Eodem die ad parcendum expensis and vexationibus pauperum incuria
spirituali litigantium, and ad breuiandum lites pro expedienti fuit ordinatum
in causis ciuilibus and prophanis, quod ad instantiam laici actoris clericus
reus citetur per suum ordinarium vel eius officialem ad certum diem
peremptory, apponendo causam in citatione, propter quam reus citatur ad
comparendum scilicet responsurus sub pena excommunicationis: Quo die
adueniente, reus habet litem contestari. Quod si reus fatetur petitum, moneatur
ad soluendum infra quindecim dies sub pena excommunicationis: si vero deneget
petitum, assignetur terminus actori ad producendum omnes suas probationes
peremptory, iuxta arbitrium Iudicis: Quo die adueniente, and receptis
huiusmodi probationibus assignetur terminus reo ad producendum omnes suas
exceptiones and defensiones peremptory iuxta arbitrium iudicis: Quo adueniente
receptisque exceptionibus and defe^sionibus, assignetur terminus ad
concludendu^ and ad sententiam diffinitiuam proferendam si li queat, sic quod
infra* quadraginta dies a tempore executae citationis sente^tia feratur, a qua
nulla pars friuole appellet, nec iudex tales appellationes admittat. Et si
iudex infra quadraginta dies propter defectum vel negligentiam non fecerit
co^plementum Iustitiae, vel friuolas exceptiones admittat, et de hoc coram suo
ordinario conuictus fuerit, sit ipse debtor principalis parti conquerenti. Et
quod istud statuatur de presenti authoritate consilij prouincialis.

That in ilk Arbitrie be chosin ane od Persoun. Ca. xcviij.
ITEM Ordinatum est super omnibus and singulis causis infra regnum nunc
pendentibus sub compromisso si inter clericos arbitri sint electi in pari
numero, per diocesanu^ Episcopum de consilio sui capitu^ dispar persona
partibus non suspecta eligatur. Si vero inter Barons vel quoscunque alios
laicos extra burgum commorantes, tunc eligatur dispar persona neutri partium
suspecta per vicecomitem, infra cuius balliam parts conpromittentes
commorantur, de consilio tamen baronum, quos vicecomes ille commode pro tempore
habere poterit neutri partium suspectorum. Si autem inter Burgenses seu alios
habitantes infra burgos arbitri sint electi, tunc dispar persona non suspecta
per prepositum and consilium burgi, infra quem parts inhabitant, eligatur. Ad
negocia vero causas and lites futuras per arbitria terminandas, arbitri de
cetero in dispari numero and non in pari eligantur. Arbitria autem aliter inita
and facta nullius sint roboris vel mome^ti. Quo ad exceptiones falsas and
friuolas in Iudicio repellendas, tres status regni referunt se ad ordinationem
Parliamenti prius facti.

That the cause of all Merchandis deid outwith the Realm, be decydit within.
Ca. xcix.
ITEM Eodem die Rex ex deliberatione trium statuum in Parliamento congregatorum
decreuit, quod causae omnium mercatorum and incolarum regni Scoriae in
Zelandia, Flandria, vel alibi extra regnum decedentium, qui se causa
mercandisarum suarum, peregrinationis, vel aliqua quacunque causa (dummodo
causa non morandi extra regnum) se transtulerunt, debent tractari coram suis
ordinarijs infra regnum, a quibus sua testamenta consumantur, non obstante quod
quaedam ex bonis huiusmodi decedentium tempore sui obitus suerunt in Anglia vel
in partibus transmarinis.

James Be the grace of God King of Scottis, till all and findrie the Bischopis,
Abbottis, Pryouris, Clerkis, Erlis, Barronis, Lordis of Regalitie, vassallis,
Iusticis, Schireffis, Prouestis, Baillies, Ministeris, and leidaris of the Law
within Burgh and without, and till all vthers Officiaris, our liegis and
subiectis, to quhais knawlege their our letters sall cum, greting, For quhy,
that out of our last Parliament haldin at Perth in the Month of October last
bypast be the ordinans of our three estatis, their was depute certain persounis
at time and place conueniabill, quhen us sold like to assembill to ordand and
co^moun vpone certane statutis profitabill for the co^moun good of the Realm,
We with the foirsaid persounis, assemblit for stanching of the felloun
slauchter* and barganis that is appeirand, and for the breking of the Law in
sic caise hes ordanit and statute in the form as after followis, that is to
say.

Anent slauchter. Ca. c.
IN THE First, quhair any man beis slain within the Realm, alsweill within
Regalitie as within Ryaltie, and in Burrowis as to land, than incontinent
without delay als fast as the Schiref beis certifeit thairof, outher be the
party, or be any vthers, he sall pas and persew the slayaris ane or maa, and
raise ye Kingis horn on them and raise incontinent the country in his supporte
quhil he be ouertane. And git he may be ouertane he salbe put in sicker
festna^ce quhil the law be done on him, and that salbe done within xl. dayis at
the farrest: and be it reid hand, it salbe done within that son. And gif he
eschape out of that Schirefdome vnarreistit, the Schiref sall write or send ane
of his Officiaris to the Schiref of that nixt Schirefdome, and certify him of
sic men that hes done sic felony aganis the King, and ar fugitive fra the Law,
and than sall that Schiref persew him or them out throuch his Schirefdome in
the samin manner as the the other did befoir without delay. And swa forth fra
Schiref to Schiref, quhill he be outher ouertane, or put out of the Realm. And
gif he happinnis to fle in the Regalitie, out of the Ryaltie, the Schiref sall
certify the Lord of the Regalitie, or his Stewart or Baillie, the quhilk sall
persew the Trespassoure in like manner as the Schiref, as is foirsaid. And
quhair ever he happinnis to be takin, that Schiref, Stewart, or Baillie of the
Regalitie, sall send him to the Schiref or his Baillies of the nixt
Schirefdome, the quhilk sall ressaue him, and send him to the nixt Schiref, and
swa forth fra Schiref to Schiref, quhill he be put to the Schiref of the schire
quhair the deid was done, and their sall the Law be ministerit to the party as
is foirsaid, and gif it be forthocht felony, he sall dee thairfoir.

Of Fugitouris fra the Law. Ca. cj.
AND Gif it happinnis the man fugitive to eschape throw diverse Schirefdomes,
that Schiref or Schireffis that he is eschapit fra, sall pas to the chief burgh
of his Schirefdome, and their gar cry oppinly and proclaim, that sic a man hes
done to the King sic a felony and trespass agane the Kingis Majesty, and is
fugitive fra the Law, and their forbid that na man house nor herbrie him,
resset him, or give him support or help in any degree, under the pane of life
and gudis.

Of slauchter in the Barrony. Ca. cij.
ITEM Gif a man be slain in the Barrony, the Barrone or his Officiaris sal
arreist him, and gif he be infest with sic fredome, he sall do the Law as is
befoir said, or else present him to the Schiref or his Ministers, and eschaip he
vnarreistit out of the Barrony, and efterwart it may be knawin be ane assyse,
befoir the Justice or the Schiref, that the Barrone mycht have areistit him,
and outher for sleuth or favor leit him pas vnarreistit, the Barrone sall pay
to the King xx. pund. And eschaip he in the default of the Barrone Seriand or
Baillie of the Barrony, they beand requyrit or warnit, gif they be not of power
to pay. xx. pund, they sall remain in the Kingis presoun quhill they ouertak
the Kingis will thairupone.

Of slauchter in Burgh. Ca. ciii.
ITEM In like manner sall the Officiaris of the Burgh do, gif any man be slain
within Burgh, they sal tak him gif he may be ouertane, and put him in suertie
quhill the Judge may be warnit, that hes power to do the Law, and gif the
Alderman and Baillies hes na power to do the law, their the Judge hauand power
sall ressaue the trespassoure, and minister the Law within the time foirsaid.

Of slauchter in Regalitie, and the Officiaris thairof. Ca. ciiij.
ITEM It is statute, that gif any Schiref or Minister of Regalitie, that
ministeris not the Law as is befoir said, and that may be ouertakin on him,
outher be ane assyse befoir the King or his Justice, or be witnessing of good,
worthy, and true men, that is to say, three or four, or five, or maa, he salbe
in the Kingis presoun xl. dayis, and pay to the King xl. pundis, and the croy
to the narrest of the kin of the slain man.

Of the Lord of the Regalitie. Ca. cv.
ITEM It is statute, that gif the Lord of the Regalitie be warnit, and executis
not the Law, na garris his Officiaris execute it, as is befoir said, he salbe
in like pane to the King, as is the Schiref. And gif the Minister of the
Regalitie faillies in the executioun, as is befoir said, he salbe punist be the
Lord of the Regalitie, in manner as the Schiref salbe punist be the King. And
rychtswa Alderman and Baillies in Burgh, salbe punist be the Kingis Justice gif
they fail in the executioun of the Law, as is foirsaid.

Of inquisitioun of Forthocht felony. Ca. cvj.
ITEM It is statute, that gif any man bargains outher in Burgh or on land,
quhether that the party pleine or not, that the Officiaris, that is to say,
Alderman, Baillies, or the Seriandis in absence of the Baillies sall arreist
both the parties, and that day, gif it be befoir the Sone ga down, and na
haliday sall give them the knawlege of ane assyse, quhether it be forthocht
felony or suddanlie done. And gif it be suddanlie done, demaine them as the
Law tretis of befoir, and gif it be forthocht felony, his body to be put in
presoun, quhill he amend to the party, be the sycht of leill and true men
befoir the Schiref gif it be Ryaltie, and rychtswa befoir the Lord or his
Baillies in the Regalitie, and befoir Alderman and Baillies in Burgh, he sall
gar amendis be maid after the quantity of the trespass done to the party, and
demainit syne as Law will.

Of the Fugitoure in Forthocht felony. Ca. cvij.
BE THE auise of the haill parliament, it is statute and ordanit, gif sic
bargane happinnis to be in Burgh, and be callit Forthocht felony, and the
deiddoar eschaip vnarreistit fra the Alderman and Officiaris of the Town, and
fleis the Law, but delay the Alderman or baillies sall write to the Schiref or
the Officiaris to the Regalitie quhair he happinnis to be resset, and certify
them of his misdeid, and that he is fugitive fra the Law, and than sall they
persew him as a fugitive, and send him again quhair the deid was done, and to
abide the Law but delay, after as he hes maid default.

Anent assouerance taken betuix persounis discordand. Ca. cviij.
ITEM It is statute, that quhair two parteis discordis, and after ar put under
Borrowis, ilk ane assouerit of vthers, and their purches, after that ane of
their freindis thinkis that thocht the principal parteis be assouerit, he is
not assouerit, cummis and outher hurtis or defoulis the party that is contrary
to his friend or slayis, and gif he slayis, he sall die thairfoir, and tyne all
his gudis as escheit to the King, and gif he hurtis or defoulis with felony
assaileand with edge or ure, he sall remain in presoun but remeid, quhill
assyth be maid to the party, and amendis to the King or to the Lord, that it
belangis to as effeiris.

Anent Fugitouris. Ca. cix.
ITEM Gif it happinnis the Schiref to persew Fugitouris with the Kingis Horn
as is foirsaid, and the country rise not in his supporte, they all or part
herand the Kingis Horn, or beand warnit be the Mairis, and followis not the
outhorne, and that may be ouertane vpone them be ane assyse befoir the
Schiref, ilk gentilman sall pay to the King vnforgeuin xl.s. and ilk eman xx.s.

That Mairis and Seriandis have wandis and Hornis. Ca. cx.
ITEM Fra thine forth, it is statute and ordanit, that ilk Officiar of the
Kingis, as Maire, or Kingis Seriand, and Barrone Seriand sall not pas in the
country, na Barrone Seriand in the Barrony, but ane horn and his wand, and
that salbe in this manner.

The Kingis Officiar as is foirsaid, sall have ane horn, and ilk ane a reid
wand of three quarters of ane arde lang at the leist, and the Officiaris of the
Regalitie ane wand of the samin lenth, the taken end reid, the the other end
quhite, and ane horn quhair he passis within the Regalitie. The Barrone
Seriand ane horn and a quhite wand of ane elne lang, the Seriand of the Burgh
ane reid wand allanerlie, like the Kingis Officiar, and als often as he beis
sundin without his wand in the Burgh he sall pay viij.s. vnforgeuin to the
King, and thairattoure to abide chalange befoir the Chalmerlane, And gif the
Kingis Seriand hes not horn and wand as is foirsaid, he salbe chalangit befoir
the Schiref at the heid courtis. And he be convict, he sall pay xl.s. to the
King. And rychtswa the Seria^d of the Regalitie salbe chalangit at three heid
Courtis befoir the Lord of the Regalitie. And he be convict, he sall pay till
his Lord xl.s. And gif the Barrone Seriand defaultis, he salbe punist after the
unlaw of the Barrone Court. And that ilk Seriand be thus purwayit be xv. dayis
nixt after witsonday nixt tocum.

CONSILIO Generali illustrissimi principis domini Iacobi dei gratia Regis
Scotiae tento apud Perth primo die Mensis Martij Anno domini Millesimo
Quadringentesimo vicesimo septimo, Et Regni domini regis vicesimo tertio, eum
continuatione dierum and temporum summonitis and vocatis more debito and solito
Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus, and Liberetenentibus qui
de domino nostro Rego tenent in capite, et de quolibet burgo certis
Burgensibus, co^parentibus omnibus illis qui debuerunt, voluerunt, and
potuerunt co^mode interesse, quibusdam vero absentibus quorum aliqui legitime
excusati fuerunt, alijs se contumaciter absentantibus quoru^ nomina patent in
rotulis sectarum, quorum quilibet adiudicatus fuit in amerciamento december
librarum ob suam contumaciam.

Of them hauand Merchandice out of the Realm vncustumit. Ca. cxj.
DIE Veneris quinto Mensis Martij supradicti. The King with consent of the three
estatis, statute and ordanit, that they that hes out of the Realm merchandice,
not payand the custume, outher gold or silver, gif they be present and convict,
or gif they be out of the Country, gif the King hes cleir document thairof,
that without any dome they be banist, and other panis maid aganis them
standand nevertheless in their force, outtakand them that is in hostage for the
King in Ingland, for quhais costage how it salbe maid, the King sall ordane the
manner.

That small Barronis and Frehalders neidis not to cum to Parliamentis. Ca. cxij.
ITEM The King with consent of the haill Counsall generally hes statute and
ordanit, that the small Barronis and fre tennentis neid not to cum to
Parliame^tis na general counsal, swa that of ilk Schirefdome their be send
chosin at the heid court of the Schirefdome ewa or maa wise men after the
largenes of the Schiresdome, outtane the Schirefdomes of Clakmannan and
Kinrossie, of the quhilkis ane be send of ilk ane of them, the quhilk salbe
callit Commissaris of the Schire, and be their Commissaris of all the Schiris
salbe chosin ane wise man and expert, callit the co^moun speikar of the
Parliament, the quhilk sall propone all and sindrie neidis and causis pertening
to the commounis in the Parliament or general cou^sall, the quhilkis
Commissaris sall have full and haill power of all the laif of the Schirefdome
under the witnessing of the Schireffis seill, with the seillis of diverse
Barronis of the Schire, to heir treit and finally to determine all causis to be
proponit in Counsall or Parliament, the quhilkis Commissaris and sp^ikaris sall
have costage of them of ilk Schire that aw comperance in Parliament or
Counsall, and of their rentis ilk pund salbe vthers fallow to the contribitioun
of the said costis. All Bischopis, Abbottis, Pryouris, Dukis, Erlis, Lordis of
Parliament, and Bantentis, the quhilkes the King will be ressauit and Su^mound
to Counsall and Parliament be his special precept.

Of Craftismen within Burrowis. Ca. cxiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that men of Craftis within Burrowis, sall haif
for a eir to cum of every craft a wardane chosin be the counsal of the Burgh,
the quhilk wardane with counsall of other discreit men vnsuspect assignit till
him be the said cou^sall sall examine and pryse the matter and the warkmanschip
of ilk craft, and set it to a certane price, the quhilk gif any brekis, the
said wardane sall punis the brekaris in certane pane, quhame gif he punis not,
the Alderman, Baillies, and counsall of the Burgh sall punis them in certane
pane, quhame gif they punis not, the King sall have a certane pane of y^ Burgh.
The pane of the brekaris of the price salbe escheit of the samin thing, of the
quhilk the price beis brokin of, to be applyit the taken half to the wardane of
that craft, and the the other half to the commoun wark of that Burgh quhair it
beis seen may expedient. The pane of the prisas gif he be negligent and punis
not, salbe in the unlaw of the Burrow court, als often as he beis convict
culpabill and faultise, salbe applyit for the half to the commoun purse of the
Town, and for the the other half, quhair it beis may expedient, to the wark of
the town. The pane of the Alderman, Baillies, and counsall of the Burgh, that
beis negligent in the punitioun of the said wardane, als often as they default,
salbe in x. pund to the King, and salbe rasit after that they be chalangit and
convict be the Chalmerlane and his Deputis in the Chalmerlane air anis in the
eir. The quhilk ordinance salbe extendit to masounis, wrichtis, smythis,
taileouris, wobstaris, and all vthers in likewise generally, quhais feis and
handlin salbe prysit, as is befoir said. And attoure to landwart in
Schirefdomes ilk Barrone sall gar pryse in their Barronies, and punis the
trespassour is, as the wardane dois in the Burrowis, and gif the Barrone dois
not, the Schiref sall punis the Barrone, and gif the Schiref dois not, they
salbe in amerciament to the King, as the Alderman, Baillies, and counsall in
Burrowis. And the Alderman, Baillies, and counsall in Burrowis sall inquyre ilk
month at the leist gif the wardanis of the craftis pryse weill and punis the
trespassouris, and gif any man compleineis of over greit price, or of the
breking of the price maid or set to the Alderman, Baillies, and counsal, at
they punis the brekaris of the price, and gar the party compleineand be
assythit under the pane foirsaid.

Of Beggaris. Ca. cxiiij.
ITEM The King hes statute with consent of his haill Parliament and counsall,
and eikit to the statutis maid in his Parliament of Beggaris: that in Burrowis
the Chalmerlane in his air ilk eir sall inquyre, gif the Alderman and Baillies
have keipit the said statute: and gif they have brokin it, they salbe in xl.s.
to the King.

Of wolf birdis. Ca. cxv.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be the King with consent of his haill counsall,
that ilk Barrone within his Barrony in ganand time of the eir chaise and seik
the quhelpis of the wolfis, and gar slay them. And the Barrone sall gif to the
man, that slayis the wolf in his Barrony, and bringis the Barrone the heid.
ij.s. And quhen the Barronis ordanis to hunt and chaise the wolf, the tennentis
sall rise with the Barrone, under the pane of ane wedder of ilk man not rysand
with the Barrone. And that the Barronis hunt in their Barronies, and chaise
four times in the eir, and als often, as any wolf beis seen within the Barrony.
And that na man seik the wolf with schot, bot allanerlie in the times of
hunting of them.

Of Cruuis in watteris. Ca. cxvj.
ITEM The King with consent of the haill counsall, hes contine wit the statute
of the putting away of the cruuis in watteris, that fillis and ebbis, for three
eiris to cum in form and effect, as was statute in his first Parliament.

The leif to Merchandis to fuire their gudis. Ca. cxvij.
ITEM The King hes grantit to the Merchandis, quhair Scottis Schippis may not
be gottin, that they may fuire their gudis and Merchandice in Schippis of other
countries, as they best may, for a eir, not ganestanding the statute maid
thairupo^e in the contrare.

Anent Lipper folk. Ca. cxviij.
ITEM That na lipper folk, nouther man nor woman, enter na cum in a Burgh of
the Realm, bot thryse in the oulk, that is to say, ilk monounday, wednesday,
and friday fra ten houris to two after nune. And quhair Fairis and Mercatis
fallis on they dayis, that they leif their entry in the Burrowis, and gang on
the morn to get their leuing.

ITEM That na lipper folk sit to thig, nouther in Kirk na in Kirkaird, na other
place within the Burrowis, bot at their awin Hospital, and at the port of the
Town, and other placis outwith the Burrowis. ITEM That the Bischopis,
Officiallis, and Denis inquyre diligently in their visitatioun of ilk paroche
Kirk, gif any be smittit with lipper. And gif any sic be fundin, that they be
deliuerit to the King, gif they be secularis. And gif they be Clerkis to their
Bischopis. And that the Burgessis gar keip this statute, under the pane
contenit in the statute of beggaris. And quhat lipperous that keipis not this
statute, that he be banist for ever of that Burgh, quhair he disobeyis, and in
likewise to landwart.

Anent the passage of Clerkis out of the Realm. Ca. cxix.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that na Clerkis religious nor seculare pas out
of the Realm, bot gif he cum to his ordainar first, or than to the Chancellar
of the Realm, and schaw to them good and honest cause of his passage, and make
faith to them, that he do na barratrie, and have his letters of license and
witnessing thairupone. And gif any dois the contrary, or makis barratrie fra
it be kend with sufficient and good document, that he underly the statute maid
agane them, that hes money out of the Realm. And yt this statute be not
allanerlie exte^dit to them, that dois barratrie in times to cum, bot als to
them outwith the Realm now, y^ beis co^uict of barratrie. And als the King
forbiddis, that any of his liegis send any expensis till any barratoure, that
is now outwith the Realm, or gif them help or favor, in quhat degree that
ever they attene to, quhil they cum hame in the Realm, under the pane of the
breking of the Act of Parliament.

That na man pas to Courtis with gaddering. Ca. cxx.
ITEM The King and the Counsall hes interpret and declarit, that their be a
statute maid in his first Parliament, that na man sold rydand na gangand cum
to na court nor semblay with multitude of folkis na with armis, bot soberly and
esaly, after as his estait requyris, and with his counsallouris and
foirspeikaris neidfull to causis.

That nane interpreit the Kingis statutis. Ca. cxxj.
ITEM The King of deliverance of counsall be manner of statute forbiddis, that
na man interpret his statutis other wayis, than the statutis beiris, and to the
intent and effect, that they war maid for, and as the maker of them
vnderstuid: and quha sa dois the contrary, salbe punist at the Kingis will.

Of wild Foulis. Ca. cxxij.
ITEM That na pertrikis, plwuers, blak cokis, gray hennis, na mure cokis, na
sic fowllis be taken with na manner of Instrume^tis fra the beginning of lentren
quhil August, under the pane of xl.s. And that indictment pas thairupone be the
Justice Clerk.

CONSILIO Generali illustrissimi principis Iacobi dei gratia Regis Scotiae
tento apud Perth and inchoato, ratificato, and approbato, tanquam sufficienter
and debite premunito, per tres Regni status duodecimo die Mensis Iulij Anno
domini Millesimo Quadringentesimo vicesimo octauo, eum continuatione dierum and
temporum, summonitis and vocatis debito modo and more solito Episcopis,
Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus, and omnibus Liberetenentibus, qui
tenent in capite, de dicto domino nostro Rege et de quolibet burgo regni certis
Burgensibus, comparentibus omnibus illis qui debuerunt, voluerunt, and
potuerunt interesse, quibusdam vero absentibus quorum quidam fueru^t legitime
excusati, alijs per contumaciam se absentantibus, quoru^ nomina patent in
rotulis sectarum, quoru^ quilibet adiudicatus fuit in amerciamento december
librarum ob eius contumaciam.

Of the aith to be maid to the Queen be the Clergy and the Barronis. Ca. cxxiij*
QVO die Dominus Rex ex deliberatione and consensu totius consilij statuit,
quod omnes and singuli successores Praelatorum Regni quoru^cunque, necnon omnes
and singuli heredes futuri Comitum, Baronum, omniumque Liberetenentium domini
Regis teneantur facere consimile iuramentum Dominae nostrae Reginae. Nec vllus
Praelatus de cetero admittatur ad suam temporalitatem aut here is euiusuis
tenentis Domini Regis ad suas tenendrias, nisi prius prestet Reginae illud
Iuramentum.

Continuatur consilium vsque ad crastinum diem.

PARLIAMENTVM EXCELLENTISSIMI PRINCIPIS ET DOMINI NOSTRI, Domini Iacobi dei
gratia Regis Scotiae Illustrissimi inchoatum and tentum apud Perth in loco
consueto xxvj. die Mensis Aprilis Anno Domini Millesimo Quadringentesimo
vicesimo nono, et Regni sui xxiij. cum continuatione dierum summonitis and
vocatis more debito and consueto Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus,
Baronibus, and Liberetenentibus omnibus, qui de Domino nostro Rege tenent in
capite, et cuius^ibet burgi Regni Commissarijs comparentibus omnibus illis, qui
voluerunt, quibusdam vero absentibus, quorum quidam fuerunt legitime excu^ati,
alijs per contumaciam absentibus in amerciam entis Parliamenti condempnatis and
adiudicatis.

Anent Fugitouris fra the Kingis Lawis. Ca. cxxiiij.
QVO die consensum fuit and statutum, quod omnes and singuli fugientes a Rege
vel alio quocunque eius locum tenente punientur sicut rebels publici and
notorij.

That husband men sold remane for a eir with their takkis. Ca. cxxv.
ITEM Dominus Rex obtinuit per modum requestus a Praelatis and Baronibus, quod
non remouebunt pro anno futuro colonos nec husbandos a terris suis nondum alijs
assedatis, nisi domini illarum terraru^ illas terras capia^t ad vsus suos
proprios.

ITEM Eodem die Dominus Rex cum consensu and assensu trium statuum continuauit
hoc suum Parliamentum vsque ad Festum Beati Martini in hyeme proxime futuri sub
premonitione quindecim dierum, vibi, and quando placuerit Regi.

In the Parliament haldin At Perth the vi. day of the month of March be our
Souerane Lord the King James, the eir of God ane thousand four hundredth and
xxix* It was ordanit and statute be the King and the three Estatis, with haill
consent and assent, for till exclude frivolous and fraudfull exceptiounis and
opiniounis, throw the quhilkis money and diverse persounis ar defraudit and
haldin fra their landis.

Of Mairis of fee. cxxvj.
IN The first of the power of the Summounder, it is statute and ordanit, that a
Mair of fee, quhether he be Mair of the Schirefdome or of part, sall have power
to present ane sufficient persoun or personnis and habill to the Schiref in
court to be deputis under him, quhilkis salbe sworn in the plane court to the
said office, and admittit be the Schiref, and geuin the wand. He sall schaw
nane other power in his attachiamentis, na in his Su^moundis making, bot
allanerly the precept of his the quhilk commandis him to make the Summoundis.
And swaay till endure and minister in the said Office, quhill his power be
lauchfully reuokit in court be his ordinar. And swa in the Schirefdomes quhair
their is Mairis of fee in a ward, and not in ane other, the Schiref sall cheis
sufficient and habill persounis ane or maa, after as the custume of the
Schirefdomes is, the quhilk salbe chosin be him with the consent of the members
of the court, and sworn in Court and admittit, and minister in all thingis
pertenand to the said office.

Anent Officiaris that makis any Summoning. Ca. cxxvij.
ITEM It is statute, that the Summoundour sall Summound, and make his reheirs in
court, quhether that him lykis, be writ or tongue, keipand the vj. termis of
Summoundis. Swa that he have sufficient witness of diverse Barronies, as is
co^tenit in the Law, the quhilkis sall sweir in court, that they bystude, saw
and herd, and for witness war taken, quhair that Summou^dour maid the Summoundis,
in manner and form as is contenit in that writ, and he sall have fredome to
reid the Summoundis, or gar reid them gif he can not, but any exceptioun.

Anent exceptiounis to be maid aganis the Kingis breuis. cxxviij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that fra thynefurth their sall nane exceptioun
auale aganis the Kingis breuis, quhether that they be lang writtin or schort,
swa that they hauld the form of the breiue statute in the Law of befoir,
congruit and not rasit, na blobbit in suspect placis, that is to say, in the
name and the surname of the followar, and of the defendar, and the name of the
land or of the cause vpone the quhilk the brief was purchest, and the dait.

Of essoneis to be maid in Court. Ca. cxxix.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that their salbe nane essoneour admittit in
court, bot gif he have a power special for y^ cause for him, that he essoneis,
and find borrowis to prove his essonie at the nixt court as the Law requyris,
and nane essoneis to be admittit in court, bot the essoneis statute and writtin
in the law of befoir, or gif a pure man fall suddenly seik, two leill men, his
neichtbouris or his paroche Priest sall sweir it, and that to be admittit for
that day.

Anent a Borgh to be fundin in Court. Ca. cxxx.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that quhair a Borgh is fundin in a court upon
a weir of law, that the party defendar as to that Borgh sall have fredome to
be auisit, and ask leif thairto and sall have leif, and quhether he will be
auisit within Court, or out of Court, findand borrowis of his entry, and his
answer within the hour of cause at the consideratioun of the Judge and the
Court.

Of the domes falling. Ca. cxxxj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that quha sa will falls dome, sall not remove
out of the place he standis in, quhen the dome is geuin, na it be auisit with
na man, quhill the dome be agane callit, and that salbe that a man may gang
esely xl. pais, and to be considderit after the consideratioun of the Judge and
the court, and gif it be agane callit be ane aduocat of the party, he beand
admittit anis to speik for that party in the Court be name and surname, it sal
not neid him to reheirs his awin name, na the Dempstaris in the dome falsing,
bot allanerly to say, THAT DOME IS FALSE, STINKAND, AND ROTTIN IN THE SELF, AND
THAIRTO A BORGH, and assign a ressoun protestand for ma.

That na recounter be hard in Court and the parties absent them. Ca. cxxxij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that quhair two parties apperis at the Bar,
the taken stryk a Borgh vpone a weir of Law, the the other party sall have leif to
be auisit, gif he will ask it, quhether he will recounter it or not, as is
foirsaid, and gif he recounteres the Borgh, and strenthis it with ressounis, he
and his party remouit the court. And gif it happinnis them both or ane, till
absent them, and cum not again to the dome geuin of the decreit, quha sa at
the dome is geuin agane, sall remane in ane unlaw of the court, and tyne the
actioun, for the quhilk the Borgh was fundin, and the recounter never to be
hard nor have remeid to agane say that dome.

Anent the persounis that sall weir claithis of Silk and Furringis. Ca. cxxxiij.
ITEM It is statute, that na man sall weir claithis of Silk, na Furringis of
Mertrickis, Funeis Purray, na greit, na rychear furring, bot allanerly Knychtis
and Lordis of two hundredth merkis at the leist of eirly rent, and their eldest
sonis and their airis, but special leif of the King, askit and obtenit. And
nane other weir brouderie, Perle, nor Buleone, bot array them at their a win
list in all other honest arraymentis, as serpis, beltis, bruchis, and cheineis.

Anent the persounis that salbe haill harnest and weill horsie. Ca. cxxxiiij.
BE THE auise of the haill Parliament it is statute and ordanit, that ilk man
that may dispend eirly xx. pund or ane hundredth pund in mouable gudis, that he
be weill horsit, and haill harnessit, as gentilmen aucht to be: And vthers
simpillar of x. pund of rent or fyftie pundis in gudis, have hat, gorget, and a
pesane with wambrasseiris* and reirbrasseiris, and gluiffis of plate, breist
plate, pans, and leg splentis at the leist, or gif him lykis better.

Anent the grathing of emen for weir. Ca. cxxxv.
ITEM That ilk eman, that is of xx. pund in gudis have a good doublet of fence,
or ane habirgeon, ane irne hat, with bow, scheif, sword, bucklar, and knyfe,
and the eman, that is na archear, na can not draw a bow, sall have a good souir
hat for his heid, and a doublet of fence, with sword and bucklar, and a good
axe, or else a broggit staff.

That euerilk Barrone within him self ordand his men to be graithit, as is
befoir writtin. Ca. cxxxvj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that ilk Barrone within him self sall se and
ordand his men to be bodin, as is befoir writtin. And gif he dois not this
betuix this and Martymes, the Schirefsall raise of ilk eman than not bodin, as
is foirsaid, a wedder, and of ilk gentilman, two wedders, sa that they be
warnit of xl. day is warning at the first time, and at the nixt time of xv.
dayis warning, of ilk eman not bodin two wedders, and of ilk gentilman four
wedders, and at the thride time of xv. dayis warning of the eman three wedders,
and of ilk gentilman a mairt, and swa forth fra. xv. dayis to xv, quhill they
be anis lauchfully bodin, as effeiris.

Of ilk Burges man hauand fyftie pundis in gudis. Ca. cxxxvij.
ITEM It is ordanit, that ilk Burges hauand fyftie pundis in gudis saw haill
anarmit, as a gentilman aucht to be: and the eman of lawer degree, and Burgessis
of xv. pund in gudes salbe bodin with hat, doublet, or habirgeoun, sword, and
bucklar, bow, scheif, and knyfe: And that he, that is na bowman, have a good
axe and sure wappinnis, as is forsaid: And that the Baillies sall raise the pane
heirof in Burgh, gif it beis not keipit, that is to say, of ilk harnest man
iiij.s. at the first viij.s. at the nixt, a merck at the thride day, ay forth
quhill he be weill anarmit: And of ilk eman ii.s. at the first, iiij.s. at the
nixt, and viij.s. at the thride, and swa forth quhill he be weill auarmit.

Anent Schippis that brekis in this Realm. Ca. cxxxviij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that Schippis, that brekis in this country,
the Schip and the gudis salbe escheit to the King, gif they be of they*
countries, the quhilkis vsis and keipis the samin law of brokin Schippis in
their awin la^d, and gif they be Schippis of any land that keipis not that law,
they sall have the samin favor heir, as they, keip to Schippis of this land
brokin within them.

That aduocatis and ^oirspeikaris in temporal courtis sall sweir. Ca. cxxxix.
THROV The consent of the haill Parliament it is statute and ordanit, that
aduocatis and foirspeikaris in temporal courtis and alswa the parties that
they pleid for, gif they be present, in all causis that they pleid, in the
beginning or he be hard in the cause, he sall sweir, that the cause he trowis
is good and leill, that he sall pleid. And gif the principal party be absent,
the advocate sall sweir in the saul of him, after as is contenit in their
meters.

Illud iuretur, quod lis sibi ius^a videtur.
Et si quaeretur, verum non insicietur.
Nil promittetur, nec falsa probatio detu^.
Vt lis tardetur, dilatio nulla petetur.
Of Barronis and Lordis hauand landis on the west sey. Ca. cxl.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that all Barronis and Lordis hauand landis and
lordschippis ueir the sey in the weit, and on the north partis, and namely
fornent the Ilis, that they have galayis, that is to say, ilk four merkis
worth of land ane air. And that this till understand of them, that are not felt
befoir of galayis. For they that are feft befoir sal keip and vphald the
galayis, that they ar feft of befoir, and haldin to sustene be their au^d
infeftment. And that the saidis galayis be maid and reparrellit be Maij cum a
twelf month under the pane of a merck to be rasir to the Kingis use of ilk
air. And the landis and lordschippis, quhat ever they be, streikand endlang the
coistsyde, and in wart in the land. vj. mile sall contribute to the repatatioun
and the sustentatioun of the saidis galayis.

Of the nature of the brief of inqueist and seissing. Ca. cxlj.
ITEM It is ordanit, that the samin statute maid vpone the proclamatioun of the
inqueist be keipit vpone the brief of seissing, that is to say, gif the brief
be presentit to the Schiref or Baillies in the heid court, that it be seruit
incontinent. And gif it be presentit on ane other day outwith the court, that
it be cryit on xv. dayis warning. And gif it be neir witsonday or Martymes, the
seissing salbe geuin, and the party contrare salbe preuilegeit to brek
seissing of fee and heritage xv. dayis after, and of the conquest xl. dayis
after that cause, sa that the brekar be in seizing of befoir.

Of persounis remanand in Ingland without the Kingis leif. Ca. cxlij.
ITEM It is statute, that gif any of the Kingis liegis passis in Ingland, and
resydis and remainis their aganis the Kingis will, he salbe haldin as tratoure
to the King.

Of souertie askit be any party of vthers. Ca. cxliij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that gif any of the Kingis liegis hes any dout
of the life, outher be deid or ma^nance or violent presumptioun, and he ask
souertie of the party, that the plaint is maid vpone, sa that the party
planteis make prufe of the deid, or mannance, or of the violent presumptioun
maid or done till him be his aith, or other sufficient prufe, and the Schiref
do not, that efferis till his office in that caise, he salbe in xl. pund to the
King, and assyth the party.

Anent the serving of Inqueistis and Retouris. Ca. cxliiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, vpone the serving of Iuqueistis and Retouris,
agane to the Kingis Chapel, that all frehalders dwelland within any
Schirefdomes, compeir at the heid courtis, in their proper persounis with their
seillis, bot gif it happin them to be absent vpone a ressonabill cause. And
gif any be absent in that caise, that he send for him a sufficient gentilman,
his attornay with the seill of his arms, and swa in Schirefcourtis set vpone
xv. dayis warning. And gif it happinnis that the court be wa^k, and not
sufficient in the Ryall within the Schirefdome, the gentillis of the Regalities
sall compeir at the warning of the Schiref, without prejudice of the Regalitie,
and enforce the court. And they that aucht comperance, and compeiris not, salbe
in ane unlaw of the court.

Anent Salmound Fische. Ca. cxlv.
ITEM It is ordanit, that the statute of fisching of Salmound maid be the King
that now is, and the three Estatis, be firmly keipit, ay forth quhil it be
reuokit be the King and the three Estatis, of the Parliament, ^uttakand the
watters of Sulway and Tweid, quhilkis salbe reddy to all Scottis men all times
of the eir, als lang as Berwick and Roxbrugh at in the Inglismenis handis.

PARLIAMENTVM EXCELLENTISSIMI PRINCIPIS DO. IACOBI SCOTOrum Regis illustrissimi
inchoatum and tentum apud Perth die penultimo Mensis Ianuarij Anno Do.
Millesimo Quadringentesimo Tricesimo, and regni sui xxvj. Quo die sectis
vocatis, and curia Parliamenti affirmata, absentes contumaciter iudicabantur in
amerciamentis Parliamenti.

QVO die Do. Rex ex consensu trium statuum continuauit Parliamentu^ vsque ad
Festum Beati Michaelis Archangeli proxime futurum sub praemonitione viginti
dierum per praecepta regia facienda. Cetera autem in originali praesentis
Parliamenti contenta sunt, nisi acta inter parts, quae non sunt necessaria
scribere.

the Parliament of our Souerane Lord the King James be the grace of God King of
Scottis, haldin at Perth and begune the monounday the xv. day of October. The
eir of God ane thousand four hundredth xxxj. eir. The quhilk day all
Bischoppis, Abbottis, Erlis, Barronis, Banrentis, and all vthers callit. etc.
The absentis iugeit in amerciamentis, the Parliament was continewit to the
morn.

For the resisting of* Rebellouris in the North. Ca. cxlvj.
FOR the res^stg of the Kings rebellouris in y^ Northland, and the costage to
be maid thairupone, it is fullely co^sentit be the three Estatis, ordanit, and
concludit, that their be liftit and rasit ane contributiou^, that is to say, of
all landis of the Realm, quhair the eild of two pennies was rasit, their be
now x. d. rasit, and quhair the two d. was not rasit, their be now xij. d.
rasit of ilk pund. And this contributioun to be taken throw all the Realm of
all mailis of landis and rentis of haly kirk, as of temporal Lordis, na gudis
of Lordis, na Burgessis outtane, saifand the extent of the mailis of the Lordis
proper domanis haldin in their awin hands, mailis of Burgessis housis within
Burrowis inhabit be them self, and with their proper gudis, of the quhilkis
they tak na maill, riddin horse, and drawin oxin except allanerly, of the
quhilkis na eild salbe rasit. Attoure this contributioun salbe taxit and rasit
with all teleritie possibill, brocht and deliuerit to the auditouris of it,
that is to say, the Abbottes of Balmexinouch, S. Colu^bis inche, Schir Iohne
Scrimgeour, Iohne of Fyfe of Abirdene, quhilkis sall begin their comptis on the
morn nixt after the purificatioun of our Lady nixt tocum at Perth, gif the
Pestilence be not their, and gif it beis their, at Sanctandros. The quhilkis
auditouris sall put this contributiou^ in a kissed of. iiij keyis, of the
quhilkes keyis ilk ane of them sall have ane. And that kissed to remane in the
Castle of Sanctandros, under the keiping of the Bischop and the Prioure. And
in caise, that peax beis maid in the menetyme, this contributioun sall remane
under the samin keiping in depois to the commoun proffeit and use. The quhilk
done, the King commandit till continue the Parliament till monounday the xij.
day of the foirsaid month and eir.

Anent the selling of Salmound out of the Realm. Ca. cxlvij.
THE King and the haill Parliament hes statute and ordanit, that na Salmound be
sauld, na bartourit with any man, that hes it out of the realm, bot for Inglis
money allanerly, gold, or silver for y^ taken half, and Gascone wine or sic good
penny worthis for the the other half.

That the Gouernoure of the Realm indurand his time mycht not analy na landis,
that fell to the Crown. Ca. cxlviij.
ITEM The said day it was decretit be the three Estatis in plane Parliament,
that the Governor of the realm indurand the time of his Gouerna^ce, mycht not
gif fra the Crown na landis, na analy that fell to the Crown, throw the
deceis of any bastardis. And thairfoir the gift and the infestmentis maid till
Adame ^er of the landis of etthame was of nane auale.

PARLIAMENTVM EXCELLENTISSIMI PRINCIPIS AC DO. NOSTRIDO. IAcobi Regis Scotiae
illustrissimi tentum and inchoatum apud Striuiling primo die Me^sis Martij Anno
Do. Millesimo Quadringentesimo Tricesimo tertio cum continuatione dierum and
temporum. Quo die sectis vocatis, and curia Parliamenti affirmata omnes and
singuli absentes condempnati and adiudicati fuerunt in amerciamentis curiae.
etc. Quo facto de mandato Regis Parliamentum vsque ad crastinum diem,
videlicet, secundum diem Mensis and Anni praedictorum fuit continuatum.

Anent the breking of the Kingis protectioun. Ca. cxlix.
ITEM As tuiching the breking of the brief of the Kingis protectioun, it is
seen speidfull be the Lordis assemblit at Perth at this time, That quhat
persoun, that hes the Kingis protectiou^, and it be brokin on him, fra he have
compleineit to the Schiref, the Schiref sall summound the party upon xl. dayis
warning, to compeir befoir him at the nixt heid court to answer to his party,
anent the breking of the Kingis protectioun. And quhether he appeir or not, to
gar it be knawin be ane assyse, gif the Kingis protectioun be brokin. And gif
it be fundin, that he hes brokin the Kingis protectioun, he salbe in the Kingis
unlaw in x. pund and assyth the party, as law will, notwithstanding any law or
statutis maid of befoir.

Of the brief of aquoe ductu. Ca. cl.
ITEM The parliament hes statute and ordanit, that y^ brief under writtin, have
course quhil the nixt parliament, allane^ly of wattergangis, that is to say, of
mylne leidis and nane other thingis. REX. etc. Accedens ad presentiam nostram.
A. de. B. nobis grauiter conquerendo monstrauit, quod licet ipse fuisset in
possessione cuiusdem aqueductus ad molendinum de T. infra balliam vestram per
certos annos. N. tamen de S. ipsum unjust and sine iudicio inquietat and
perturbat in possessione sua praedicta praefatum a queductum destruendo and a
molendino praedicto subtrahendo. Quare vobis precipimus and mandamus, quatenus,
si est ita, praefatum. A. restituatis ad possessionem suam praedictam and ipsum
autoritate nostra sic restitutum just defendatis. Et si dictus. N. credit se
aliquod ius habere in hac part, prosequatur illud in forma iuris communis per
breuia capellae nostrae vel alias secundum quod per leges regni fuerit
faciendum.

Of mandementis to execute the Actis of Parliament. Ca. cl.
ITEM Eodem die placuit Do. Regi ad supplicationem Praelatoru^ supersedere
punitioni vicecomitum Regni* eo quod non feceru^t in suis vicecomitatibus
debite iustitiam nec actoru^ Parliamentoru^ Do. nostri Reg is executionem vsque
ad proximum Scaccarium. Ideoque Rex eisdem mandauit Vicecomitibus sub omni
paena, quam admittere possent erga Regem, vt iustitiam faciant, and acta
Parliamentorum exequantur, Praeterea Rex mandauit Do. Regalitatum regni sub
paenis consimilibus, vt in suis Regalitatibus iustitiam faciant, and acta
Parliamento ru^ exequantur.

PARLIAMENTVM EXCELLENTISSIMI PRINCIPIS AC DOM. IACOBI DEI gratia Scotorum
Regis Illustrissimi tentum and inchoatum apud Perth decimo die Me^sis Ianuarij
Anno Do. Millesimo Quadring. Tricesimo Quarto. Quo die sectis vocatis, and
curia Parliamenti affirmata, electi fuerunt and iurati ad determinandas causas
and querelas, videlicet, Abbates de Scona and insulae S. Columbae, Magister
Ioha^nes Senescalli, Praepositus de Methuen, Robertus Senescalli de Lorne,
Thomas So meruel de eodem, Walterus de Haliburtou^ Johannes de Spens de Perth,
Thomas de Camera de Abirdene, and Iacobus de Parklie de Linlithquho.

Of the forfaltoure of the Erldome of Merche. Ca. clj.
ITEM Die Martis, videlicet, vndecimo die Mensis and Anni praedictoru^ in
praedicto Parliamento praefati excellentissimi Principis tento apud Perth, vt
supra, super iure tam proprietatis quam possessionis omnium and sigularum
terrarum Comitatus de Merche and Dominij de Dumbar, Procuratoribus and
praelocutoribus dicti excellentissimi Principis and Do. nostri etc. Actoris ab
vna pro sequentis, necnon procuratore Do. Georgij de Dumbar militis rei and
defendentis, partibus ab altera, ipsorumque allegationibus iuribus and
rationibus attentis ad plenu^ consideratis and discussis, dictisque Do. Georgio
and eius praelocutore remotis, postea reuocatis and reintratis, per tres status
Regni in dicto Parliamento praesentes and existentes deligenti examinatione and
matura deliberatione praehabitis co^corditer suit decretum ac per os David
Dempstar iudicatoris Parliamenti sente^tialiter iudicatu^, quod ratione
forisfacturae Do. Georgij de Du^bar quonda^ Comitis Marchi^ and Do. de
Dumbaromne ius tam proprietatis quam possessionis omnium and singularum
terrarum comitatus Merchiae, and Dominij de Dumbar, aliarumque terrarum quas de
dicto Domino nostro Rege tenuit in capite eum omnibus and singulis suis
pertinentijs fuisse, spectasse and pertinuisse, ac esse, spectare and pertinere
debere, tam in possessorio, quam in petitorio ad Dominum nostrum Regem
supradictum.

Of letters of fidelity promittit to our Lady the Queen. Ca. cliij.
ITEM Eodem die Mensis and Anni supradictorum omnes Domini de Parliamento, tam
ecclesiastici, quam seculares, ac etiam Burgorum Commissarij promiserunt dare
literas suas retinentiae and fidelitatis Dominae nostrae Reginae.

ITEM Eodem die, de mandato Domini nostri Regis Parliamentum suit continuatum
vsque ad Festum Beati Iohannis Baptistae sub praemonitione quindecim dierum.

CONSILIVM Generale serenissimi principis Domini Iacobi Regis Scotorum tentum
apud Edinburgh and inchoatum ibidem, vicesimo secundo die Mensis Octobris Anno
Domini Millesimo Quadringentesimo Tricesimo sexto, and Regni praefati Domini
nostri Regis tricesimo primo.

Of selling of theiffis. Ca. cliiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be the King, with consent of the three Estatis,
that nouther Lord of Regalitie, Schiref, Barrone, na vthers sell any thief, or
fine with him of thiftdome done, na to be done, under the pane to the Lordis of
the Regalitie, doand in the contrare, of tinsall of the Regalities, and
Barrones* Iustitis, and Schireffis of life and gudis. Saifand that this statute
sall not stryke to Bordouraris dwelling on the Merchis, bot for thift to be
done after the making of this statute. And this stature enduring the Kingis
will.

That assysaris sall sweir. Ca. clv.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that all iugeis sall gar the assysouris sweir
in the making of their aith, quhen they ar chargit to assysis, that they
nouther have taken, nor sall tak meid na buddis of any party: And gif any sic
be geuin, or hecht, or any prayer maid befoir the giving out of the
declaratioun and determinatioun of the assyssouris: the said assyssouris sall
oppinly reueill the buddis, giftis or prayaris, and the quantity and the manner
thairof to the Judge in plane court.

Of Crounaris. Ca. civj.
ITEM It is ordanit, that all Crounaris sall arreist all time, all weill befoir
the cry of the Air, as after, all them that salbe geuin to him in portowis be
the Justice Clerk, and name vthers.

Anent Mairis and Seriandis. Ca. clvij.
ITEM It is ordanit, that all Mairis and Seriandis arreist at the Schireffis
bidding, albeit that na party followar be, all trespassourris, and that the
said Schiref follow the said trespassouris in the Kingis name, gif na party
followar apperis.

Of Inglis men. Ca. clviij.
ITEM It is ordanit, that na man be assouerit of Inglismen, na tak
protectiounis of them for landis or gudis, bot allanerly the wardanis,
quhilkis sall have leif geuin be the king under the pane of Tresoun.

Of the stanching of theissis and Trespassouris. Ca. clix.
ITEM It is ordanit for mair stauching of thift and trespass, that suppois a
theif bide two sonnis, three or four, or maa, after he be attachit, he sall not
have fredome to abide xl. dayis, bot he salbe Iugeit als sone, as a court may
be set thairfoir.

Of inbringing of Buleoun. Ca. clx.
ITEM It is ordanit, that of ilk seck of wol, that sall pas out of Scotland the
Scottis Merchand gif he salis thairwith or the Scottis Merchand, that sellis it
to the stra^gearis, sall find sickar souertie to the custumaris of the portis,
quhair the Schippes saillis, to bring hame in Scotland to the Master of the
Kingis cuinie three ounce of Buleoun, and of a last of hydis alsmekill, as of the
three seck of woll. And of five Hamburgh barrellis alsmekill, as of a seck of
woll. And of other gudis, that awe na custume, or awe custume, after the
fraucht of the Serplaith, that is to say, it that payis a Serplaith in fraucht,
sall bring three ounce of Buleoun hame, under the pane of tinsall of alsmekill
Buleoun, as they sold bring hame to be applyit to the King. And the custumaris
of ilk Burgh sall write all manner of gudis, that enteris to schipbuird for the
serching of knawlege heirof.

That nane lie fundin in Tauernis after nine houris. Ca. clxj.
ITEM It is ordanit, that na man in Burgh be fundin in Tauernis of wine, aill
or beir, after the straike of ix. houris, and the bell, that salbe rungin in
the said Burgh. The quhilkis fundin, the Alderman and Baillies sall put them
in the Kingis presoun. The quhilk gif they do not, they sall pay for ilk time,
that they be fiudin culpabill befoir the Chalmerlane fyftie. s.

The statute anent Inglis claith. Ca. clxij.
ITEM It is ordanit, that na man under the pane of escheit, by any Inglis
claith or other good within the (...) of Scotland fra Inglismen, or without.
And that na Inglisman hauand conduct, bring in and sell, or change any Inglis
gudis, bot gif they gudis be specifeit, and leif geuin in his saifconduct,
saifand in payment of ransoun of Inglismen.

Tuiching the selling of Salmound till Inglismen. Ca. clxiij*
ITEM It is ordanit, that na Scottisman sell to Inglismen, or in Ingland befoir
hand or other wayis any Salmound, bot that Inglismen by them in Scotland for
Inglis gold, and nane other contentatioun. And gif the Inglismen will not by
them, the Scottis Merchandis may send them in flanders or other placis,
quhair them thinkis: swa that of na wise they nouther send them, nor sell
them in Ingland under the pane of escheit. And for the good of the Merchandis,
the King will grant conduct till all them, that will cum, and by Salmound in
Scotland.

That nane by wine fra Flemingis of the Dam. Ca. clxiiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that na man of Scotland by at Flemingis of the
Dam in Scotland any kind of wine, under the pane of escheit thairof.

That the Law be haldin, quhair the trespass is done. Ca. clxv*
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that for vij. eiris tocum the Kingis justice
of both the sydis of the watter of Forth, and als the Schireffis for trespass
done outwith Regalities and Burrowis, the said justice and Schireffis sall hald
the Law, quhair the trespass was done, and nouther defer to Burrowis na
Regalities thairin.

That nane have out of Scotland gold, silver, na Iowels. Ca. clxvj.
ITEM That nane have out of Scotland gold, silver, na Iowellis cuineit, nor
vncuineit, under the pane of escheit.

Hic finiuntur statuta Parliamentorum Regis Iacobi primi ET SEQVVNTVR STATVTA
PARLIAMENTORVM REGIS IACOBI SECVNDI.
PRIMVM PARLIAMENTVM IACOBI SECVNDI SCOTORVM REGIS.
PARLIAMENTVM SERENIS. SIMI PRINCIPIS AC DO. NOSTRI METVENDISSIMI Do. Iacobi
Secundi diuina fauente clementia Scotorum Regis illustrissimi tentum apud
Edinburgh and inchoatum ibidem vicesimo die Mensis Martij Anno Domini Millesimo
Quadringentesimo Tricesimo Septimo, and Regni sui primo.

Of the Coronatioum of our Souerane Lord. Ca. j.
QVO die comparentibus tribus Regni statibus apud Edinburgh, omnes Comites,
Nobiles, and Barons, ac Liberetenentes dicti Regni venientes ad castru^ de
Edinburgh praefatum Do. nostru^ Regem cum maximo applausu and apparatu ad
laudem dei and letitiam totius populi ad monasterium Sanctae Crucis de
Edinburgh pro Corona Regni Scotiae ibidem suscipienda solemniter produxerunt.
Cetera autem praesentis Parliamenti sunt in certis actis tangentibus parts.

Of the reuocatioun of landis. Ca. ij.
THE haill three Estatis of the Realm sittand in plane Parliament, that is to
say, the Clergy, Barroms, and Commissionaris of Burrowis be ane assent, nane
discreipand, weill auisit and deliuerit, hes reuokit all alienatiounis,
alsweill of landis and of possessiounis, as of mouable gudis, that war in his
Fathers possessioun, quhame God assolie, the time of his deceis, geuin and maid
without the auise and consent of the three Estatis. And hes ordanit, that ane
inuentar be maid of all the gudis in to depois belangand to the King be them,
that best knawis the gudis, and that this inuentar be keipit to the Kingis age.
And hes ordanit be manner of statute that na landis nor possessiounis pertening
to the King be geun nor grantit till any man, without the auise and consent of
the three Estatis of the Realm, unto the time of his age of xxi. eiris. And gif
it happinnis any sic alienatiounis to be maid in prejudice or hindering of the
Crown, that it be of na value, force, nor effect.

the Counsall haldin and begu^n at Striuiling in the Tolbuith of that ilk the
Friday the xiii. day of the Month of March, the eir of God ane thousand four
hundredth threttie and aucht eiris.

Of halding of Sessiounis eirly. Ca. iij.
ITEM It was seen speidfull and deliuerit, that their sold be two Sessiounis
eirlie, in the quhilkis the Lord Lieutennent and the Kingis chosin counsall
sall fit, the first beginnand on the morn after the exaltatioun of the haly
Cross nixt to cum, and the the other to begin vpone the first monounday of Lentren
thairefter followand.

Anent Rebellouris and vnressonabill men, being resset and haldin within
Castellis. Ca. iiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that quhair their is any rebellouris or
vnreulfull men within Castellis or fortalicis haldin or resset, or quhair their
be any presumptioun violent of rebellioun, or spilling of the cuntrie, it is
auisit and ordanit, that the Lieutennent raise the cuntrie, and pas to sic
housis, and arreist their persounis, quhatsumeuer they be, to the Law, and tak
souertie of they persounis, being within they housis, that the cuntrie and all
the Kings liegis be vnharmit and vnskaithit of the said housis, and of them
that inhabitis them fra thine forth. And gif any makis difficulty to be
arreistit and to find souertie, as Law will, they salbe streine* t thairto.

the counsal General haldin at Striuiling in the Tolbuith of that ilk, and
begu^n the Tuisday the secund day of the Month of August, the eir of God ane
thousand four hundredth and forty. The quhilk day the sutis callit, and
absentis amerciat.

Of halie Kirk.
THE Friday the fyft day of the month and eir befoir writtin. The haill three
Estatis nane dissentand hes ordanit, that haly kirk be keipit in fredome, and
na man vex kirkmen in their persounis nor gudis, under all charge, that they
may i^rin aganis God and our Souerane Lord the Kingis Majesty.

Of the halding of Justice airis in all placis. Ca. v.
ITEM The samin day the haill three Estatis hes ordanit, that the Iusticis on
the south side of the Scottis see set their Justice airis, and hald them twyis
in the eir, and alswa on the north side of the Scotts see as auld use and
custume is. And rychtswa Lordis of Regalities within their Regalis, and alswa
the Kingis Baillies of his Regalis. And that the King him self, quhill Justice
be anis haldin in the Realm be in ilk town, quhair the air salbe haldin, or
neir thairby, quhair his counsall thinkis it speidfull.

Of remeid and punitioun of diverse crymis. Ca. vj.
ITEM The three Estatis hes concludit the said day, that our Souerane lord the
King ride throw all the Realm incontine^t after their be send word to his
counsall, quhair any rebelliou^, slauchter, birning, reif, forfalt, or thift
happinnis, and thairto call the Schiref of the Schire, quhair the thing beis
done befoir him, and or the King depairt out of that Schire, to set remeid of
sic harms done, or gif any sic sall happin to be done, quhether the defalt be
in the Officiaris, or in the doaris, to be punist be the King. The quhilk
conclusiou^ and ordinance, all the Barronis of commoun assest and consent ar
oblist till assist both with their power in bodyis and gudis, als often as salbe
seen speidfull, be auise of the counsall, for the good and auale of the Realm
and the commoun proffeit.

CONSILIVM GENERALE TENTVM ET INCHOATVM APVD STRIVILING PER EXCELLENtissimu^
Principem and Do. nostrum Regem Iacobum secundum in sua persona propria
praesidentem die quarto Mensis Nouembris Anno Do. Millesimo Quadringe^tesimo
Quadragesimo Tertio.

The supply and defense of haly Kirk. Ca. vij.
THE King and the three Estatis hes statute and ordanit, that the statute of
haly kirk, that is oppressit and hurt, be keipit be the law of haly kirk, and
actis, and statutis maid of befoir time in general counsall and Parliament.
And that general process be maid in form, and general cursing aganis all the
brekaris of the said fredome, and als agane particular or singular persounis be
censure of haly kirk. And ye ilk place assist til vthers processis. And that na
persounis, the quhilkis ar notour spoleoures, distrublaris, or inuasouris of
haly kirk, nor nane, aganis quhame the process beis led of cursing, be ressauit
in the Kings Castle, or place, or in his presence, nor admittit to cou^sall na
Parliament, herd nor answerit in ye law of judgment heritage or other causis,
bot ever eschewit, as cursit, unto the time the said persounis cum to amendis
and assyth the party, and obtene absolutioun in form of Law* Alswa that firm
and fast obedience be kepit till our haly Father Eugene the Pape, be actis of
general and provincial counsall publicit and notifeit befoir and proclamit be
the Kings authority. And that rigorous process be maid agane the fauouraris of
scissioun and the ganestanda^is of the said obedience. And that na persounis
spiritual nor temporal, change the said obedience, quhill the King and the
Realm ordand and decreit thairupone.

Tuiching all and syndrie landis and possessiounis quhilkis our Soueraue Lordis
Father had in his hand the day of his deceis. Ca. viij.
IN PARLIAMENTO TENTO APVD PERTH IN PRAETORIO EIVSDEM XIIII. DIE Mensis Ialij
Anno Domini Millesimo Quadringentesimo Quadragesimo Quinto, sectis vocatis, and
contiauatur ad Edinburgh.

THE Last day of the said Parliament it was concludit and decretit, that all
and sindrie landis and possessiounis vumouable, of the quhilkis of good mind
King James, quhains God assolie, father till our Souerane Lord, that now is,
the day of his deceis had in peceabill possessioun, sall abide and remane with
our said Souecane Lord, that now is, in sic possessioun, as his father bruikit
them, and vndemaudit or vnpleyit of any man befoir any Judge within the Realm,
unto the time of his lauchfull age. And gif it happinnis any persute be maid in
the meintyme in the court heirof be any man, they becerne and declaris all
process, that may follow thairupone, to be of na strenth, force, nor effect.

PARLIAMENTVM EXCELLENTISSIMI PRINCIPIS AC DOMINI NOSTRI Domini Iacobi Secundi
Dei gratia Scotorum Regis Illustrissimi inchoatum and tentum apud Edinburgh in
praetorio eiusdem die vicesimo Mensis Ianuarij Anno Domini Millesimo
Quadringentesimo Quadragesimo nono, and Regni sui xiij. Quo die vocatis omnious
and singulis Dominis Regni Praelatis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, and
magnificis Regni Comitibus, Baronibus, Liberetentibus, Burgorum Commissarijs,
absentes in rotulis sectarum designantur, and in amerciamentis debite
iudicantur.

The punitioun of slauchter of Salmound. Ca. ix.
ITEM It is ordanit, that quha sa beis convict of slauchter of Salmound in time
forbiddin be the Law, sall pay xl.s. but remissioun the first time. And at the
secound time four pundes. And at the thryde time he sall tyne his office for
ever.

And alswa he, that garris slay, or mantenis the slayar, or is airt or part of
the deid doing, salbe demanit, as the principal doaris. And gif any man be
infeft of fredome to fische in forbiddin time, sic fredomefull ceis for vij.
eiris to cum. And gif any dois in the contrare, he sall pay ane unlaw befoir
the Justice, upon the quhilk trespass the Justice Clerk sall inquyre at the
resauing of the indictmentis, as of other punctis belangand his office.

Of oppin reiffis and spoileis. Ca. x.
THROV The consent and auise of the haill Parliament, it was ordanit and
decretit, quhair any oppin and publict reiffis and spoliatiounis outher of Kirk
gudis, or vthers happinnis within the Realm, that the party spoleit
compleinie to the Schiref, in quhat Schirefdome the spoleouris remanis in, and
that the gudis spoleit ar resset in. And that the Schiref pas to the spoleouris
and resettouris of them, and the gudis spoleit, and charge them to restoir
agane the spoliatioun, and arreist the spoleouris and resettouris of them, and
the gudis spoleit to the Law.

And gif the spoleouris or ressettouris disobeyis the Schiref, sa that he may
not compel them to restoir agane the spoliatioun, the Schiref sall blaw out
on them to the Kingis horn as rebellouris, and pronounce them as sic
rebellouris oppinly to the Lord Lieutennent. And gif the Schireffis refusis to
do their office, or be negligent, or parciall, than the party spoleit sall
compleine to the Kingis Lieutennent of the Schiref, and the Lieutennent sall
demaine the Schiref, as the spoleouris sold have been demanit, and that sic
executioun be maid be the Officiaris vpone them, that aganestandis and
disobeyis the Kingis actis and decretis geuin under the Kingis wax, and
decretit be the Lieutennent and the three Estatis. And gif sic trespassouris put
to the Kingis horn, make na restitutioun and fulfilling of the actis, as is
befoir said, within xv. dayis, and findis souertie to underly the Law for their
disobeying, y^ frathyne forth they persounis be notourly cryit rebelloures to
the King be the Officiaris. And sic men sold be demanit be the actis of xl.
dayis, the auld act not aganestanding. And gif any sic trespassouris, reifaris
or spoleouris, of any me^nis gudis put to the Kingis horn, makis not
restitutiou^ within the foirsaid xl. dayis of y^ gudis spuileit, and bindis
them to the Law, as is befoir writtin, they sall not be resauit be na minister
of the Kingis to the Law, quhill befoir all thing they have maid full
restitutioun of the spoliatioun.

That the Officiaris and Lordis of Regalis sall execute and fulfill this
foirsaid act. Ca. xj.
ITEM It is ordanit and decretit, that this act salbe execute and fulfillit be
the Officiaris and the Lordis of the Regalities within the Realm with the help
and supply of the Lord of the Ryall, gif neid be. And gif the Officiaris of
Regalities fulfillis not this act, it salbe leiffull to the Kingis Schiref to
fulfill it within Regalities.

ACTA PARLIAMENTI TENTI APVD EDINBVRGH ET INCHOATI decimo nono die Mensis
Ianuarij Anno Do* Millesimo Quadringentesimo Quadragesimo nono.

Of letters of captioun to be geuin be the King. Ca. xij.
IN THE First for the mantening of the fredome of haly kirk it is ordanit, that
fra the censure of haly kirk be led and vsit vpone any persoun, and it be maid
knawin be the Ordinar, the Kingis letters of captioun salbe geuin, and the auld
Law vsit as effeiris.

And that the Schiref and vthers officaris execute the Kingis letters, and put
the persounis that the censure of haly kirk is led vpone, in the Kingis waird.
And gif the persou^es be fugitive, and may not be ouertane be the Schiref or
the Off^ciaris, and they have landis and gudis, they landis salbe and their
gudis arreistit and prysit to the party, like as for other debt at certane
market dayis, as effeiris. And gif the saidis persounis be not ouertane be the
said Officiaris, and they have nouther landis nor gudis, they salbe put to the
Kingis horn. And this act till endure to the nixt Parliament. etc.

The proclamatioun of general peax. Ca. xiij.
ITEM It is ordanit, that general peax be proclamit and keipit out throw all
the Realm, that all man may travel surely and sickerly in merchandice, and
other wayis in all placis throw the land, swa that na man neid till have
assouerance ane of other, bot that the Kingis peax be assouerance till all man.
And quha that offendis thairin, to be punist be the King or his Officiaris. And
that the King make sic Officiaris, that can weill, and may weill, punis sic
trespassouris. And attour gif any persoun dreidis ane other, that he pas to the
Schiref, or to the Officiaris, that it effeiris to, and make that knawin, or
sweir that he dreidis him, and they sall tak borrowis of peax after the actis
maid thairupone of befoir. And that just men be maid Iusticis, that kennis the
Law, and that will minister euinly, alsweill of the greit, as of the small. And
rychtswa of other Officiaris. And gif they be negligent to minister their
office, that they be punist be the King. And that the Justice pas twyse throw
the cuntrie in the eir after the auld Lawis.

That nane rebel aganis the Kingis persoun na his authority. Ca. xiiij.
ITEM It is ordanit, that nane rebel aganis the Kingis persoun, na his
authority. And quha sa makis sic rebellioun, to be punist after the quality
and quantity of sic rebellioun, be the auise of the three Estatis. And gif it
happinnis any within the Realm oppinly or notourly to rebel aganis the King,
or makis weir aganis the Kingis liegis agane his forbidding, in that caise the
King to gang vpone them with assistence of the haill landis, and to punis
them after the quantity of the trespass. And attoure gif it happinnis any man
till assist in red, confort, or counsall or mantenance to them, that are
iustifeit be the King in his present Parliament, or sall happin to be iustifeit
in time cumming for crimes committit aganis the King in contrar of the act
maid. etc. Fra it be notour, or the trespassour be convict thairof, he salbe
punist in like manner, as the principal trespassouris*

Of the keiping of trewis on the Bordouris. Ca. xv.
ITEM It is ordanit, that the wardane cheis sic deputis and Officiaris under
him, as he will stand for, for the keeping and observing of the trewis, sen he
hes the charge. And that the King gar assist to him in the suppleing of him and
his Officiaris, gif any wald tak on hand to disobey, or ganestand.

Of punitioun of Officiaris trespassand in their office wilfully. Ca. xvj.
ITEM It is ordanit, that gif any Officar wilfully trespasses in the
ministratioun of his office of the Law, that beand ouertane or preuit on him
befoir the King or his Counsall, he sall tyne his office for ane eir and day at
the Kingis will, and assyth the party, as effeiris. etc.

Of the remaning of pure commounis in their takis and malingis. Ca. xvij.
ITEM It is ordanit for the saiftie and favor of the pure pepill, that
laubouris the ground, that they and all vthers, that hes takin or sall tak
landis in time tocum fra Lordis, and hes terms and eiris thairof, that suppois
the Lordis sell or analy that land or landis, the takaris sall remain with
their takkis, unto the ischie of their termis, quhais handis that ever they
landis cum to, for siclyke maill, as they tuik them for.

of wedsetting of landis. Ca. xviij.
BOT quha sa takis or hes taken landis in wedset, and syne for maill lang time
after the land be quite out for half maill or neir thairby, that they takkis
sall not be keipit nor haldin after the quyting out of the said land, bot gif
they be set for the werray maill or neir thairby.

For the restorance of spoliatioun. Ca. xix.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that any man, that beis spoleit, and cummis
befoir the King and his counsall, and compleineis of spoliatioun, and the
spolie may be preuit, their the party present, or summound lauchfully, and not
comperand, or apperand, the spolie beand preuit, the Schiref of the schire
salbe commandit be the King to make him, that is spoleit, be restorit but delay.
And gif the pleineour of the spolie have na prufe reddy befoir the King, the
King sall write to the Schiref at his instance to set him aperemptour day of
xv. dayis at the farrest, to the quhilk he sall warn the parties to cum. At
the quhilk day quhether they cum or not, the spolie beand preuit, the Schiref
sall make him, that is spoleit, but delay to be restorit, as is befoir said,
together with the expensis, the quhilkis the party followar lauchfully makis,
and the Kingis unlaw as effeiris.

That the Justice, Chalmerlane, Crownaris, and all other Officiaris ride in
competent and esy number. Ca. xx.
ITEM It is ordanit, that Iusticis, Chalmerlane, Crownaris, and other
Officiaris, that makis course throw the land, ride bot in competent and esy
number, to eschew greuance and hurting of the pepill, the quhilk number of auld
time was statute and modifeit. And that the Crownaris ceis of the taking of
the. x. d. for the wrang custume of them, that findis them reddy borrowis.

Of the away putting of Sornaris. Ca. xxj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, for the away putting of Sornaris, ouerlyaris,
and maisterfull beggaris with horse, hundis, or other gudis, that all
Officiaris, both Schireffis, Barronis, Alderman, Baillies, alsweill within the
Burgh, as outwith, takane inquisitioun at ilk court, that they hald, of the
foirsaid thingis: And gif any sic be fundin, that their horse, hundis, or other
gudis be escheit to the King, and their persoun put in the Kingis waird, quhill
the King have said his will to them. And alswa that the said Schiref,
Baillies, and Officiaris inquyre at ilk court, gif their be any, that makis
them ^ulis, and ar bardis, or vthers sic like rinnaris about. And gif any sic
be fundin, that they be put in the Kingis waird, or in his irinis for their
trespassis, als lang as they have any gudis of their awin to leif vpone. And
fra they have not to leif upon, that their eiris be nalit to the trone, or till
ane other tree, and their eiris cuttit of, and banist the cuntrie. And gif
thairefter they be fundin agane, that they be hangit.

Of the examining of actis of Parliament and general counsall. Ca. xxij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that their be chosin twelf persounis of the
three Estatis, till examine all actis of Parliamentis and general counsall,
haldin in our Souerane Lordis time, and in his fathers time, quhame God
assolie. And at they persounis schaw them, that are good and accordand for the
time, in the nixt Parliament or general counsall, and the place to be at
Perth. And the said persounis to begin vpone the said thing on monounday the
first haill oulk of Lentrene. And their ar the persounis. etc.

For the eschewing of derth within the cuntrie. Ca. xxiij.
ITEM It is ordanit for the eschewing of derth within the land, that
Schireffis, Baillies, and other officiaris, both to Burgh and to land tak and
inquyre at ilk court, that they hald, quhat persounis within their boundis byis
victual and haldis it till a derth. And gif it beis fundin, that the Schiref
and Officiaris make it knawin at ilk marcat cross to the King, quhat persounis
they ar, and that they be bot as okkirraris repute. And that they be punist and
demanit as okkirraris sold be. And that the victual that they have, be
escheit to the King.

That na Burgessis na other persoun hald mair victual, than will sustene him.
Ca. xxiiij.
ALSVA that na Burgessis nor nane other persounis, that byis any corn or
victual to sell agane, hald victual in Burgh nor outwith, mair than will
sustain him and his meinie to new corn, under the pane of escheit of the
victual to the Kingis use, bot at that victual be presentit to mercatis, and
sauld, as the price gais. And attoure that y^ Kingis liegis in all placis
throwout the Realm, have power to by and sell victual at their lyking both on
the north half and south half of Forth, ilk ane till vthers, but any letting or
impediment. And that na man hald auld stakkis in his aird langar, than ule
under the pane of escheit thairof to the King.

That na man do tresoun to the Kingis Maiestis. Ca. xxv.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that gif any man, as God forbid, commit or do
tresoun aganis the Kingis persoun, or his Majesty, or rysis in feir of weir
aganis him, or layis hands vpone his persoun violently, quhat age the King be
of, oung or auld, or ressettis any, that hes committit tresoun, or that
suppleis them in help, red, or counsall, or that stuffis the housis of them,
that are convict of tresoun, and haldis them aganis the King, or that stuffis
housis of their awin in furthering of the Kingis rebellis, or that assaileis
Castellis or placis, quhair the Kingis persoun sall happin to be, without the
consent of the three Estatis, salbe punist as tratouris.

That the Regalities being in the Kingis handis sall be iustifeit be the Kingis
Justice. Ca. xxvj.
ITEM It is ordanit, that all Regalities, that are in the Kingis handis, or
salbe in time to cum, be haldin as Ryaltie and iustifeir be the Kingis Justice,
quhill they remane in the Kingis handis, and the frehaldaris of the said
Regalities sall compeir at the Justice airis, and their Suittaris within the
Schirefdomes, that they arin, and to the Kingis Parliamentis and geaerall
counsallis, as the frehalders of the Ryaltie dois.

For eschewing of maisterfull thift and reif. Ca. xxvij.
ITEM For eschewing of greit and maisterfull thift and reif, it is ordanit,
that the Justice do law out throw the Realm, and quhair he may not hald
Justice of maisterfull men, he sall verify and certify the King thairof: than
the King sall provide with his secreit counsall in all haist remeid thairof.

Anent Justice Clerkis, that they reueill na manis actioun. Ca. xxviij.
ITEM It is ordanit, that Justice Clerkis reueill na manis actioun to na
persoun, or translate any actioun vtherwayis, than it was geuin him, bot for
the better to the King, or change namis ane for ane other, or put out any of
the Rollis without commandment of the King, or of the counsall under the pane
of ^^nsall of his office, his honor, and his gudis to be at the Kingis will.

For the bigging of towris and fortalicis. Ca. xxix.
ITEM It is ordanit, that anentis the bigging of towris and fortalicis, that
the auld Law and statute maid thairupone be obseruit and keipit in time to cum.

Of money and strykaris thairof. Ca. xxx.
ITEM As anentis the money it is referrit to the actis maid of befoir be the
xxiiij. persounis chosin thairto, both for the hame bringing of the Buleoun be
the Merchandis, and of the new straik to be maid, and the course thairof be the
money that now rinnis. And that their be maid at all portis of the Realm
strait serchearis to restreinie the having out of the money, and rychtswa upon
the Bordowraris of the Merchis. And that all falls strykares of gold, silver, or
of falls grotis and pennyis be serchit, and writtin for, and brou^ht to the King
to be punist, as Law will. And that nane tak on hand to stryke in time to cum,
bot they, that hes or sall have command of the King under his greit seill.

Anent the Summounding of any persounis. Ca. xxx^.
ITEM It is ordanit, that gif any persoun garris Summou^d ane other befoir the
King and his counsall for any cause, and the party Summound be contumar, he
salbe condampnit at the first day in the expensis of the party followand, and
in.xx.s. to the King for his amerciament. And be he absent and contumax at the
secund Summoundis, he salbe conda^pnit be the Judge in the expensis of the
party followar, and in.xl.s. for the Kingis unlaw. And be he contumax at the
thride day, at the quhilk he salbe Summound to cum, the quhilk Summoundis sall
make intimatioun, that quhether he compeir or not, the Judge will proceid as Law
will in the cause, and than gif he be Sommound thryse and compeiris not, he
salbe condampnit in the parties expe^sis, and in four pundis for his unlaw to
the King. And than sall the Judge proceid in the cause and do Justice. And gif
the cause be on fee and heritage, the party Summound, as is foirsaid, salbe
condampnit for his contumacie, and the party followar salbe put in possessioun
of the said fee and heritage, and bide thairin ay, and quhill his party assyth
fullely all the expensis, in the quhilkes he was condampnit, and to the King of
all his vnlawis: the quhilk done, he salbe herd in the principal cause mouit
aganis him, not aganestanding the decreit of possessioun befoir geuin, bot gif
he bide sa lang, that prescriptioun lauch fully be runnin. And gif the cause be
of mouabill gudis, the party followar salbe put in possessioun of the the other
parties gudis, to the quantity of the thing or the gudis, in the quhilkis the
the other party beis iugeit, to remane with the party followar for a eir and a
day. And gif the party condampnit within the eir and day cu^mis and assythis
fullely all the the other parties expensis iugeit to the party followar, and all
the Kingis vnlawis, as is befoir said, and findis cautiounis to stand and abide
the party at the Law, than sall he recover agane the possessioun of his gudis,
and be herd and have Law in the cause principal.

And gif the party condampnit have landis or gudis, than sall his landis and
gudis be recognist in the Kingis handis. And gif he hes na landis na gudis,
than sall he be outlawit and put to the Kingis horn. And this ordinance to
continue to the nixt Parliament. And that all Lords hauand Regalities,
^allinge all them of their Regalities e^ter the act befoir writtin. And that
ilk ane of the three Summou^dis be of xv. dayis warning at the leist. And at the
letters of Summoundis pas under the quhite wa^x, and the Summoundis of the
Lordis of Regalities to pas under their seillis, or their signettis.

the Counsall General haldin at Perth and begu^n in the Tolbuith of that ilk,
be ane excellent Prince James the secund be the grace of God King of Scottis,
the monounday the feird day of Mail, the eir of God ane thousand four hundr^th
and fyftie eiris, and of his Regne the xiiij. eir. The quhilk day the suittis
callit. etc.

That na man of this Realm bring haine poison under the pane of treson. xxxij.
THE Friday the.viij. day of the Month befoir writtin. The Lordis of the three
Estatis gatherit and asse^blit in the freir kirk, and commonand vpone diverse
matters belangand the commoun good of the Realm, it was be the King and als the
Lordis of the three Estatis, assentand, and consentand, ordanit, and be the
manner of ay lestand statute determinit, and forbodin, that na kind of man nor
woman of the Realm of Scotland for silver, nor gold, nor nane other
Merchandice be na manner of way sold by, na inbring na kind of poysoun in the
Realm, for any manner of use under the pane of tresoun. And gif o^y persoun of
the Realm of Scotland in any time to cum bring in any manner of poysoun, throw
the quhilk any Cristin man or woman may tak bodily harm, and that may be kend
or they convict thairof, that persoun or persounis sa declar^t and convict,
sall tyne and forfault to the King life, land, and gudis.

That na strangear bring hame poysoun. Ca. xxxiij.
ITEM Gif any strangear, ane or maa, man or woman, of any other Realm cum in
this Realm of Scotland, and inbring be any manner of way poysoun, throw the
quhilk any Cristin man or woman may tak bodily skaith, and that may be kend, or
they co^uict thairof, they sall underly the samin panis, as is befoir writtin
of them of this Realm, and na conduct nor remissioun to help them in that
cais.

the Parliament off a full hie and excellent Prince our Souerane Lord James the
Secund be the grace of God King of Scottis, haldin at Edinburgh and begu^n in
the Tolbuith of the samin, the xxviij. day of the month of Iunij. the eir of
God ane thousand four hundredth and fyftie eiris. The quhilk day the Suitis
callit. etc.

ITEM Eodem die sexto die Mensis Iulij Anni supradicti praelibato Do, nostro
Rege in Parliamento praesidente Domini trium statuum Regni decreuerunt and
co^cluserunt omnia and singula acta and decreta Parliamentorum and consiliorum
generalium facta edita and promulgata pro Iohanne Lind say de Dunrod penes
terras suas de Morahame quibuscunque temporibus retroactis obseruari deberi and
execution^ debite demandari.

the Parliament off our Souerane Lord James be the grace of God, King of
Scottis, haldin at Striuiling the xxv. day of the Month of October, with
contine watioun of dayis, the eir of God ane thousand four hundredth fyftie ane
eir. The quhilk day the suitis callit. etc.

The auisement of the Deputis of the three Estatis tuiching the matter of the
money. Ca. xxxiiij.
ITEM In the first, that they think it expedient for diverse causis, that they
have considderit and counsallis, that their be strikin in this Realm new money
conformit euin in wecht to the money of Ingland, with the quhilk this Realm
hes part of commoning. And that their be strikin of the ounce of brint silver or
Buleoun of that fynes, viij. grotis, and of the samin matter and wecht, as
effeires, half grot, penny, half penny, and ferding.

ITEM That the samin new grot to be strikin have course for.viij. d. the half
grot for.iiij. d. the penny for ij. d. the half penny for j. d. and the ferdin
for a half penny.

ITEM That the Inglis grotis, of the quhilkis. viij. grotis haldis ane ounce,
have course rychtswa for.viij. d. the piece. And the half grot Inglis conformit
to the said grot in wecht, have course for. iiij. d. And that na Inglis penny
have course, bot at the will of the ressauar.

ITEM Fra the new grot be strikin and proclamit, and a special day set for the
course of it, than the new grot that now rinnis for. vj. d. sall descend
to.iiij. d. and the half grot to.ij. d.

ITEM That the Demi, the grot, and the half grot, that now rinnis, have their
course, that they now have unto the time of the proclamatioun, and the course of
the said new money.

ITEM that their be strikin ane new penny of gold callit a Lion with the prent
of the Lion on the ta side, and the image of Sanct Androw on the the other side,
with a side coit euin to his fute, halding the samin wecht of the half Inglis
Nobill. And that the said Lion be not takin in payment, bot gi^ it hald the
full wecht of the said half Inglis Nobill. And that the said new Lion fra the
day that it be cryit, have course and sall rin for vj.s.viij. d. of the said
money, and the half Lion of wecht fra the day it be cryit, and of fynnes
thairefter, have course for iij.s.iiij. d. Item after the course of the said
proclamatioun the Demi, that now rinnis for ix.s. sall rin than for.vj.s.viij.
d. and the half demi for.iij.s.iiij. d.

ITEM The Ryall of France sall have course for vj.s.viij. d. and the Salute
hauand the w^cht of the said new Lion sall half course than als for vj.s.viij d.
And the Crown of France hauand a crownit flower delice on ilk side of the
Scheild, that rinnis now in France for coursabill payment, and the Dolphin
Crown ilk ane of them hauand course for.vj.s.viij. d. And the Rydars of
Fla^ders hauand course for.vj.s.viij. d. And the Inglis new Nobill callit the
Pace sall have course than for.xiij.s.iiij. d. And the half Nobill thairof for
vj.s.viij. d. and sa the ferding for.iij.s.iiij. d. and the Flemis Nobill that
time hauand course for.xij.s.viij. d. And all other kind of gold hauand na
course, bot as the byar and the sellar can accord.

ITEM The pennyis that war strikin be the Kingis Cuineouris, that is to say,
Robene Gray, Iohne of Dalrympill father him self, Alexander Tod, and Iohne
Spethy, sall have course, as they now have, unto the the time of the said new
straik. And of they pennyis salbe taken bot.xij. d. in a pund. And all other
kind of pennyis strikin be Henry Goldsmyth and be all other falls Cuineouris,
outher in Innernes, Dysart, of Forfare, or in any other place sall have na
course fra this day forth, na be ressauit for payment.

ITEM Fra the new grot have course for.viij. d. that the foirsaid pennyis
strikin be the said Kingis Cuineduris have na langar course, na be ressauit in
payment.

ITEM That this new cuinie be strikin euin forth with grot, half grot, and
penny unto the said new grot, rin for.viij. d. the said new grot for.xij. d.
the half grot for vj. d. and the penny for iij. d.

ITEM That the Lyo^ and half Lion be strikin euin sa furthwith, and have course
to the said time the Lion for r.s. And the half Lion for.v.s.

ITEM That prouisioun be maid for the grauouris of the irnes And that now
incontinent traist sworn men pas forth, and ressaue all the irnis of the
Kingis strykaris both of gold and silver, together with the letteris of
grauing fra the grauouris, and befoir the King and his counsall they be
distroyit, and the new irnis, that salbe maid, salbe geuin within the cuinie
place.

ITEM That the master of the money sall answer for all gold and silver, that
salbe strikkin under him, quhill the wardane have taken assay thairof, and put
it in his buist. And that na man sall tak the said money fra it be burlit and
clippit, bot at his awin lyking. And the said master sall have power to cheis
all seruandis under him to stryke, and to punis them, gif they trespass. And
that the prentaris and strykaris war na goldsmythis, and vthers mycht be gottin.

That na man have out of the Realm gold, silver, na Buleoun. Ca. xxxv.
ITEM That na man have out of the Realm, gold, silver, na Buleoun, under the
pane of escheiting thairof, the taken half to the King, and the the other half to
the taintour and the takar. Nevertheless because that diverse men mon pas throw
England be land, or be sey to France, Flandaris, or other cuntries, and na
further, vpone the quhilk the King mon tak serchouris of leill men.

That na cattle be sauld in Ingland, bot for reddy gold or silver. Ca. xxxvj.
ITEM That na cattle be sauld in Ingland to Inglismen, bot for reddy gold or
silver, under the pane of escheit of samekill as is sauld, to be distribut
betuix the King and the wardane of the Merche.

Anent the outquyting of wedsetis. Ca. xxxvij.
ITEM That all wedsetis that are maid in time of the money that now rinnis, be
payit in the time of the quyting out with sic money, as was lent, or else the
auale of it.

Anent dettis and obligatiounis. Ca. xxxviij.
ITEM Anent dettis and obligatiounis of the payment of the quhilkes the termis
ar gane, ilk man that will not pay betuix this and Alhallowday cum a twelf
month, sic manner of dettis throw obligatiounis, or other manner of way
contractit in the money, that now rinnis, they sall pay it of the money, that
rinnis fra that day forth. Nevertheless the saidis deputis intendis not to give
forther delay of the payment thairof, bot at the lyking of the party.

PARLIAMENTVM EXCEL LENTISSIMI PRINCIPIS ET DO. NOSTRI DO. Iacobi Secundi Dei
gratia Regis Scotorum Illustrissimi tentum apud Edinburgh vicesimo sext die
Mensis Augusti Anno Do. Millesimo Quadringentesimo Qu^dragesimo secundo, and
Regni eius decimo sexto, summonitis and vocatis more debito and consueto,
Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus, and caeteris
liberetenentibus, qui de Do. nostro Rege tenent in capite and cuiuslibet Burgi
Regni Commissarijs comparentibus.

ITEM It is ordanit be the auise of the King and the said Lordis, that the
Inglis penny have course throwout the Realm for, iij. d. like as it had of
befoir, unto the time of the nixt Parliament. Thairfoir we charge, that nane
tak vpone hand to refuse the taking of the said money under the charge, that
after may follow.

ITEM The haill Prelatis, Lordis, and Barronis of the Realm, hes ordanit and
deuisit a Parliament to be haldin at Edinburgh, and to begin the xxviij. day of
the month of Merche nixt tocum, with contine watioun of dayis. Thairfoir we
charge straightly and commandis in our Souerane Lordis name all Prelatis,
Barronis, frehaldaris, and all vthers within Burgh and outwith, that awpresence
their to compeir the said day and place, to commoun, treit, and conclude vpone
sic thingis, as is proffitabill, and speidfull for the Realm.

ITEM It is statute and ordanit be our Souerane Lord, and be auise of the
Lordis now present with him, that all manner of man, that hes corn vnthreschin
within the Realm, sall gar it be halely threschin out befoir the last day of
Maij nixt tocum, under the pane of escheit to the King of the corn, that
happinnis to be vnthreschin, alsweill within bernis, as outwith. And that
furthwith in all gudly haist our Souerane Lordis letters pas to all Schireffis
of the Realm of charge for keiping of the said ordinance. And that the said
Schireffis see, that the said statute be execute. And quhat Schireffis, that
fail eis heirintill, that they be dischargit of the executioun of their office
in time to cum enduring the Kingis will, and vthers to be depute thairto.

Of victual. Ca. xxxix.
ITEM It is ordanit, that na manner of victual be haldin in gyruall be any man,
bot allanerly, that is neidfull for their awin persounis, and the sustentatioun
of their houshaldis, and finally unto the time of Michaelmes nixt to cum, bot
at they be presentit to the market under the pane of escheit.

That na man hald mair victual than will sustene him self. Ca. xl.
ITEM Heirefter it is statute and ordanit, that na man hald victual in gyrnall
to a derth, and that na man hald victual mair, than will serve him and his
family for ane quarter of ane eir. And that they present all that they have
mair to the market, within ix. dayis after to be sauld, under the pane of
escheit thairof. For the serchi^g of the quhilk thing, their is depute
serchouris in Edinburgh and L^^^h certane persounis.

PARLIAMENTVM EXCELLENTISSIMI PRINCIPIS ET DO. NOSTRI METVENDISsimi Do. Iacobi
dei gratia Scotorum Regis Illustrissimi tentum and inchoatum apud Edinburgh
xvj. die Mensis Iulij Anno Do. Millesimo Quadringentesimo Quinquagesimo Quarto
Comparentibus tribus Regni statibus. etc.

Anent the keiping and executioun of Justice. Ca. xli.
ITEM It is actit and statute, that the statutis maid befoir time anent the
keiping and executioun of Justice be keipit after the tennoure of the actis
maid of befoir time thairupone.

That inbringars of victuallis be favorably tretit. Ca. xlij.
ITEM For inbringing of victuallis it is ordanit, that strange aris that
bringis in victuallis, be favorably tretit and thankfully payit for their
victuallis, and that their be na new custume taken of them, and at their be na
mair victual taken to the Kingis part, bot allanerly alsmekill as will serve
his houshald, and rych^swa gif Scottis Merchandis bringis in victual out of
Ingland, that they be favorably tretit, as said is.

IN PARLIAMENTO SVPREMI DO. NOSTRI REGIS TENTO ET INCHOATO apud Edinburgh nono
die Mensis Iunij Anno. etc. lv. Et Regni Regis xix. decimo die Mensis eiusdem
iudicium forisfacturae datum fuit super Iacobo comite de Douglas decimo die
Mensis eiusdem processus and iudicium forisfacturae super Beatrice Comitissa de
Douglas, Archibaldo Comite Morauiae and Iohanne Douglas de Baluany data and
facta fuerunt.

DEcimo tertio die Mensis praedicti iudicium forisfacturae datum fuit super
Iohanne de Stounthachilde Quhitch ester, Iohanne Schaw de Henristoun and
Waltero Sinclar.

THE King with the auise and counsall of his three Estatis of his Realm hes
continewit his Parliament to the feir^ day of August nixt tocum with contine
watioun of dayis. etc.

PARLIAMENTVM EXCELLENTISSIMI PRINCIPIS ET DO. NOSTRI MEtuendissimi Do. Iacobi
Secundi dei gratia Scotorum Regis Illustrissimi tentum and inchoatum apud
Edinburgh quarto die Mensis Augusti Anno Do. Millesimo Qua dringentesimo
Quinquagesimo Quinto.

The annexatioun of landis to the Crown. Ca. xliij.
ITEM In the first forsamekil as the poverty of the Crown is often times the
cause of the poverty of the Realm, and that money other inconuenientis ar
their throw, the quhilkes war lang to expreme, be the auise of the full
counsall of the Parliament, it is statu^e and ordanit, that in ilk part of the
Realm for the Kingis residence, quhair it happinnis him to be, their be
certane Lordschippis and Castellis annexit to the Crown perpetually to remane.
The quhilk may not be geuin in fee and heritage away nor in fra^ktenement to
any persoun, of quhat estate or degree that ever he be, but auise, deliverance
and decreit of the haill Parliament, and for greit ^eand and ressonabill causis
of the Realm. And albeit it happin our Souerane Lord, that now is, or any of
his successouris of Scotland till analay or dispone vpone the Lordschippis and
Castellis annexit to the Crown, as is befoir said, that alienatioun or
dispositioun salbe of nane auale. And it salbe lefull to the King, beand for
the time to ressaue they landis, quhen ever him lykis to his awin use but any
processis of Law, and the takaris sall refound all proffeitis, that they have
takin up of they landis agane to the King, for all the time that they have
them, and that our Souerane Lord, that now is, be sworn, and in like manner
all his successouris Kingis of Scotland into their coronatioun, to the keiping
of this statute, and all the points thairof. Their ar the Lordschippis and
Castellis annexit to the Crown.

IN The first the haill custumis of Scotland, the quhilkis war in our Souerane
Lordis handis the day of his deceis. And that our Souerane Lord, that now is,
content them, that hes pensiounis geuin forth of the Custume with other thingis,
sa that the haill custumis may remane till him. Item the Lordschip of Ettrik
Forest, with all boundis pertening thairto. Item the haill Lordschip of
Galloway, with sic fredomis co^moditeis, as it hes their dayis, togidder with
the Castle of the Creif. Item the Castle of Edinburgh. Item the landis of
Ballincreif and Gos^uird, togidder with all other landis lyand about, pertening
to the King within the Schirefdome of Louthiane. Item the Castle of Striuiling,
with all and sindrie the Kingis landis lyand about it. Item the Castle of
Dunbertane, with the landis of Cardros, Rosneth, with the pensioun of Cadrow,
and the pensioun of the ferme meill of Kirkpatrik. Item the haill Erldome of
Fyfe, with the place of Falkland. Item the Erldome of Stratherne with the
pertinentis, the house and Lordschip of Brechin, with the service and
superiority of Cortoquhay. Item the house of Innernes and Vrquhard, and the
Lordschippis of them, and the Lordschippis of Abernethy, with the watter
maillis of Innernes, togidder with the Barronyis of Vrquhard, Gle^norquhane,
Boneich, Bonochar, Annach Edderdaill, callit Ardmannach, Pecty, Brachly,
Stratherue, with the pertinentis.

ITEM The reid Castle with the Lordschippis of Ros pertening thairto. And that
the annexatiounis of their lordschippis and Castellis to the Crown, make na
prejudice to our Souerane Lady the Quenis infeftment, that now is, anent the
Lordschippis and Castellis assignit till her dowry be our Souerane Lord and
the three Estatis.

That nane resset James sumtyme Earl of Douglas. Ca. xliiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that na persou^ of any estate, resset, house,
herbrie, support, or supply be na manner of way James sumtyme Earl of Douglas,
his brether, complicis or adherance, under the pane of tinsall and forfatour of
life land and gudis, Ipso facto. And that na persounis gottin of them that are
forfaute in this Parliament, succeid to any heritageis in this Realm in time
to cum^.

That their be na wardanis on the Bordowris maid in fee and heritage. Ca. xlv
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that in time to cum their be na wardanis on
the Bordowris maid in fee and heritage. And that the wardanis have na power to
know of the poyntis of tresoun, saifand the poyntis quhilkes ar neidfull for
the conseruatioun of the trewis. And swa that the wardane court intromet with
nathing, that pertenis to the dittay of the Justice Air.

That all Regaliteis being in the Kingis handis, be annexit to the Ryaltie. Ca.
xlvi
ITEM That all Regaliteis that are now in the Kingis handis, be an nexit to the
Ryaltie. And that in time tocum, their be na Regalities grantit without
deliverance of the Parliament.

That na office be geuin in fee and heritage in time tocum. Ca. xlvij.
ITEM That their be na office in time tocum geuin in fee and heritage, and that
the officis that are geuin sen the deceis of our Souerane Lord that deid is, be
reuokit and ad^ullit, excepta^d the wardanry of the Merche, the quhilk our
Souerane Lord hes geuin til his sone Alexander Earl of Merche, and Lord of
Anna^dirdail.

ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that quhair ever officis of custumis that are
reuokit, the quhilkis war grantir till any persoun, that maid coist at the King
thairfoir, it salbe recompa^sit to them, the proffeitis vptane thairof in the
meintyme beand co^sidderit

Quha bringis a falls cuineour to the King sall have x. pund. Ca. xlviij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that quhat ever he be that arreistis a falls
cuineour, he bea^d taintit with the fall set, the said arreistar bringand him to
the King, he sall have x. pund for his travel of the Kingis cofferis, and the
escheit of him that he arreistis. And this act for three eiris to endure.

Of Sornaris. Ca. xlix.
ITEM Quhair ever Sornaris be ouertane in time tocum, that they be deliuerit to
the Kingis Schireffis, and that furthwith the Kingis Justice do Law vpone them
as vpone a theif or reuar. etc.

That their be xij. persounis vpone the secreit counsall of Burrowis. Ca. l.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, for the commoun proffeit of all Burrowis of
the Realm, that their be viij. or xij. personnis, after the quantity of the
Town, chosin of secreit counsall, and sworn thairto, the quhilkis sall
decreit all matters of wrang and unlaw within the Burgh, to the auale of v. pund
or viij. pund within viij. dayis warning. Swa that in prejudice of the
innocentis, the delayar have not the privilege of the processis of Law, bot
vpone viij. dayis warning to be decidit be the said persounis.

Of ane Ambaxat to the Pape. Ca. lj.
ITEM It is ordanit, that their pas ane Ambaxat to our halie father the Pape,
for the obedience to be maid, and certane priuilegis to be purchest for the
commoun good of the Realm. And as anent the persounis that sall pas, their
expensis and instructiounis is referrit to our Souerane Lord the Kingis secreit
counsall.

The manner of arraymentis for the Parliament. Ca. lij.
ITEM As tuiching the habitis of the Erlis, Lordis of Parliament,
Commissionaris of Burrowis, and aduocatis, sall have and use at all
Parliamentis and general counsall times, It is statute and ordanit, that all
Erlis sall use mantillis of brown granit, oppin befoir, furrit with quhyte
lyning, and lynit befoir out with ane hand braid to the belt steid, with the
samin furring, with lytill hudes of the samin claith, and to be vsit vpone
their schuldaris. And the other Lordis of Parliament to have ane mantill of
reid, rychtswa oppinnit befoir, and lynit with silk, or furrit with cristy gray
greece or purray, togidder with ane hude of the samin claith, furrit as said is.
And all Co^missaris of Burrowis, ilk ane to have ane pair of clokis of blew,
furrit ^ute side, oppin on the rycht schuldar, furrit as effeiris, and with
hudes of the samin, as said is. And quhat Erl, Lord of Parliament,
Co^missionares of Burrowis, that enteris in Parliament or general cou^sall,
but the said habit furrit, sall furthwith pay thairefter x. pu^d to the King
vnforgeuin. And that in ilk Burgh quhair Parliament or general counsall salbe
haldin, their be ordanit quhair the bar vsis to stand, a sat of three segis,
ilk ane h^ear than other, to the Commissaris to sit on, under the pane of x.
pund to be rasit of the Town, quhair the Parliament or general cou^sall salbe
haldin, and the said segis vnmaid, als often as they ar haldin.

ITEM That all men that are foirspeikaris for the coist, to have Habitis of
grene, of the fassoun of a Tunikill, and the sleuis to be oppin as a Talbert.
And quhilk of the foirspeikaris that wa^tis it in y^ time of the said
Parliame^tis, or general cou^sallis, the said habites, and efterwartis speikis
for meid, sall pay.v. pund to the King.

ITEM This Parliament be the King and the three Estatis, is continewit to the
xij. day of October nixt to cum, with continewatioun of dayis, and ordanit
daily to be continewit be certane persounis ordanit thairto.

ITEM PER Dominos trium Regni statuum in praedicto Parliamento congregatos
decretum extitit and determinatum, quod quia in Parliamento supremi Do. nostri
Regis nuper in Praetorio Burgi de Edinburgh tento nono die Mensis Iunii An. Do.
Millesimo Quadringentesimo Quinquagesimo Quinto, et certo dierum spacio
continuato Iacobus olim Comes de Douglas, Johannes Douglas olim de Baluany eius
stater, and Beatrix dictorum Iacobi and Iohannis matter contra Regem and Regnum
perpetrarunt ac Anglicis in Regiae Maiestatis, quantum in eis est, laesionem
and dispendium palam and notorie adhaeseru^t, prout de presenti adhaerent, ne
igitur Regem and Regnum aut subditos and fideles Regis per ipsorum aut eis
adhaerentium nepharias proditiones quouismodo laedi seu grauari contingat in
futurum vnamini consensu and assensu omniu^ and singulorum Praelatorum,
Procerum, Baronum, Burgorum Commissariorum, and Liberetenentium treis Regni
Scotiae status in dicto Parliamento representa^tium ibidem decreuerunt, quod
nulla persona ligea seu sidelis Scotiae, cuiuscunque status gradus aut
conditionis existat, scienter recipiat, supportet, aut suppleat quouismodo
dictos Iacobum olim Comitem de Douglas, Iohannem Douglas olim de Baluany eius
fratrem, Beatricem ipsorum Iacobi and Iohannis matrem homines seruientes, seu
eis adhaerentes, vel eorum aliquem, aut eis vel alicui eorum hospitium,
auxil^um, seu iuuamen quouismodo praebeat in futuru^ sub pena proditionis,
necnon forisfacturae vitae terrarum and bonorum ipso facto. Et quod nulla
persona de quacunque personarum praedictarum in dicto Parliamento forisfacta
genita vel generanda quascunque hereditates, dominia, terras seu possessiones
in Regno Scotiae successiones futuris temporibus quouismodo valiant vendicare.
Et dicti Domini vnanimi consensu and assensu decreuerunt presens actum pro
perpetuo robora firma habere.

PARLIAMENTVM EXCELLENTISSIMI PRINCIPIS ET DO. NOSTRI METVENDISsimi Domini
Iacobi Secundi dei gratia Scotorum Regis Illustrissimi tentum apud Striuiling
xiij. die Mensis Octobris Anno Do. Mill. Quadrin. Quad^a. Quinto, congregatis
tribus Regni statibus.

The manner of taikning, for bailis making. Ca. liij.
ITEM It is seen speidfull, that their be coist maid at the eist passage,
betuix Roxburgh and Berwyk. And that it be walkit at certane fuirdis, the
quhilkis gif mister be, sall make taikninges be bailis birning and fire. In the
first, a baill to be maid at Hume, be the walkaris at that fuird, quhair it may
be seen at Hume. And als that y^ samin persounis may cum to hume in proper
persoun, and their bailis to be maid in this manner. Ane baill is warning of
their cumming, quhat power that ever they be of. Two bailis togidder at anis,
they ar cummin in deid four bailis, ilk ane beside other, and all at anis as
iiij. candillis salbe suithfast knawlege, that they ar of greit power and menis
far as to Hadingtowne, Dumbar, Dalkeith, or thairby. The samin talkningis to be
watchit and maid at Eggerhop Castle fra they see the fire of Hume, that they
fire rychtswa. And in like manner on Soltre ege sall se the fire of Eggerhop
Castle, and make taikning in like manner. And than may all Louthyane be warnit,
and in special the Castle of Edinburgh, and their four fyris to be maid in
like manner, that they in Fyfe, and fra Striuiling eist, and the eist part of
Louthyane, and to dumbar all may see them and cum to the defense of the
Realm. And they will not be sleuthfull them self, for to be warnit of their
fyris, they sall wit of their cumming over Tweid, and than considdering their
far passage, we sall god willing be als sone reddy as they, and all pepill be
west Edinburgh, to draw to Edinburgh, and fra Edinburgh eist to Hadingtoun. And
all Merchandis of Burrowis to persew the eist quarter quhair it passis, and at
Dunpenderlaw and Northberwyklaw Bailis to be brint in form befoir writtin, for
warning of the sey coist. And gif any Scottisman dois any tresoun, that is to
say, warnis of the ryding of ane hoist, or any Scottisma^ to do harm in
Ingland, or to Inglismen, and that may oppinly be knawin vpone him, he sall
have furthwith the commoun Law, and be hangit and drawin, and his gudis escheit
to the King.

Of persounis sclanderit or suspect of tresoun. Ca. liiij.
ITEM Gif any persoun or persounis be sclanderit or suspect of tresoun, they
salbe taken and remain in firmance, and their gudis under sure borrois, quhill
the time they have tholit ane assyse, quhether they be quyte or foul.

That nane pas in Ingland in time of weir. Ca. lv.
ITEM That na man pas into Ingland without leif of the King, the wardane, or of
them he geuis power to in that part, in time of weir, under the pane of
tresoun.

That na Inglisman cum in Scotland without conduct. Ca. lvj.
ITEM Gif any Inglisman cummis in the kinrik of Scotland, to Kirk, market, or
any other place but conduct or assouerance of the King, the wardane, or them
y^ power hes, he salbe lauchfull presonar to quhat persoun, that lykis to tak
him. Item gif any Scottisman bring in any Inglisman, or meitis them at any
tryistis not power hauand, they salbe takin, and put in firmance, their good
takin and arreistit to the time, that they be punist at the Kingis will and the
wardanis. Item that na Scottisman sit vpone na special assouerance of any
Inglisman, but leif of the King or the wardane, under the pane of tresoun.

That na Scottisman supply Berwyk or Roxburgh. Ca. lvij.
ITEM That na Scottisma^ supply Berwyk nor Roxburgh, with na victual fuel,
nor nane other supportatioun, under the pane of tresoun. And quhen the wardane
rydis, or any other chiftane and with him greit fellowschip or small, that nane
gang away with na manner of good quhill it be thriddit, and partit befoir the
chiftane, as use and custume is of the Merchis, under the pane of tresoun, and
to be hangit and drawin, and his gudis escheit.

That na man reif na manner of gudis nor presonar. Ca. lviij.
ITEM That na man reif ane other na manner of gudis, nouther presonar nor other,
quhilkis they ar in possessiou^ of, in Inglis ^ird, or in Scottis, under the
pane of deid. etc.

That nane raise affray in the host wilfully. Ca. lix.
ITEM Gif any man ras^s affray in the hoist in wilful manner withoutin cause,
salbe accusit of tresoun.

ITEM It is statute, that quhair sa ever any raidis ar maid in Ingland, that
their said statutis be deliuerit to the heidismen. And that they oppinly gar
them be maid knawin till all them that passis with them, that nane of them
may have essonie or excusatioun of negligence.

The King sall tak inquisitioun of all Sornaris and oppressouris of his liegis.
Ca. lx.
ITEM The King sall tak inquisitioun, quhair he cummis till any heid Burgh of
the cuntrie, gif their be any within the Schire of Sornaris, or oppressouris of
the Kingis liegis, or the pure pepill, or disobeyaris of his letters, and they
persounis the King sall punis as effeiris.

Of garnisounis to be laid vpone the Bordowris. Ca. lxj.
ITEM As tuiching the laying of garnisonnis upon the Bordowris, It is auisit
and ordanit be our Souerane Lord and three Estatis, that their be laid in
garnisounis, that is to say, two hundredth speiris, two hundredth bowis, vpone
the eist and middill Merchis, and vpone the west Merchis to be laid ane
hundredth speiris and ane hundredth bowis. And for the making and finding of
their expensis, their salbe furthwith writtin letters to all the Schireffis to
send in writ to our Souerane Lord the namis of all and sindrie the Lordis,
Barronis, and frehaldars, alsweill dwelland within the boundis of Regaliteis as
Ryalteis, and the auale of ilk man, their landis, tentis, possessiounis, and
the auale of their mouabill gudis, als neir as can be estemit. And thairefter
the Lordis, that sall sit, after the cumming of the said writtis fra the
Schireffis sall auise how money ilk Lord and frehaldaris sall find, quhen, and
quhair. And they that are neir hand the Bordowris ar ordanit to have good
houshaldis and weill abileit men, as effeiris. And to be reddy at their
principal place and to pas with the wardanis, quhan, and quhair they salbe
chargit. etc.

CONSILIVM generale excellentissimi Principis and Do. nostri Do. Iacobi Secundi
Dei gratia Regis Scotorum tentum apud Edinburgh and inchoatum ibidem xix. dic
Mensis Octobris Anno Do^ Millesimo Quadringentesimo Quinquagesimo sexto,
congregatis tribus Regni statibus. etc.

Statutis belangand weir and the defens of the Realm. Ca. lxij.
ITEM As to the first article, quhair it speikis of the deliverance and
decreit, that the King should gif anentis debaitis betuix diverse persounis of
the Realm of the taking of presonaris in winning of towris and fortalicis,
that article is referrit to the Barronis. For the decisioun thairof pertenis to
them. For they have experience thairof. Item as to the secund article tuiching
the supply of the Bordowris, the prouisioun of the defense of the Realm agane
the somer saisoun, the Estatis thinkis, that the Bordowris misters not samekill
supply, as they did in the time this matter was laid to the King, and at they
may this eir, god belouit, defend them self better, than ferner for diverse
causis: First that they ar better cornit, than they war ferner, and their
ennimeis war cornit. Secundly they have specialitie and peax at the leist of
two Bordowris, quhill Candilmes. On the west Bordowris in winter dayis is
se^^dil skaith. And the Clergy presumis their may be specialtie gottin to
them, and it be desyrit. And trowis the Inglismen will als far consent till a
specialtie fra Candilmes till wedder dayis, as they do now till Candilmes,
considderand als the Inglismen hes had this somer bygane and traistis till have
this somer to cum surfat coist and travel, and they be not suppleit both in
winter weir and be reddy to the somer weir. And all thingis co^sidderit, they
have had mekill mair travel and chargis of weir in this somer bygane, than the
Bordowraris had. Thairfoir they think the Bordowraris sold be content at this
time. And quhen any greit ouerset is like to cum on the Bordowraris, they think
the inlandis men sold be reddy in their suppli^.

ITEM It is ordanit, that all manner of man, that hes land or gudis, be reddy
horsit and geirit, and after the faculte of his landis and gudis, for the
defense of the Realm, at the commandment of the Kingis letters be bailis or
outhornis. And quha sa beis not, he will be punist in his persoun and gudis.
And that all manner of man betuix sextie and sextene be reddy on their best
auise to cum to the Bordowris, and defend the land, quhen any wittering cummis
of the incumming of ane greit Inglis hoist. And at na pure man, na vnbodin be
chargeit, to cum to any raidis in Ingland. And that ilk man, that his gudis
extendis to xx. merkis, be bodin at the leist with a Iak, with sleuis to the
hand, or splentis, and ane prikit hat, a sword, and a bucklar, a bow, and a
scheif, gif he can get it. And gif he can not, to have and ax and ane targe
outher of ledder or of fyrne buird with two bandis upon the bak. And throwout
all the Schiris they be warnit to provide for sic thingis, and to cum to make
their wapinschawinges befoir the Schireffis, Baillies, or Stewartes of the
Regalitie on the morn after the law dayis after ule. And quha that cummis not
bodin, as effeiris, after his faultis to be punist in his gudis. And swa forth
their wapinschaw ingis to be maid and continewit fra.xxx. dayis to.xxx. dayis.

ITEM It is thocht speidfull, that the King make requeist to certane of the
greit Burrowis of the land that are of any mycht to make cartis of weir, and in
ilk cart two gunnis, and ilk ane to have two chalmers, with the remanent of the
graith, that efferis thairto, and ane cunnand man to schute them. And gif they
have na craft in the schuting of them, as now, they may leir, or the time cum,
that will be neidfull to them.

ITEM as to the thride article bela^gand the sending to France, the three
Estatis thinkis it sufficiently preuidit at this time anentis the matter. For
they ar content of the letters and instructiounis, that are past.

The reule for the Pestilence. Ca. lxiij.
ITEM As to the feird article belangand the pestilence and governance of it.
The Clergy thinkis, that their sold na man to la^d nor to Burgh, that hes
gudis to serve him self and his meinie, be put out of his awin house, les than
he will not remane, na will not be closit up in his awin house. And gif he
disobeyis his neichtboures in that caise, he sall be compellit to pas out of
the town. And gif their war any persounis, that had na gudis, to find them
self, put forth of any town, they of the town sold find them, and not lat
them pas away fra the place, that they war depute to remane, to fyle the
country about them. And gif any sic put out of the town wald steill away,
they of y^ town, that put him out, sold gar follow him, and bring him agane,
and compel him to remane, and punis him for his away passing. And that na man
birne ane vthers house, bot gif it mycht be done but hindering or skaith of his
Neichbouris. And at the Prelatis make general processiounis throwout their
dioceis twyis in ilk oulk for stanching of the Pestilence, and grant perdone to
the Preistis, that gais in processioun.

The money and the gold cryit heichar. Ca. lxiiij.
ITEM As to the article belangand the money, it is statute, y^ the ordinance in
the Parliament maid of befoir auent the inbringing of Buleoun be better punist
and keipit, than it hes been in times bygane. And that their be money of other
cuntreis cryit till have course in the Realm, sic as the Henry Nobillis of pace
to be cryit to xxij.s. The Salute, the Rydar, the Crown, the Dolphin to.xi.s.
the Rens Gudling to.viij.s. And to the intent, that the Demyis, that at keipit
in hand, have course and cum out throw the Realm, and syne to remane in the
Realm, and not to be had out of it, it is thocht expedient, that the Demi be
cryit to.x.s. And the new Lion to have course for.x.s. as it hes. And the new
grot to.xij. d. notwithstanding that it was ordanit to have course for.viij. d.
fra certane time forth. And the vj. d. grot till have course, as it hes. And at
their be cuineit of ilk pund in small pennyis a schilling. And at the wardane
se^, at that be done to the ^ynnes of the matter, that is cuineit, as he will
answer thairfoir. And that the Inglis grot, and half grot, and penny have
course, as they had of befoir. And that the Lordis and auditouris of the Checker
eirnistly purway and examine the ^ynnes both of gold and silver, the quhilk is
presentit to them vpone the Checker in a buist be the wardanis of the cuinie.
And that the cuineouris under the pane of deid nouther cuinie Demi, nor other
that is cryit till have course in the land, nor it vj. d. grotis.

Of ministering of Justice and Sessionnis halding. Ca. lxv.
ITEM As to the article belangand Justice, the King thinkis the article is
weill maid of the self, and beseikis our Souerane Lord to gar it be continewit
and execute. And that furthwith the Lordis be chargit to begin and sit in sum
clean place, and minister Justice, and decyde co^plaintis after the tennour of
the actis. And that they be sworn in the Kingis presence, to minister the law
justly and euinile. And their ar the persounis. Item the first Month for the
Clergy, the Bischop of Dunkeldin, the Abbot of Paslay, the Abbot of Mel^os. For
the Barronis the Lord Grahame, Schir Patrik Hepburne, the Lord of Carnbee. For
the Commissaris of Burrowis Williame of Cranstou^ of Edinburgh, Robert Narne of
Striuiling, and Robert Marser of Perth. The secund Month for the Clergy the
Bischop of Brechin, the Abbot of Dumferinling, the Abbot of Lundoris. For the
Barronis the Lord Abirnethy, the Lord of Calderwod, Schir Robert of
Leuingstoun. For the Commissaris of Burrowis Williame Bonar of Sancta^dros,
David Spalding of Dundie, and Thomas Andersoun of Couper. Third Month for the
Clergy, the Bischop of Murray, the Abbot of Halyrudhous, the Dene of Murray
Clerk of the Register. For the Barronis the Lord Lyndsay of the Byris, the
Lord of Murthly, and the Constabill of Dundie. For the Commissaris of Burrowis
Iohne of Mar, Iohne of Fyfe of Abirdene, Iohne of Aytoun of Hadintoun. And the
Lordis thinkis speidfull that their Lordis begin to sit on the Monounday
the.viij. day of November in Edinburgh. And all causis that can not be red at
this time be the auditouris of co^plaintis, to be continewit to that day but
prejudice of party. And fra Edinburgh to pas quhair the auditouris thinkis
may speidfull.

Of Fairis. Ca. lxvj.
ITEM As tuiching the complaintis maid be the Commissaris of Burrowis of the
Realm, that pure co^mounes ar gretumly iniurit and oppressit be the Kingis
Schireffis, Constabiles, and their ministers in tymis of Fairis takand
distressis of their gudis of lytill quantity, quhilk they bring on their
heidis, or their bakis, or in their armis, in like manner of Kerris, sleddis,
and smnall tymmer, it is seen speidfull, that of sic gudis of lytill quantity
or price, na distres be taken in time tocum for auld use and custume. The
Schireffis sold have, bot the best ox or kow or vnriddin horse, quhilkis ar
stallit, and brotht to sell. Item of greit stallis of Merchandice, quhilkis
cummis on horse bakis or couerit cramis, that occupyis the Fairis, of the
quhilkis they have use to tak their distres for the continewatioun of Fairis,
the quhilk distres aw to be deliuerit agane at the court of the fair, gif the
persoun hes done na defalt nor distrublin in the fair.

Of the down laying of Constabill feis. Ca. lxvij.
ITEM quhair the Constabill deputis and his ministers in the time of the
Sessioun and general counsall and Parliament takis distressis for Constabill
feis of all manner of gudis, greit and small, that cummis to the market to sell
both merchandice and victual, it is seen speidfull, that, that use be laid
down and forbiddin in time tocum, bot gif the Constabillis feftment beir him
till it, and the three Estatis all in the nixt Parliament or general counsall.
And that in the meintyme the Constabill ceis. For their can na Law be fundin
according to that use.

ITEM It is seen speidfull, that restitutioun be maid of victuallis, that
passis to Berwyk, Roxburgh, and Ingland under sic panis, as effeiris.

PARLIAMENTVM EXCEL LENTISSIMI PRINCIPIS ET DO. NOSTRI METVendissimi Do. Iacobi
Secundi Dei gratia Scotorum Regis Illustrissimi tentum and inchoatum apud
Edinburgh sexto die Mensis Martij Anno Do. Millesimo Quadringentesimo
Quinquagesimo septimo comparentibus tribus statibus. etc.

Of Sessiounis haldin* and the Schiref to be neir thairby. Ca. lxviij.
INPRIMIS As to the article of the Sessiou^ it is seen spe^dfull to the King
and the three Estatis, y^ it be continewit to the nixt Parliament in manner as
after followis, that is to say, the Lordis of the Sessioun sall sit thryis in
the eir, ilk time.xl. dayis, in their three placis, Edinburgh, Perth, and
Abirdene. The number of the persounis, that sall sit salbe.ix. hauand power and
voittis in the deliverance of causis, of ilk estate three, and the Clerk of the
Register. The Sessioun now nixt to begin and haldin at Abirdene the.xv. day of
Iunij and contenand.xl. dayis. The secund Sessioun to begin in Perth thairefter
the.v. day of October, and continue other.xl. dayis. The thride Sessioun to
begin in Edinburgh the.xiij. day of Februar nixt thairefter, and to
continue.xl. dayis. The Lordis, that are chosin to the first Sessioun in
Abirdene ar their. The Bischop of Ros, or Cathnes, or Murray, the Abbot of Deir
Dene David Bain, and Master walter Idill for the Clergy. The Earl of Errol,
the Lord Glammis and the Lord Forbes for the Barronis. Iohne of Fyfe, Androw
Meineis, and walter Thomsoun of Innernes for the Burrowis. The Lordis that sall
sit in the secund Sessioun in Perth. The Bischop of Dunkeldin, the Abbot of
Lundoris, the Archedene of Sanctandros for the Clergy. The Lord Gray, Patrik of
Rettray, Thomas Abircrumby of that ilk, for the Barronis. Archabald Stewart,
Robert Marser, and David Spalding for the Burrowis. The Lords for the third
Sessioun in Edinburgh to be haldin, the Bischop of Glasgow, or Galloway, or ane
other Bischop, the quhilk the King sal charge thairto, the Abbot of
Halyrudhous, the Prouest of Linclowden for the Clergy. The Lord Lyndsay, and
the Lord Hailis for the Barronis. Williame of Cranstoun, Alexander Neper, and
Robert Narne for the Burrowis. And that the Schiref of the Schire, that the
Lordis sittis in, be reddy by them for the time of their sitting till
vndergang sic charge, as they sall put till him, togidder with a Maser to
minister in his office. The causis that the Lordis of Sessioun sall sit vpone.
In the first all spoliatioun done fra the first day of Ianuar the eir of our
Lord. etc. xlix because that the act of spoliatioun was maid that eir. And all
other spoliatioun, that salbe done enduring the eiris and termis of the halding
of the Sessioun.

Quhat power the Lordis of Sessioun sall have. Ca. lxix.
ITEM The saidis Lordis of the Sessioun sall have power to know and decyde all
spoliatiounis maid fra the day of the coronatioun of our Souerane Lord the
King, to the said first day of Ianuar, for the space of a eir tocum. The quhilk
eir gane and outrun, all sic spoliatiounis maid befoir the said first day of
Ianuar, salbe decydit and determinit befoir the Judge ordinar of the Realm, the
Lordis of the Sessioun hauand na power to know vpone them after ^he said eir
be outruunin. The quhilkis actiounis of spolie consistis in two manners, the
first is spoliatiou^ of mouabill gudis, nouther tuiching fee nor heritage, the
quhilk indifferently salbe decydit befoir the Lordis of ye Sessioun. The
Secund spoliatiou^, that is to say, done because of landis or possessiou^is
debatabill, or groundit on fee and heritage, and vpone that spoliatioun the
Lordis of the Sessioun sall proceid thus, that is to say, quhen the party
spoleit compleineis befoir the Lordis of the Sessioun on any persoun, the
Lordis sall call the Schiref, and furthwith sall gar restoir the ground without
prejudice of any party, ^uichand that fee and heritage, and recognis the
landis in the Kingis handis, vpone the quhilk spoliatioun is maid, unto the
time they be lousit be the King, And the King to make inquisitioun be taken be
the Schiref, quha was last lauchfull possessour of they landis. And that
inquisitioun to retoure agane to the King, and thairefter lat them to brogh to
that last lauchfull possessour of they landis. And als they saidis Lords sall
know vpone all spoliatiounis of takkis and malingis. And alswa to know vpone
all obligatiounis, contractis, and all manner of dettis, and other civil
actiounis, the quhilkis concernis nouther fee nor heritage. And the parteis
compleineand to have full fredome to follow their actiou^is befoir the saides
Lordis or their ordinar judge. And for till eschew malicious vexatiounis of any
party followand or defendand befoir the Sessiounis, the saidis Lordis sall
furthwith gar the expensis be payit to the party wrangously wexit be the
modificatioun of the said Lordis.

The manner how the cause sall be broch^ befoir the Lordis. Ca. lxx.
THE manner as the cause salbe brocht befoir the Lords of the Sessiou^ is this.
The Schireffis of the Schiris, quhair the said Lordis sall sit, salbe now
warnit to proclaim in ilk ane of their placis three Month of befoir the Sessioun
to be haldin at dayis and place befoir writtin. And gif any persounis hes any
actiounis to follow, he sall warn them to pas to the Kingis Chapel and raise
Summoundis peremptour vpone.xl. dayis, and call his party befoir the Lordis of
the Sessioun, the quhilkes sall minister them Justice, as effeiris. And this
Summoundis to be understand vpone actiounis done befoir the proclaim of this
Sessioun. The party sall answer peremptourlie vpone schortar time, after as he
beis Summound, swa that the time of the Summoundis extend to xv. dayis. And gif
any actioun pertening to the said Lordis knawlege be continewit in the time of
the said Sessioun in the Schire quhair the Sessioun sittis be any persounis,
they persounis to be arreistit furthwith with a Maser, and Justice to be done
thairupone, as effeiris. And all other causis pertening to the knawlege of the
said Lordis salbe utterly decydit, and determinit be them, but any remeid of
appellatioun to the King or the Parliament. And quhat persoun, that ever
purchessis a Summoundis vpone his party, and he have any preuis to leid, that
he raise than a Summoundis vpone his preuis, and bring them with him to the
Sessioun, as he will be seruit.

ITEM As tuiching the expensis of the Lordis befoir writtin, and the placis
that they sall sit in, and the greit good of the Realm considderit, the Lordis
of the three Estatis thinkis, that the saidis Lordis of the Sessioun of their
awin benevolence sold beir their awin coistis, considering the schortnes of
the time of their sitting, the quhilk is bot.xl. dayis, and perauenture in vij.
eir not to cum agane to them. And to support sum part of their expensis, they
sal have the Kingis unlaw of their awin court, the quhilk sall be.xl.s.
vnforgeuin, to be deuidit betuix them, and the Clerk of the Register be
euinlie portiounis.

ITEM The said three Sessiounis endit, our Souerane Lord and his counsall
ordanit and nemmit other Lordis to sit at times and placis seen speidfull to
him and his said counsall, unto the time of the nixt Parliament, with sic like
power, as they had befoir.

Of wapinschawing. Ca. lxxj.
ITEM It is decretit and ordanit, that the wapinschawinges be haldin be the
Lordis and Barronis spiritual and temporal, four tymis in the eir. And that
the futball and golf be utterly cryit down, and not to be vsit. And that the
bow markis be maid, at ilk paroche Kirk a pair of buttis. And schuting be vsit
ilk Sunday. And that ilk man schute.vj. schottis at the leist, under the pane
to be rasit vpone them, that cummis not at the leist.ij. d. to be geuin to
them that cummis to the bow markis to drink. And this to be vsit fra Pasche
till Alhallowmes after. And be the nixt midsomer to be reddy with all their
graith without failie. And that their be a vow^x and a ^^egear in ilk heid
town of the Schire. And at the town ^urneis him of (...) and graith, after as
neidis him thairto, that they may serve the cuntrie with. And as tuiching the
futball and the golf to be punist be the Barronis unlaw, and gif he takis not
the unlaw, that it be takin be the Kings Officiaris. And gif the parochin be
mekill, that their be three or four or five bow markis in sic placis, as ganis
thairfoir. And that all man, that is within fyftie and past.xij. eiris sall use
schuting.

The prouisioun for the money. Ca. lxxij.
ITEM As to the money, their ar the Lordis, that are chosin thairupone, the
Bischoppis of Murray, Ros, Cathnes, the Abbot of Dumfermling, the Abbot of
Halyrudhous, Master Patrik oung, the Lord Grahame, the Lord Lyndsay, the Lord
Ha^miltoun, the Lord of Cranstoun, Iohne of Da^rympill, Archibald Stewart,
Alexander Naper, George of Faulow, and Iohne of Fyfe. And their persounis to be
chargi^ with the Kingis letters to compeir in the time of the nixt Checker in
the place quhair the Checker is haldin, or any other place seen speidfull till
our Souerane Lord to commoun vpone the matter of the money for the proffeit of
the Realm. And in the m^intyme it is seen speidfull, that the striking of the
cuinie ceis, quhill other prouisioun be maid thairof.

Of falls Goldsmythis. Ca. lxxiij.
ITEM As anent the reformatioun of gold and silver wrocht be goldsmythis and to
eschew the dissauing done to the Kingis liegis, their salbe ordanit in ilk
Burgh, quhair goldsmythis wirckis ane vnderstandand and a cu^nand man of good
conscience, quhilk salbe Dene of the craft. And quhen the wark is brocht to the
goldsmyth, and it be gold, quhat gold that beis brocht till him, he sall gif it
forth agane in work na war, na.xj. granis. And the said goldsmyth sall tak his
wark or he give it forth, and pas to the Dene of the craft, and gar him examine,
that it be sa fine as is befoir writtin. And the said Dekin sall set his mark
and takin thairto, togidder with the said goldsmythis. And gif fault be fundin
thairin efterwartis, the Dene ^oirsaid and goldsmythis gudis salbe in escheit
to the King, and their lyffis at the Kingis will. And the said Dene sall have
to his fee of ilk ounce wrocht.j. d. And quhair their is na goldsmythtis, bot
ane in a town, he sall schaw that wark takinnit with his awin mark to the heid
Officiaris of the town, quhilkis sall have a mark in like manner ordanit
thairfoir, and salbe set to the said wark. And quhat goldsmyth, that geuis
forth his wark vtherwayis, than is befoir writtin, his gudes salbe confiskit to
the King, and his life at the Kingis will.

That na Litstar by claith to sell. Ca. lxxiiii.
ITEM It is seen speidfull, that lit be cryit up, and vsit, as it was wont to
be. And at na listar be draper, nor by claith to sell agane, nor it tholit
thairto under the pane of escheit. etc.

That na persou^ saill without three Serpaith of gudis. Ca. lxxv.
ITEM Anent the estate of Merchandice, and restrictioun of the multitude of
salaris, it is seen speidfull be the estate of Clergy and the Barronis, and
statute be the King, that their saill na personis, bot habill and of good fame,
and that he have at the leist three serplaithis of his awin gudis, or else the
aua^e thairof committit till him. And at the saillaris in Merchandice be (...)
men of Burrowis, i^dwellaris within Burgh. etc.

The habitis for Lordis of Sessioun and men of Law. Ca. lxxvj.
ITEM As anent the habitis of Erlis, Lordis of Parliament, Commissionaris of
Burrowis and men of Law, it is seen speidfull, that they be maid and vsit after
the tennour of the act maid thairupon. And that the King make a patroun of ilk
habit, and all the laif to be maid thairefter.

Personnis chosin for the reformatioun of hospitallis. Ca. lxxvij.
ITEM As anent the reformatioun of hospitallis, it is seen speidfull, that our
Souerane Lord charge his Chancellar, quhilk of Law aw to vis^e, the hospitallis
foundit be Kingis, and they june to him, the ordinar of ilk diocy, and vthers
two persounes of good conscience to visee the said hospitallis. And quhair they
can ge^ the fundatiounis of them, to gar them be keipit. And quhai^ na
fundatioun can be gottin, to make inquisitioun of the cuntrie, and refer to the
King to see the remeid thairfoir. And this to be put to executioun, and to be
done betuix this and Martimes. Their ar the persounis, that salbe iunit to the
Chancellar, the ordinar of the diocy of Sanctandros, Robert of Leuingstoun, and
the Archidene of Sanctandros. In the diocy of Glasgow, the Lord of Ellyotstoun,
the Archidene of Glasgow. In the diocy of Dunkeldin, the Dene of Dunkeldin, and
Thomas Abircrumby. In the diocy of Brechin, Schir Iohne Ogilwy, and the Dene of
Brechin. In the diocy of Abirdene, the Lord Forbes, the Abbot of Deir. In the
diocy of Murray the Lord Duthous, the Abbot of Kinlos. In Galloway the Lord
Maxwell, and Master Iohne Oliver. In Ros the Chancellar of Ros, and Williame
Vrquhard in Crumbathye. And for the laif of the dioceis the Chancellar, and
quhame he will tak with him.

Of coistly cleithing, and at na woman cum to the Kirk mussallit. Ca. lxxviij.
ITEM That sen the Realm in ilk estate is gretumly purit throw sumptuous
cleithing, both of men and women, and in special within Burrowis and
co^mounis of landwart, the Lordis thinkis speidfull; that restrictioun be maid
thairof in this manner, that na man within Burgh that leuis be Mercha^dice, bot
gif he be a persou^ constitute in dignity, as Alderman, Baillie, or other good
worthy me^, that are of the counsall of the town, and their wyfis weir claithes
of silk, nor costly scarlettis in gownis or furringis with mertrikis. And yt
they make their wyfis and douchters in like manner be abileit ganand and
correspondand for their estate, that is to say, on their heidis schort
courchis, with lytil hudis, as ar vsit in Flanders, Ingland, and other cuntreis.
And as to their gownis, that na weme^ weir mertrikis nor letteis, nor tailis
vnsittin lenth nor furrit under, bot on the haly day. And in like manner the
Barronis, and other pure gentill men, and their wyfis, that are within.xl. pund
of auld extent. And as anent the commounis, that na laubouraris, nor husband
me^ weir on the wark day bot gray, and quhite, and on the haly day bot lycht
blew, grene, reid, and their wyfis rychtswa, and courcheis of their awin
making, and that it exceid not the price of xl. d. the elne. And that na woman
cum to Kirk, nor market with her face mussallit, or couerit, that scho may not
be kend, under the pane of escheit of the courchie. And as to the Clerkis, that
nane (...) gownis of scarlat, nor furring of mertrikis, bot gif he be ane
persou^ constitute in dignity in cathederale or College Kirk, or else; that he
may spend (...) hundredth merkis, or greit Nobillis, or doctouris. And this to
be now proclamit* and put to executioun be the first day of Maij, under the
pane of escheit of the habit, that is to say, of the clerkis be the ordinar
Iug^, and the lai^ be the Kingis Officiaris. Item it is seen speidfull, that
Justice Airis be haldin, and continewit eirly throwout the Realm ^or good of
y^ commounis.

A Lord, Prelat, Barrone and frehalder may set in feuferme. Ca. lxxix.
ITEM As anent feuferme, the Lordis thinkis speidfull, that the King begin and
gif exempill to the laif. And quhat Prelat, Barrone, or frehalder, that can
accord with his tennent vpone setting of feuferme of his a win la^d in all or
in part, our Souerane Lord sall ratify and approve the said assedatioun, sa
that gif the tenandry happinnis to be in waird in the Kingis hands, the said
tennent sall remane with his feuferme vnremouit, payand to the King siclyke
ferme enduring the waird, as he did to the Lord, sa that it be set till a
competent auale without prejudice to the King.

That the fredomis of Regalis be keipit, and nane abusit in prejudice of the
Kingis Lawis. Ca. lxxx.
ITEM As to the Regalis, it is statute and ordanit, that all priuilegis and
fredomes be keipit, as they ar foundit. And gif any have and Regal, abuse it
in prejudice of the Kingis Lawis and breking of the cuntrie, that they be
punist be the King and be the Law, as effeiris.

That na persounis be tholit to beg betuix xiiij. and.lxx. eiris. Ca. lxxxj.
ITEM It is seen speidfull and statute, that na beggar be tholit to beg nouther
within Burgh, nor to land betuix xiiij. and. lxx. eiris, bot they be seen be
auise of the commounis of the cuntrie, that they may not win their leuing
vtherwayis. And they that sa beis fundin, have a certane taikin to landwart of
the Schiref, and in Burrowis of Alderman and Baillies, under the pane of
birning on the cheik, and banissing of the cuntrie, and that to be done be the
Schireffis to land, and Alderman and Baillies to Burgh.

Ane universal mesour to be maid and a standart. Ca. lxxxij.
ITEM Anent mettis and mesouris, it is seen speidfull, that sen we have bot a
King and a Law universal throw out the Realm, we sold have bot a met and
mesour general to serve all the Realm, that is to say, ane pynt, a quart,
quhilk was geuin be the ordinance of the three estatis, Schir Iohne Forstar that
time beand Chalmerlane into the Burgh of Striuiling, as for the standart, they
to remane universally throwout the Realm. And the firlot salbe maid
thairefter, that is to say, ilk firlot sall contene.xviij. pyntis of the samin
mesour round and in like wide under and abone, the two buirdis co^tenand euin
over in thicknes ane inche and a half, and the breid over within the
buirdis.xvj. inche and a half. And the half firlot and peck to follow in the
samin kind. And of their said mesouris, that is to say, pynt, quart, and
firlot, salbe maid new.iij. standartis, ane to be send till Abirdene, ane other
to Perth, and the third till Edinburgh, to remane, and now to be proclamit
their fra the feist of Sanct Michaell nixt tocum, that they mesouris, pynt,
quart, and firlot have course, and nane vthers. Swa that in the meintyme all
manner of persounis, that thinkis till use the said mesouris, may get them
beand brint and seillit with the seillis of they steidis, as they will use, and
be seruit thairefter. And gif any persounis after the said termis vsis other
mesouris, than their, and their may be taint gottin thairof be the dittay, or
vtherwayis, they sall pay the unlaw of the Chalmerlane Air dowbill. And gif any
man be foundit of auld or of new fermis of other mesouris, than arabone
writtin, their fundatioun sall stand in effect, and the mesour of their
fundatioun salbe proportionit to this mesure, that now is, swa that the samin
quantity sall remane with the geuar and the ressauar, but prejudice of any of
them.

Of Remissiounis, gif the party be not content. Ca. lxxxiij.
ITEM Anent the contentatioun of parteis compleineand of diverse persounis,
quhilkes hes remissiou^is of the King, it is seen speidfull for any party,
quhair of it is pleineit, and allegis till his remissioun as for spolie of
gudis, outher be thift, or reif, the party allege and till his remissioun sall
find sicker borrois, to content the party compleineand within.xl. dayis nixt
followand. And gif he dois not, he sall remane in the Kingis presoun, quhill
the said.xl. dayis be runnin, and than his remissioun to be expyrit, and of na
value. And as of actiounis committit in tymis bygane, the party compleineand
sall have recours to y^ Lordis of the Sessioun, the quhilkis sall have power to
gar them be restorit after the tennour of the act of spoliatiou^ maid
thairupone: or gif it plesis the party to follow to the feird Air after the
auld use and custume. And thairefter gif the party be not content, his
remissioun to be expyrit, and of nane auale, as is foirsaid. etc.

Of Chalmerlane Airis. Ca. lxxxiiij.
ITEM Anent the reformatioun of Chalmerlane Airis, be the quhilk all the
estatis, and specially the pure co^mounis ar sairly greuit, the Lordis in the
name of the three Cstatis exhortis our Souerane Lord at it pleis him with the
said counsall of the three Estatis beand now present to have piety and
considderatioun of the money and greit inconuenientis, that fallis vpone his
pure liegis thairthrow, and of his grace to provide suddane remeid and
reformatioun thairof.

That na frehalder be constreineit to the Parliament, bot he be of.xx. pund
worth of land. Ca. lxxxv.
ITEM The Lordis thinkis speidfull, that na frehalder, that haldis of the King
under the soume of.xx. pund, be constreineit to cum to the Parliament nor
general counsall, as for presence, bot gif he be ane Barrone, or else be
specially of the Kingis commandment warnit outher be officiar or be writ.

Of the taking of stressis be the Constabill. Ca. lxxxvj
ITEM Quhair the Kingis Constabill Deputis and his ministers in time of the
Sessioun or general counsall and Parliamentis takis distressis for Constabill
feis of all manner of gudis, greit and small, that cummis to the mer^at to sell,
both Merchandice and victuallis, It is seen speidfull, at that use be laid
down and forbiddin in time to cum, bot gif the Constabillis infeftment beir
him thairto, and at they be schawin to the King and the three Estatis at the
nixt Parliament or general counsall. And that in the meintyme the Constabill
ceis. For their can be na Law ^undin according to that use.

The punitioun of negligent Officiaris. Ca. lxxxvij.
ITEM Our Souerane Lord and his three Estatis ordanis and determinis, gif that
any of his Officiares or Schireffes, Mairis, Baillies, Crownaris, Seriaundis,
Prouestis of Burrowis, and their ministeres both to land and to Burgh, be
fuudin faultise or negligent in the executioun of their officis, and it may be
lauchfully preuit on him, or notourly kend, gif the said office pertenis to him
in fee and heritage, he sall tyne his office, and the proffeit thairof for ane
eir and day, and to be punist be the King in his persoun and gudis, after the
quantity of his trespass. And gif his office pertenis to him not in fee and
heritage, he sall tyne his office for all the times he hes it, and to be punist
in his persoun after the quantity of trespass at the Kingis will.

That na ligis nor bandis be maid within Burrowis na manrent. Ca. lxxxviij.
ITEM It is seen speidfull to the Lordis, that within the Burrowis throwout the
Realm na liggis nor bandis be maid, nor it na commotioun nor rising of
co^mounis in hindering of the commoun Law, bot at the commandment of their
heid. O^^icira And gif any dois in the contrare, and knawlege and taint may be
gott^n thairof, their gudis, that are fundin guilty thairin to be con^i^^ir to
the King, and their lyffis at the Kingis will. And that na man dwella^d within
Burgh be fundin in manrent, nor ride in rout in feir of weir with na man bot
with the King or his Officiaris, or with the Lord of the Burgh, that they dwell
in, or with their Officiaris under y^ samin pane. And in like manner, that na
indwellar within Burgh nor land, purches any Lordschip in oppr^ssioun of his
neichtbouris in like manner under the samyn pane.

Of them that occupyis Lordis landis agane their willis Ca. lxxxix.
ITEM Anent maisterfull men, that schaipis them to occupy maisterfully Lordis
landis, both spiritual and temporal, the Lordis thinkis speidfull, that the
pe^sounis compleineand vpone sic maisterfull men, sall cum to the Kingis
Schire^ and Baillie, and ask his ground for to be deuoydit, or to see quhat
ressoun, y^ party occupyand the ground pretendis for him. And gif the Schiref
finds na ressoun in the occupaisoun of the ground, the Schiref sall deuoyde
the ground both of him and his gudis, and charge him in the Kingis name, that
he make na mair distrublance to the Lord nor his ground in time cumming under
the pane of the Kingis waird. And gif he dois any thing thairattour, furthwith
till arreist his persoun and send him to the Kingis waird.

The Justice to tak inquisitioun of Sornaris, bairdis, feineit fulis, and
maisterfull beggaris in all Justice Airis. Ca. lxxxx.
ITEM The Lordis thinks speidfull, that in all Justice Airis, y^ Kingis
Justice gar tak inquisitiou^ of Sornaris, bairdis, maisterfull beggares, or
feineit fulis, and outher banis them the cuntrie, or send them to the Kingis
presoun.

To saw brom and make heigis. Ca. lxxxxi.
ITEM Anent plantatioun of woddes and heigis, and sawing of brom, the Lordis
thinkis speidfull, that the King charge all his frehalders both spiritual and
temporal, that in the making of their witsondayis set, they statute and
ordand, that all their tennentis plant woddis and treis, make heigis and saw
brom, after the faculteis of their malingis, in placis convenient thairfoir,
under sic pane as Law and unlaw of the Barrone or Lord sall modifie.

Of sawing of quherit, peis and beinis. Ca. lxxxxij.
ITEM Anent the sawing of quheit, peis, and beinis, it is seen speidfull, that
ilk man erand with a pluch of viij. oxin, sall saw at the leist ilk eir ane
firlot of quheit, half ane firlot of peis, and xl. beinis, under the pane
of.x.s. to the Barrone of that land, that he dwellis in, als often as he beis
fundin faultise. And gif the barron sawis not the said corn in his domainis,
he sall pay to the King.x.s. And gif the Barrone beis fundin negligent in the
ressauing of that pane fra his housbandis, their salbe rasit on him.xl.s. als
often as he defaultis, without remissioun of the King.

That na man cum to courtis bot in sober wise. Ca. lxxxxiij.
ITEM It is ordanit and decretit, that in all Justice airis, Schiref courtis,
and generally all courtis of spiritual and temporal, that all persounis,
frehalders, and all vthers of the Kingis liegis, sall cum thairto in sober and
quiet manner. And that na man bring with him maa persounis than ar in his daily
houshald and familiaris. And fra he be cummin to his Innis, he and they sall
lay their wappinnis and armor fra them (gif they bring any with them) and
use na wappinnis for that time bot his knyfe. And gif any man be feidit, and
allegis feid, or dreid of any party, the Schiref sall furthwith of both tak
law borrois, and forbid them in the Kingis name to trubill the Kingis peax,
under the pane of Law. The quhilk pane the King sall execute without
remissioun, vpone the brekaris of the peax foirsaid. And gif the Schiref be
negligent thairin, he salbe punist after the form of the statute maid of the
reformatioun of faultis of Officiaris within the Realm.

Of airdis, heigis, and wild foulis, and to distroy foulis of reiff. Ca.
lxxxxiiij
ITEM That na man make hedgis of dry staikis, rise, or stikis, or it of hewin
wod, bot allanerly of lyand wod. Item anentis birdis and wild foulis, that
ganis to eit for the sustentatioun of man, as Per^rikis, Pluwers, and sic like
foulis, it is ordanit, that na man distroy their nestis, nor their eggis, nor
it slay wild foulis in mouting time, quhen they may not ^^e. And that all men
after their power distroy nestis and eggis of birdis, and foulis of reiff. etc.

To distroy ruikis, crawis, and other foulis of reiff. Ca. lxxxxv.
ITEM Anent ruikis, crawis, and other foulis of reif as ernis, bissartis,
gleddis, mittalis, the quhilk distroyis both cornis and wild foulis, sic as
pertrikis, plowers, and vthers. And as to the ruikis and crawis bigga^d in
orchardis, treis, and other placis, it is seen speidfull, that they that sic
treis pertenis to, lat them to big, and distroy them with all their power,
and in na wayis that their birdis fle away. And quhair it is taintit that they
big, and their birdis fle and the nest be fundin in the treis at Beltane, the
treis salbe saultit to the King, bot gif they be redemit fra him be them, that
they pertenit first, and.v.s. to the Kingis unlaw. And at the said foulis of
reif alluterly be distroyit be all manner of man, be all ingyne of all manner of
craftis that may be fundin. For the flauchter of them sall cause greit
multitude of diverse kind of wild foulis for mannis sustentatioun.

Of the slauchter of reid fische. Ca. lxxxxvj.
ITEM As anent reid fische, it is ordanit, that quha sa beis convict of
slauchter of reid fische in time forbiddin be the Law, the doar, and he that
biddis it be done, sall pay.x. pund for his unlaw but remissioun. And at the
third time, and he be convict of sic trespass, he sall by his life. And gif any
man be infeft of fredome to fische in forboddin time, sic preuilege sall ceis
to the nixt Parliament, and gif any dois the contrare, he sall pay ane unlaw
befoir the Justice, vpone the quhilk trespass the Justice Clerk sall inquyre at
the ressauing of the dittay. etc.

That nane set creilis in watters. Ca. lxxxxvij.
ITEM That na man in smolt time, set veschellis, creilis, weiris; or any other
ingyne to let the smoltis to ga to the sea, under the pane of.x. pund to the
King. And at the Schiref of the land distroy them, that at maid.

To see for the distructioun of wolfis. Ca. lxxxxviij.
ITEM It is ordanit for the distructioun of wolfis, that in ilk cuntrie quhair
any is, the Schiref or the Baillies of that cuntrie sall gadder the cuntrie
folk three times in the eir, betuix Sanct Markis day and Lambnes, for that is
the time of the quhelppis. And quhat ever he be that ry^is not with the
Schiref, Baillie, or Barrone within him self, sall pay vnforgeuin a wedder, as
is contenit in the auid act maid thairupone. And he that slayis ane wolf in any
time, he sall have of ilk houshalder of that parochin that the wolf is slain
within, a penny. And gif any wolf happinnis tocum in the cuntrie that wit be
gottin of, the cuntrie salbe reddy, and ilk houshalder to hunt them under the
pane foirsaid. And they that slayis ane wolf sall bring the heid to the
Schiref, Baillie, or Barrone, and he salbe dettour to the slayar for the soume
foirsaid. And quhatsumeuer he be, that slayis ane wolf, and bringis the heid to
the Schiref, Lord, Baillie, or Barrone, he sall have.vj. d.

Anent the slayaris of Hartis, and distroyaris of Cuningis. Ca. lxxxxix.
ITEM Anent the slayaris of Hartis in snaw time, and ^distructioun of Cuningis,
the three Estatis declairis, that to be a punct of dittay.

Of lesing makers, and tellaris of them. Ca. c.
ITEM It is statute and actit of befoir in ane Parliament of our Souerane
Lordis time, that last deceissit, in the eir of our Lord ane thousand four
hundredth twenty four eiris, That all lesing makers and tellaris of them, the
quhilk ingenners discord betuix the King and his pepill, quhair ever taint may
be gottin of them, they salbe chalangit befoir them, that power hes, and tyne
life and gudis to the King, and to be at his will. And in this present
Parliament, it is consirmit, appreuit, and ordanit to be conseruit and execute
in time tocum.

Of Mure burn. Ca. cj.
ITEM Quhair it is statute in a Parliament of our Souerane Lord that last
deceissit, the.xxvj. day of Mai^ the eir of God ane thousand four hundredth and
xxiiij. eiris, that na man make mureburne after the Month of Merche, quhill
cornis be schorne, under the pane of.xl.s. to be rasit be the Lord of the land
of the byrnar. Add gif he hes not to pay, that he be punist.xl. dayis in
presou^. And gif the Lord of the land rasis not the pane, na punissis not the
trespassouris, as is befoir said, the Justice Clerk be indictment sall gar sic
trespassouris, as is befoir said, be correctit befoir the Justice and punisit,
as is befoir expremit. In this Parliament the three Estatis approuis and
ratifeis this statute and ordanis it to be keipit in time tocum.

That all the actis be copyit fra the Clerk of the Register and proclamit. Ca.
cij.
ITEM The Lordis thinkis speidfull, that our Souerane Lord command all his
Schireffis and Commissaris of Burrowis to cum to the Clerk of the Register, and
gat copy all the actis, articlis, and statutis above writtin, and gat proclaim
them oppinly throwout their Schiris, and Burrowis: Sa that nane of his liegis
allege ignorance of them in time tocum. And als that the actis and ordinancis
abo^e writtin, the quhilkis ar necessar till his Barrones and frehalders, be
schawin at their witsondayis making, or their Barrone Courtis rychtswa be takin
and copyit and schawin to their tennentis. Swa that nouther the frehalder nor
tennentis pretermit the observing of the saidis decretis. And at the panis set
thairupone be dew he ra^it, that the said actis, and decretis may be obseruit,
as effeiris. etc. And attour sen God of his grace hes send out Souerane Lord
sic progressis and prosperity, that all his Rebellis and brekaris of his
Justice, ar remouit out of his Realm, and na maisterfull party remanand that
may cause any breking in his Realm. Swa that his hienes be inclynit in him
self and his ministers to the quiet and commoun proffeit of the Realm, justice
and equity to be keipit amang his liegis, His three E^^atis may humbly
exhortis and requyris his hienes, to be melynit with sic deligence to the
executioun of their statutis, actis, and decretis above writtin, that God may be
emplesit of him, and all his liegis spiritual and temporal, And pray till God
for him and give thanking to him, that send them sic a Prince to their
Governor and defendar.

HIC FINIVNTVR STATVTA PARLIAMENTORVM REGIS IACOBI SECVNDI. ET SEQVVNTVR
STATVTA PARLIAMENTORVM REGIS IACOBI TERTII.
PRIMVM PARLIAMENTVM IACOBI TERTII SCOTORVM REGIS.
PARLIAMENTVM EXCELLENTISSIMI PRINCIPIS ET DO. NOSTRI DO. Iacobi Tertij dei
gratia Regis Scotorum Illustrissimi tentum and inchoatum apud Edinburgh nono
die Mensis Octobris Anno Do. Millesimo Quadringentesimo Sexagesimo sexto, Et
Regni sui primo.

For the observing of the honor of haly Kirk. Ca. j.
ITEM In the first it is statute and ordanit, that the privilege and honor of
haly Kirk, and spiritual persou^is be obseruit, keipit, mantenit, and defendit
in honor and liberty be our Souerane Lordis authority, for the time of his
Regne, as it hes been in time of his nobill Predecessouris and progenitouris of
befoir, after the form and statute maid thairupone. etc.

Anent the marriage of our Souerane Lord. Ca. ij.
IN THE first anent the marriage of our Souerane Lord the King, my Lady my
Lordis of Albany and Mar, the Lordis referris their matters to the hamecumming of
certane Lordis now beand in England, quhilkis hes charge to commoun thairupone.
And that certane Lordis be limmit in this present Parliament, having the
strenth of the samin, to co^moun and conclude at their have cumming, that salbe
seen speidfull for the matters foirsaidis, and in like wise the annual of
Noroway. Alswa the saidis Lordis sall have power of the Parliament to sit and
judge the persounis, that haldis fra our Souerane Lord the King, or fra my Lord
of Albany their Castellis, and to make Summoundis vpone them, and all other
thingis to do, that is necessary thairfoir, after the form of the act maid
thairupone. And alswa they sall have power till autorize, ratify, or till
annull, as they think expedient and proffitabill, all actis and statutis auisit
and commonit in the Sessiounis of Burrowis for the good of Merchandis, and
proffeit of the Realm. And this power till endure unto the first day of
Februar.

Anent the Quenis dowarie. Ca. iij.
ITEM As to the Dowarie of the Queen, it is or^anit, that y^ third of the
Kings rentis of assi^e, that is to say, ofla^dis and custumes, be assignit
till her tier^e and Dowarie allanerly, and na forther.

That na commendis be purchest. Ca. iiij.
ITEM Anentis commendis, it is statute, that na commendes of new or auld be
sustenit, or sufferit within y^ realm, na that commendis purchest of befoir be
haldin. And that nane of our Souerane Lordis liegis tak vpone hand to purches
nor tak any commendis, na to hald commendis purchest of befoir, outher of
Religious or secular benefice, under the pane of tinsall of his te^poralitie
for his time, and his commend, and under the pane of Rebellioun vtherwayis,
than is lauchfull to the Ordinar to commend for sex monethis.

That na pensioun of benefice be takin. Ca. v.
ITEM That na pensiou^ of new, nor auld be purchest nor takin outwith the
Realm nor within, of any beneficis religious or secular, without y^ consent of
the possessour, geuar and takar, under the samin pane.

The pane of breking of lauborrois. Ca. vj.
ITEM As anent lawborrois, it is statute, that gif lawborroes be brokin vpone
any Bischop, Abbot, or Prelat of halykirk, Earl, Lord of Parliament, that is to
say, in the hurting of their awin persounis or their seruandis, the borgh or
borrowis of him, that findis they borrois, and brekis the samin, sall pay to
our Souerane Lord for amerciament the soume of ane hundredth pund. And gif
lawborrois be brokin vpone Knycht, Barrone, Squyar, or greit beneficit Clerkis,
the soume of fyftie pundis. And gif they be brokin vpone Burgessis, emen, or
Preistis, the soume xxx. pund, togidder with amendis to the party, les than
the lawborrois bring the trespassouris to the King, or the Schiref of the
Schire within.xl. dayis, or else pay the soume, as effeires, for the persoun, as
is befoir writtin. And the King to have the vnlawis of all lawborrois brokin,
that is taken be his awin Officiaris, outher to land or to Burgh. And the Lordis
of the Regalis and Barronis sall have the vnlawis within their landis, quhair
sic borrois ar takin be them, or their Officiaris, in sa far as they have
privilege, after the form of the auld infeftmentis and fredomis, as they had
befoir. And this to endure to the nixt Parliament.

That Summoundis be maid of xxj. dayis. Ca. vij.
ITEM As anent Summoundis, it is statute for the eise of y^ Kingis liegis, that
Su^moundis peremptour be abbre git to xxj. dayis of all actiounis custumabill,
to cum befoir the King and his counsall, that the Summoundis be execute of the
time foirsaid.

Anent bairnis to be put in fe^ of ^andis, and their answers. Ca. viij.
ITEM Anent bairnis to be put in fee of their landis. It is statute, that in
time cumming, gif any bairne be put in fee of landis, his father or grandschir
beand on live, and present in the Realm for his defense, he sall answer to the
party followar vpone the said landis, as he war of perfyte age. etc. And this
till endure quhil the nixt Parliament.

That na Inglisman have benefice within Scotland. Ca. ix.
ITEM That na Inglisman have benefice, secular or Religious, within the Realm
of Scotland, after the form of the act maid thairupone be King Robert the
Bruce.

That na persounis have money out of the Realm, under the pane of escheit
thairof. Ca. x.
ITEM It is statute for the matter of the money, and for the halding of the
samin within the Realm, and ordanit that na man spiritual nor temporal liege
to our Souerane Lord, have nor send na money out of the Realm, under the pane
of.x. pund vnremittabill to the King for amerciament, and als mekill money as
he takis or sendis out of the Realm. And attour it salbe a point of dittay,
and secularis to cu^ befoir the Kingis Justice depute in that part, to be
limmit and ordanit be his hienes, of.xv. dayis proclamatioun, and gif they be
fundin culpabill, they sall pay the said amerciament, togidder with the
quantity of the money, that is takin out of the Realm: And Clerkis befoir
their Ordinar and Official, and gif they be fundin in like wise culpabill
thairin, they sall pay the said amerciame^t, togidder with als mekill money, as
is takin out of the Realm, sai^and moderat expensis to the auale of ane Inglis
Nobill of ilk persoun. And that Clerkis sailling or passing out of the Realm,
sall cu^ befoir their Ordinar or his Official, and make ai^h, that they sall
nouther have nor send na money out of the Realm, bot his said expensis. And
that secularis sall cum befoir the Kingis deputis to be limmit at ilk hauin,
and make faith in like wise. And quha that passis spiritual or temporal out of
the Realm, not geuand his said aith, salbe in amerciament to the King of.v.
pund, of Clerkis to be rasit be their Ordinar, and of secularis be his hienes.

For the inbringing of money within the Realm. Ca. xj.
ITEM For the inbringing of money within the Realm, it is statute, that ilk
man Merchand, hauand woll, (...), or hyde out of the Realm, sall bring for ilk
seck of brint silver two vn^e to the Kingis cuineouris, for the quhilk he sall
have.x.s.ij. d. after the form of the act last maid in Parliament thairupone,
and the pane c^^^enit in the samin. And this till endure to the nixt Parliament.

Of the money and blak ferdingis. Ca. xij.
ITEM It is statute for the eise and sustentatiou^ of the Kingis liegis, and
almous deid to be done to the pure folk, that their be cuineit copper money,
four to the penny, hauand on the ta part the croce of Sanct Androw, and the
crown on the the other part, with subscriptioun of Edinburgh on the ta part, and
ane. R. with James on the the other part. And that their be cuineit three hundredth
pu^dis contenand silver. And that they pas in payment for breid, and a^ll, and
other Merchandice, and in greit Merchandice to be takin.xij. d. in the pund.
And that all other money gold and silver have course, as it had of befoir,
except the new Inglis grot of Edwartis cuinie to have course amang the Kingis
liegis for.x. d. and na darrar, and the new Nobill of the Rose for xxv.s. And
the Lordis, that salbe limmit to have strenth of the Parliament in other
causis, as is befoir writtin, have power to make sic reulis and statutis of
the.vj. d. grot of the flower delice, as they sall think expedient for the good
of the Realm.

Anent the reformatioun of hospitallis. Ca. xii^.
ITEM Anent the reformatioun of hospitallis, and for the keeping of the faileit
creaturis, It is statute and ordanit, that all the Ordinaris of the Realm sall
warn all them, that hes hospitallis in their diocyis, and Summound them till
a day be the Kingis and the Ordinaris letters. To the quhilk day the
Chancellar, or his Deputis sall cum with the Ordinar and see the infeftmentis
and fundatiounis. And be the auise of the Chancellar and Ordinar, to be reducit
to their first fundatiounis, quhairthrow Goddis service may be obseruit and
miserabill persounis sustenit. And quhair the infeftmentis can not be fundin be
the auise of the Ordinar and the Chancellar, the frutis of the hospital salbe
assignit to pure and miserabill persounis, in sa far as the frutis ar of auale.
And that two good men of conscience be warnit be the Ordinar, to be with him
and the Chancellar for the reformatioun to be maid. And that to be done
incontinent, or the parting of the Ordinar and the Chancellar.

ACTA IN PARLIAMENTO CONTINVATO A.IX. OCTOBRIS AD VLTIMVM DIEM IANVARII Anno
Do. Millesimo Quadringentesimo Sexagesimo sexto.

That nane pas in Merchandice out of the Realm bot fre men. Ca. xiiij.
ITEM In the first, that nane of our Souerane Lords liegis saill, nor pas in
Mercha^dice out of the Realm, bot fremen burgessis dwelland within Burgh, or
their familiaris, factoures, seruandis, being with them in houshald at meit
and drink, Sai^and, y^ it salbe leiffull to Prelatis, Lordis, Barro^is,
Clerkis, to send their proper gudis with their serua^dis, and to by agane things
neidful to their proper use.

That na man of craft use Merchandice. Ca. xv.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that na man of craft use Merchandice be him
self, nor saill in Merchandice, nouther be him self, nor his factouris, nor his
seruandis, bot gif he have leif, and renounce his craft but color or
dissimulatioun. etc.

That na man saill in Merchandice without half a last of gudis. Ca. xvi.
ITEM That na man saill, nor pas out of the Realm in any Merchandice, bot a
famous and worschipfull man, ha^and of his awin half ane last of gudis, or
samekill in stering and governance, under the pa^e of.x. pund to be rasit to
our Souerane Lordis proffeit of ilk persoun doand in the contrare heirof.

That na Schip be frauchtit without a Charterpartie. Ca. xvij.
ITEM It is in likewise statute and ordanit, that in time to cum their be na
Schip frauchtit without a Charterpartie contenand their punctis under writtin,
that is to say, that the master of the Schip sall find sufficient steirman,
tymmirmen, and schipmen convenient for the Schip. And at the master find fre
to the Merchandis Fire, walter, and salt on his coist. And gif their happinnis
any contentioun or debait betuix the master and the Merchandis, that they sall
underly the iurisdictiou^ and ordinance of the Burgh, quhairto the Schip is
frauchtit without any exceptioun. And that na Merchandis gudis be reuin nor
spilt with vnressonabill stollin as with spakis, nor that na gudis be schorne,
nor strikin up in na wise into the masters default, or his seruandis, under
the pane of tinsall of the said fraucht, and amending of the skaith to the
Merchandis. And at the master fure na gudis vpone his over loft. The quhilk
and he do, they gudis sall pay na fraucht, nor na gudis under the ouerloft to
scot nor lot with they gudis, in caise they be cassin. And at ever ilk Schip
excedand.v. last of gudis sall pay to the Chaplane of the natioun a
seckfraucht, and within.v. last half a seckfraucht, under the pane of.v. pundis
to be rasit to our Souerane Lord the Kingis use of ilk persoun doing in the
contrare heirof. And at na drinksiluer be taken be the master nor his doaris,
under the pane abone writtin: And hamewart a tunn fraucht to the Kirk wark of
the town, that they ar frauchtit to.

That na Schip saill with stapill gudis fra Symonis day and Jude, quhill
Candilmes. Ca. xviij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that in time to cum their be na Schip
frauchtit out of the Realm with any stapill gudis, fra the feist of Symonis
day and Jude, unto the feist of the purificatioun of our Lady, callit
Candilmes, under the pa^e of five pundis of the usual money of Scotland, to be
rasit to our Souerane Lordis use, of ilk persoun frauchting any Schip in
contrare heirof.

That na Merchandis sall pas to Brugis as stapill. Ca. xix.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that nane of our Souerane Lordis liegis sall
fra the feist of Sanct Peter, callit Ad v^^cula, ^ure any Schippis in
Merchandice, or gudis to the Swyn the Sluice, the Dam, or Bruges, under the paue
of tinsall of all their gudis, and banissing of their persounis out of the
Realm. And that all persounis now hauand gudis in the townis of Bruges, the
Dam, or the Sluice, remove and deuoyde them self and their gudis of the saidis
placis befoir the said feist of Sanct Peter. And fra thine forth that they
nouther by nor sell, na make Merchandice in any of the placis besoir writtin,
under the pane foirsaid.

License to Merchandis to pas to Middilburgh with their gudis. Ca. xx.
ITEM Our Souerane Lord with auise of his counsall, at Edinburgh the.xxix. day
of August, the eir of God etc.lxvij. eiris, grantit tollerance and sufferance
till all Merchandis of his Realm, that saillis fra thine forth, to pas with
their Schippis to the town of Middilburgh, to do their Merchandice their. And
not to remane their as stapill, bot quhill our Souerane provide for a stapill
to them, and quhill his hienes see quhat fredomis and priuilegis they sall
have in time to cum, in the place quhair they salbe stapillit, for the quhilk
certane persounis salbe send in all gudly haist, and bring answer agane
thairupone.

That Merchandis saill to the Rochell, Burdeous and France. Ca. xxj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit in the said Parliament, that it salbe leiffull
to all Merchandis in this Realm, to ^aill to the Rochell, Burdeous, France,
and Normandy, with sic Merchandice as is convenient thairfoir, sic like as they
did of befoir. And all stapill gudis to remane in stapill, and pas to na
mercattis. And this to be obseruit and keipit under the panis foirsaid.

ACTA PARLIAMENTI IACOBI TERTII REGIS SCOTORVM TENti apud Edinburgh.xij. die
Mensis Octobris Anno Do. Millesimo Quadringentesimo Sexagesimo septimo.

The proclamatioun of the money hoichar up. Ca. xxij.
ITEM Our Souerane Lord the King and his three Estatis in this present
Parliament, findis his hi^n^s and the ^aill body of the Realm gretumly hurt
and skaithit in the money of this Realm hauand lawar course, than other Realmis
hes about us, throw the quhilk the cuinie of this Realm is borne out in greit
quantity: For the quhilk our Souerane Lord and his three Estatis in this
present Parliament, hes statute and ordanit, that the money of other Realmis,
that is to say, the Inglis Nobill, Henry, and Edwart with the Rose, the French
Crown, the Salute, the Lew, and the Rydar, sall have course in this Realm of
our money to the value and equiualence of the course, that they have in
Flanders, that is to say, Edwart with the Rose, to.xxxij.s. of our money. Item
the auld Edwart to.iiij. merkis the v^ce of the samin price, as the Rose hes
course. The Henry Nobill to xxvij.s.vj. d. the French Crown to.xij.s.vj. d.
the Salute to.xiij.s.iiij. d. the Lew to.xv.s.vj. d. the Rydar to.xxiiij.s. the
Demi to.xij.s. the Lion with the Crown to.xij.s. Item the auld Inglis grot
sall pas for.xvj. d. the Borage grot, as the new grot. The new grot of Edwart
for.xij. d. the Spurrit grot as the auld Iuglis grot for.xvj. d. the Inglis
penny.iij. d. and the new Inglis penny rychtswa. The grot of the Crown sall
have course for.xiiij. d. Item the half grot vij. d. The grot of the four
delice.viij. d. And the quhyte Scottis penny and half penny to have course, as
they war wont to have. And the stryking of the blak pennyis to be ceissit, that
their be nane strikin in time tocu^, under the pane of deid. And at strait
inquisitioun be takin be all Schireffis and Baillies of Burrowis, gif any sic
stryking be maid, and the strykaris to be brocht to the King and punissit as is
befoir writtin, and the bringaris of sic persounis to be weill rewardit
thairfoir, as effeiris.

The manner of dettis and contractis paying. Ca. xxiij.
ITEM Because our Souerane Lord and his three Estatis, considderis and
vnderstandis, that his hienes and the hail Realm in ilk estate is greitly hurt
and skaithit in the cha^geing and heying of the course of the money, as is
befoir writtin, both in dettis paying, and contractis, bygane annuallis,
wedsetis, and landis set for lang terms, custumis, and procuraseis of
Prelatis, and all other dettis, les than they war prouydit in this present
Parliament, be our Souerane Lord and his three Estatis, that both the creditour
and the dettour, the byar and the sellar, the borrowar and the lennar, the Lord
and the tennent, spiritual and temporal, be obseruit to the desire of the
intentis of them, that war in the time of the making of their contractis, and
payment to be maid in the samin substance, that was intendit the time of the
making of the contractis maid befoir this present Parliament: Swa that quhat
variatioun be maid in this Parliament of alteratioun of the money for the
commoun good of the Realm, the samin substance and value redound to the
ressauar, like as he sold have had the time of the making of this act.
Thairfoir our Soueraue Lord and the three Estatis, statutis and ordanis, that
all dettouris, that aw any dettis of contractis maid of befoir, pay to their
creditouris the samin soumis in substance, as it was intendit betuix them,
befoir the making of this act, in sic like money, as it eid immediately befoir
this act. And proportionaly in pundis, schillinges, of the reckning, that it
salbe in time cumming to rise with the money, like as it eid of befoir. And in
like manner, all annual rentis, wedsettis, lands set for termis, custumis,
procuraseis, and all other dettis of contractis maid of befoir, to be payit in
sic like money, as eid immediately befoir this act. Item for all contractis,
byingis and sellingis, in time tocum, to be maid of the money after the course
as it sall have in time tocum, or else as plesis the parties. And attour in all
obligatiounis maid in times bygane with this clause maid, of usual money of
Scotland, that it be interpreit and understand to be payit in the value and
substance, as the money had course in the time of the making of this act, and in
all manner, form and effect, as is abone writtin.

That Ferryaris make briggis under the pane of tinsall of their baitis. Ca.
xxiiij.
ITEM It is seen expedient be the Lordis, for the utility and proffeit of the
Kingis hienes and his liegis, quhilk diverse tymis passis over ferryis with
their horse, for the saiftie of the samin, that at all passagis of ferryis of
ilk side of the watter, that is to say Leith, Kinghorne, the Quenis ferry, on
the the other side of the watter, the Portincraig and the eist ferry, to be maid
briggis of buirdis, or portis in ferry baittis, for the eise of schipping of
the said horse. And at the said briggis be maid within.xx. dayis nixt following
the making of this act, under the pane of tinsall and confiscatioun of the
boit, and not to use the office for a eir and a day. And that the Kingis
letters be writtin thairupone.

The propositioun of the Clergy and Burrowis. Ca. xxv.
IN Presence of our Souerane Lord and the three Estatis in plane Parliament, Ane
worschipfull Clerk Master Archibald Quhytlaw Dene of Dumbar, Secretar to our
Souerane Lord, in the name and behalf of the haill Clergy, and in like wise ane
honorabill man Richard of Kintor Burges of Abirdene, in the name and behalf of
the haill Commissaris of Burrowis, humbly maid requeist and besoucht our
Souerane Lord of his grace, that gif it happinnis of caise, that his hienes in
times to cum proclamis his money to lawar price and les auale, than it is now
proclamit, that thairfoir subsydis and procuracyis, custumis, and duties,
mycht be takin and payit of the money to the auale and price, as they pay. The
quhilk requeist our Souerane Lord in presence of his said three Estatis,
graciously and hartly grautit in all thingis foirsaid.

Item our Souerane Lordis Parliament haldin at Striuiling the.xij. day of
Ianuar, the eir of God ane thousand four hundredth three scoir seuin eiris, and
coutinewit of befoir forth of Edinburgh, with continuatioun of dayis, and power
committit be the haill three Estatis to certane persounis under writtin, to
commoun and conclude vpone the matters after followand: Quhilkes persounis being
callit and comperit. And their ar the namis. etc.

ITEM Anentis the matter of Norroway, it is ordanit, that the Ambaxat that
passis for the Kingis marriage, have instructiounis in that matter, as salbe seen
speidfull to the King and his counsall.

The crying up of certane money. Ca. xxvj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that fra hynefurth the Scottis grot of the
Crown, that past for.xii. d. of befoir, sall have in time tocum course amang
our Souerane Lordis liegis for xiiij. d. And the half grot of the samin
for.vij. d. Item the auld Inglis penny sall have course effeirand to the auld
Inglis grot, that is to say, for.iiij. d. Item in like wise the new Inglis
penny of Edwart till have course effeirand to the new grot of Edwart for.iij. d.
Item that the quhyte Scottis penny have haill course in all payment, quhill the
nixt Parliament, and than gif it neidis remeid to be set thairfoir, as salbe
thocht speidfull. Item that in time tocum their be taken in payment of blak
money, bot.xij. d. in the pund, and swa discendand proportionally as the soume
discendis. Item it is ordanit for the heying of the auale of the crownit grot,
and Inglis pennyis to be na hurt contrar the actis maid of befoir anent the
money, bot that act to stand in all force and effect, as it was first maid. etc.

The inbringing of buleoun appreuit. Ca. xxvij.
ITEM Anent the inbringing of buleoun, the haill three Estatis now beand
present, ratifeis and appreuis the actis and statutis maid thairupone of
befoir, and ordanis them to be obseruit and execute, quhill the nixt
continewa^ioun of Parliament, or haill Parliament, or general counsall. etc.

The Chalmerlane to see for mettis and mesouris. Ca. xxviij.
ITEM Anent mettis and mesouris, it is statute and ordanit, that the
Chalmerlane and Schireffis sall put the last act maid thairupone till dew
executioun in all placis, as they will answer to our Souerane Lord. etc.

ACTA PARLIAMENTI TENTI APVD EDINBVRGH. etc.

Anent the money till have ane universal course. Ca. xxix.
FORSAMEKIL as the Lordis of the three Estatis depute till auise vpone the
money, considders the greit murmr that is past because of diuersiteis of
payment within the Realm, throw the intaking of rentis be the auld payment,
and geuin out again be the samin price, Considering als that the penny worthis
ar rissin with the penny, and mekill derrar than they war wont to be, that
sold hie the money till have general course to the hie price, that ilk man
that sold ressaue any rentis, sold be skaithit to the feird or the fyft part
of his rent, quhilk is to heavy to them in all estatis, and till eschew the
greit rumoure heirof, and for to content the commounis, It is statute and
ordanit, that the money fra hyne forth have universal course throwout the
Realm. And als it is ordanit, that the actis and statutis maid vpone the
inbringing of buleoun within the Realm, and als the keiping of money within
the Realm, be obseruit and keipit under rycht ^air and heavy panis, and
rychtswa other statutis maid for the keiping of the samin, that it pas not out
with the Realm. Item it is ordanit, that unto the time it be auisit be the
wysest of the Realm and them, that vnderstandis them best thairin depute
thairto, and at greit lasar as effeiris to dispone the money, as salbe seen
may speidfull for the proffeit of the Realm, that in the meintyme fra this
forth the Scottis money, that is to say, the Demi, the Lion, the grot of the
Crown, and the grot of the flower delice, and the small penny, and the
ferdene, sall have the samin course, that they had befoir the first
proclamatioun maid in the Parliament in the month of October. That is to say,
the Demi, and the Lion.x.s. the grot of the Crown.xij. d. the flower
delice.vj. d. ob. And for the money of other Realms, to draw it within the
Realm, they ordand it to have course, the Inglis Nobill of the Roise and the
auld Edwart keipand pace for.xxviij.s. the Nobill of the Henry.xxiiij.s. The
Lew.xiiij.s. The French Crown.xj.s. The Salute and the Rydar till have course,
as they eid of befoir. And the auld Inglis grot.xiij. d. and the new Inglis
grot.xi. d. The Inglis penny.iij. d. the Spurrit grot.xiij. d. And the Scottis
pennyis till have course, as they had of befoir. And of the ferdingis to
tak.ij.s. in the pund. And attour it is ordanit, that gif any man hes maid any
obligatiounis, or contractis, sen the last Parliament, or lent, or bocht, or
sauld, sen the said time, they sall pay with sic like money and sic like value,
as it had course in the time, quhen they maid their contract, borrowit, or lent,
bocht or sauld. And this privilege till endure to them quhill the feist of
Lambines nix tocum, and na ^angar for their payment, and to outred their self.
etc.

Anent setting of Sessiounis. Ca. xxx.
ITEM The Lordis thinkis expedient, that their be a Sessioun after the form of
the Sessioun last haldin, and with sic (...) power, and Lordis to be chosin to
sic thairupone, and the place to be limmit, and the lawborrois to be
continewit, the Prelatis, the Barronis, and Commissaris for their part, and the
laif to be referrit, to the actis maid thairupone o^ befoir.

The statute of nolt and scheip sauld. Ca. xxxj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that na kynor oxin, scheip, nor other cattle
be sauld out of the Realm, be nane of the Kingis liegis, under the pane of
escheit. And the wardane sall have na power to gif license in the contrare
heirof.

That their be two Sessiounis. Ca. xxxij.
ITEM That their be two Sessiounis, ane in Edinburgh to sit a Month, and ane
in Perth to begin the first monounday of October, and to sit.v. oulkis. The
Sessioun of Edinburgh to begin the.xv. day of November.

The setting and autorising of Justice Airis and falsing of domes. Ca. xxxiij.
ITEM Is to the Justice Airis, notwithstanding that their is ane part of them
set in feriall time, that nevertheless for the good of peax the Airis that are
now set salbe lauchful for serving of brenis, falsing of Domes, and doing of
all other justice.

Quhilkis Airis, and all thingis to be done in them, the Lordis of the
Parliament autorizeis, ratifeis, and appreuis.

ACTA PARLIAMENTI TENTI APVD EDINBVRGH XX. DIE MENSIS Nouembris Anno Do. etc.
lxix.

ITEM In the first it is statute and ordanit, that the fredome of haly kirk be
obseruit and keipit in all immunitie, privilege, and fredome in likewise, as it
hes been in times of may Nobill Princis Predecessouris and progenitouris to
our Souerane Lord of haill mind, quhame God assoilie.

Of Schireffis and Iugeis Ordinaris. Ca. xxxiiij.
ITEM As to the article of Schireffis and other Iugeis Ordinar, quhilkis will
not execute their office, and minister Justice to the pure pepill, it is
statute and ordanit, that the party compleineand in any part of the Realm,
sall first cum till his Judge Ordinar of temporal landis, as Iusticis,
Schireffis, Stewartis, Baillie, or Barrone, Prouest, or Baillies of Burrowis,
and make his complaint, and ask at him administratioun of Justice. And gif he
gettis Justice dewly execute and ministerit to him he man remane content. And
gif the Judge Ordinar faileis him, and will not minister him Justice, he sall
cum to the King and his counsall, and tak letters of Summoundis, and Summound
the party, and in like wise his Judge Ordinar, quhat ever he be of temporal
landis. And gif the Judge be fundin culpabill, and wald not minister Justice, he
salbe punist, and put fra his office for a certane time, after the discre^ioun
of our Souerane Lord and his counsall, and pay the expensis of the party
compleineand And our Souerane Lord sall gar minister Justice to the party
compleineand in that caise. And gif the Judge Ordinar minister him partyall
Justice, and dois him wrang in the administratioun of Justice, in like wise the
party compleineand sall Summound him befoir the King and his counsall. And gif
befoir them he be fundin culpabill, or partial in the administratioun of
justice, be he a Schiref, Baillie, or other Officiar of fee, he salbe put fra
his office for three eiris. And gif he be ane Schiref or any other Judge Ordinar
for a time, he salbe put perpetually fra his office, and pay the expensis of
the party, and his persoun to be punist at the Kingis will. And in like wise
the Officiar of fee. And gif the party compleineand vpone the Ordinar judge, be
fundin be the King and his counsall in the wrang, he sall pay the expensis of
the said judge Ordinar for his vexatioun, and his persoun punist at the Kingis
will in likewise. And gif any party hes any proper actioun agane the Schiref,
or any Judge Ordinar, it salbe leiffull to him to cum to the King, and outher
Summound his party befoir the King, or make ane other Officiar in that part, to
minister Justice to him. And that ilk Judge Ordinar, Schireffis or any vthers,
salbe haldin to answer for their deputis, as them self. Nevertheless, it salbe
leiffull to the Kingis hienes to tak the decisioun of any matter, that cummis
befoir him, at his emplesance, like as it was wont to be of befoir.

Of landis selling under reuersioun to cum agane to the first sellar. Ca. xxxv.
ITEM As tuiching new inuentiounis and selling of landis be Charter and
Seissing, and taking agane of reuersiounis, and it happin the byar to sell the
samin land agane to ane other persoun, it is now seen expedient in this present
Parliament, and according to Law and conscience, that the first sellar sall
have recours to the samin landis, sauld be him under reuersioun, to
quhatsumeuer handis the saidis landis cummis, payand the money, and schawand
the reuersioun, and have sic privilege and fredome agane the persounis that
haldis the said landis, as he sold have agane the principal first byar. And
because sic reuersiounis may of caise be tint, our Souerane Lord sall make the
said reuersiounis be Registerit in his Register, gif it be requyrit, on their
expensis, that is to say, of ilk ane, ane half a merk, the quhilk Registerit,
sall have the samin force, as the principal reuersioun war schawin for the
time.

Of obligatiounis to be followit within.xl. eir or else prescriue. Ca. xxxvj.
ITEM As anent obligatiounis, that sall be followit in time cumming, except
them, that are dependand in the Law befoir the making of this act, it is
auisit, that the party to quhame the obligatioun is maid, that hes interes
thairin, sall follow the said obligatioun within the space of.xl. eiris, and
tak document thairupone. And gif he dois not, it salbe prescriuit, and be of
nane auale, the said xl. eiris beand runnin, and vnpersewit be the party.

Tuiching the electioun of Officiaris in Burrowis. Ca. xxxvij.
ITEM Tuiching the electioun of Officiaris in Burrowis, as Aldermen, Baillies,
and other Officiaris, because of greit contentioun eirly for the chesing of the
samin, throw multitude and clamor of commounis simpill persounis, it is thocht
expedient, that na Officiaris nor counsall be continewit after the Kingis Lawis
of Burrowis forther than ane eir. And at the chesing of new Officiaris, be in
this wise, that is to say, the auld counsall of the town sall cheis the new
counsall in sic number, as accordis to the town. And the new counsall and the
auld in the eir foirsaid, sall cheis all Officiaris pertening to the town, as
Alderman, Baillies, Dene of Gild, and other Officiaris. And that ilk craft sal
cheis a persoun of the samin craft, that sall have voit in the said electioun
of Officiaris, for the time inlyke wise eir by eir. And attour it is thocht
expedient, that na Capitane, nor Constabill of the Kingis Castellis, quhat
town that ever they be in, sall beir office within the said town, as to be
Alderman, Baillie, Dene of Gild, Thesaurar, na nane other Officiar that may be
chosin be the town, fra the time of the nixt chesing forth.

Of Notaris and Tabelliounis making be the King. Ca. xxxviij.
ITEM It is thocht expedient, that sen our Souerane Lord hes full
iurisdictioun, and fre impyre within his Realm, that his hienes may make
Notaris and Tabelliounis, quhais instrumentis sall have full faith in all
causis and contractis, civil within the Realm. And in time to cum that na
Notar be maid, nor to be maid, be the Emperouris authority, have faith in
contractis civil within the Realm, les than he be examinit be the Ordinar,
and appreuit be the Kingis hienes. And that full faith be geuin to the Papal
Notaris in times bygane, and to cum, in all their instrumentis. And als that
full faith be geuin to all Instrumentis geuin of befoir be the imperial
Notaris, like as they ar of auale. And attour that the Notaris, that be is maid
be our Souerane Lord, be examinit befoir their Ordinaris Bischoppis, and have
certificatioun of them, that they ar of faith, good fame, science, and lawtie,
according for the said office.

That wollin claith be met be the rig. Ca. xxxix.
ITEM To eschew dissait and skaith of our Souerane Lordis liegis daily, and at
all times sustenit throw the metting of wollin claith be the seluage, it is
thocht expedient, that in time cu^ming all wollin claith be met be the rig, and
not be the seluage.

Of the indorsing of the Kingis breuis and letters. Ca. xl.
ITEM As tuiching the indorsing of the Kingis breuis and letters, that full
faith may be geuin thairto, it is seen expedient in this present Parliament,
that Schireffis, Baillies, or any other Officiaris, outher of fee, or in that
part, that executis the Kingis breuis or letters, set their seillis or signetis
to them befoir witness, and procure gif they have nane, till all executioun,
and indorsing of the said breuis and letters: Swa that faith may be geuin
thairto, and vtherwayis their indorsing till have na faith.

That the extorsiounis of the Kingis liegis be not taken in fairis. Ca. xli.
ITEM Because their is abusioun fundin in the keiping of Fairis, Parliament
times, and general counsallis, that the greit Constabillis of Castellis,
Schireffis, or baillies of Burrowis, takis greit extorsiounis of the Kingis
pure liegis, quhikis they call their feis, that is not aucht to them, like as
of ilk laid of flesche, fische, victuallis, meill or malt, or siclyke
burdingis, as foulis on mennis bakis, and other thingis borne in mennis handis,
to the quhilk they have na ressone, it is seen expedient, and statute in this
present Parliament, that all sic thingis be forborne, in the time to cum, and
na sic extorsiounis to be takin of the Kingis liegis, under the pane of
punissing of their persounis, at the Kingis will, and to be put fra the
executioun of their office for ane eir.

That poynding on Martymes and witsonday be delayit to the feird day. Ca. xlv.
ITEM Because of Keiping of haly dayis and divine service, quhilkis ar greatly
brokin, and namely in the poynding for maillis and annuallis, incasting and
outcasting of tennentis, quhilkis causis greit dissentioun, and causis often
times greit gaddering and discord vpone solempnit dayis of witsonday and
Martymes, for the eschewing of the quhilk, It is thocht expedient in this
present Parliament, that the said poynding for maillis and annuallis, incasting
and outcasting of tennentis, be deferit to the third day after witsonday and
Martymes, without prejudice of any persounis, and in likewise their be na
Fairis halding on haly dayis, bot on the morn after.

Of slauchter of forthochfellony and suddantie and fleing to gyrth. Ca. xliij.
ITEM Because of the eschewing of greit slauchter, quhilk hes been rycht
commoun amangis the Kingis leigis now of lait, both of forthochtfellony and of
suddaintie, And because money persounis committis slauchter vpone
forthochtfellony, in traist they salbe defendit throw the immunitie of haly
kirk and gyrth, and passis and remanis in Sanctuareis: It is thocht expedient
in this present Parliament for the stanching of the said slauchters in time
cumming, quhair ever slauchter is committit on forthocht felony, and the
committar of the said slauchter passis and puttis him in gyrth for the saiftie
of his persoun, the Schiref sall cum to the Ordinar in placis, quhair he is,
under his iurisdictioun, and in placis exempt to the Lordis masters of the
gyrth, and lat them wit, that sic a man hes committit sic a crime on
forthochtfellony, Tanquam insidiator and per industriam, For the quhilk the Law
grantis not, nor leiffis not sic persounis to iois the immunitie of the Kirk.
And the Schiref sall require the Ordinar to lat a knawlege be takin be ane
assyse on.xv. dayis, quhether it be forthochtfellony or not. And gif it be
fundin forthochtfellony, to be punist after the Kingis lawis. And gif it be
fundin suddantie, to be restorit agane to the fredome and immunitie of haly
kirk and gyrth. And thairupone to set good souertie to the Ordinar. And that
souertie be and fundin, the said Ordinar, and the master of the gyrth sall
suffer the persounis to be had to the said knawlege. And at the Schiref sall
put to executioun the actis of King James the first maid vpone slauchter and
fugitouris fra the Law, quhilkis beiris in effect, that quhat time any Schiref
be certifeit of any slauchter, outhir be the party, or be any other way, he
sall incontinent raise the Kingis horn, and his liegis within the boundis of
his office, and pas, and seik that persoun, and do justice on him after the
form of the Lawis of the Realm. And gif he be fugitue, and eschaipis out of
the Schirefdome, he sall send ane Officiar to the Schiref, in quhais
Schirefdome he enteris in, and denunce and signify to him, that sic a man hes
done sic a trespass, and felony agains the King within the boundis of his
Schyre, and hes eschaipit out of the samin, and cummin within the boundis of
his office, chargeing him in the Kingis name, and be the vertew of this act, to
raise the Kingis liegis and his horn in likewise, to persew that trespassour,
quhill he be ouertane, or put him out of the Schire, and in like wise send his
Officiar to the nixt Schiref, in quhais Schire the said trespassour interis in,
to persew him, quhill he be ouertane, or else put of the Realm. And attour ilk
Schiref of the Schire, quhair the said fugitoure is socht, and not ouertane,
sall pas to the heid Burgh of the said Schire, and proclaim of the Kingis name
and behalf, that sic a man hes committit sic a slauchter and felony, and is
fugitive fra the Law, and charge all the Kingis liegis, that na man tak on hand
to house, herbry, resset, nor help the said trespassour be any manner of way,
under the pane of tinsall of life and gudis. And at the Kingis dittay be takin
heirupone in his Justice Air, and to be punist, as is above writtin.

And gif any Schiref be fundin culpabill heirupone in the executioun of his
office, the said Schiref salbe punished at the Kingis will, and be remouit fra
his office for three eiris. And gif the Schiref be fundin diligent in the
executioun of his office, or any other persoun, that laubouris for the taking
of the said trespassouris, salbe rewardit and thankit thairfoir be the King, as
effeiris.

That the pure tennentis sall pay na ferrar, than their termis maill for their
Lordis det be the brief of distres. Ca. xliiij.
ITEM Till eschew the greit heirschip and distructioun of the Kingis commounis,
maillaris, and inhabitaris of Lordis landis throw the force of the brief of
distres, That quhair any soumes ar obtenit be vertew of the said brief vpone
the Lord awnar of the ground, that the gudis and cattle of the pure men
inhabitaris of the ground ar takin and distreineit for the Lordis dettis,
quhair the maillis extendis not to the auale of the det, It is auisit and
ordanit in this present Parliament, that fra hynefurth the pure tennentis sall
not be distreineit for the Lordis dettis, forther than his termis maill
extendis to. And gif the soume obtenit be the brief of distres exceidis the
termis maill, the Officiar sall at the instance of the party, that obtenis the
det gang to any other proper gudis of the dettoure, and pay the remanent of his
det, gif he hes samekill within the Schire. And gif he hes not samekill landis
nor gudis within the Schire, the creditour sall cum to the King, and bring
certificatioun of the said Schiref, how mekill he wantis of the soume recouerit
be the brief of distres, and may not get his proper gudis within the Schire.
And than the King sall gif his letters to any other Schireffis, quhair the
dettour hes any other gudis or maillis within the Realm, and gar them be
prysit, and pay the said creditour within xv. dayis after the form of Law. And
quhair the dettour hes na mouabill gudis, bot his landis, the Schiref, befoir
quhame the said soume is recouerit be the brief of distres, sall gar sell the
land to the auale of the det, and pay the creditour: Swa that the inhabitantis
of the said landis be not hurt, nor greuit for their Lordis dettis. Nevertheless
it salbe leiffull to the persoun, that aucht that land, first to redeem and
quyte out the samin agane within.vij. eiris, payand to the byar the money, that
it was sauld for, and the expensis maid on the our lord for charter sesing and
infeftment. And the said redemptioun and lousing to be maid within.vij. eiris,
as said is, or not. And gif the creditour takis the termis maill be vertew of
the brief of distres, it sall not be leiffull to the Lord to tak it again. And
gif their can not be fundin a byar to the said landis, the Schiref of that
Schire or any other, quhair he hes land, sall cheis of the best and worthyest
of the Schire, and leist suspect to any of the parteis, to the number of.xiij.
persounis, and appryse the said landis, and assign to his creditour to the
auale of the said soume within.vj. Monethis, after the said soume be recouerit
befoir the Schiref. And als the over Lord sall ressaif the creditour or any
other byar, tennent till him, payand to the over Lord a eiris maill, as the
land is set for the time. And faileing thairof, that he tak the said land till
him self, and vndergang the dettis.

Of fische, Salmound, girsillis, trowtis, and nettis in watters. Ca. xlv
ITEM For the multiplicatioun of fische, salmound, girsillis, and trowtis,
quhilk ar distroyit be cowpis, narrow massis, nerris, prynis, set in rivers,
that hes course to the sea, or set within the flude merk of the sea, It is
auisit in this present Parliament, that all sic cowpis and prynis de distroyit
and put away for three eiris. And quha sa haldis them up, salbe indytit, and
punist be the Kingis Justice in his Justice Air, as distroyaris of reid fische,
after the tennour of the act of slauchter of reid fische last maid of befoir.
And in likewise all myllaris, that slayis smoltis with creillis or any other
manner of way, salbe punist be the Kingis Lawis, after the tennour of the said
act maid vpone the slauchter of reid fische. And that ilk Schiref within his
Schire sall distroy and cast down the said Instrumentis, cowpis, prynis, and
narrow mass^s, nettis, creillis, or any other sic like.

The Parliament, Justice Airis, nor Chalmerlane Airis neidis not be continewit
fra day to day. Ca. xlvj.
ITEM It is seen speidfull, that the court of Parliament, Justice Air, nor
Chalmerlane Air, or sic like courtis, that hes contin ewatioun, neidis not to
be continewit fra day to day, bot at they be of sic strenth, force, and effect,
as they had been continewit fra day to day, unto the time, that they be
dissoluit, The Parliament be the King, the Justice Air be the Justice, the
Chalmerlane Air be the Chalmerlane, and vthers sic like courtis. And that nane
exceptioun proponit be any persounis be admittit in the contrare.

The Setterday and other Vigillis to be haly day fra euinsang to euinsang. Ca.
xivij.
ITEM As for samekill as the Setterday and other Vigillis are not of Law biddin
halyday, not fra euinsang to euinsang, that thairfoir masonis, wrychtis, or
other craftismen, that are set for lang time or schort for to wirk, sall on the
Setterday and other Festuall euinningis wirk quhill four houris after nouin,
under the pane of tinsall of his oulkis fee. And that they keip na ma haly
dayis, nor is biddin of haly kirk of greit solempnit feistis. And gif any dois
the contrare, that the Ordinar leid process of cursing vpone them.

Anent the reductioun of hospitallis. Ca. xlviij.
ITEM Because in the last Parliament their was ane notabill act maid vpone the
reductioun of hospitallis to their first sundatioun, and na executioun maid
thairupone hiddertillis: it is statute in this present Parliament, that the
said act maid of befoir for the reductioun of hospitallis of the Realm be put
to executioun, and that the three Estatis of the Realm require the Kingis
hienes and the Ordinaris to make the said act be execute, obseruit, and keipit.
And that Master Richard Guthre be the principal confessor to the King, and
general elemosynar, and that he be stuffit be the Kingis authority and the
Ordinaris for the reformatioun of the samin.

That ferryaris make briggis. Ca. xlix.
ITEM In likewise the statute maid vpone ferryaris for briggis to be maid for
the keiping and saiftie of horse, (...) put to executioun, and the persounis
punist, that hes been negligent in the keiping of the samin.

That the Kingis Rollis and Register be put in buikis. Ca. l.
ITEM It is thocht expedient, that the Kingis Rollis and Register be put in
bulkis, and have sic strenth, as the Rollis had of befoir.

That na Deneiris of France cortis nor maleis be taken, nor brocht hame Ca. lj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that their be na Deneiris of France, Maleis,
Cortis, Mytis, nor nane other counterfettis of blak money be taken in payment in
this Realm, bot our Souerane Lordis awin blak money, strikin and prentit be
his cuineouris under the pane of deid. And na manner of persounis bring in to
this Realm any strange blak money of other Realms, or counterfit the Kingis
money under the pane of deid, as said is. And attour in time cumming, that na
man tak in payment nor offer in payment any blak money, bot of our Souerane
Lordis awin cuinie. For quha that they be fundin with, salbe dettour for them.

PARLIAMENTVM TEN TVM APVD EDINBVRGH SEXTO DIE MENSIS Maij Anno Do. Millesimo
Quadringentesimo Septuagesimo primo.

ITEM In the first it is statute and ordanit, that the fredome and privilege of
haly kirk be obseruit and keipit, with out violatioun, as it had been in the
times of our Souerane Lordis Nobill progenitouris of befoir.

Eodem Anno.viij. Augusti.

Anent breuis pleidabill. Ca. lij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, be the Lordis having the haill power of the
three Estatis committit to them, and the body of the Realm and Parliament,
that in time tocum quhair any breuis pleidabill happinnis to be followit befoir
quhas^meuer judge and their be exceptiounis, ane or maa proponit, and thairupone
borrowis and recounters fundin and dome geuin falsit, and agane said be outhir
of the parteis, and thairefter discussit in the Parliament: Gif it happinnis
the dome to be discussit and determit for the party followar, than sall the
parteis both pas agane to the nixt Justice Air, and the samin brief and
processis maid of befoir salbe red agane, and the party followar make his
clame, and the party defendand sall have fredome and privilege to tak ane or
maa other exceptiounis, dilatouris, or peremptouris, as they follow in ordour,
nixt after the first exceptiounis proponit, that the dome was falsit vpone of
befoir. Bot it sall not be leiffull to them to tak any exceptiounis that they
pretermittit and leit pas by at that time, bot they sall pas ordourly fordwart
fra exceptioun to exceptioun, how often that ever the dome be falsit, unto the
time that the brief be brocht to the recognitioun of ane assyse, gif it plesis
the party to make persute thairto. And the said ordour and form contenit in
this act above writtin, to be obseruit and keipit in all punctis in the
proceeding of the brief of mortancestry purchest be Andro Bissat, agane the
Lord of Ardros, and now dependant in the Justice Air of Couper.

Anent the stanching of slauchter with additioun. Ca. liij.
ITEM Anent the stanching of slauchter, quhilk is sa commoun in the cuntrie,
both in Sanctuary placis, and vthers, the Lordis thinkis expedient, that the
act of the last Parliament maid thairupone be keipit, with this additioun, that
quhair any slauchter is committit, and the party comittand the slauchter be
put to the horn of party, and syne thairefter cumme, and bind them to the
Law, the Sehiref sall not ressaif him to the Law, nor gif him dilatouris of.xl.
dayis without he bring with him sufficient borrois, that he sall compeir
peremptourlie the said day, to underly the Law. And faileing thairof, that the
committar of the said slauchter be put to the Kingis horn at the said day
peremptour, and all his gudis escheit to the King, and his borrois to pay.xx.
pund to the King for the unlaw. And fra hyne forth to be demanit be the
Schireffis, as is contenit in the actis maid of befoir in the last Parliament.
And to have knawlege quhat Schireffis hes been negligent in the executioun of
the said act maid vpone slauchter sen the last Parliament. And that now their
be limmit a day to the Schireffis at the emplesance of our Souerane Lord,
quhair the Schiref sall compeir, and abide his accusatiou^ thairupone. And quha
that beis fundin culpabill, to be punist after the tennour of the act of
Parliament. And in the meintyme that their pas letters of the Kingis in all
Schiris, to be proclamit at the heid Burrowis, that quhair any parteis
compleineis vpone slauchter sen the said time, that they cum to the King the
said day with their plaintis, and the King sall minister them justice without
fauouris.

That na Clerkis purches beneficis, or office of Collecto^rie at the court of
Rome, the quhilk was not thairat befoir. Ca. liiij.
ITEM As to the article of the greit damage and skaith daily done to all the
Realm be Clerkis, religious, and secularis, quhilkis purchessis Abbaseyis, and
other beneficis at the court of Rome, quhilkis war never thairat befoir, and
purchessis be meinis office of Collectourie, and takis vpone them to raise heavy
and greit taxatiounis of Prelatis and Clerkis, and makis informatioun of the
auale of the beneficis in the court of Rome mair than use and custume was of
befoir, or that ever was done in any Kingis time bygane, and to provide for the
making of vnionis of beneficis pertening to Abbaseis, and other annexit and
unit to Bischoprikis, and vthers in heirschip and distructioun of religious
placis, and agane the commoun good of the Realm: Thairfoir the Lordis thinkis
expedient, that co^siddering the vnestimabill damnage and skaith in the having
of innumerabill riches out of the Realm thairthrow, that sic Abbaseis, and
other beneficis purchest be secular or Religious persounis, quhilkis war never
at the Court of Rome of befoir, be of nane auale, bot at the saidis placis have
fre electioun of the samin. And that nane of our Souerane Lordis liegis
spiritual nor temporal, tak vpone them to be Collectouris to the sege of
Rome of na hiear nor greatar taxatioun of Bisshoprikis, Abbaseis, Pryoreis,
Prouestreis, na other beneficis, that awe taxatioun bot as the use and custume
of auld taxatioun hes been of befoir, as is contenit in the Prouinciallis buik
or the auld taxatioun of Bagimont. And attour that their be na vnionis nor
annexatiounis maid in time tocum to Bischoprikis, Abbaseis, nor Pryoreis of any
benefice, nor that na vnionis, nor annexatiounis maid now of the lait, sen our
Souerane Lord tuik the Crown, be of strenth, value nor effect, nor be sufferit
within the Realm, bot at the said beneficis, that war unit be put agane to
their first fundatioun to the place, at they war at befoir the time of the
union. And the said vnionis to be reput of na force, strenth nor effect in time
cumming. And gif any persounis of our Souerane Lordis liegis spiritual or
temporal wald attempt, or hes attemptit in the contrare of their punctis above
writtin, salbe demanit, as tratouris to our Souerane Lord and his successouris,
and never to bruik benefice, nor use worschip within the Realm. Neuerthe les
it salbe leiffull to Lordis and Barronis to purches annexatiounis and vnionis
of any benefice, that they can purches, outher their awin patronage, or vthers
to be unit to secular Collegis foundit, or to be foundit.

Of cartis of weir to be maid. Ca. lv.
ITEM As to the article of greit damnage and skaith daily done to all the
Realm, that gif it happinnis our auld ennimeis to inuaid the Realm, it war
expedient, to gar certane cartis of weir be maid be Prelatis, Barronis, after
the faculty and power of the persounis, for the defense of the Realm, The
Lordis thinkis expedient, that the said cartis of weir be maid be the said
persounis, as for this time.

The lenth of speiris, and that emen have targeis, and of wapinschawing. Ca.
lvj.
ITEM It is thocht expedient, that na Merchandis bring speiris in this Realm
out of any other cuntrie, bot gif they contene.vj. elne of lenth, and of a
clyft, na that na bowar within this cuntrie make na speiris, bot gif they
contene the samin lenth. And quha that dois the contrar, that the speiris be
escheit, and the persounis punist at the Kingis will. Item that ilk eman, that
can not deill with the bow, that he have ane good ax, and ane targe of ledder,
to resist the schot of England, quhilk is na coist bot the value of a hyde. And
at ilk Schiref, Stewart, Baillie, and vthers Officiaris, make wapinschawing
within the boundis of their office, after the tennour of the act of Parliament,
sa that in default of the said wapinschawing, our Souerane Lordis liegis be not
destitute of harnes, quhen they have neid. And at the fute ball and golf be
abusit in time cumming, and at the buttis be maid up and schuting vsit, after
the tennour of the act of Parliament maid thairupone. etc.

That nane weir silkis within ane hundredth pundis worth of land. Ca. lvij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, in this present Parliament, that considdering
the greit poverty of the Realm, the greit expensis and coist maid vpone the
inbringing of Silk in the Realm. That thairfoir na man sall weir silkis in
time cumming, in dowblat, gown or clokis, except Knychtis, Menstrellis, and
Heraldes without that the weirar of the samin may spend ane hundredth pundis
worth of land rent, under the pane of amerciament to the King of.x. pund, als
often as they ar fundin weirand silkis, and escheiting of the samin, to be geuin
to the Heraldis and Menstrellis, except the claithis that are maid befoir this
Parliament. And at the Schiref of ilk Schire, Alderman and Baillies of
Burrowis, tak inquisitiou^ thairof, and send it to the King. And at mennis
wyffis within ane hundredth pundis, weir na Silkis in lyning, bot allanerly in
collar and sleuis under the samin pane.

Anent the money and crying down of the allayit grot vj. d. Ca. lviij.
ITEM As tuiching the matter of the money, sen the matter is greit and tuichis
the haill body of the Realm in greit neirnes, and that the Lordis heir present
can not haistely be auisit to tak a fynall determinatioun thairof. It is
statute and ordanit, that the money have course as it dois now, unto the
continewatiou^ of this Parliament. And the Lordis that sall have power in all
other matters for the commoun good of the Realm, at that time to auise,
determine, and conclude vpone the said matter of the money, that now rinnis. And
in likewise gif it be seen speidfull to make innouatiou^ of any new money,
outher gold, or silver, the saidis Lordis sall have power to auise and conclude
thairupone. And as anentis the new allayit grot of.vij. d. It is ordanit be our
Souerane Lord, that fra thine forth it have course for.vj. d. and the half grot
of the samin for.iij. d. And the cuinie and course thairof to be continewit,
quhill the continewatioun of the nixt Parliament. etc.

For the eschewing of manswering of falls assysis or inqueistis. Ca. lix.
ITEM For the eschewing of manswering of falls assyse and inqueistis in greit
hurting of our Souerane Lordis liegis, and specially be inqueistis in
heritageis, It is statute and ordanit, that in time cumming, quhair a party
findis him greuit be any assyse or inqueistis be partial malice or ignorance
of the assyse or inqueistis, saifand and exceptand the assyse of breuis
pleidabill, quhilk this statute sall not extend vpone, it salbe leiffull to the
party greuit to cum to our Souerane Lord and his counsall, and tak a
Summoundis of the said inqueist, to compeir befoir them at certane day and
place peremptourly, and their produce his euidentis of the ignorance or falset
of the said inqueist. And gif it happinnis him to preif the said falset, the
party greuit salbe reducit to the conditioun, that it was in of befoir, or the
said inqueist or assyse procedit, and the determinatioun of the said assyse or
inqueist to be of nane auale, and the saidis persounis of the assyse or
inqueistis, to be punist after the form of the Kingis Lawis, in the first buik
of his Majesty, Contra temere iurantes super assisara. And gif the party
compleineand be fundin the wrang, he sall pay ane unlaw of.x. pund to the King,
and make all the expensis of the party that is Summound.

That Lordis, Barronis, and Burrowis gar make Schippis, Buschis, and greit
Pinkboittis with nettis. Ca. lx.
ITEM The Lordis thinkis expedient for the co^moun good of the Realm, and the
greit entres of tyches to be brocht within the Realm of other cuntreis, that
certane Lordis spiritual and temporal, and Burrowis gar make greit Schippis,
Buschis, and other greit Pinkboittis with nettis, and all abilementis ganand
thairfoir for fisching. And the executioun of this matter and the form, and the
number of the samin be had at the continewatioun of this Parliament.

The party that tynis his actioun salbe in ane unlaw of.xl.s. Ca. lxj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that quhair any party followis any actioun
befoir the Lordis of counsall in time tocum, the party that beis fundin in the
wrang, and the sentence is geuin agane, sall pay ane unlaw of.xl.s. to the
Lordis to be disponit be the Chancellar, and the expensis of the party, that
winnis the cause, be the modificatioun of the Lordis. etc.

ITEM It is auisit, that this present Parliament be continewit to the secund
day of August nixt tocum. At the quhilk day their Lordis under writtin, that is
to say, for the Prelatis, the Bischoppis of Glasgow, Dunkeldin, Abirdene, the
Abbotis of Halyrudhous, Newbottill, and Lundoris, the Archidene of Glasgow, and
the Official of Louthiane. For the Barronis my Lordis of Albany, the Erlis of
Huntlie, Craufuird, Ergyle, Menteith, Merchell, and Erroll, the Lords of
Hammiltoun, Erskin, Lyle, Kilmawris, Lindsa^, Olyphant, Glammis, Setoun,
Forbes, and Borthick. For the Burrowis Schir Alexander Naper, and Walter oung
for Edinburgh, Androw Charters for Perth, Androw Alansone for Abirdene, Malcome
Forster for Striuiling, James Ogilwy for Dundie, Archibald Hephurne for
Hadingtoun, Williame Bonar for Sanctandros, and Alexander Foulis for
Linlithgow. And the may part of them and all other Lordis, Prelatis,
Barronis, and Commissionaris, that plesis them to call to them, sall have the
full power, and strenth of the haill three Estatis of this Realm beand gadderit
in this present Parliament, to auise, determine, treit, and conclude after, as
they findin their wisdomis, concerning the matters disponit vpone the weilfair
of our Sauerane Lord, that are now oppinnit in this present Parliament, and
vnendit, and other matters, that sall occur for the time for the weilfair of our
Souerane Lord and the commoun good of the Realm.

ACTA PARLIAMENTI IACOBI TERTII TENTI ET INCHOATI APVD Edinburgh nono die
Mensis Maij Anno Do. etc. lxxiiij.

Of the fredome of haly kirk.
IN Primis it is statute and ordanit be our Souerane Lord and his three Estatis
in this present Parliament, that the fredome and honor of haly kirk be
obseruit and keipit in siclyke fredome as it hes been in our Souerane Lordis
may Nobill progenitouris times of befoir.

Ane Ambaxat in Ingland for the redressis of the Barge. Ca. lxij.
ITEM It is thocht expedient in this present Parliament, that our Souerane Lord
send ane honorabill Ambaxat in Ingland for the obtening of redres of the Barge,
and other attemptatis done agane the trewis, and to laubour any other good
matters of freindschip and amity, that may be to the obseruatioun and keiping
of peax in time tocum, and to the good of the Realm be auise and will of our
Souerane Lord.

ITEM That our Souerane Lord send commissioun till his father the King of
Denmark, to make and bind confideratioun and alliance with the Imperour,
exceptand our Souerane Lordis first alliance.

Of the money and buleoun. Ca. lxiij.
ITEM Anent the matter of the money and the inbringing of buleoun, It is statute
and ordanit, that the actis statutis maid of befoir, anent the inbringing of
buleoun salbe obseruit and keipit, that is to say, of ilk Serplaith two ounce of
brint silver, and of other gudis effeirand thairto, of the last of hydis.iiij.
ounce, and of the last of Salmound two ounce, and of claith and other gudis, with
this additioun, That the custumaris sall, or they gif the coket to any Schip,
tak souertie and borrois of ilk a Merchand for the hamebringing of buleoun, as
said is: and sall eirly make count thairof in the Checker. And gif the
custumaris faileis in the taking of the said souer tie, they to be punist
thairfoir, and depryuit of their office for ever. And quhat Merchand that
faileis heirin, to pay.x. pund to the King. And because the matter of the money
is rycht subtle and greit, and may not rycht haistely be set, it is thocht
speidfull, that the three Estatis commit their power to certane wise discreit
persounis to the number of.x. or xij. to auise, and set the course of the money,
and to dewise new money, as they think may expedient.

Of the brief of tutorie. Ca. lxiiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit anent the brief of tutorie, that it be
vnderstandin in time cumming, that he, that is nerrest agnat, and of.xxv. eiris
of age, fulfilling the laif of the panetis of the brief, salbe lauchfull
tutour, suppois the child, that happinnis to be in tutorie, have ane oungar
brother or sister, notwithstanding that the agnat is not immediate to succeid to
the child: because of oungar brether and sisters.

Of arreistmentis. Ca. lxv.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit anent the preuing of arreistmentis be Crownaris
or Seriandis, on the north half of the watter of Forth, that hes been vsit of
befoir, to be preuit be tuiching of wandis, It is statute and ordanit, that in
time tocum all preuis salbe maid be Crownaris and Seriandis be witness and
persounis, like as is vsit, and done on the south half of Forth.

Anent airschip of mouabill gudis of Barronis. Ca. lxvj.
ITEM Anent the airschip of mouabill gudis, that the airis of Barronis,
gentilmen, and frehalders sall have, It is statute and ordanit, that the saidis
airis sall have the best of ilk a thing, and after the statute of the Burrow
Lawis, and as is contenit in the samin.

Of obligatiounis. Ca. lxvij.
ITEM Anentis the act maid of befoir of prescriptioun of obligatiounis, It is
ordanit, to be vnderstandin in this wise, that all auld obligatiounis maid of
befoir, that is elder, than the dait of.xl. eiris not dependand in the Law in
the time of the making of the said actis, salbe prescriuit, and of na strenth,
and in likewise in time tocum all obligatiounis maid or to be maid, that beis
not follow it within.xl. eiris, sall prescriue, and be of nane auale.

The answer of the retour. Ca. lxviij.
ITEM Anent the breuis of inqueist to be seruit in time to^^, It is statute and
ordanit, that it be answerit in the retour quhat the land was of auale of the
auld, and the werray auale, that it was worth, and geuis the day of the serving
of the said brief.

That all complaintis first persew their Judge Ordinar. Ca. lxix.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the Schireffis, Prouestis, Baillies of
Burrowis, and other Iugeis Ordinar sall minister Justice of all complaintis,
after the form of the last act maid thairupone, and under the panis contenit
in the samin. And that fra this set forth all persounis, that hes co^plaintis,
persew to their Judge Ordinar, and vex not our Souerane Lord nor his cou^sall
with na complaintis, bot gif it be on Officiaris, that will not do Justice, nor
minister their office, after the form of Law, and as is contenit in the last
act

That four of the auld counsall be chosin to the new. Ca. lxx.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit in Burrowis, notwithstanding the actis maid of
befoir, that their salbe of the auld counsall of the eir befoir, four worthy
persounis chosin eirly to the new counsall, at their entry to sit with them,
for that eir, and have power with them to do Justice.

Anent ouerlordis, that will not enter to their landis. Ca. lxxj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit anent ouerlordis, that in defraude and skaith
of their vassalis and tennentis, differris till enter to their landis and
superioriteis, That in time tocu^ the saidis ouerlordis sall enter to their
landis and superioriteis, and do their diligence thairto, but fraud or gyle
within.xl. dayis, after that they be requyrit be their vassalis or tennentis.
The quhilk gif they do not, the saidis vassalis or tennentis incontinent
thairefter to be enterit be the King or the ouerlord, that the superiorities ar
haldin of, and hald of him, and the the other ouerlord, that fraudfully differris
his entry, to tyne the tennent for his lyfetyme: and assyth the party of his
coistis and skaithis, that salbe sustenit throw him in default of his entry.

That persounis arreistit to the Justice Air enter within bar. Ca. lxxij.
ITEM Because in times bygane their was haldin ane use and conswetude, that
persounis indytit to the Justice Air wald cum in presence of the Justice in the
Tolbuith, and hald them outwith the bar, and wald not enter for the payment of
ane lytill unlaw, quhilk is greit derisioun and scorn of Justice, and
lychtlying of the Kingis hienes: It is thairfoir statute and ordanit, that in
time cumming all persounis arreistit, that may be apprehendit the time of the
Air in the Tolbuith, or the Town, quhair the Justice is, salbe takin and
deliuerit to the Justice to be iustifeit for his crime, and his trespass: Swa
that the arreistment be maid of befoir the time of the beginning of the Air and
sait of Justice.

The unlaw of steiling of halkis, hundis, pertrikis, and duikis. Ca. lxxiij.
ITEM Anent the eschewing of greit troubill, discord, and diverse
inconuenientis, that may cum anent the steilling of halkis and hundis, It is
statute and ordanit, that in time cumming na manner of persounis tak ane other
mannis hundis, nor halkis maid or wild out of nestis, nor eggis out of nestis,
within ane other mannis ground, but license of the Lord, under the pane of.x.
pundis. And in like wise that na eggis be taken out of the pertrikis, nor wild
duik nestis, under the pane of.xl.s. And this to be a punet of dittay in time
to cum

Of Dais and Raise, hunting of Deir, and taking of cuningis. Ca. lxxiiij.
ITEM That na man sla Dais, nor Raise, nor Deir in time of storm, or snaw, or
sla any of their kiddis, quhill they be ane eir auld, under the pane of x.
pundis. And it to be a punct of dittay. And in likewise, that na man hunt,
schute, nor sla Deir nor Raise in vthers closis or parkes, or tak out cuningis
out of vtheres cuninghaires, or any foulis of vthers do weatis, or fische out
of vthers puilis, or stankes, but special license of the awnaris under the
pane of dittay, and to be punist as thift.

That ferryaris make briggis. Ca. lxxv.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that in time tocum the ferryaris of Kinghorne
sall tak of fraucht bot.ij. d. of the man, or woman, and the birding, and for a
horse.vj. d. And quhat persounis that bringis horse or beistis, sall make the
persounis and the virdingis fre, sa that the horse birding and the persoun, that
salbe, pay vj. d. And in likewise other beistis sall make the persounis fre of
fraucht. And at the Quenis ferry sall be takin bot.j. d. of the man, alswa the
horse two pennyis, and all in the form and manner abone writtin. And at the
Portincraig ane penny for the man, and the horse ane penny. And quhat ferryaris,
that dois in the contrare, sall pay.xl. s. to the King and his persoun
presonit, at the will of the King. And at the ferryaris make briggis to their
baittis after the form of the actis maid of befoir, under the pane contenit in
the samin.

ITEM This Parliament to be continewit to the.vj. day of August with
co^tinewatioun of dayis, and the power of the three Estatis to be committit to
certane persounis to the number of xxiiij. Prelatis, Barronis, and Commissaris
under writtin, to auise and conclude vpone the matters, that sall occur in the
meintyme, and in special of the money, and with power gif they think
speidfull, to continue it to ane other day, and have the samin authority. And
their ar the names of the persounis, that is to say. etc.

PARLIAMENTVM IACOBI TERTII SCOTORVM REGIS ILLVSTRISSIMITEN tum and inchoatum
apud Edinburgh xx. die Mensis Nouembris Anno Do. Mill^simo Quadringentesimo
Septuagesimo Quinto.

Of the fredome of haly kirk.
IN THE First it is statute and ordanit be our Souerane Lord the King and his
three Estatis, that the fredome grantit befoir to haly kirk be obseruit and
keipit in all wayis as it hes been be his Nobill progenitouris of befoir. And
gif any kirk man be hurt or greuit in special, that it salbe schawin to the
Kingis hienes, and he sall gar reformatioun be maid thairof.

That the Justice set his Airis twyis in the eir. Ca. lxxvj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit for the administratioun of Justice of criminal
actiounis, that our Souerane Lordis Justice sall set his Airis twyis in the
eir, and pas throwout the Realm and execute our Souerane Lordis breuis, Lawis,
and statutis maid of befoir, that in his default na rychtous complaint be herd
in time tocum. And attour it is statute and ordanit, that in time tocum all
Schireffis, within the boundis of their officis execute dewly the actis of
Parliament maid of befoir the.xx. day of November, the eir of God ane thousand
four hundredth three scoir nine eiris, in the quhilk is contenit the manner, how
they salbe demanit, that are fugitiuis to the gyrth. And that ilk Schiref tak
with him now the copy of this act, that they sall not excuse them be ignorance
in time to cum.

That all complaintis first persew to their Judge Ordinar. lxxvij.
ITEM As anent the administratioun of Justice in civil artiounis and
complaintis throw all the Realm, it is staute and ordanit, that all parteis
compleineand, sall first pas to their Judge Ordinar, and persew Justice. And
that the Ordinaris sall minister them Justice without partial meinis or
sleuth. Andgif the Judge faileis in his office and administratioun of Justice,
the party sall cume and pleinie to the King and his counsall vpone the Judge,
and inlykewyse on the party. And in that caise they sall have Summoundis,
both on the Judge and on the party to compeir befoir the King and his
counsall, and their have justice and reformatioun, after the tennour of the act
of Parliament maid of befoir the.xx. day of November the eir of God ane
thousand four hundredth three scoir fyftene eiris.

Anent falls assyse or inqueistis, and the pane thairof. Ba. lxxviij.
ITEM As tuiching the reformatioun of falls assyse, passand vpone cryminall
actiounis befoir our Souerane Lordis Justice, Schireffis, or other Officiaris,
It is statute and ordanit, conformand to the Kingis Lawis, De paena temere
iurantium super assisam, That quhair indytit persounis ar schawin befoir the
assyse, in the accusatiou^ of a trespassour, notoure, or manifest knawlege
beand of the trespassoure, and it happin the persounis that passis on the
assyse, wilfully be fauouris or partial meinis, to acquyte the trespassour, or
trespassouris, in that caise it salbe leiffull to the King and his counsall to
call the assyse, and inquyre at them, gif they concord all in a voice, or how
money said all in a voice, and how money said ane other way. And they that are
suspect De temerario iurame^to salbe accusit befoir the King and his Justice,
quhat day and place, that it plesis his hienes. And gif they persounis plesis
to grant their fault, and Temerariu^ periurium, to be punist thairfoir, after
the form of the auld Law. And gif they deny or makis excusatioun thairof be
ignorance, the King or his counsall sall give them than ane greit assyse
of.xxv. Nobill persounis, and schaw to that assyse the euidentis or notour
knawlege of the trespass, in sa far as was schawin to the first assyse. And
thairefter gif it beis fundin that the first assyse acquit the trespassouris be
temerarite, or wilfully be fauouris or partiality, sa money as beis co^uict of
y^ crime, to be punist after the form of the auld Lawis, contenit in the buik
of Regiam Maiestatem. Nevertheless the persounis, that happinnis to be accusit
of the trespass, outher to be convict, or maid quyte, after the form of the
first deliverance, and the false assyse to be punist, as said is.

Anent the marriage of our Souerane Lordis sister. Ca. lxxix.
ITEM Anent the marriage of our Souerane Lordis sister, the Lordis of the three
Estatis thinkis at his hienes and the Lordis of his counsall sold in all gudly
haist auise her marriage in sum convenient place, and fra his Estatis know the
place, they sall according thairto support with their gudis after their
faculteis, and greit chargeis that they have borne of befoir, beand considderit.

Anent the inbringing of buleoun. Ca. lxxx.
ITEM As anent the money, because the Lordis vnderstandis, that the
pretermitting and sleuth that hes been in the executioun of the actis maid for
the inbringing of buleoun in the Realm, and als the serching and keiping of
the money fra passing forth of the Realm, hes causit the greit scantnes of it,
that is now of the money throw all y^ land, That thairfoir our Souerane Lord
sall it cause the actis and statutis maid of befoir both in the inbringing of
buleoun, and keiping of the money, be scharply put to executioun. And that the
brekaris thairof be punist after the form of the actis maid thairupone of
befoir. And that the King now depute true and habill persounis to be serchouris
in time tocum, that will and may do diligence for the halding in of the money,
as is statute of befoir. And that the Merchandis sall have for ilk ounce of
brint silver, that he bringes hame to the cuiniers xij.s. and the cuineour of
that brint silver, to make.xij. grotis of the ounce of the samin prent, that the
new grot is now. And of the new fynance of the new Inglis grot. And that their
be ane penny and ane half penny of silver maid of the samin fynance, according
to the new grot, and that penny to have course for three pennyis.

That nouther silver nor gold be put to the fire. Ca. lxxxj.
ITEM Because it is weill knawin, that all cuineit money both silver and gold
put to the fire to be maid buleoun to other new money, is minist, waistit, and
distroyit in the translatioun be the fire incurris greit skaith in hurt of the
King and all his liegis, and sold not be sufferit in time tocum: It is
thairfoir statute and ordanit, that fra hyne forth nouther silver nor gold,
that beiris pre^t and form of cuinie, that it be in any wise moltin, or put to
the fire be the Kingis cuineouris, or be goldsmythis to any wark, without
special license or charge of the King, bot all gold and silver, that is
cuineit, and hes prent be obseruit and haldin haill to pas amangis the Kingis
liegis, as he ordanit it to have course. etc.

Anent the brief of Idiotrie and furiositie. Ca. lxxxij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that sen their is ane brief of our Souerane
Lordis Chapel maid and ordanit for the saiftie of alienatioun of Lordis and
Barronis landis throw Idiotis and natural fulis, furious, and wodmen the time
of their folly, the quhilkis breuis saiffis not the alienatioun, bot allanerly
fra the time of the serving of the saidis breuis, and remeidis it not, that is
done of be foir, in caise it be done in the time of the folly or furiositie,
albeit he be als greit a fuill and furious befoir, as after: It is statute and
ordanit thairfoir in time tocum the said brief be reformit and ane clause put
thairin, To inquyre of the folly and furiositie, and how lang time he was of
they conditiounis. And fra it be knawin be the inqueist, that the persounis be
fulis or furious the time thairof, the alienatioun maid be him after the time,
that the inqueist findis, that he was outher fule or furious, salbe of nane
auale, bot retretit, and brocht agane till him alsweill, as the alienatioun
maid after the serving of the said brief.

That the money and gold be cryit up hiear. Ca. lxxxiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, for the greit scantnes and want of gold, that
is within the Realm, throw having out of the samin, because it standis heir in
a lawar price, than it dois in other cuntreis, It is statute and ordanit, that
the gold have course in time tocu^ in this wise, that is to say, the Rois Nobill
to xxxv s. The Henry Nobill to.xxxj.s. The Angel to.xxiij.s. The French
Crown to.xiij.s.iiij. d. The Demi to.xiij.s.iiij. d. The Scottis Crown
to.xiij.s. The Salute to.xv.s.vj. d. The Lew to.xvij.s.vj. d. The Rydar
to.xv.s.vj. d. And all other gold to pas after the fynes, and wecht, and at the
plesance of the geuar and the takar.

And at all siluermoney have course siclyke in time tocum, as it hes this day.

Of the payment of the dettour and the creditour. Ca. lxxxiiij.
ITEM To remove discord amangis the Kingis liegis betuix the creditouris and
the dettouris, that are awin soumes, It is statute and ordanit, that
notwithstanding the variance of the course of the commoun gold and silver, quhat
course at ever it have, the dettour sall pay his creditour the det of the money,
that sold have been pay it at the termis befoir the making of this act with
sic money and of the samin price, as the money had course befoir this
proclamatioun and Parliament.

That na courtis of guerra be haldin. Ca. lxxxv.
ITEM Because their hes been abusioun of Law in times bygane be the Schireffis,
Stewartis, Baillies, and Officiaris in the halding of courtis of guerra to the
greit heirschip and skaith of our Souerane Lordis liegis, and of his awin
hienes in his awin Justice Airis, quhilkis ar spilt be the said guerra courtis:
It is statute and ordanit, that in time tocum their be na courtis of guerra
haldin be na manner of persounis under the pane of punitioun, as for a man
slayar and reiffar of his gudis, and vsurpar vpone the Kingis liegis and his
authority.

PARLIAMENTVM IACOBI TERTII REGIS SCOTORVM ILLVSTRISSIMI tentum apud Edinburgh
quarto die Mensis Iulij Anno Domini Millesimo Quadring entesimo Septuagesimo
Sexto.

Of our Souerane Lordis reuocatioun. Ca. lxxxvj.
IN the first of all alienatiounis, infeftmentis and giftis geuin and grantit
be him to quhatsumeuer persounis, that be hurt or prejudicial till his airis,
or to his Crown of quhatsumeuer heritage pertening to his hienes in any time
to this day, and in special of giftis of landis, mailis, fischingis,
patronagis of Kirkis, giving of waird landis in blanchferme, setting of landis,
making of Regaliteis, and taleis maid in his tender age tra the rychtous airis:
Alswa all giftis geuin be his hienes of keeping of Castellis for langar times,
than enduring his will, and in special of the Castellis, that are the keyis of
the Realm, and generally all manner of alienatiounis, as said is, that is, or
may be prejudicial till his airis, and Crown in any wise, or that is agane
any good conscience.

The annexatioun of the Erldome of Ros. Ca. lxxxvij.
ITEM Our Souerane Lord with the consent of his three Estatis of his Realm,
annexis till his Crown the Erldome or Ros with the pertinentis, to remane
thairat for ever, swa that it all not be leiffull to his hienes or his airis,
nor his successouris to make alienatioun of the said Erldome or any part
thairof, fra his Crown in any wise: Saifand that it salbe leiffull to him and
them, to gif the said Erldome at their plesance till ane of his, or their
secund souis lauchfully to be gottin betuix him and his Queen.

ITEM My Lord Chancellar sall remember to pronunce the approbatioun of my Lord
of Glasgowis Charter to declair, that the King hes grantit him to have a
Seriand with a silver wand.

PARLIAMENTVM SVPRE MI DOMINI NOSTRI REGIS IACOBI TERTII tentum and inchoatum
apud Edinburgh sexto die Mensis Augusti An. Do. Millesimo Quadringentesimo
Septuagesimo septimo.

Of haly Kirk.
IN the first it is statute and ordanit, that the fredome of haly Kirk be
obseruit and keipit in siclyke liberty, as it hes been in all times bygane in
our Souerane Lordis progenitouris times. And gif it be hurt in any wise, that
reformatioun be maid thairof.

Of slauchter. Ca. lxxxviij.
ITEM Because that slauchter and other trespassis, as trosoun, re^^, and
commoun thift is, and hes been sa co^moun throw all the partis of the Realm,
and is supposit the may occasioun thairof is the reddy granting of the Kingis
grace in giving of remissiounis and respectis to the committatis of the samin:
Our Souerane Lord at the greit instance and requeist of the Lordis of the three
Estatis of his Realm, and for the eschewing of the trespassis and enormiteis,
the saiftie of his liegis, and the commoun proffeit of the Realm, of his
special fauouris, and grace hes grantit to clois his handis and ceis the
giving of respectis and remissiounis to any persounis for any manner of
slauchter committit, se^ his age of.xxv. eiris, or that salbe committit in any
times tocum for three eiris: That in the meintyme the cuntrie may be put in peax
and reule, and his liegis leif in surety: Nor that his hienes sall grant na
remissiounis for commoun thift within the cuntrie. And gif any remissiounis be
grantit, and geuin for auld actiounis, that it salbe expremit and prouydit in
the remissioun, that the trespass for the quhilk the remissioun was geuin, was
committit befoir his age of.xxv. eiris. And gif it beis ^^^din the contrare,
the remissioun or respect to be of nane auale.

Of the money. Ca. lxxxix.
ALSVA because our Souerane Lord is informit, that his Realm is purit and
waistit of money in default of cuinie, that hes been strikkin in times bygane,
and the auld money, that had course in this Realm both of the Realms self and
vthers hes been transtatit, and put to the fire, and maid buleoun to other
money, that is strikin of new, contrare the auisement of the last Parliament,
throw the quhilk their is n^ne or lytill of the auld money of this cuntrie, or
vthers gangaud nouther Demyis, Lyonis, Inglis Nobillis, Lewis, French Crownis.
Inglis grotis, Flower delycis, fourtene penny grotis, bot for the may part
both gold and silver put to the fire: Our Souerane Lord at the requeist of his
Estatis and of his special grace hes now grantit to make the actis of his
Parliament both maid in his progenitouris times, and his awin of the
inbringing of buleoun to be put to executioun, and be obseruit and keipit, and
in likewise the actis maid vpone the serching and keiping in of the money in
the Realm to be put to scharp executioun, and good serchouris set thairupone
at all portis and placis neidfull. And gif it be neidfull, he sall set scharper
rue lis thairupone be counsall and auise of the Lordis of his counsall. And in
the meintyme, quhill the Realm may be stuffit of buleoun, and it may be sone,
and knawin quhairof, that new money may be strikin, his hienes will of his
grace, as said is, gar ceis all cuineing and stryking of the money, gold,
silver, greit and small, and gar tak the irnis fra the cuineouris incontinent,
and put them in sicker keiping: Swa that their cum na mair hurt in the Realm,
throw stryking of the money in time cumming. And quhat time his hienes thinkis,
that the Realm be stuffit of buleoun, he sall than, god willing, with auise of
his Lordis of Counsall make and set a reule of his money both gold and silver,
and of the wecht and fynes, that it sall hald the course, that it sall have, and
make and ordand ane wardane and ane Master of his cuinie of substance and
knawlege, that salbe responsabill to his hienes vpone their lyfis and honor
for the keiping of ordinance and statute, that salbe maid.

Ane Ambaxat to the Duik of Burgunie. Ca. lxxxx.
ITEM Anent the course of Merchandice, because that their is letters cummin
rycht hartfull, thankful, and honourabill fra the Prince of Burgunie, and the
Estatis of his landis, for the keiping of fredome of the Merchandis of his
Realm in time tocum, and the reformatioun of skaith, that they have sustenit
in time bygane, and the alliance and confederatioun maid betuix our Souerane
Lord and the Prince of Burgunie of befoir beand renewit: It is ordanit be our
Souerane Lord, and the Lordis of the three Estatis, that certane persounis be
ordanit in manner of Ambaxat, to pas with our Souerane Lordis letters, to the
Duik of Burgunie both to renew and confirm the alliance maid of befoir, and
to get confirmatioun of the priuilegeis grantit to Merchandis of the Realm of
befoir, and purches other greter priuilegeis, gif they can be gottin in favor
of the Merchandis. And als to persew the skaith that is sustenit of befoir, and
get reformatioun thairof. And the expensis of the said Ambaxat to be takin of
the haill Burrowis. etc.

Of victuallis. Ca. lxxxxj.
ITEM Because victuallis ar rycht scant within the cuntrie, The may
supportatioun, that this Realm hes, is be strangearis of diverse other
natiounis, that bringis victual, and because of diverse new impositiounis and
arreistmentis, that hes been put vpone them at their cumming and entres, they
may not have liberty and fredome to dispone vpone their awin gudis, the quhilk
causis diverse of them to forbeir to cum in this Realm to the greit and heavy
skaith of all the Kingis liegis in all estatis: It is statute and ordanit, that
all strangearis and Merchandis cummand in the Realm with victuallis and other
leiffull Merchandice be honorably ressauit, and favorably treittit, and fra
they have enterit their gudis in the Tolbuith, as use and custume is, that our
Souerane Lord be seruit first of the best, and syne the Lordis of his conusall
after the price, that salbe maid with the Merchandis, and the remanent to be
sauld amangis the Kingis liegis. And that na troubill nor arreist be put vpone
Merchandis, strangearis, nor their gudis, bot at they have liberty to use, and
do their leiffull Merchandice, as use and custume hes been in times bygane.

Anent Cruuis. Ca. lxxxxij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the act maid of befoir be King James the
first anent cruuis set in watters be obseruit and keipit, the quhilk beiris in
effect, that all cruuis set in watters, quhair the sea fillis and ebbis,
distroyis the frye of all fischis, be put away and distroyit for ever mair,
notwithstanding any fredome or privilege geuin in the contrare under the pane
of five pund for ilk cruue. And that they, that hes cruuis in fresche watters,
that they gar heip the Lawis anent the Setterdayis slop, and suffer them not
to stand in forbodin time under the samin pane. And at ilk hek of the said
cruuis be three inche wide, as the auld statute requyris, maid be King David,
and at the mid streme be left fre be the space of sex fute. And at it salbe a
point of dittay both of them, that dois the contrare, or garris be done. And
quha that beis convict thairof, to pay five pund, as said is.

Anent ferryaris that rasis fraucht. Ca. lxxxxiij.
ITEM Anent ferryaris that rasis fraucht vpone the Kingis liegis, and their
gudis mair, than is ordanit and statute of befoir be the Parliament, to be
geuin and taken for the man and the horse and his birding, It is statute and
ordanit, that in time to cum na ferrayaris tak mair fraucht of man, horse, or
gudis, bot samekill as is statute and ordanit be the Parliament of befoir to be
taken, under the pane of five pund to be payit to our Souerane Lord, and amendis
to the party, sa often as they trespass. And this to be a point of dittay in time
tocum.

Anent mureburne. Ca. lxxxxiiij.
ITEM Anent mureburne, that is plainly now done in all Monethis contrare the
actis and statutis maid of befoir, for the punitioun and stanching thairof, It
is now statute and ordanit, that the unlaw of mureburne salbe in time tocum
five pund of them, that beis convict befoir the Justice in the Justice Air.
And that na mureburne be maid fra the last day of March, quhill Micha^^^es day
under the pane foirsaid.

Of the bind of Salmound. Ca. lxxxxv.
ITEM Because it is heuily murmurit, and the Realm greitlie sclanderit be
strangearis and vthers, that byis Salmound, of the minissing of the veschell
and barrellis, that the Salmound is packit in, It is statute and ordanit, that
in time to cum all Salmound be packit in barrellis of the mesour of Hamburgh
after the auld assyse, and na smallar barrellis, nor veschellis. And that na
Couper within the Realm make smallar barrellis to pack fische in, than the said
mesour of Hamburgh, and the auld assyse. And gif any dois the contrare heirof
in time to cum, the first sellar, that sellis the fische of falls packingis in
sic small barrellis, sall tyne the fische, and to be our Souerane Lordis
escheit, and the Cowper, that maid the barrellis, sall pay five pund to the
King. And that the Kingis custumaris salbe serchouris heirupone in ilk Town.
And als it salbe a point of dittay.

Of beggaris and Sornaris. Ca. lxxxxvj.
ITEM For the stanching of maisterfull beggaris and sormaris, that daily
oppressis and heryis the Kingis liegis, It is statute and ordanit, yt the auld
statute maid of befoir in our Souerane Lordis time King James the first be put
to scharp executiou^ but fauouris, that is to say, quhair ever any commoun
fornaris beis ouertaine in time tocu^, that they be arreistit and deliuerit to
the Kingis Schireffis.

And that they be furthwith brocht to the Kingis Justice, to do and execute the
Law on them, as on a commoun theif and reiffar. And that dittay be taken
thairof eirly, and punist, as said is in the Justice Air. etc.

Of schoing of horse in the quick be smythis. Ca. lxxxvij.
ITEM Because ignorant smythis throw ignorance or drunkinnes spillis and
cruikis mennis horse throw schoing in the quick, It is statute and ordanit; that
quhen ever a smyth schois a mannis horse in the quick, that smyth sall make and
pay the coist of the horse, quhill he be haill, and in the meintyme find the man
ane horse to ride vpone, and do his laubour, quhill the said horse be haill. And
gif the said horse cruikis throw the said schoing, and will not hale, the smyth
sall hald the said horse him self, and pay the price of the horse to the man,
that aw him.

ITEM Sen our Souerane Lord purposis in all gudlie haist to send certane Lordis
in Ambaxat to the King of Ingland in certane honorabill matters and causis
concerning the honor and worschip of his hienes, and the publicque good of the
Realm, that is to say, the marriage of his sister, and to have in haist agane
answer of his said Ambaxatouris. And als anent the Su^moundis and processis
maid to the Lord of the Ilis and Schir Alexander Rait, as is contenit in the
Summoundis maid on them, as is writtin in the continence of the samin: The
Estatis now present hes for sparing of laubour and travel of them self
committit their full power and strenth of the haill Parliament to their
persounis under writtin, that is to say, viij. of ilk estate to commoun, auise,
and conclude vpone the said matters, and all thingis concerning the samin, and
the saidis persounis to conuene personally togidder in Edinburgh, or quhat
other place it plesis the Kingis hienes, the.ix. day of October nixt tocu^ with
continewatioun of dayis. And their ar the names of the persounis. The Bischoppis
of Glasgow, Dunkeldin, Abirdene, Murray, the Abbottis of Halyrudhous, and
Newbottill, the Secretar Master Alexander Iuglis, Master Williame Elphinstoun
for the Clergy. The Earl of Angous, the Earl Merchall, the Lord Abirnethy, the
Lord Hammiltoun, the Lord Lyle, the Lord Borthick, the Lord of Stobhall and
the Master of Torphichin for the Barronis. Iohne of Knowis of Abirdene,
Williame Monorgound of Du^die, Alexander Bunche of Perth, Simon Greg of Couper,
James of Creichtoun Prouest of Edinburgh, and Henry Cant of Edinburgh, Malcome
Forester of Striuiling, and Alexander Foulis of Linlithquho for the
Commissaris. etc.

Heir followis the statutis maid and appreuit be our Souerane Lord the King,
and his three Estatis in his Parliament haldin and begunn at Edinburgh the
secund day of April the eir of God ane thousand four hundredth four scoir ane
eir. etc.

IN the first it is statute and ordanit, that all our Souerane Lordis liegis
both to burgh, and to land, spiritual Lordis landis, and temporal be warnit
and chargit to be reddy to cum to our Souerane Lord bodin in the best wise with
bowis, speiris, axis, and other abilementis of weir, quhat time they be
chargeit on.viij. dayis warning, or sonar, gif neid be, and with victual to
endure and lest for.xx. dayis, after they cum to the King under the pane of Law.

Of spelris and their lenth and iakkis. Ca. lxxxxviij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that their be na speiris in time tocum maid
nor sauld, that is schortar, than.v. elnis and a half or else at the leist.v.
elnis befoir the bur, and of greitnes according thairto, under the pane of
escheiting of all his gudis, that makis or sellis them. Item it is ordanit,
that all persounis, that sall weir takkis for the defense of their body, that
they gar make them side to the knee, they that wantis leg harnes, and they that
hes leg harnes, that their iakkis be maid sa lang, as to cover the vuer part of
their leg harnes. And that every axman, that hes nouther speir nor bow, sall
have ane terge of tree, or ledder after the fassioun of the exempill, that salbe
send to ilk Schiref.

Of persounis cummand to the hoist. Ca. lxxxxix.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that na persounis cummand to our Souerane
Lordis hoist, waist or distroy meadow, nor cornis, nor spolie any manner of gudis
in their cumming, or ganging within the Realm of Scotland, under the pane of
punitioun of their persounis, as brekaris of our Souerane Lordis proclamatioun
of his hoist, and refounding of the skaith, that they do. And that ilk Lord and
Barrone salbe responsabill for the persounis, that are under their leiding, and
deliver the persounis, that dois the skaith to the King, or his Lieutennentis
or wardanis, or else refound, and pay the skaith, that is done them self.

Of wapinschawing and abilementis for weir. Ca. c.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the actis and statutis maid of befoir
anent the wapinschawing and abilement of weir, to be maid be all persounis,
salbe put to dew executioun after the form contenit in the said actis: And at
the panis contenit in the samin be scharply rasit, but fauouris of the brekaris
thairof.

Furnesing of Castellis.
ITEM Our Souerane Lord hes ordanit to gar purway and stuff his Castellis of
Dunbar and Lochmaban with victuallis and artailerie, and quhair they ar faileit
in any part to gar them be hastily reparrellit and fortifeit. And als his
hienes co^mandis and chargeis all the Lordis of his Realm, both spiritual
and temporal, that his Castellis neir the Bordouris and an the sea coist, sic
as Sanctandros, Abirdene, Temptalloun, Hume, Douglas, Halis, Adringtowne, and
specially the Hermitage that is in may danger, and sic vthers Castellis and
strenthis, that may be keipit and defendit fra our Inimeis of Ingland, that ilk
Lord stuff his awin house, and strenth them with victuallis, men and
artailerie, and to amend and reparrell them, quhair it misteris, sa that they
be keipit and defendit, as said is.

Aganis the reifar Edwart.
WE do ow to wit that the three Estatis of this Realm be and gadderit and
asse^blit in this present Parliament hes vnderstandin and knawis weill, that
this instant weir is now mouit vpone our Souerane Lord and his Realm aganis
the mind, will, and intentioun of our Souerane Lordis hienes, quhilk send his
writing with ane Herald and Purseuant, offerand for his part to have maid
redressis of all attemptatis done agane the trewis, that stude for the time, sa
that siclyke mycht have been had, And thairefter the said Herald and Purseuant
be and lang haldin and taryit in Ingland be the reifar Edward calland him King
of Ingland, they war send agane but answer outher in word or writ in lychtlying
of our Souerane Lord and his ressonabill desyris, quhilk was allanerly to have
had peax, and to have keipit his trewis, as appeirit weil after the hame
cumming of the said Herald and Purseuant: Quhen their was ane hoist of the
haill power of Scotland gadderit to have past for the resistance and inuasioun
of our Inimeis of Ingland, our Souerane Lord at the requeist and monitiounis of
our haly father the Papis bullis schawin to him in the time, skalit his greit
hoist in hope and traist, that his ennemeis sold have been in siclyke wayis
obedient to our haly father, under the quhilk traist and the skaling of the
power foirsaid, their was incontinent greit birning, heirschip, and
distructioun done vpone our Souerane Lord, his Realm, and liegis, and
notwithstanding all this his Majesty it desyris, and wald have peax: Sa that
it had been according to the worschip and honor of his hienes and his Realm,
be the sycht of his said three Estatis, as his excellency hes now offerit the
samin. And because it is verraly traistit and supponit, that the said reifar
Edward throw birnand avarice, and for falls reif and conquest, not dreidand God
nor the effusioun of Christian blude, nor hauand respect nor rememorance, that
he was oblist and sworn to have keipit the trewis foirsaid, bot postponand the
band of his lautie and honor, that he sold have had, is utterly set to
continue in his weir, that he hes begunnin and mouit, and be all his power
tendis and schaipis till inuaid and distroy in sa far, as he may to conquest
this Realm: THE THREE ESTATIS foirsaid hes thairfoir hartfully of their awin
fre will grantit and promittit to our Souerane Lord, to remane and abide at the
command of his hienes with their persounis and their substance of landis and
gudis in defense of his may Nobill persoun his successioun Realm, and
liegis, as they and their foirbearis hes of auld times done of befoir.

The Kingis promis for ministrationn of Justice and good reule.
OUR Souerane Lord now knawand and vnderstandand weill both the greit
affectioun and hartfull luif but dissimulatioun, that his Lordis, Prelatis,
Barronis, and all vthers his liegis spiritual and temporal hes of his
persoun, hes now schawin and declairit his mind oppinly, that his Majesty
sall with help of God and with good and true counsall of his Prelatis and
Lordis gar Justice be euinly ministerit to all his liegis, and apply him to put
good reule in all the partis of his Realm to the commoun proffeit and good
thairof. Quhairthrow all his true liegis sall have cause to be of good confort,
and tak consolatioun and curage of the greit disconfort and confounding of his
Inimeis, and of falls tratouris and untrue hartis.

The manner of reddynes to resist the reifar Eduard.
AND For the resisting and aganestanding of the said reifar Edward, quhilk
schaipis till inuaid this Realm with greit army and power both be sey and
land, It is auisit and seen proffitabill be our Souerane Lord and the three
Estatis, that all diligent laubour and solistatioun possibill he had, to get
knawlege and understanding of the counsall and dispositioun of the said reifar
Edward of Ingland, and quhat time he schaipis to inuaid this Realm outher in
proper persoun or be his wardanis. And in the meintyme that letters be writtin
to all Schireffis, chargeing all our Souerane Lordis liegis, to be reddy with
certane dayis victual tocum weill abileit for weir till his hienes in all
possibill haist, after as they salbe chargeit. And to cause wapinschawingis to
be haldin every.xv dayis. And boundis to be limmit vpone the sey coistis
every sex mylis of lenth and a mile of breid. And Capitanis to be limmit
every sex mile to gadder the cuntrie, and await thairupone, quhen their is na
greithoisting be land, and than all persounis in general tocum thairto. And
that all persounis within the boundis, gif it sall happin our Inimeis to inuaid
the Realm be sey, in they partis to be reddy for the resisting and
unpugnatioun of them: Sa that gif the said reifar Edward happinnis to cum in
proper persoun to be resistit be our Souerane Lord in proper persoun, and with
the haill body of the Realm, as they will leiue and die with his hienes in his
defense. And gif the said reifar sendis wardanis, they to be resistit be
wardanis and Lieutennentis stu^^it with sufficient power according for the time.

Of Currouris and their horsing.
AND Because the Currouris hes been and ar sleuthfull in presentatioun and
giving of our Souerane Lordis letters to the Lordis and Schireffis, quhame to
they ar directit, his hienes hes ordanit, that in continent after the letters
be writtin outher under preuie seill or signet, that their salbe limmit a
sufficient persoun of the Thesauarie to ressaif them stuffit with money, to
make the expe^sis of the persounis, beiraris of the said letters, quhilkis salbe
autentick persounis, and weill horsit men to warn his liegis in the farrest
part of the Realm befoir vthers, that are neirar.

For the resisting of the tratour James of Douglas.
ITEM As tuiching the resisting and stansching of the tratoure James of
Douglas, quhilk is now cummin to the Bordouris, It is grantit and ordanit be
our Souerane Lord and the three Estatis for the cause abone expremit, That
general proclamatioun be maid, that quhatsumeuer persoun or persounis, that
will slay or bring y^ said James persoun to his hienes, sall have thairfoir,
and be infeft heritablie in ane hundredth merkis worth of land, and als to have
ane thousand merkis of money of the Realm. And thairefter sall stand in luif
and tenderness to his good grace in all times cu^ming. And for the taking,
slaying, or bringing to his hienes of any tratour being with him cummin of
gentill blude, they salbe payit.xx: pund, and for ane eman.x. pund. And
quhatsumeuer persoun, that now assistis the said tratour Douglas, y^ will
within.xxiiij. dayis cum to our Souerane Lord, and abide with his hienes in
faith and lautie, sall have full remissioun and forgiveness of all tresoun, and
other trespassis committit be them of time bygane. And quha will not cum
within the time abone expremit, sall never be ressauit in fauouris nor grace.
And als to proclaim, that general respet and remissioun salbe geuin to all
Bordouraris and other persounis of the Realm, that hes committit any tresoun
or trespass in time bygane, except the persounis that plesis his hienes to
except, that is to say, the tratour James of Douglas, Alexander Iarding, Schir
Richard Holla^d, and Master Patrik Halyburtoun, Preistis and vthers siclyke
tratoutis, that at sworn Inglismen, and remanis in Ingland. etc.

The vphalding of Berwyk and garnisounis to be laid on the Bordouris vpone the
expensis o^ the three Estatis.
ALSVA The three Estatis considderand and vnderstandand the honorabill and
curagious opinioun of our Souerane Lord in the halding up of the Town of
Berwyk, and the greit coist and expe^sis, that his hienes hes maid in the
fortifeing, strenthing, and bigging of the wallis of the samin, and reparatioun
of the Castle and stuffing thairof be artailerie, and als the greit charge and
coist, that his Majesty hes now takin upon him to hald and lay on his awin
expensis garnisou^ of v. hundredth men of weir in the said Town for the keiping
and defense thairof, to the greit honor and proffeit of the Realm and harm
and skaith to our Inimeis: The saidis Estatis of their awin fre will hes
gra^tit to our said Souerane Lord to send and wage on their expe^sis.v.
hundredth men of weir to be laid in garnisou^ in placis under writtin on the
Bordouris for the defense of the samin, and the resisting of our said Iuimeis.
And the soume that salbe payit of their wagis salbe deuidit and schawin be the
three Estatis after the form of the auld use and consuetude of diuistoun maid
of besoir, yt is to say, xij. scoir of men of weir to be furnist be the Clergy,
xij. scoir be the Barronis.vj. scoir be y^ Burrowis. And to enter in placis
under writtin, yt is to say, in garnisou^is on the Bordoures the first day of
the Month of Man, and fra thine forth to remane to the completing of three
Monethis. And the garnisounis foirsaid to enter in Berwyk the first day of
Iunij. And fra thine forth to remane for the space of three Monethis. Item it is
ordanit, that the said men of weir salbe laid in the placis after following,
that is to say, in Berwyk.v. hundredth as said is, of the quhilkis their salbe
ever.ii. hu^ndreth reddy to ische at the co^ma^d of the wardane of the eist
Marchis, and his Lieutenne^tis, and obey to yame, and ride als often, as they
salbe chargit. Ite^ to be laid in Blacader.xx. men and in Wetherburne.xx. men
and in Hume.lx. of men. Item on the middill Marchis in Cesfuird.lx. In
Iedburgh.lx. In Ormistou^.xx. In Edarstou^ xx. In Coklaw.xx. In
Dolphinstou^.xx. Ite^ in the Hermitage ane hundredth men, quhilkes salbe reddy
to support both the middill and the west Bordouris in time of neid, as they
salbe warnit and chargit. Item on the west Bordouris in Lochmaban ane hundredth
men, In Castle mylk.xl. men, In Annand.xl. men, In Bellis Tower.xx. men. Item
to the hundredth men of weir, that sall ly in Blacader, Wetherburne, and Hume
James of Borthick sone to the Lord Borthick to be Capitane, and he to cheis the
said hundredth men, sic as he will answer for to the Kingis hienes. And in
likewise he to cheis and depute two gentill men to be Capitanis under him, ane
to remane in Blacader, ane in Wetherburne, and him self in Hume.

ITEM On the middill March in C^sfuird, Ormistoun, and Edgerstoun the Lord of
Edmondstoun to be Capitane, and he to cheis the said hundredth men, as said is.
And to cheis and depute two Capitanis under him, and him self to remane in ane
of the said three placis, and the the other two Capitanis in the the other two placis.
Item of the hundredth men in Iedburgh, Coklaw, and Dolphinstoun the Lord of
Cranstoun to be Capitane, and cheis the hundredth men, and two Capitanis under
him, as said is. Item to be Capitane of the hundredth men in the Hermitage the
Lord of Lamingtoun, and he to cheis them, as said is. Item to be Capitane of
Loch maban of the hundredth men, and to cheis them, as said is, the Lord of
Closeburne. Item of the hundredth men, and to cheis them, and two Capitanis, as
said is, in Castelmylk, Annand, and Bellis Tower the Lord of Amisfeild, and he
to remane in ane of the three placis, and his two Deputis, ane in ilk ane of the
the other two placis.

wageis.
ITEM The principal Capitanis foirsaid sall ressaif the haill wageis for them
self, and the Capitanis under them, and for all the persounis committit to
their governance, as said is. And thairefter pay ilk man, as they will answer
to the Kingis hienes. And ilk persoun to have for his wageis on the day, ilk
speir.ij.s.vj. d. and ilk bow.ij.s. And that the taken half of the said
wageouris salbe speiris, and the the other half bowis.

ITEM Our Souerane Lord hes ordanit the Lord Dernly to be wardane on the west
Bordouris, and co^mandis and chargeis, that all his liegis answer and obey to
him, and his Lieutennentis in the said office in time tocum.

Contrare the fauouraris of James of Douglas.
ITEM Attour for the defense and supply of our Souerane Lordis liegis, that
remanis on the Bordouris and punitioun of the untrue persounis, quhilkis
fauouris and suppleis the false and tressonabill opinioun of the tratour James
of Douglas, our Souerane Lordis hienes hes committit full and haill power to
all his wardanis to exerce their officis on all sic persounis within their
boundis without any exceptioun. And hes reuokit all exceptiounis grantit to any
persounis of befoir except allanerly sa money persounis, as remanis within the
Town and Castle of Berwyk. And gif any exceptioun be desyrit, their salbe
nane grantit without a special and ressonabill cause vnderstandin and
declairit be the Lordis of counsall befoir the giving thairof.

Ane Ambaxat to the King of France.
ALSVA It is auisit, ordanit, and concludit be our Souerane Lord and his three
Estatis, that ane honorabill Ambaxat be send fra our Souerane Lordis hienes and
fra the Estatis of the Realm to the King of France and to the Parliament of
Paris, desyrand the King of France, as his brother and confederat to help and
supply his hienes and his Realm now in his weiris mouit be their commoun
Inimie of Ingland aganis them, like as our Souerane Lord hes ever and will be
reddy to his brotherheid, quhen he salbe requyrit, making mentioun alswa, that
he hes diverse times writtin to the King of France thairupone, and gottin nane
answer.

Anent the reuocatioun maid be a woman hauand coniunctfeftment after her
husbandis deceis. Ca. cj.
MEmorandum the vj. day of March the eir of God, etc lxxxj. eir Robert
Danelstoun was persewit be a woman callit Glen befoir the Lordis of counsall,
and scho wald have cummin agane her aith, that scho maid in Judgment befoir the
Official of Glasgow, and their was schawin ane Instrument under the seill of
the said Official, that scho consentit to the alienatioun of sic landis, and
swoir, that scho sold never cum in the contrare heirof, and wald have had the
saidis landis allegeand, that it was her coniunctfeftment, and maid reuocatioun
after her husbandis deceis, sayand that he compellit her thairto. The actioun
was deliueri agane this woman.

Anent the Indult grantit to the Archibischop of Sanctandros. Ca. cij.
ITEM Our Souerane Lord and his three Estatis hes in this present Parliament
approuit, ratifeit, and confirmit all the actis and stat^^is of Parliament maid
of befoir, tuiching the obseruatioun and keiping of the Indult and privilege
grantit be our haly father y^ Pape to the Archibischop and sege of Sancta^dros,
anent the co^firmatiou^ of electioun of Abbottis Electis and Postulatis, the
quhilkis actis and panis co^tenit in them salbe alsweill extendit upon the
brekaris of them, that assistes, or geuis help, supply, fynance, or
supportatiou^ thairto, as on the principal: And als with extentiou^ of the
samin actis till all vthers placis of the Realm within their diocyis, y^ hes
been in use, co^suetude, or possessiou^ of confirmatiou^ of electiounes,
Postulatiou^is of Abbaseyis, Pr^ories, or Prelaceis of times bygane in their
diocyis. And in likewise that all other priuilegis and indultis grantit be our
haly fathers the Papis of befoir to our Souerane Lord and his progenitouris, to
the proffeit and auale of their successouris or pepill, be in likewise obscruit
and keipit in all punctis and articulis contenit in them, in sa far as salbe
seen proffitabill to the good publicque of the Realm, and specially be the
Papis Celestyne and Innocence, to Kingis of good mind Williame, and Alexander
his progenitouris. And that letters be writtin to our haly father the Pape
heirupone. And this to be extendit be the causis, as is contenit in the act of
Parliament maid thairupone of befoir. etc.

That our Souerane Lord present to beneficis all times the sege vacand. Ca.
ciij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be the King and his three Estatis anent the
privilege of the Crown vsit and obseruit in all times bygane, anent the
presentatioun of beneficis in the time of the vacatioun of the segis of
Bischoppis, that our Souerane Lord and his successouris sall in time tocum the
time of the vacatioun of the sege have power to present to beneficis all times,
quhill the Prelat, and Bischop make his bullis of prouisioun be schawin to the
Kingis hienes, and his Cheptour. And in caise that our Souerane Lord of his
special grace and fauouris admit any Prelat to his temporalitie befoir the
schawing of his bullis, as said is, that sic admissioun salbe na prejudice, nor
skaith to his hienes, anent his said privilege and rycht of presentatioun.

Contrare the purchessaris of beneficis aganis the Kingis privilege Ca. ciiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the act of Parliament maid of befoir for
punitioun of the persounis, that laubouris and dois any thing contrare to the
said privilege, salbe extendit alsweill vpone them, that takis officis of
procuratioun on them, or supportis, or suppleis they persounis with money and
fynance to be punist, as the principal doaris. And attour gif any persou^ or
persounis in time tocum rasis or purchessis any commissioun of the sege of Rome
to be prouydit of any benefice, that beis fundin vacand, the sege of the
Bischop vacand for the time, the persounis, that rasis purchessis, or vsis sic
co^missiounis salbe repute, and haldin as brekaris and violatours of our
Souerane Lordis priuilegis, and transgressouris agane the at of Parliament,
and incur the panis contenit in the samin.

For treiting of strangearis inbringand victuallis. Ca. cv.
ITEM Our Souerane Lord of his special grace and his three Estatis hes ordanit
and commandit, that in time tocum all freindis, strangearis, and alienaris of
other cuntreis, that cummis heir with Merchandice and victuallis to the
supportatioun of the Realm salbe favorably treitit, and chereist in time
cu^ming, to the intent and effect, to cause them tocum within the Realm,
considdering that the Merchandis of this Realm ar throw weiris stoppit to
exerce and use the course of Merchandice, and specially to gar victuallis be
brocht in, sen their is now scantnes thairof.

ACTA PARLIAMENTI IACOBI TERTII REGIS SCOTORVM TENTI apud Edinburgh.xxiiij. die
Mensis Februarij Anno Do. M.iiii.C. lxxxiij.
Of wappinschawing and reddynes in weir. Ca. cvj.
IT Is auisit and thocht expedient be the three Estatis of the Parliament, that
our Souerane Lordis patent letters under his preuie seill be writtin to all
Schireffis, Baillies, and Officiaris within his Realm chargeing them be oppin
proclamatioun, and other wayis, they warn his liegis within the bou^dis of
their officis, that they weill abileit for weir be reddy vpone.viij. dayis
warning tocum to the King of his Lieutennentis, quhair they salbe chargeit for
the defense of the Realm, and resisting of his Inimeis of Ingland furnist with
victual, and expensis for the spare of.xx. dayis after their cumming to the
said place and term assignit to them. And that the said Schiref proclaim and
hald wappinschawingis within the boundis of their office to see, that our
Souerane Lordis liegis be bodin for weir after the form of the act of
Parliament, and to punis them, that are absent, and not weill abileit, after
form of the said act of Parliament. And the said wapinschawing to be (...) often
as is contenit in the act of Parliament maid thairupone. And the said Schiref
and Baillies to warn the King the day of the wappinschawing, that he may send
a special serua^d of his awin to see, that his liegis be weill bodin, and that
the said Schireffis do their office, as effeiris thairin. And quhat Schireffis
or Officiaris beis fundin negligent or sleuthfull in the executioun of their
officis to be punist after the form of the said act. And that the Schiref put
in roll and bill how money speiris, bowis, and axis, and fensabill persounis he
findis within the said Schire, and bring the names of them to the assemblay of
the Kingis hoist under his seill, and other four seillis of the Barronis, that
beis in the Schire. And that the Baillies of the Regaliteis and Barronis use
and exerce their privilege in the halding of wappinschawingis within them self
after the form of the said act of Parliament maid thairupone.

Recovering of Dunbar Castle.
SECVNDLIE As tuiching the recovering of ye Castle of Dunbar, that is now
stuffit and withhaldin be our Souerane Lordis Inimeis of Ingland, It is auisit
and thocht expedient be the haill Lordis of Parliament, that the said Castle
be asseigeit the first day of the Month of Maij be the Kingis hoist on the
south part of the watter of Forth. And they to be chargeit be the Kingis writ
patent under his preuie seill, at they be at the said Castle of Dunbar the
said first day personally weill abileit, and bodin for weir, and furneist with
victual and expensis their to remane after their cumming the said first
day.xx. dayis with the Kingis hienes or his Lieutennentis. And that all
persounis, that are ordanit to be bowis at the wappinschawing bring their bowis
and be furneist with schot. And quhat persoun, that beis absent, the said first
day, that presentis not him self to the said Lieutennent salbe repute and
haldin, as absent fra the Kingis hoist, and all his gudis takin and confiskat
to the King. The quhilkis confiscatiounis our Souerane Lord hes grantit and
geuin to the sustentatioun of the said assege and hoist, to be distribute be
the Lieuteunent with the auise of the reinanent of the Lordis, that sall be
present at the said asseige. And for the executioun thairof, that ilk Schiref
and Baillie leif ane Depute in his Schire of wisdom, substance, and lautie to
tak the said escheit and bring it in a bill to the quantity and auale thairof
to the Kingis hoist, that it may be distribute, as said is. And gif the said
Schiref and Baillies faileis heirintill be them self, and dois the contrare of
this charge, and that may be attaintit and preuit on them, That their gudis be
confiskat, their office tint for their lyfetyme, at the Kingis will.

And gif the falt be fundin in their Depute, and not in them, that they sall
bring the said Depute to the King to be punist, as said is. And in likewise
that letters be writtin to all our Souerane Lordis liegis on the north side of
the watter of Forth, at they be at the said asseige the.xviij. day of the said
Month of Maij weill abileit and stuffit, as said is.

Sequuntur Acta. etc.

Aganis Alexander Duke of Albany.
THE Article tuiching the persounis, that are Summound for art and part of the
tressonabill assistance to Alexander vmquhile Duke of Albany, The Lordis
thinkis expedient, that our Souerane Lord do Justice vpone sic persounis both
on them, that are now Summound, and to proceid to the punitioun of them after
their demeritis and offense. And to cause diligent inquisitiou^ to be maid in
all partis to have knawlege, quhat persoun geuis assistance or fauouris the
said tresoun, and to make them be punist with all rigor according to Justice,
and exempill to all vthers in time tocum, to commit sic odious crimes aganis
his Majesty.

As tuiching the feird article, considdering the greit tresoun, slauchters,
reiffis, thiftis, and other enormiteis with disobeying and lychtlying of the
Kingis authority, for the stanching and ceissing heirof and putting forth of
Justice, The Lordis thinkis, expedient and counsallis the Kingis hienes, to gar
his Justice Airis be set and haldin generally throw all the Realm with sic
authority to pas with the Justice to the said Airis, that trespassouris may be
punist but fauouris. And at the Kingis hienes will witschaif, that the Lordis
of his counsall commoun with certane Lordis and heidismen on the Bordouris, and
vthers for the apprehending and taking of the maisterfull trespassouris, that are fugitive fra his Lawis and brekaris of the cuntrie. And at the wardanis hald
the wardane courtis, als often as it is requyrit, and punis trespassouris, but
fauouris. And to provide for a wardane on the west Bordouris.

The denying of remissiounis and respectis.
AND Alswa our Souerane Lord the King hes closit his handis fra the geuin of
remissiounis and respectis in time to cum to them, that committis tresoun,
slauchter, or forthochtfellonie, co^moun thift, or manifest reif within the
cu^trie for two eiris nixt to cum.

ITEM As tuiching the Kingis maillis, rentis, and fermis y^ ar haldin fra his
hienes, vpone the quhilk his estate and houshald sold be sustenit, The Lordis
thinkis expedient, that the Kingis Master of houshald and Comptrollar, auise
and see, quhair his rentis and fermis ar withhaldin, and obeyis not the Kingis
chargeis. And at the Master of houshald and other Lordis of counsall pas and
distreinie the Officiaris in they partis, to bring their persounis to the King
that disobeyis his authority, and withhaldis his rentis.

ITEM Anent the Estatis and Lordis that are not now cu^min to this Parliament to
give their counsallis to the weilfair and good publicque of the Realm, The
Lordis vnderstandis that they have faultit and sold be blamit, and referris
the blame of them to the Kingis hienes.

ITEM Anent the diuisioun, debatis, and discordis, that standis amang our
Souerane Lordis liegis, Barronis, and vthers quhilk is dangerous to be
vnstanchit both of brekaris of the Realm, and at they sold gang in unity
and concord, to the resisting of our Souerane Lordis Inimeis of Ingland, It is
thocht expedient be the saidis Lordis to counsall our Souerane Lord to make be
callit befoir him and his cou^sall the greit Lordis, and put them in
freindschip and concord, or they depart fra his presence. And to command his
Justice and Lordis, that passis to his Justice Airis, that they call befoir
them other smallar persounis to make unity and concord amang them: Sa that
our Souerane Lordis liegis stand in peax amang them, and be obedient to our
Souerane Lordis authority.

And that all Schireffis, Baillies, and other Officiaris tak the copy of their
articlis or they depart, at they may not excuse them of the vnknawlege of their
articlis.

Of impetratioun of beneficis the sege vacand Ca. cvij.
ALSVA Anent impetratiounis maid in the court of Rome, in contrare our Souerane
Lordis privilege the sege vacand, It is ordanit and statute be our Souerane
Lord and his three Estatis, that the actis concerning his patronage the sege
vacand be put to dew executioun vpone the brekaris of the said actis. And at
the Cha^cellar that salbe for the time, sall write to our haly father the Pape
under his seill of the Realms behalf, for the defense of our Souerane Lordis
patronage, ay and quhen he beis requyrit according to our Souerane Lordis
letters send to our haly father the Pape, for the defense of his patronage for
the time, as said is.

Of the money. Ca. cviij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be our Souerane Lord and his three Estatis in
this present Parliament, that a fine pe^ny of gold be strikin of the wecht and
fynes of the Rois Nobill, and a penny of silver to be equal in fynes of the
auld Inglis grot, and x. of them to make ane ounce of silver, and to have course
and pas for.xiiij. d. And their salbe alswa ane half grot of the samin. And the
said penny of gold to have course, and pas for.xxx. of the said grotis. And ane
other penny of gold to be of the samin prent, and to have course for.xx. of the
said grotis. And the third penny of gold to have passage for.x. of the said
grotis. And the said penny of gold to have sic prent and circumscriptioun, as
salbe auysit be the Kingis hienes. And all other money, to be conformit equally
thairefter. And at our Souerane Lord sall limmit a wise man, that hes knawlege
in the money to be wardane thairof, and to examine and assay the fynes of the
said gold and silver, after the form and reule maid in the Parliamentis of
befoir: The wardane and the cuineouris hauand siclyke feis for their laubouris,
as they had in our Souerane Lordis fathers and grandschiris times, and siclyke
proffeit tocum to the Kingis hienes of the cuinie. And for the inbringing of
buleoun the Merchandis sall for the good of the Realm bring in of ilk serplath
of woll, skin, hydis, and claith, and of ilk last of Salmound effeirand thairto
four ounce of brint silver. And they sall have for ilk ounce.x. of the said
grotis.

ITEM It is auisit and thocht speidfull be the Lordis of the articlis, that the
fredome of haly kirk be obseruit and keip^^ in time tocum, like as it hes been
in times of our Souerane Lordis may Nobill progenitouris of befoir. And gif
their be any Kirk men of any degree hurt or greuit agane the privilege of the
Kirk, y^ they cum till our Souerane Lord, and his counsall, and schaw their
complaintis, and quhame by they ar iniurit. And thairefter reformatioun,
ame^dis, and executioun to be maid of the iniuris with punitiou^ of the
trespassouris according to the auld Lawis, actis, and statutis maid of befoir.

Ane Ambaxat to King Richard.
ITEM Anent the peax and trewis, that is now takin betuix our Souerane Lord his
Realm and liegis, and Richard King of Ingland his Realm and liegis, for
certane eiris tocum be his hienes last Ambaxatouris send in Ingland, and
thairefter confirmit be his Majesty, and als anent the keiping of the diet,
that is now appointit to be maid and confirmit, and the number of the Estatis
and the persounis, that sall pas in the said Ambaxat, and the expensis, that
they sall have, and quhair it salbe taken: IT IS thocht expedient be the Lordis
of the articlis, that the peax and trewis foirsaid takin of befoir be obseruit
and keipit in all thingis after the form of the Indentouris maid thairupone
unto the end of the termis contenit in the samin. And in likewise it is thocht
speidfull be the saidis Lordis, that the diet, that is appointit in ork anent
the marriage foirsaid be obseruit and keipit, and that their be ane honorabill
Ambaxat send to conclude and perform the samin: Sa that sic desyris, as salbe
requyrit of the behalf of our Souerane Lord for the said marriage, be grantit
and fulfillit, and the pointis, that sold be desyrit of the party be
aggreabill and convenient. And the said marriage and alliance beand appointit
and concordit, that peax and trewis be takin for sa lang termis, as sall pleis
our Souerane Lord. And as to the Estatis and number of the persounis, that sall
pas in the said Ambaxatrie, The Lordis foirsaid thinkis for the honor of our
Souerane Lord, that their salbe sex persounis, that sall pas in the said
Ambaxat, that is to say, ane Bischop, ane Earl, ane Lord of Parliament, ane
honorabill and wise Clerk, ane Knycht, that is ane Barrone, and a Squire, that
is a Barrone, and with them seruandis to co^pleit to the number of fyftie two
persounis. And that they sall have to their expensis five hundredth pundis
Scottis. The quhilk salbe payit be the three Estatis in this form, that is to
say, be the Prelatis and Clergy two hundredth pundis, be the Barronis two
hundredth pu^dis, and be the Burrowis ane hundredth pundis. And at this taxt be
incontinent rasit and brocht in, that it may be reddy to deliver to the said
ambaxat befoir the day of their passage: Sa that in default thairof they be not
taryit, as the last Ambaxat was.

Of the fische garth. Ca. cix.
ITEM Anent the article of the fische garth of Esk debatabill betuix the
Realms, that of auld use, quhair it was put in be the Inglis party, and put
out be our Souerane Lordis liegis Bordouraris in they partis, The Lordis
counsallis the Kingis hienes, to write to the King of Ingland schawand him the
debatis of the said fische garth. And gif it plesis him to send his Commissaris
with sufficient powar to certane day, to auise for the said fische garth, gif it
aucht to be haldin in or not, after the rychtis, that salbe schawin be ather
party, and tak sic directioun thairin, that it be nane occasioun of brek
betuix the Realms. For our Souerane Lord will, that alwayis for his part his
trewis be keipit and without prejudice of his rychtis: Sa that he may have
siclyke of the King of Ingland and his party, and the sonar the better, for
the stanching of the said debaittis. For the directioun of the said fische
garth was takin of befoir into King Edwardis time, and our Souerane Lordis
Commissaris come their, and not the Commissaris of Ingland party. And
thairfoir the questiounis remanis vndecydit. And at redressis be maid of all
attemptatis be the Lieutennentis and their Deputis in the meintyme according to
the said trewis.

Of remissiounis and respectis. Ca. cx.
ITEM It is thocht expedient be the Lordis foirsaid, that for the incres of
Justice and tra^quillitie of the Realm, that our Souerane Lord cause his
Justice airis to be haldin universally in all partis of his Realm twyis in the
eir, anis on the gers, and anis on y^ corn unto the time, yt the Realm be
brocht to good reule. And counsallis his hienes to call a part of the Lordis
and heidismen of all partis of his Realm, and tak dittay of them of notoure
trespassouris without exceptioun of any persoun, to be takin and iustifeit
without remissioun, quhilk they understand wald be greit cause of the commoun
good and weilfair of the Rtalme. And at na respectis be geuin in time tocum.
For they ar mair agane Justice, than plane remissiounis ar. And at the
respectis, that are geuin be na prejudice to the parties, anent the persewing of
their rychtis, na to dittayis, nor arreistmentis to the Kingis Officiaris,
Crownaris nor other Deputis. And at na remissiounis war geuin for commoun
thift, except the first airis, as for the Bordouraris, that is to say, the
Mers, Teuidale, Iedburgh forest, Liddalisdale, Eskdale, Ewisdale, and
Anna^^erdale.

Ane Ambaxat to the Pape. Ca. cxj.
ITEM It is requyrit and seen speidfull, that our Souerane Lord sall send his
honorabill Ambaxat to our haly rather the Pape, for the making of his
obedience, and for the desire of honorabill and proffitabill priuilegis and
faculteis of the King, and commoun good of the Realm. THE Lordis of the
articlis thinkis, that sen the Archibischop of Sanctandros is to pas to the
court of Rome; and that our Souerane Lord hes writtin of befoir to our haly
father the Pape in special, that he is to cum and he offeris him self for
singular emplesance of our Souerane Lord and the Realm, to pas on his awin
expensis, that thairfoir he is may convenient and may honorabill persoun,
that can be send, and that our Souerane Lordis co^missioun and (...) of his
matters be committit till him with sic other persounis of estate, as effe^^is.
And gif it plesis his hienes, to adiune any other to him, it is the better. And
that their matters vnderwrittin be put in instructiounis, that salbe geuin to the
Commissaris with sic other matters, as pleses our Souerane Lord.

Instructiounis.
IN the first the saidis Commissaris sall desire ane co^firmatioun in the best
form of the al^^ance and confederatioun betuix our Souerane Lord and the King
of France. They sall have the copy and transsumpt autentick under the seill of
the Cha^cellar and the Bischop of Glasgow. And in likewise they sall impetrat,
and desire at our haly father a confirmatioun of the conuentiounis,
confederatiounis, and bandis maid betuix our Souerane Lord and the King of
Denmark that last deceis^^, of the doonatioun and impignoratioun of the landis
of Orknay and Schotland and of perpetual exoueratioun, renuntiatioun, and
discharge of contr^dictioun of the Ilis after the form of the said
conuentiounis.

And (...) they sall impretrate ane erectioun of Coldinghame to our Souerane
Lordis Chapel in the best form, outher be commissiou^ or vtherwayis, as they
think may expedient, and may best get with decreit of diuisioun of the said
Pryorie into Prebendis, be the extinctioun of the Religioun, and the erectioun
maid of befoir be our haly fathers predecessouris, and vmquhile the Cardinallis
of Rome Commissaris Iugeis to the samin.

And mairattour that the saidis Commissaris sall schaw to our haly father the
Pape in the name of our said Souerane Lord, how his hienes hes diverse times
writtin and maid supplicatioun both till our haly father and his
predecessouris, for the promotioun of his tender Clerk and counsalour Master
Alexander Inglis Dene and Elect of the Kirk of Dunkeldin to the Bischoprik of
the samin, and to do all their diligence possibill for his said promotioun, and
als for the promotioun of our Souerane Lordis Clerk and traift counsallour
Master Iohne of Ireland professor in Theology to the Archidenrie of
Sanctandros, quhen it happinnis to vaik be promotioun of the said Master
Alexander to the said Bischoprik of Dunkeldin. And that they sall schaw and
declair determinatly to our said haly father, that our Souerane Lord with
consent of his three Estatis will not suffer Master George Brou^e, nor nane
vthers, that hes presumit to the promotioun of the said Bischoprik of Dunkeldin
contrare our Souerane Lordis mind, will, and special wrytting to have any
possessioun of the samin. And that their be new special letters of our
Souerane Lordis under his preuie seill direct to our said haly father with
consent and deliverance of his three Estatis, it as of befoir, for the
promotioun of the saidis Master Alexander and Master Iohne, as said is. And
to retreit and reduce the pretendit promotioun maid of the said Master George.
And attour to make supplicatioun to our haly father, that sen he hes promouit
Reverend fathers, Robert Blacader to the Bischoprik of Glasgow, and Williame
Elphinstoun to the Bischoprik of Abirdene, and Iohne of Hepburne to the Pryorie
of Sanctandros, quhilkis ar thankful persounis to our Souerane Lord and of his
special counsall and ressaifit and admittit be his hienes to their
temporalitie, that thairfoir his halynes wald defend them tharin, gif any wald
tend to make them troubill or move pley agane them.

Of Barratouris.
ITEM Because their is certane persou^is barratouris, quhilkis of greit
vntreuth and ingratitude hes mouit pl^id and questioun, and vexit and troublit
certane persounis promouit to beneficis be presentatioun of our Souerane Lord
the time of the vacatioun of the sege of Bischoprikis in co^trare till our
Souerane Lordis privilege, and to the greit hurt, damnage, and skaith to the
rycht of his Crown: The saidis Commissaris sall thairfoir desire at our haly
father the Pape, to put silence to the saidis persounis barratouris, and make
the pleyis and debatis now mouit be them agane any party concerning our
Souerane Lords privilege, and being in contrare thairof, to be ceissit in time
tocum. And als that his halynes wald considder the greit distance of his Realm
fra the court of Rome, That he thairfoir grant to our Souerane Lord and his
successouris to superseid, and delay the dispensatioun vpone any Prelaceis or
digniteis elective for the space of sex Month, that our Souerane Lordis
writing and supplicatioun may be send for the promotioun of sic persounis, as
is thank full to his hienes: Sa that their be na persounis promouit to
Prelaceis nor digniteis without auise of his hienes: Sen alwayis the Prelatis
of his Realm hes the first voit in his Parliament, and of his secreit counsall.

For confirmatioun of auld and impetratioun of new priuilegeis.
AND alswa the saidis Commissaris sall laubour to get confirmatioun of all auld
priuilegeis and Indultis grantit of befoir to the sege of Saneta^dros, with sic
Indultis and priuilegeis, as may be gottin and grantit of new to the samin sege
for the honor and proffeit of our Souerane Lord and the Realm.

And als that their be desyrit and gottin till other Bischoppis of the Realm
all Indultis, that may be grantit to the honor and proffeit of the segeis of
our Souerane Lord, and the Realm, as said is: Prouyding alwayis, that nane
annexatiounis nor vnionis be maid to Bischoprikis, nor Abbaceis, pensiounis,
nor commendis co^trare the said actis and statutis of Parliament maid of befoir.

Alswa that our Souerane Lord be auisit, gif their be any special matters, that
he will desire at our said haly father, as nominatiounis for the promotioun of
his familiaris and Clerkis, that his hienes will schaw the matters to the
Commissaris, and give them commissioun thairupone. And generally to ^olist all
other thingis, as salbe thocht expedient, and proffitabill for his hienes
Realm and liegis.

Alswa that their be letters of special supplicatiou^ and requeist writtin to
our haly father the Pape of our Souerane Lordis exhorting and praying his
halynes to have considderatioun of the greit troubill, that hes been maid to
the Kirk of Sanctandros, and the greit det, that the may Reverend father
Williame Archibischop of y^ samin hes of befoir payit, and it is awing part to
the Chalmerlane throw the said troubill. And thairfoir to schaw favor to him
in the said dettis. And to grant to him and to his Kirk sic honorabill
priuilegeis and Indultis, as salbe schawin, desyrit be him at his cumming to
our haly father the Pape. And at the Lordis of the three Estatis write their
letters of sic supplicatioun according to our Souerane Lordis writing.

Alswa that special letters be writtin to our haly father the Pape in the name
and behalf of our Souerane Lord, that all beneficis elective quhilkis of the
commoun Law pertenis to electioun of Cheptouris, as Deneries and vthers, be
confirmit be their Ordinaris, notwithstanding the rewlis of the Chancellarie,
maid, or to be maid in the contrare, saifand alwayis the privilege of our
Souerane Lord, quhilk he hes Sedibus vacantibus, in the presentatioun of sic
beneficis elective, And collatiounis to be maid and geuin be the said Ch^ptour
thairupone, considdering all other Princis hes sic priuilegeis within their
Realms.

Of ferryaris that takis dowbill fraucht. Ca. cxij.
ITEM Because their is greit extorsiounis rasit vpone our Souerane Lordis
liegis, both pure and rich, be taking of dowbill and tribill fraucht be the
ferryaris, in contrare the auld actis of Parliament, and use and consuetude of
the Realm, The Lordis of the articlis thinkis expedient, that all ferryaris
within the Realm in time tocum be chargeit, that they raise nor tak na mair
fraucht of our Souerane Lordis liegis for man nor other good, bot samekill, as
is statute and ordanit of befoir to be payit, and after the auld use and
consuetude. And that they be reddy to serve all men for that fraucht, sa at
they be not taryit in default of the ferryaris. And at this be a point of
dittay in time tocum. And quha that beis convict, in the first Air sall pay the
unlaw of the Air. And at the nixt time, the bait to be escheit. And at the
third time, to be suspendit fra the using of the said office for all the dayis
of his life, and to be presonit, and wardit at the willof our Souerane Lord.
etc.

That their be ane Dekin and serchour of goldsmythis. Ca. cxiij.
ALSVA it is auisit and concludit be the Lordis of the articlis, that for the
eschewing of the greit damnage and skaithis, that our Souerane Lordis liegis
sustenis be the goldsmythis in the minissing of the fynes of the silver wark,
That fra thine forth their be in ilk Burgh of the Realm, quhair goldsmythis
ar, ane Dekin, and ane serchour of the craft. And that ilk goldsmythis wark be
markit with his awin mark, the Dekinnis mark, and the mark of the Town, of the
fynes of.xj. d. fine. And quhair their is any sic wark within the said fynes,
The wark to be brokin, the wark man to vpmak the auale of the fynes foirsaid,
and the said warkman to be punist thairfoir at the Kingis will. And that na
goldsmyth tak vpone hand to be a master, or to hald oppin buith of the craft,
bot gif he be admittit be the Officiaris of the craft, and the haill body of
the craft. And gif any be fundin vsand craft, haldand oppin buith, that are
insufficient, that the persounis be causit to ceis and put under a master of
craft. And this act to be put to executioun within.xl. dayis nixt followand the
proclamatioun of the samin.

The crying down of the new plakis. Ca. cxiiij.
OUR Souerane Lord of his special grace, and at the requeist and desire of the
Lordis of the three Estatis in his Parliament hauand considderatioun of the
greit distres, that now proceidis amangis his liegis in default of victuallis,
and all other Merchandice and gudis, that is put to derth, and rasit, and put
to exceidand price, and haldin and abstrackit fra mercattis throw occasioun of
greit quantity of falls counterfetit money plakis strikin in cuinie of lait be
falls cuineouris, not allanerly within this Realm, bot als out with the Realm
sa subtillie, and in sic form of metal, that it is vnpossibilll to decerue
and know the true fra the false: That thairfoir his hienes mouit of piety, and
of his grace, as said is, and for saiftie of his pepill, eschewing of derth,
and money vthers inconuenientis hes ordanit to ceis the course and passage of all
the new plakis last cuineit, and gar put the samin to the fire. And of the
substance, that may be fynit of the samin to gar make ane new penny of fine
silver, like the.xiiij. d. grot ordanit of befoir, quhilk is of fynes to the
Inglis grot, and.x. of them to make ane ounce. And in part of releuing of his
pepill, that they sall not tyne all the soumes, that they have of the saidis
plakis, his hienes hes causit Thomas Tod, and Alexander Leuingstoun to ressaif,
grant, and tak vpone them all plakis both true and falls, that is within his
Realm fra quhat sumeuer persounis, that will bring or send them to the saidis
Thomas and Alexander betuix this and the last day of Maij inclusiue, and to gif
thairfoir.ij. d. for ilk plak, that is to say, a.xiiij. d. grot for.vij. of the
said plakis, or any other payment, that will empleis the party ressaifand. And
the saides Thomas and Alexander sall find souertie to the persounis, that they
ressaif the money fra, to make them payment, as said is, gif souertie be
desyrit of them. And that the latter payment salbe maid to all persounis be
the last day of September nixt tocum.

Of talloun and salt hydis. Ca. cxv.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the actis and statutis maid of befoir
anent the halding of talloun within the Realm be keipit and put to scharpe
executioun Item it is statute and ordanit, that na hydis saltit dry, nor barkit
be had to the sey nor out of the Realm fra this day forth for.ij. eiris tocum,
under the pane of escheit of the samin.

PARLIAMENTVM EXCEL LENTISSIMI PRINCIPIS ET DO. NOSTRI DO. Iacobi tertij dei
gratia Scotorum Regis Illustrissimi tentum and inchoatum apud Edinburgh primo
die Mensis Octobris Anno Do. Millesimo Quadringentesimo Octuagesimo Septimo.
etc.

Refuse of remissiounis and respectis. Ca. cxvj.
OUR Souerane Lord hes considderit and vnderstandin, that his Realm is
greitlie brokin in theself, his liegis troublit, and heryit, throw tresoun,
slauchter, reif, birning, thift, and oppin heirschip throw default of scharpe
executioun of Justice, and over commoun granting of grace and remissiounis to
trespassouris: HIS hienes thairfoir of his special grace, and in favor of his
pure liegis and for the reducing and bringgin of his Realm to Justice,
tranquillity, and quietness hes of his fre will grantit to his three Estatis of
his Realm in this his Parliament, that he sall for.vij. eiris nixt tocum,
clois, stop, and restreinie giving of remissiounis and respectis for cryminall
actiounis, that is to say, for tresoun, murder, birning, reuissing of women,
violent reif, slauchter of forthochtfellony, co^moun thift, and resset of
commoun thift, and falls cuineing to be co^mittit fra this day forth enduring
the said.vij. eiris. And alswa quhe^ any trespassour or trespassouris, that are
not obedient to the Law happinnis to be arreistit and taken be force agane their
will, and brocht to his hienes or Justice, that his Majesty sall grant na
remissiounis to sic persounis, nor suffer them to be deliuerit, nor put fra
Justice, bot cause them to be punist extremely be the Law according to their
trespassis and demeritis.

Of Iusticis generallis to be maid. Ca. cxvij.
AND Attour his hienes hes in likewise grantit, depute, and ordanit ane or two
Iusticis general in the south side of the watter of Forth, and ane or two on
the north side, and to cheis the samin persounis ganing thairfoir both of
wisdom and knawlege, and that is of will and good mind to execute Justice,
and that hes powar and strenth of their awin with part of supportatioun to be
maid be his Majesty in sic wise, that his hienes and authority sall god
willing be honorably borne forth and trespassouris brocht to the Law, and
scharply punist. And sall cause and make his Justice Airis to be set, and haldin
in all gudly haist in all partis of the Realm.

For inbringing of trespassouris and defending of them at the bar. Ca. cxviij
ALSVA because our Souerane Lord hes sa graciously applyit him to the cou^sall
of his three Estatisat this time in all thingis concerning them and the commoun
proffeit of the Realm and beninglie gra^tit to them all their delyre and
requeistis, that they have maid to his Majesty, all the Lordis spiritual and
temporal, Barronis, frehalders, and co^muniteis of the Estatis of the Realm
hes frelie grantit, that ever ilk ane of them for him self sall faithfully
promit, and sweir, that they sall not in time tocu^ ma^tein, fortify, supply,
defend, nor be aduocatis, norsta^d at the bar with manifest tratouris, nor
co^moun men slayaris, theiffis, reiffaris, nor other trespassouris, nor
persounis pertening to thameself nor vthers: Saifand it salbe leiffull to them
in sober wise to stand with their kin and freindis in the defense of them in
honest actiounis: Bot at they sall at all their gudlie power bring or gar bring
trespassouris to Justice, and underly the Law but dissimulatiou^, quhe^ ever
they be requyrit or chargeit thairto be our Souerane Lord or his Justice, and
als than at all their power and knawlege sall gif their counsall, help,
supply, favor, and assistance to inquyre and get knawlege of the said
trespassouris for the executioun of Justice vpone them after their demeritis.
And at the Lordis of the Regaliteis, and all vthers spiritual and temporal,
that hes iurisdictioun of courtis nor their ballies sal not sell any
trespassouris, nor fine with them, nor sell not for lufe, favor, affectioun,
or meid or rewaird leif Justice undone. And that ilk ane of them sall make
suithfast and true relatioun to our Souerane Lordis Chancellar or Justice,
quhen they salbe requyrit of the persounis, that dois in the co^trare heirof.
And quha sa beis convict and attaintit of the breking of the punc^is and
articlis foirsaid or any of them, salbe punist after the form of the Kingis
Lawis and of Regiam Maiestatem, and the statutis maid be King James the first
and King James the secund our Souerane Lordis grandschir and father, quhome God
assolie. etc.

Of Crownaris. Ca. cxix.
ITEM It is thocht expedient, statute, and ordanit for the good of Justice,
inbringing of trespassour is to the Law, and punissing of them, that in time
tocu^, quhen the Crownar resaiffis his portewis and traistis, y^ their be any
parsounis co^tenit in the samin, y^ will disobey him, that he dar not, nor is
not of powar to arreist, in that raise the Crownar sall pas to the Lord and
Barrone of the Barronie, quhair that persoun or persounis dwellis and
inhabitis. And gif he dwellis not within a Barronie, he sall pas to the Schiref
of the Schire, and schaw his portewis, that he hes sic persounis contenit
thairin, and inquyre and ask, gif that Lord Barrone or Schiref will be souertie
and Borgh for they persounis or persou^, to enter them to the Justice Air, sen
they dwell within their Lordschippis, Barroneis, and boundis. And gif they
grant thairto, he sall deliver them the names of the persounis, yt they cum
borrois for, indentit in writ, seillit, or subscriuit with their awin hands. And
gif they deny and refusis the souertie or Borgh, he sall ask and require y^
said Lord, Barron, or Schiref in the Kingis name outher to pas, or se^d their
Officiaris with their houshald and familiaris in sufficient number with the
said Crownar to stuff, fortify, and supply him in the making of his
arreistment, taking, or keiping of the persoun, that will not find souertie,
quhill he be brocht to the Schiref to be keipit to the Justice Air. And quhat
Lord, Barrone, or Schiref, that denyis or refusis the doing thairof, sall
pay.x. pund to the King at the nixt Justice Air thairefter: Sa that it may be
sufficiently preuit be the Crownar, that they war requyrit thairto, as said is.

Of slauchter with additioun. Ca. cxx.
ITEM It is thocht expedient, statute, and ordanit, that the actis of
Parliament maid of befoir anent the punitiou^ of slauchter be put to executioun
with this additioun, That quhair any persoun committis slauchter, and cu^mis
not incontinent to the Schiref to bind him to the Law, and find souertie
thairfoir after the form of the said actis of Parliament maid of befoir, bot
beis fugitive and absentes him, The Schiref sall than furthwith be him or his
Deputes search and seik the co^mittar of the said slauchter at his dwelling
place, gif he hes any. And gif he hes nane, and can not be personally
apprehendit, Than the Schiref sall put his gudis under arreist, and pas, or
send his Depute to the heid Burgh of the Schire, quhair the slauchter is
co^mittit, and be oppin proclamatioun at the market croce warn, and charge the
flayar ane or maa, as they be, that they cu^ to him within sex dayis nixt
after, and find souertie to co^peir, and underly the Law at a certane day under
the panis contenit in the actis of Parliament maid of befoir. The quhilkis sex
dayis beand ru^nin, and the persounis not co^peirand, and findand souertie, as
said is, Than the Schiref incontinent to put them to the horn, and denunce
them the Kings rebellis, and tak and escheit their gudis. And make warning to
the nixt Schiref, yt sic persounes ar put to the horn be him, and charge him
in our Souerane Lordis name to do the samin, or else tak and arreist their
persounis gif they may be apprehendit, and bring them to the Law.

Of the keiping of arreistit trespassouris. Ca. cxxj.
ITEM It is thocht expedient, statute, and ordanit, for the punitioun and
iustifeing of sic trespassouris, as hes been in times bygane after, that they
war takin and arreistit be the Crownaris, and indefault, that they could find
na borrois, nor their was na Castle to ressaif and keip them in, quhill the
Justice Air, and their throw eschaipit and was put fra the Law: THAT thairfoir
in time tocum, quhair any Crownar arreistis and takis sic trespassouris, he
sall bring them to the Schiref of the Schire, quhilk Schiref sall ressaif
them, and keip them in surety and firmance on our Souerane Lordis expensis,
quhair it faileis of their awin gudis, quhill the nixt Justice Air, and than
present them to the Justice. The quhilk Schiref sall have allowit to him in
the Checkar for the expensis, that he makis in the keiping of they persounis,
that beis deliuerit to him be the Crownar for ilk persoun.iii. d. on the day,
he bringa^d a testimonial to the Checkar fra the Justice under his seill, of
the persounis, that he bringis to the Justice Air, and how lang time, and quhat
dayis he kepit them. Apone the quhilk time and dayis the Justice sall tak
certificatioun and prufe in the Air, quhat time the Crownar deliuerit them,
and how lang the Schiref keipit them. And gif the Schiref refusis to ressaif
the persoun or persounis, that salbe brocht to him be the Crow nar, as said is,
he sall underly the danger and unlaw of the Justice Air to the feird court, as
ane Brogh sold do, for fault of entry of a persoun arreistit, the Crownar
preuand, that he brocht sic persounis to the Schiref and requyrit him to
ressaif them, as said is.

Of Schireffis and Crownaris. Ca. cxxij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that because the Crownaris in times bygane
throw wrang consuetude and abusioun of the Law, after that a trespassour was
convict, befoir the Justice, and condampnit to the deid, the saidis Crownaris
wald incontinent pas or send to escheit the gudis pertening to our Souerane
Lord of sic convict trespassouris, and at their awin hand intromet with the
samin, and approper a part thairof to their use both corn, and cattle, and
other gudis, that of Law or ressoun sold not pertene to their office: It is
thairfoir thocht expedient, statute, and ordanit in this Parliament, that in
time tocum na Crownar tak vpone hand to tak any sic gudis, or intromet
thairwith, quhill the Schiref of the Schire or his Deputis pas or send with
them, and see all the haill gudis, and thairefter deliver to them samekill,
as they sold have of ressoun, and as pertenis to their office, and bring the
remanent till our Souerane Lord, and his Thesaurar. And that the Schiref
deliver to the Crownaris na mair, than they aucht of Law to have. And gif they
do in the contrare heirof, and intromettis and takis any of the said gudis at
their awin hand, they to be punist thairfoir, as for reif.

ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that their be charge geuin to the Justice,
that he in time tocum the last day of his Air gif ane assyse to the Schiref and
Crownar, gif they have vsit and done their office trewly. And gif they be
conuic^, and fundin falls thairin, that they be punist thairfoir after the form
of Law and their demeritis. etc.

Of cumming to courtis in sober wyis. Ca. cxxiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the act and statute maid of befoir anent
the cumming to courtis in sober wyis and quiet but armis, or conuocatioun of
our Souerane Lordis liegis be put to scharpe executioun in all pointis contenit
in the samin, and with this additioun, That fra the Schiref be sickerly
certifeit and get knawlege, that any parteis makis conuocatioun and gaddering
of armis tocum to the court, The Schiref sall be him self, his Deputis, or
Officiaris send to they parteis, and charge them to ceis, and skaill their
gadderingis, and cum in sober and quiet wyis to the court after the form of
the said act, the quhilk gif they do not, that he sall ceis the court for that
day, and incontinent cum and schaw to our Souerane Lord, quhat persounis
disobeyis him. And thairefter to call they persounis, and tak knawlege of their
disobeysance. And quha that beis fundin culpabill, salbe punist be warding of
their persounis for ane eir, and als to pay the expensis and damnage, that the
party sustenis be deferring of Justice, throw the said disobeysance.

That all actiounis first persew their Judge Ordinar. Ca. cxxiiij.
ITEM It is thocht expedient, that all civil actiounis, questiounis, and
pleyis mouit betuix quhatsumeuer parteis be determinit and decydit befoir their
Judge Ordinar, as Justice, Chalmerlane, Schireffis, Barronis, Prouestis, and
Baillies of Burrowis, and vthers Officiaris Iugeis, and Ministers of Law, to
quhame they actiounis pertenis and effeiris, to be determinit and decydit: Swa
that na actiounis salbe deducit, callit, nor determinit befoir the Lordis of
our Souerane Lordis counsall, except allanerly actiounis pertening in special
to our Souerane Lordis actiounis and complain it is maid be Kirkmen, wedowis,
Orphanis, and Pupillis, actiounis of strangearis of other Realms, and
complaintis maid vpone Officiaris for fault of executioun of their office, or
quhair the Officiaris ar party them self. And quhen ever the complaint, is
maid on the Officiar for wrangous and inordinat proceiding in any matters, and
summoundis be determit and geuin thairupone, the party that hes persewit or
defendit the actioun, salbe summound and callit the samin day with the Officiar
for their entres, and special charge geuin, that the rolme^, it is of the court
be brocht with them to that day, that it may be vnderstandin, quhether it be
rychtously proceidit and determinit, or not. And gif it beis fundin, that the
Officiar hes proceidit wrangously, or vnordourlie, The process salbe reducit,
and adnullit, and he to pay the expensis of the party, and to be punist at the
will of the King after the form of the act of Parliament maid in that matter of
befoir. And gif the party compleineand beis fundin in the wrang be making of
the complaint, he sall pay both the expensis of the Officiar and the party.
And gif the party be not of powar to pay the coistis, Than their persounis
sall be at the will of the King taken, and punist be warding or presoning of
their persounis, prouyding alwayis, that this statute hurt not the process of
the falsing of domes, quhair it plesis the party to proceid that way. And that
all summoundis, that are now rasit or standis under continewatioun dependand and
vndetermynit, salbe decydit and endit befoir the Lordis of counsall. And this
act and statute till endure quhill the nixt Parliament.

The desyris of Burrowis. Ca. cxxv.
THEIR Ar the articlis, that the Commissaris of Burrowis desyris to be red in
presence of our Souerane Lord and his Lordis. etc. and to be ratifeit and
appreuit in this present Parliament for the budoing and down putting of the
letter of Marque geuin be the King of Romany vpone our Souerane Lordis liegis
spiritual and temporal.

Ambaxat to the King of Romany for undoing of ane letter of Marque. Ca. cxxvj.
IT IS thocht expedient and ordanit be the haill three Estatis of the Realm,
that their be ane Ambaxat, that is to say, ane Clerk, and two Burges men send
over sey to the king of Romany with co^missioun and powar to laubour and to be
diligent in all gudlie haist for the down putting and distroying of the letter
of Marque, and the coistis to be maid heirupone salbe sustenit be the haill
Merchandis of Burrowis. And at the said expensis may be inbrocht betuix this
and Martymes for the haistie passage of the saidis persounis, Considdering the
time is schort and approchis of the suspensiou^ of the said letter of Marque,
the quhilk induris bot quhill Pasche, and that we mycht have our Souerane
Lordis letters direct till all Officiaris of Burrowis to speid the ingaddering
of the said expensis be the said Martymes day, under the pane of warding of
their persounis, and payment of the soumes vnbrocht in of their a win proper
gudis. The quhilkis haill Commissaris hes ne^mit, and is content of Master
Rychard Lawsoun for the Clerk, Steuin Lokart and Robert Marser, or James Rollok
for the Burgessis.

And the saidis Commissaris desyris of our Souerane Lordis good grace, his
greit seill, togidder with the seillis of his Lordis, that gai^ the sentence
heir in Scotland vpone the Coleunaris clame, to be hungin to the said sentence
and process thairof for the verificatioun of Justice, that they gat in Scotland,
quhilk may be destructioun to the said letter of Marque. etc.

their ar the actis and statutis, that the haill Commissaris of Burrowis desyris
to be ratifeit and appreuit in this present Parliament, and to be put to
executioun for the honor of our Souerane Lordis hienes, his Realm, and
weilfair of Merchandis.

Of saillaris to have half ane last of gudis. Ca. cxxvij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the actis of Parliament maid of befoir
vpone the greit multitude of simpill dishonest persounis saillaris forth of all
Burrowis south and north in the partis of Flanders, Holland, or Zeland, mycht
be put till dew executioun: Sa that na man saill in the saidis partis in way of
Merchandice, bot famous and worschipfull men haua^d ilk ane of their awin half
a last of gudis, or hauand samekill in sterage or governance under the pane
of.x. pund to be rasit to our Souerane Lordis use, as the auld actis proportis.
And als that na Merchand saill within the foirsaid partis, bot gif he be a fre
man of a Burgh, and indwellar of the samin under the said pane. And that
serchouris mycht be limmit heirvpone haueand powar to execute and search the
Actis, and raise the pane, and inbring the samin till our Souerane Lordis
Checkar, als often as they be fundin do and the contrare heirof. And the
Commissaris thinks expedient, that in ilk Burgh the Prouest, Baillies, and
custumaris, be Sercheouris and answer heirof.

That craftismen vsand Mer^handice renunce their craft. Ca. cxxviij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the act of Parliament tuiching the
craftismen vsand and deiland with Merchandice mycht be put till executioun, sa
that he, that is a craftisman, outher forbeir his Merchandice, or else renunce
his craft, but any dissimulatiou^ or color under the pane of escheit of the
Merchandice, that he vsis occupyand his craft, and this escheit to be inbrocht
be the said serschouris to our Souerane Lordis use, and count thairof to be
maid in the Checkar.

Of chesing of Officiaris in Burrowis. Ca. cxxix.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the act of Parliament maid anent the
chesing of Officiaris in Burrowis may be ratif^ it, and appreuit, and put to
executioun, and in time tocum to be obseruit and keipit: Sa that the electioun
of Officiaris mycht be of the best and worthyest indwellaris of the Town, and
not be partiality nor maisterschip, quhilk is undoing of Burrowis, quhair
maisterschippis and requeistis cummis.

Of frauchting of Schippis and the panis thairof. Ca. cxxx.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be the three Estatis in this present Parliament,
that the act of frauchting and lading of Schippis mycht be put till executioun
after the te^nour of the samin, and at na gudis be furit be the master vpone
his ouerloft, nor the Merchandis gudis to be strikin up, nor vnressonablie
spakit, nor reuin under the pane of.xx. pund to the Kingis ^se. And this to be
serchit be the Officiaris of the Burgh, and the (...) frauchtismen of the
Schip, the quhilk sall answer thairfoir.

The bind of Salmound and mesour thairof. Ca. cxxxj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be the three Estatis in this Parliament, that
the Barrel bind of Salmound sold keip and contein the assyse and mesour of
fourtene gallonis, and not to be myuist under the pane of escheit of the
Salmound, quhair it beis fundin les to the Kingis use. And that the Prouest,
Baillies, and custumaris of ilk Burgh be serchouris heirto. And that ilk burgh
have three hupe irnis, videlicet, ane hupe irne convenient heirfoir ane at ilk
end of the barrel, and ane in the middis for the mesuring of the barrel, and
a birning irne, to mack the samin under the pane of escheit of the barrel
vnmarkit.

That Commissaris of Burrowis compeir togidder at anis in the eir in
Innerkething. Ca. cxxxij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be the haill three Estatis, y^ eir lie in time
tocu^, certane Commissaris of all Burrowes both south and north conuene and
gadder togidder anis ilk eir in the Burgh of Innerkething on the mor^e after
Sanct James day with full commissioun, and their to commoun and treit vpone the
weilfair of Merchandice, the good reule and statutis for the commoun proffeit
of Burrowis. And to provide for remeid vpone the skaith and iniuris sustenit
within the Burrowis. And quhat Burgh, that compeiris not the said day be their
Co^missaris to pay to the coistis of the Co^missaris.v. pund. And eirly to have
our Souerane Lordis letters to distremie heirfoir, and for the inbringing of
the samin.

Of fisching and making of hering at the west sey. Ca. cxxxiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the act maid of befoir be the Lordis of
our Souerane Lordis counsall ane^t the fisching and making of hering at the
west sey, and other fische, and Merchandice be put to executioun, obseruit, and
keipit in all times, and specially now in this time. And strait serching to
pas thairupone, and punitioun to be execute after the tennour of the said act.

That nane attempt contrare the annexatioun of the Pryorie of Coldinghame to
the Chapel Royal. Ca. cxxxiiij.
ITEM It is auisit, grantit, and ordanit be our Souerane Lord, and be the auise
of his three Estatis, that inhibitioun be geuin to all his liegis spiritual and
temporal, that nane of them tak vpone hand, to do or attempt to do contrare
the union and annexatioun maid at the Pryorie of Coldinghame to his Chapel
Royal, or to make any impetratioun thairof at the court of Rome, or to
publicque or to use any bullis or process purchest in contrare the said union,
and erectioun under the pane of tresoun, tinsall, and forfatour of life, land,
gudis. etc.

HIC FINIVNTVR STATVTA PARLIAMENTORVM REGIS IACOBI TERTII ET SEQVVNTVR STATVTA
PARLIAMENTORVM REGIS IACOBI QVARTI.
PARLIAMENTVM PRIMVM EXCELLENTISSIMI PRINCIPISET DOMINI NOSTRI DOMINI IACOBI
QVARTI Scotorum Regis Illustrissimi tentum and inchoatum apud Edinburgh sexto
die Mensis Octobris An. Do. Millesimo Quadringen. Octuagesimo octauo.
THEIR Ar the articlis auisit and concludit in this present Parliament be our
Souerane Lord and his three Estatis.

Of the fredome of halie Kirk. Ca. j.
IN the first, that the fredomes, liberteis, priuilegeis, immuniteis of halie
Kirk and spiritual persounis be obseruit and keipit in honor and worschip for
the time of our Souerane Lord, that now is, like as it hes been in the time of
his may Nobill progenitouris of good mind of befoir. And gif their be any
spiritual men, that hes any actioun of grief or disple four done to them,
that lykis to complein, they salbe hard thankfully, and Justice done to them,
according to the plesour of God and honor of our Souerane Lord.

Of our Souerane Lordis marriage. Ca. ij.
SECVNDLY Sen our Souerane Lord is now be the grace and mercy of God of
perfect age to compleit the haly band of Matrimony with ane Nobill Princes
borne and descendit of a Nobill and wirschipfull house of auld honor and
dignity, That thairfoir in this present Parliament it is auisit and concludit,
that ane honorabill Ambaxat be send in the Realms of France, Brettane,
Hispanie, and vthers placis, as salbe limmit, that is to say, ane Bischop, ane
Earl, or ane Lord of Parliament, a Clerk, a Knycht, and with them the number
of fyftie horse, to auise, commoun, and conclude in the said matter hauand full
commissioun thairupone. And the time of their remaning and their honorabill
expensis is modifeit in this present Parliament, to the soume of.v. thousand
pundis to be rasit.ij. thousand of the Clergy, ji. thousand of the Barronis,
and.j. thousand of the Burrowis. And the said.ij. thousand of the Barronis to
be rasit of Barronis and fretennentis and not of the co^moun pepill. And this
co^tributioun to be inbrocht betuix this and the.xv. day of Ianuar nixt tocum.
And that nouther the Clergy, Barronis, fretennentis, nor Commissairis of
Burrowis pas forth of this Town unto the time the taxt be maid, and concludit
of the soume foirsaid. And the ressauaris heirof to be for the Clergy the Abbot
of Halyrudhous, and for the Barronis the Thesaurar. And for the Commissaris of
Burrowis Walter Bertrem. And the kingis hienes sall send incontinent ane Clerk
and ane honorabill Squyar, or ane Herald in France, Hispanie, and other
neidfull placis to see and considder ane honorabill Princis according to the
dignity, honor, and emplesour of our Souerane Lord with letters of credence,
and to report and certify our Souerane Lord the King thairin.

Mairattour the said Ambaxatour sall have commissioun and full powar to renew
the haly a^lya and confederatioun maid betuix the Realms of Scotland and
France to be obseruit and keipit, like as it hes been betuix their may Nobill
progenitouris, and now of lait ratifeit, appreuit, and confirmit be the
authority of our haly father the Pape.

Of landis and gudis takin befoir the field of Striuiling. Ca. iij.
ITEM Anent the article of the gudis, landis, and housis takin befoir the field
of Striuiling be Lordis and persounis, that war with our Souerane Lord, that
now is: Our Souerane Lord mouit of piety with the cou^sall of his Lordis hes
auisit, that all the gudis mouabill belangin to pure vnlandit folkis be
restorit and deliuerit agane. And Because their was diverse of his opinion reft
be the persounis of the the other opinion, That thairfoir his hienes gaif command
to tak of the gr^it men being in his co^trare, sic as Lordis of Parliament, and
Barronis, that their gudis sen they war takin in sic time of troubill, be not
restorit: And auent the gudis takin after the Kingis proclamatioun maid the.
xij. day of Iunij last bypast, that all they gudes be restorit agane to the
persounis, that they war takin fra. And that the landis and housis foirsaid be
deliuerit to the awnaris in likewise at the emplesance of the King.

That Burgessis and vnlandit men, that any gudis was takin fra be restorit
agane. Ca. iiij.
ITEM It is auisit and co^cludit, that all Burgessis and Merchand men dwelland
in Bu^gh, and vsand the course of Merchandice, and all vnlandit men dwella^d to
landwart, that any gudis war takin fra outher be obligatioun, band, souertie or
vtherwayis, sen the time of the said field of Striuiling be restorit agane to
the persounis awnaris, that they war takin fra, except allanerly the gudis,
that was takin in the said field of Striuiling. And the saidis persounis,
obligatiounis, and souerteis to be fred and relaxit. And sa to be Iugeit
thairefter now in this present Parliament and in time tocum. And at the Kingis
hieues of his grace mouit of piety remittis and forgeuis generally and
specially all the Bugessis, Merchandis, and vnlandit men foirsaid the rancor
of his heart, and all sect of court for the actioun and cause of their being in
the field of Striuiling, Blaknes, or other placis aganis his hienes allanerlie
for y^ point. And never to be taken dittay thairof in time tocum. And that all
spiritual persounis kirkmen, that war takin in harnes in the said field, be
deliuerit to their Ordinaris to be punist, as effeiris vpone Law. And they that
war not fundin in armor, nor of the peruersit counsall, be remittit and fred,
as is above writtin.

That all Officiaris being in the field of Striuiling be suspendit fra their
officis for three eiris. Ca. v.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit for the greit displesour, that our Souerane
Lord hes taken agane them, that war of that evil opinion, and in the field of
Striuiling agane him in co^trare the co^moun good of the Realm, and
distructiou^ of the samin, and was the cause of the slauchter and deceis of
vmquhile the King his father, anent all persounis of quhat estate or degree,
that they be, that had officis of him, that is to say, wardanis, Iusticis,
Schireffis, Stewartis, Baillies, Lieutennentis, and all other Officiaris,
quhilkis hes the samin in heritage, be secludit and suspendit fra the saidis
officis for the space of three eiris nixt tocu^, and after the form of the act
of Parlime^t. And all the saidis persounes, that hes the said officis in life
rent or for termis, be secludit thairfra allutterly. Because of the said
displesance and manifest part taking agane the co^moun good of the Realm
foirsaid. And als because our Souerane Lord co^siddering the greit displesour
foirsaid will not commit y^ executioun of Justice, quhilk co^cernis his hienes
in sa greit nerves both of saul and life and his true liegis, to the saidis
Officiaris, That the persounis, that our Souerane Lord hes geuin the said
officis to, use and exerce the samin enduring the time foirsaid.

Anent the enter of airis of them that ^eceissit at the feiid of Striuiling.
Ca. vj
ITEM It is auisit and concludit anent the entres of the airis of them, that
deit in the field of Striuiling agane our Souerane Lord, at now is: Our
Souerane Lord of his grace and piety sall grant breuis to the airis of all
them, that deit in the field foirsaid. And because it may be object, that
their fathers and antecessouris deit not in the faith and peax of the King, for
the quhilk the said breuis will not be full seruit, That thairfoir our Souerane
Lord sall grant to the airis of them, that was flaine, as said is, ane letter
under the preuie seill make and mentioun, That notwithstanding, that our
Souerane Lord mycht object the said cause, that he mouit of piety and grace,
and in favor of them, that purchessis the said breuis, will not, that it be
object agane them, bot that it be said in the retour of the samin: Quod talis
defunctus obijt ad sidem Do. nostri Regis ratione gratiae tali concessae and
nobis ostensae. And that their breuis be not geuin, without that their letters
under the preuie seill be schawin to the Chapel, and the samin be their
writtin. And that their letters sall steid to them anent all other over
Lordis, that they make them na mair stopping. And that the saidis breuis be
direct to the Ordinaris.

The forth putting of Justice. Ca. vij.
ITEM It is auisit and concludit anent the forth putting of Justice throw all
the Realm, That our Souerane Lord sall eyde in proper persoun about till all
partis of his Realm to his Justice Airis. And that his Justice sall pas with
his hienes to minister Justice, as beis thocht expedient to him, and his
counsall for the time.

Anent the stanching of thift, reif, and other enormiteis. Ca. viij.
ITEM Anent the stanching of thift, reif, and other enormiteis throw all the
Realm, Their Lordis under writtin hes maid faith and geuin their bodylie aithis
to our Souerane Lord in his Parliament, that they and ilk ane of them sall
diligently with all cuire and besynes search, and seik quhair any sic
trespassouris ar fundin, or knawin within their boundis, and tak them and
justify them, or make them to be send to our Souerane Lord to be iustifeit.
And that they sall have powar of our Souerane Lord under his quhite walx to tak
and punis the saidis trespassouris but fauouris, according to Justice. And als
to gif them powar to cause other small Lordis within their boundis, to make
faith in likewise, and to rise and assist to them in the taking of the said
trespassouris. And this act till endure to our Souerane Lordis age of.xxj.
eiris. And their ar the number of the Lordis. In the first the Lord Hailis, and
Alexander Hume for the Mers, Louthiane, the wairdis of Hadingtoun, Linlithquho,
and Lauderdale. And als the Lord Hailis for Kirkcudbricht, and wigtoun. The
Earl of Angous for the Schirefdome of Roxburgh, siclyke Peblis, and Lanerk. The
said Earl and the Lord Maxwall for Drumfreis. The Lord Kennydie for Carrik. The
Schiref of Air for Air. The Lord of Cragy for Kyle. The Lord Montgumrie for
Cuninghame. The Earl of Leuenax, the Lord Lyle, and Matthew Stewart for Renfrow
and the Monkland, the Lene, Bothuill, Glasgow, Kilbryde, Auandale. The Lord
Montgumrie for Dumbartane, the Leuenax, Bute, and Arane. The Schiref of
Striuiling, and James of Edmoundstoun for Striuiling Schire. Archibald
Edmoundstoun for Menteith and Stragartnay. The Master of Ergyle for Ergyle,
Lorne, Knapdale, and Cowell. Duncane Campbell, Neill Stewart, and Ewing
Campbell for Desthore, Toor, Glenur^uhay, Ra^nach, Appmdow, Glenlyone, and
Glenfallacht. The Earl of Athole, and Alexander Robertsoun for Athole. The Lord
Drummound for Stratherne, Buchquhidder, and Dumblane. The Lord Oliphant for the
law land of the Schirefdome of Perth, Strabraun, and the Bischoprik of
Dunkeldin The Lord Gray, the Lord Glammis, the Master of Craufuird for Angus,
hieland, and lawland, and to sit with the Justice of the Regaliteis. The Earl
Merchall for the Mernis. The Earl of Huntlie, the Earl of Erroll, the Lord of
Iunerrugy fra the Mouth north and Innernes. The Lord Lindesay for Fyfe.

Of Burrowis repledge and their nichtbouris fra the Justice. Ca. ix.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit anent the article belanga^d the Burrowis in the
time of Justice Airis, quhilkis hes been repledgit fra the Justice he sittand
in the principal Burgh of the Schire, into their fredomes, Throw the quhilk
repledgeing Justice hes not been done vpone the inhabitantis of the said
Burrowis in time bygane, Thairfoir in time tocu^ it salbe leiffull to the
Kingis Justice he ^^^tand in the principal Burgh of the Rialtie vpone the
matter of the Air, to gif ane assyse to all inhabitantis within vthers Burrowis
of their awin neichtbouris, that best knawis the verity, gif they be present.
And gif sa money be not present, that may be sufficient number, That it salbe
leiffull to him to cheis ane assyse of the said heid Burgh, or to eik the
number, as he thinkis may expedient for the good of Justice and without
prejudice of the fredomes of the said Burrowis.

That a fine penny of Gold and ane other of silver be strikin. Ca. x.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be our Souerane Lord and his three Estatis in
this present Parliament, that a fine pe^ny of gold be strikin to be of wecht
and fynes to the Rois Nobill, and ane penny of silver to be equal to the auld
Inglis grot, and.x. of them to make ane ounce of silver, and to have course and
gang for.xiiij. d. And at their salbe ane half grot of the samin. And the said
penny of gold to have passage and gang for.xxx. of the saidis grotis. And ane
other penny of gold to have course and gang for.xx. of the saidis grotis of the
samin prent. And the third penny of gold to have passage for.x. of the saides
grotis of the samin prent. And the saidis pennyis of gold and silver to have
si^ prent and circu^striptioun, as salbe auisit be the Kingis hienes. And all
other money to the equally conformit thairto. And our Souerane Lord sall
limmit ane cuineour thairto, as Alexander Leuington and a wise and leill man,
that hes knawlege in the money to be wardane thairof, that is to say, James of
Creichtoun of Ruchuendaun for the space of a eir to examine and assay the fynes
of the said gold and silver after the forine and reule maid in the Parliament
of befoir* The saidis wardane and cuineouris hauand siclyke fee for their
laubouris as they had in the time of our Souerane Lordis progenitouris, and
siclyke proffeitis tocum to the Kingis hienes of the said cuinie. And as for
the inbringing of Buleoun the Merchandis sall for the good of the Realm bring
of ilk Serplaith of well, ilk last of Salmound, ilk four hundredth claith,
four ounce of brint silver, of ilk last of hydis sar ounce, ilk last of hering,
two ounce. And siclyke of all other gudis that payis custume to the King. And
the Merchandis thairof sall bring in buleoun effeirand thairto. And attour, the
Merchandis that bringis hame the said buleoun, quhilkis salbe of the fynes
foirsaid, sall have of the said cuinie, and to be payit be the wardane.xij. s.
for ilk ounce. And the said wardane sall surneis the cuineour of buleoun, and
the irnis to be put in keiping, and to ressaif it, that is cuineit to the
changeour thairof, and pay the Merchandis for the said buleoun, and to tak ane
assay of the gold and silver that salbe cuineit, as is foirsaid, to be keipit
and examinat eirlie at the Checkar, and their to be maid count of sa money
vncis, as is cuineit in the eir, both of gold and silver. And the custumaris
at their comptis making to be chargeit with sa money vncis, and vthers gudis, as
is abone writtin in the samin form. And to be dischargeit of sa far, as they
deliver to the said wardane, and cuineouris. And that all Merchandis, that beis
fundin culpabill in the breking of this statute sall pay to our Souerane Lord
the dowbill auale of the said vncis of buleoun, according to the Serplaith and
gudis abone writtin. And at all other money gold and silver sall have course to
the auale, as it is now.

That Schippis cum to fre Burrowis. Ca. xj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that in time tocum all manner of Schippis
strangearis and vthers cum to the Kingis fre Burrowis, sic as Dumbartane,
Iruin, Wigtoun, Kirkcudbricht, Renfrow, and vthers fre Burrowis of the Realm,
and their make their Merchandice. And at the saidis strangearis by na fische,
bot saltit and barrellit, nor by nane other Merchandice, bot at fre Burrowis,
and their pay their dewteis and custumis, and tak their cocket, as effeiris.
And at they make na Merchandice at Lowis, nor other placis, bot at fre Burrowis,
as said is. And at nane of our Souerane Lordis liegis tak Schippis to fraucht
under color to defraud our Souerane Lord nor his liegis, under the pane of
tinsall of their lyfis, and gudis, and at na strangearis do in the contrare,
under the pane of tinsall and confiscatioun of their Schip and gudis to our
Souerane Lordis use.

Of Clerkis that purchessis beneficis at the court of Rome. Ca. xij.
ITEM As to the article of the greit dampnage and skaithis daily done to all
the Realm be Clerkis, religious, and secularis, quhilkis purchessis Abbaceis,
and other beneficis in the court of Rome, quhilk was never thairat of befoir,
and purchessis be me^^s officis of Collectourie, and takis vpone them to raise
heavy and greit taxatiounis of Prelatis and Clerkis, and makis informatioun of
the auale of beneficis in the court of Rome, mair than use and custume was of
befoir, or at ever was done in any Kingis time bygane, And to provide for
remeid of making of vnionis of beneficis pertening to Abbaceis or vthers annexed
to Bischoprikis, or vthers in heirschip and distructioun of Religious placis,
and agane the co^moun good of the Realm, quhilkis thingis causis vnestimabill
dampnage and skaithis, considdering the innumerabill riches, that is had forth
of the Realm thairthrow: AND thairfoir the Lordis thinkis expedient, that na
sic Abbaceis, nor other beneficis, quhilkes was never at the court of Rome of
befoir, be purchest be na secular nor Religious persounis, bot at the saidis
placis have fre electioun of the samin, and as use and custume hes been in the
saidis placis. And that nane of our Souerane Lords liegis spiritual nor
temporal, tak vpone hand to be Collectoures of the sege of Rome of na hiear
nor greitar taxatiounis of Bischoprikis, Abbaceis, Prouestreis, Pryoreis, nor
nane other beneficis, that aw taxatiounis to the Court of Rome, bot as use and
custume is of all taxatiounis, that hes been of befoir, and as is contenit in
the Prouinciallis buikis of the auld taxatiounis of Bagimond. And attour, that
na vnionis nor annexatiou^is maid now of lait, sen our Souerane Lordis father,
quhome God assolie, tuik the Crown, and in special the vnionis nor
annexatiounis maid be vmquhile Patrik Grahame Archibischop of Sanctandros, and
his successouris of the Prouestrie of Lincluden, quhilk is now our Souerane
Lordis patronage, and pretendit to be annexit and unit to Androw Bischop of
Murray, be of na strenth, value, nor effect, nor to be sustenit within the
Realm, bot at the said beneficis, that was unit be put agane to the first
fundatioun to the placis, that they war takin fra, and at sic reule and
governance, as they war at of befoir in the time of the annexatiounis of the
said v^ionis, and to be repute of na force, strenth, nor effect in time
cumming. And gif any of our Souerane Lordis liegis spiritual or temporal
wald attempt, or hes attemptit in the contrare, of their punctis above writtin,
salbe demanit, as tratour or tratouris to our Souerane Lord and his
successouris, and never to bruke benefice nor use worschip within his Realm.
Nevertheless, it salbe leiffull to Lordis and Barronis to purches annexatiounis
or vniouis of any benefice, that they can purches outher of their awin
patronageis, or vthers to be unit to secular Collegeis foundit, or to be
foundit.

Of Clerkis that purchessis beneficis contrare the Kingis presentatioun. Ca.
xiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that for samekill, as it was statute or
ordanit be the Parliament in our Souerane Lordis antecessouris times of may
nobill mind, That quhatsumeuer Clerk his liege purchest any benefice at the
court of Rome, of the quhhilk the presentatioun pertenit to his hienes the sege
vacand, be rycht and privilege of his Crown, That they that attemptis,
acceptis, or purchessis any sic beneficis, or committis the crime of hurt
majesty agane his hienes, that the panis contenit in the act of Parliament,
that is to say, proscriptioun, rebelliou^, and tresoun be execute vpone them.
And now it is seen expedient be the three Estatis of the Realm, and statute and
ordanit, that quhat time it be declarit be the best and worthyest Clerkis of
the Realm befoir the Lordis of counsall, that any persoun or persou^is be
grace acceptis, or purchessis any benefice pertening to our Souerane Lordis
presentatioun the sege vacand in the court of Rome, or within the Realm, or
hes purchest, or persewit the samin, sen the last statute maid thairupone, That
after the declaratioun be maid be Clerkis befoir the Lordis of Counsall, the
Chancellar sall make the panis co^tenit in the said actis of Parliament to be
put to executiou^ upon the brekaris of the saidis actis, les na they leif the
said beneficis, after they be requyrit thairupone. And their letters of
declaratioun to be geuin in name of our Souerane Lord and his three Estatis. And
that the Ordinaris dispone upon their other beneficis for the inhabilitie of
their persounis. And gif any persounis spiritual or temporal wald mantene,
supply, or defend the saidis Clerkis brekaris of our Souerane Lordis actis of
Parliament, after at it be declairit his patronage, as said is, they beand
requyrit, and will not desist fra the suppleying of the saidis Clerkis, That
their salbe letters geuin in likewise vpone them, declaring them to have
fallin in the samin panis contenit in the actis of Parliament, as said is.

The propositioun of the debait of the field of Striuiling. Ca. xiiij.
ITEM In this present Parliament our Souerane Lord beand present, togidder with
his three Estatis of the Realm, was proponit the debait and cause of the field
of Striuiling, in the quhilk vmquhile James King of Scotland, quhome God
assolie, father to our Souerane Lord happinnit to be slane, and the cause and
occasioun thairof commonit, oppinnit, and arguit amang the Lordis of the three
Estatis, Iohne Lord Glammis presentit, and schew certane articlis subscriuit
with the said vmquhile King James hand the tennour of the quhilkis followis etc
The quhilkis beand red and schawin, that the saidis articlis was diverse times
grantit to, and brokin be peruerst counsall of diverse persounis being with him
for the time: Quhilkis counsallit and assistit to him in the inbringing of
Inglismen, and to the perpetual subiectioun of the Realm, and under dissait
and color maid, and refusit, and that our Souerane Lord, that now is ever
consentit for the good of the Realm, and the commoun proffeit thairof (For the
quhilk the Earl of Huntlie, the Earl of Erroll, the Earl Merchall, the Lord
Glammis, and vthers diverse Barronis and vthers the Kingis true liegis left him,
and his dissaitfull and peruerst counsall, and adherit to our Souerane Lord,
that now is, and his true opinioun for the commoun good of the Realm) The
quhilk matter beand schawin, examinat, commonit, and understanding be the three
Estatis and the haill body of the Parliament, they ryplie auisit, declarit, and
concludit, and in their lawteis, and allegiance ilk ane for him self declarit
and concludit: THAT the slauchter committit and done in the field of
Striuiling, quhair our Souerane Lordis father happinnit to be slane, and vthers
diverse his Barronis, and liegis was allutterlie in their default, and colourit
dissait done be him, and his peruerst counsall diverse times befoir the said
field: And that our Souerane Lord, that now is, and the true Lordis and
Barronis, that was with him in the samin field war innocent, fre, and quyte of
the said flauchters done in the said field, and all persuit of the occasioun
and cause of the samin: And that part of the three estatis foirsaidis, Prelatis,
Bischoppis, greit Barronis, Burgessis, gaif their seillis heirupone, togidder
with our Souerane Lordis greit seill to be schawin and producit to our haly
father the Pape, the Kingis of France, Hispanie, Denmark, and vthers Realms,
as salbe seen expedient for the time.

Anent Cruuis. Ca. xv.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that all cruuis and fische dammis, that war
within salt watters, quhair the sey ebbis and flowis, be allutterlie destroyit,
and put down, alsweill they that pertenis to our Souerane Lord as vthers throw
all the Realm. And as ane^t the Cruuis in fresche watters, that they be maid
of sic largenes and sic dayis keipit, as is contemt in the actis and statutis
maid thairupone of befoir.

The keiping of the Castle of Edinburgh and destroying of the Castle of
Dumbar. Ca. xvj.
ITEM It is concludit and ordanit be the auise and deliverance of the three
Estatis, that Patrik Lord Hailis be master or houshald to our Souerane Lord,
quhilk hes the keiping of the Castle of Edinburgh of his hienes, and to have
the reule and governance of my Lord James Duke of Rothesay, and of the
Artailerie, and stuff being within the said Castle to be keipit in honor and
worschip according to his estate, and like as our Souerane Lord hes geuin
command thairupone.

ITEM It is concludit and ordanit be the auise and deliverance of the three
Estatis, that the Castle of Dumbar be castin down, and allutterly destroyit
in siclyke wise, that na foundment thairof be occasioun of bigging nor
reparatiou^ of the said Castle in time tocum. And at our Souerane Lord make
coist thairupone, as effeiris. Because it hes done greit skaith in times
bygane, and war greit danger to the Realm, and it war negligentlie keipit, or
reparrellit agane.

The reuocatioun maid at Scone. Ca. xvij.
ITEM Anent the proclamatioun maid at Scone, It is statute and ordanit, that
all alienatiounis of landis, heritageis, lang takkis, fewfermis, officis,
taileis, blanchfermis, creatiounis of new digniteis grantit to any persounis,
quhat estate, degree, or conditioun, that ever they be of, sen the secund day of
Februarij last bypast be vmquhile our Souerane Lordis father, quhome God
assolie, quhilk mycht be prejudicial to our Souerane Lord, and his Crown,
that now is, be cassit and adnullit, and to be of na force nor effect in any
times tocum. Because that sic alienatiounis, giftis, and priuilegeis war
grantit, sen the said time for the assistance to the peruerst counsall, that
war contrare the commoun good of the Realm, and cause of the slauchter of our
Souerane Lordis father, and diverse vthers his Barronis and liegis.

That the airis be not hurt be their predecessouris. Ca. xviij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, anent the airis of all Lordis, Barronis, and
other landit men, that war with our Souerane Lord that now is, in the field of
Striuiling, agane the peruerst counsall in the misgyding of vmquhile his
father, quhome God assolie, and the commoun good of the Realm, that na hurt
nor prejudice be done to them be any of their predecessouris, in alienatioun
or skaith of the heritageis, that they sold succeid to, sen the time of the
said field, or in any time tocum, and gif any alienatiou^ be maid in prejudice
of the said air, that it be of na strenth, force, nor effect, in time tocum.
And decernis and declairis the samin of nane auale, gif their be any done.

HAEC SVNTACTA ET STATVTA FACTA IN PARLIAMENTO PRAEscripto and confirmata per
supremum Dominu^ nostrum Regem decimoquin to die Mensis Februarij Anno Do.
Millesimo Quadringen tesimo. lxxxix. Praesentibus ibidem tribus Regni statibus.
Of the fredome of halie Kirk.
IN the first for the honor of God, liberty, and fredome of halie Kirk and
Kirk men, It is statute and ordanit, that all priuilegeis, fredomes, and
immuniteis of the samin be obseruit and keipit in time tocum, like as they have
been in the time of our Souerane Lordis father, and foirbearis of may Nobill
mind with this additioun, That the takaris and intromettaris of the landis,
teindis, obligatiounes, proffeitis, or dew^eis of halie Kirk without tak or
assedatioun of the Persoun, Vicar or their fermoraris, be callit and that to be
a punct of dittay in time tocum.

Of Justice Airis. Ca. xix.
SECVNDLIE It is thocht expedient and ordanit, that the Justice Airis, that are
now set, that the dyetis of them be obseruit and keipit after the form of the
said dyetis and Lawis of this Realm. And that the Justice Airis, that are now
set, be proclamit and haldin with all cure and diligence for the punitioun of
trespassouris, to the acquyeting of the Realm and liegis.

Of universal concord amangis the liegis. Ca. xx.
ITEM As tuiching the lufe, amity, and freindschip to be maid amangis all our
Souerane Lordis liegis and his cou^sall, It is thocht expedient be the three
Estatis, that our Souerane Lord and his counsall sall put his authority be the
auise of his said counsall to make all persounis and parteis to be at
freindschip and concord, and quhat persoun or persounis, that refusis in his
default to heir ane ressonabill and honorabill concord of his party, That the
Kingis Justice put scharp Justice on the party quhilkis ar obstinate, throw
the quhilk the Kings hienes may cause them to be in hartlie amity,
freindschip, and quiet, with the punitioun according to the Lawis of the Realm.

For inbringing of the taxatioun and undoing of the Kingis discharge of any
part thairof. Ca. xxj.
ITEM Anent the expeditioun of the haistie inbringing and getting of the taxt
grantit in the Parliament for the expensis of ane honorabill Ambaxat, that
sold pas for our Souerane Lordis marriage, anent the part being in the bandis
of the Clergy, It is thocht expedient, that the Prelatis now being in this
Towns sold make a way with the Thesaurar, and schaw him, how the said taxt
sold be payit for the part of the said Clergy, or any of them depairt of this
Town. And for the taxt of Barronis and temporal persounis, that sold be
rasit and takin of the Schireffis, and Baillies, and other Officiaris of the
Kingis, It is auisit be the said Lordis, that the saidis Schireffis, and
Baillies, and vthers Officiaris being so often times chargeit be the Kingis
letters, and ar now callit to be heir, that thairfoir they be now chargeit be
Officiaris of the Kings, to be befoir the Chancellar, and Lordis of counsall
on friday that nixt cu^mis, in George Robesounis Innis, to make full count and
payment of the said taxt: And in likewise that all Schireffis, Prouestis, and
Baillies of Burrowis, and all other Officiaris, quhilkis come not heir, nor is
present, That letters incontinent be writtin to them, chargeing them, to
raise, inbring, and pay the said taxt to ane schort day, or else that they be
chargeit to enter their persounis in waird within the Castle of Blaknes
within.xv. dayis, gif they failie of the inbringing and paying of the said
taxt, under the panis of Rebellioun and putting of them to the horn,
confiscatioun and escheiting of all their proper gudis to the Kingis use. And
because the Lordis vnderstandis, that their is sumpart of letters grantit be
the King to spiritual Lordis, and Prelatis, and als to temporal Lordis, and
to Barrouis of discharge of part of the said taxt, the quhilk the saidis Lordis
considderis, and vnderstandis, the King mycht not discharge, sen it was grantit
be the said Estatis to the said Ambaxat, and for the cause foirsaid, Thairfoir
the saidis letters of discharge to be na defasance to them. And that na sic
letters have strenth, force, nor effect. And that letters of discharge be maid
under the preuie seill, and send to the Ordinaris and Schireffis thairupone.

For instructiounis making to renew confederatioun and alliance. Ca. xxij.
ITEM As tuiching the renewing and confirmatioun to be maid of the
confederatioun and alliance of France, and in likewise of Denmark and Hispanie,
It is thocht expedient be the saidis Lordis of the articlis, that they desire
to purches and obtene sic freindschippis, liberteis, and fredomes, for the good
public of this Realm and proffeit of the course of Merchandice, and sic
thingis, as salbe seen proffitabill be the Lordis of the Kingis secreit
counsall: That thairfoir the body of the Parliament hes committit powar to the
Chancellar and secreit counsall to make the instructiounis, and auise sic
desyris, as they sall think expedient for the good of the King, his Realm, and
liegis, quhilkis salbe done to the King, and in the name of the haill body of
his Parliament.

Ane Ambaxat to Denmark. Ca. xxiij.
ITEM Because the Lordis of the articlis vnderstandis, that it is rycht
expedient and neidfull, that ane Ambaxat be send to the King of Denmark for the
renewing of the alliance and confirmatioun of the confederatioun betuix our
Souerane Lord, his Realm, and liegis, and the said King of Denmark, his
Realm, and subiectis of the samin, and to remove all strangenes and displesour
consauit be any Prince for any cause bypast, and for the personage: IT is
auisit and thocht expedient, that their be send a Lord, a Knycht, a Clerk, to
the number of.xx. persounis, and for their expensis to have the soume of three
hundredth pundis to be rasit of the three Estatis, that is to say, ane hundredth
of ilk Estate. And at the Lordis now present or they, pairt find a way, how at
this soume sold be brocht in, and in all possibill haist, sen the said Ambaxat
man tak their vaiage in this nixt Month of March. Because of the saison of
the eir.

The Kingis reuocatioun and inbringing of his property. Ca. xxiiij.
ITEM Tuiching the article of the Kingis property for the honorabill
sustentatioun and halding of his house, according to his estate and honor,
quhilk may not be faileit without greit derogatioun of his Nobill estate: It is
considderit be the saidis Lordis of the articlis, that sen all the Lordis
spiritual, and temporal, and vthers his true liegis sold above all singular
and particular proffeit desire to prefer the Nobill estate of his excellence,
like as it was done in the time of his may Nobill progenitouris of good
mind: Heirfoir it is thocht expedient, neidfull, and ressonabill, and als
statute and ordanit in this present Parliament, That full derogatioun,
cassatioun, and adnullatioun be maid of all giftis, donatiounis, infeftmentes,
fewfermes, feis, lyferentis geuin be his hienes to quhatsumeuer persou^ or
persounis, sen the day of his Coronatioun: Sa that all landis, rentis,
custumis, Burrow mailis, fermes, martis, muttoun, pultrie, auarage, carriage,
and other dewteis, that war in the handis of his progenitouris, and father,
quhome god assolie the day of his deceis, notwithstanding quhatsumeuer
assignatioun or gift be maid thairupone under the greit seill, preuie seill, or
vthers, be allutterlie cassit, and adnullit: Swa that the haill proffitis and
rentis thairof may cum to our Souerane Lord, to the honorabill sustentation of
his house and Nobill estate, as said is: And quhair their is any feis or dewteis
to be geuin to Officiaris, wardanis, and vthers siclyke, as had feis in his
fathers and grandschiris times, That the samin feis be payit to them in money
be the handis of his ressaitaris, and Comptrollaris. And at they tak na dewteis
of the Kingis proper landis for na assignatioun maid to them. And at all their
landis, rentis, fermes above writtin remane with the King in this kind, quhill
his age of.xxj. eir, notwithstanding any gittis maid of befoir in the contrare.

The prouisioun for the Duke of Rose and Earl of Mar, and inbringing of their
rentis. Ca. xxv.
ITEM Anent the prouisioun, and ordinance to be maid for the honorabill
sustentatioun of my Lordis the Duke of Rose, and Earl of Mar, our Souerane
Lordis Brether, quhilkis ar of oung and tender age, and in the Kingis
governance and keiping: It is seen expedient, that they be honorably sustenit,
and gouernit in worschip and honor; according to their Nobill Estatis, and to
be sustenit and vphaldin of their awin rentis, quhilkis the Lordis vnderstandis
is sufficient, and of auale to vphald them. And quhair that their rentis,
mailis, fermes, and vthers dewteis ar withhaldin, and not brocht to their
proffeitis, The Lordis of the three Estatis auisis the samin directioun and way
to be takin for them, as is ordanit for the Kingis property, and bringing in
of the samin, that is to say, that their Lordis under writtin, quhilkis ar of
authority and powar in the partis quhair their landis lyis, raise and inbring
their rentis, and properteis, like as is deuysit of the Kingis, quhilkis Lordis
ar specifeit and nemmit under writtin, for the inbringing of our Souerane
Lordis dewteis, and thairis. And quhair any thing or part of their landis,
rentis, mailis, or fermes ar geuin away be the King sen the time of their
infeftmentis, that reuocatioun and adnullatioun be maid thairof in this present
Parliament, and to remane with them to their compleit age, like as is prouydit
for the Kingis hienes, as said is. And their ar the saidis Lordis names.

The names of the Lordis.
MEmorandum their ar the Lordis under writtin, to bring in the Kingis property,
and casualitie, silver, ferme, nolt, wedders, and vthers dewteis both of
restis, and vthers to the sustentatioun of the Kingis houshald ilk ane within
their boundis, as followis.

The Earl Bothueill master of houshald within the Schirefdome of Edinburgh,
Hadingtoun, Kirkcudbricht, and Wigroun. Alea^xder Hume greit Chalmerlane within
the Erldome of March, the Barronie and Lordschip of Dumbar, Cokburnispeth, the
Forest, and Striuiling Schire. And because he hes the house of Striuiling and
Newark. Archibald Edmoundstoun for Menteith and Stragartnay. The Lord preuie
seill for Fyfe. The Lord Drummound for Stratherne. The Lord Oliphant for
Methuen, and all the Schirefdome of Perth. The Thesaurar for Llilithquho
Schire. Alexander Boyd and Alexander Dunlop for Stewartoun and Kilmarnok. The
Lord Gray for Brechin and Newar, the Schirefdome of Forfar, Teling, and
Polgawy. The Lord Gray for the restis of Fethucarne, and Andro wod in time
tocum. Iohne of Lestie for Kintor. Patrik Forbes for Cowle and Oueill. Schir
Alexander Gordowne for Strathdor and Crooniar. The Master of huntlie for Mar
and Garioch. James of Douglas for Murray. The Earl of Huntlie for Pectie and
Brachlie. The Lord Montgumrie for Arane. The Lord Kennedie for Carrik,
Lessault, Munibrig, and sax scoir of pundis of the auld restis of Air. The Lord
Sinclair for Orknay and Schyteland. Schir James of Dumbar for Ros. The Lord
Dernlie for Bute. The Chancellar for Cowale, Rosueth, Knapdale, and Kintyre.
The Schiref of Air for the Teribauch and Treineane. The Lord Drummound for the
Leuenax and Drummound.

For keiping of the dayis of trewis. Ca. xxvj.
AND as tuiching the obseruatioun and keiping of the trewis takin with the King
of England, It is thocht proffitabill be the saidis Lordis of the articlis,
that our Souerane Lord cause his wardanis and Lieutennentis, that they observe
and keip dayis of trewis, als often as it is neidfull, for the obseruatioun of
the said trewis, enduring the time of the samin: Swa that his hienes and liegis
have siclyke obseruit to them for the part of Ingland. And that the wardanis
hald their courtis, and punis trespassouris for the good of the cuntrie, and
stanching of sic trespassouris.

Auditouris of our Souerane Lordis comptis. Ca. xxvij.
THE Lordis of the articlis thinkis expedient, and hes stature and ordanit in
this present Parliament, that comptis and reckning be takin of all the Kingis
Officiaris, The saurar, Comptrollar of auld and of the new of our Souerane
Lordis fathers time, and now of our Souerane Lordis time that now is. And that
additouris be chosin and nemmit, be auise and authority of his Parliament, to
heir and understand the said comptis, and at the said auditouris have their
commissioun thairto, with consent of the three Estatis. And their ar the namis
thocht expedient be the said Estatis to be auditouris of the said comptis.

The Duke of Montrois. The Earl of Huntlie. The Chancellar. The Bischop of
Glasgow. The Bischop of Abirdene. The Master of houshald. The preuie Seill.
The Abbot of Halyrudhous. The Lord Lyle. The Lord Glaminis. The Lord Gray. The
Lord Drummound. The Pryour of Coldinghame. The Thesaurar. Master Rychard
Robesone. Master Rychard Lausone. Schir Alexander Scot. The Archidene of
Sanctandros. To do siklyk vpone all comptis except their awin.
Of the Kingis secreit counsall and houshald. Ca. xxviij.
ITEM Anent the articlis and chesing of the Lordis spiritual and temporal to
be and remane with our Souerane Lordis secreit counsall for the extensiou^ and
forth putting of the Kings authority and the administratiou^ of Justice, It is
thocht expedient, that their be chosin to be of the Kingis secreit counsall,
two Bischoppis, ane Abbot, or ane Priour, sax Barronis with my Lord Chancellar,
Master of houshald, Chalmerlane, Preuie Seill, Secretar, the Clerk of the
Register. And their ar the namis of the saidis Prelatis and Barronis.

The Bischop of Glasgow. The Bischop of Abirdene. The Pryour of Coldinghame.
The Archidene of Sanctandros The Duke of Montrois. The Lord Lyle. The Lord
Gray. The Lord Glammis. The Lord Drummound.
To be of cou^sall, quhen they ar present, or quhe^ our Souerane Lord se^dis
for them.

The Earl of Huntlie. The Earl of Leuenax. The Earl Merchall. The Earl of
Erroll. The Lord Oliphant. The Lord Borthwik. Patrik Hume of Fastcastell.
Walter Ogilwy of Bone. Master Rychard Lausone. Iohne the Ros.
AND for the mair sickernes, sure supportatioun, and acceleratioun of Justice,
It is auisit and seen speidfull, that the said counsall now chosin in this
present Parliament be sworn in the Kingis presence and his three Estatis, to
gif his hienes a true and afald cou^sall in all matters concerning his Majesty
and his Realm. And sall remane of his counsall, quhill the time of the nixt
Parliament. And to be responsall and accusabill to the King and his Estatis of
their counsall. And our Souerane Lord hes humblit his hienes to promit and
grant in Parliament to abide and remane at their counsallis, quhill the nixt
Parliament, as said is. And til eschew all circumuentiounis and dissaitis, that
hes been done to the Kingis hienes be bringing of diverse signatouris of
infeftmentis, donatiounis, giftis, conductis, and remissiounis, and other sic
letters hurtand and tuichand the King in his casualitie or property: For the
secluding of the samin, his hienes hes grantit and consentit be authority of
this present Parliament, That na sir giftis, signatouris, and remissiounis,
respectis, conductis and vthers letters sall pas in time tocum, without auise,
and consent of the Lordis of the said secreit cou^sall. And all sic letters to
be subsriuit be the King and samony of the said cou^sal, as salbe present for
the time to the number of sax persounis at the fewest sittand togidder in
counsall the Chancellar beand ane. And gif any sic letters be geuin without
their consentis in other wayis, That the saides letters be of nane auale, force
nor effect, and to have na strenth. And at the Cha^celar, Preuie seill, and
Secretar answer to nane other letters, bot sic as beis subscriuit, as said is,
with the saidis Lordis of counsall. And in likewise the King to be reulit and
gouernit be their cou^sallis in the dispositiounis and giving of his tresour,
silver weschell, cheineis, iowellis, and other abiltme^tis pertening to his
may nobill persou^. And this manner of doing to be keipit and obseruit, quhill
the time of the nixt Parliament.

Of goldsmythis. Ca. xxix.
AS tuiching the article of goldsmythis quhilkis, layis and makis falls mixture
of evil metal corrupand the fine met tall of gold and silver in the decait
of our Souerane Lord and his liegis, that garris make and wirk gold and silver
for the reformatioun and eschewing of the samin: It is now auisit and
concludit, that na goldsmyth sall make mixture nor put falls layis in the said
mettallis. And to have knawlege of the fynes of their wark, that ilk goldsmyth
have ane special mark, sign, and takin to be put in his said wark, quhilk he
makis. And they samin warkis to be of fynes of the new werkis of silver of
Bruges.

And at their be ane Dekin of the craft of goldsmythis, quhilk sall examine the
said wark and fynes thairof, and see, that it be als good, as the said wark of
Bruges. And thairefter the samin Dekin to put his mark and sign on the said
wark, and to answer thairupone vpone his life and gudis. And as tuiching the
wark of gold, that it be maid als fine, as it is first moltin in presence of
the awnar, like as the tuiche and assay geum to him, quhen it is first moltin.
And na war to be deliuerit in presence of the Dekin, Swa that the Kingis liegis
be not dissauit, and that it keip the said fynes, as said is.

Anent the sailing of Merchandis. Ca. xxx.
ANENT the act of sailing of Merchandis, quhilk hes been maid of befoir, and
that the samin act be now in time tocum obseruit and keipit be the Merchandis,
and in like wise anent the inbringing of buleoun, that the act maid thairupone
be geuin and keipit in scharpe executioun. And at the audditouris of the
Checkar, and all vthers in time tocum tak count of the inbringing of buleoun,
sen the time of our Souerane Lord, like as at mair lenth is contenit in other
actis maid thairupone. And that the said co^pt be takin after the quantity of
the gudis, that is cu^min hame. And anent the sailing of the said Merchandis,
that the Prouestis, Aldermen, and Baillies of Burrowis make diligent serching
and seiking of the sailaris in winter fra Alhallowmes till Ca^dilmes, and make
the panis to be rasit on the brekaris thairof to the King under the pane of.x.
pund, to be rasit of the Officiaris, that beis negligent not punisand in their
default.

Anent ferryaris, that takis dowbill fraucht. Ca. xxxj.
AND As tuiching the act maid on the ferryaris, quhilkis takis dowbill fraucht
of the Kingis liegis, The Lordis vnderstandis, that the samin act is
proffitabill and good, quhilk they devise and thinkis expedient, that it be put
to dew and scharpe executioun. And gif any dois in the contrare, that it be a
punct of dictay. And the ferryaris brekaris thairof to be punist with rigor,
and the said dowbill fraucht to be reif in the Justice Air, after the form of
the first act maid thairupone

Anent cruuis and fische airis. Ca. xxxij.
ITEM Ane^t cruuis and fischeares quhilkis destroyis the fry of fische, and
hurtis the co^moun proffeit of the Realm, It is ordanit, that the actis and
statutis maid of befoir be obseruit and keipit with this additiou^: That
letters be writtin to all Schireffes Baillies, and Stewartis to destroy, cast
down, and put away all the cruuis within yair bou^dis incontinent without
dilay. And that dictay be taken upon them, them, that hes cruuis in contrare
the said act. And to pay for ilk cruue five pund for amerciament in the Justice
Air, to be rasit on the makar, and vphaldar of the samin. And in likewise the
Schireffis, that destroyis not the said cruuis within.xl. dayis after this
Parliament, The Schiref, that faileis, to be in amerciame^t of.xx. pund to the
King in the Justice Air, and to be a punct of dittay, as said is. And anent the
cruuis, that standis in fresche watters, that they stand not in forbodin time.
And lat the mid streme be always fre be space of.v. fute. And that the
Setterdayis slop be obseruit and keipit, as the act and statute maid be King
David requyris. And that ilk hek of the said cruuis be five inche wide,
according to the samin statute. And as for millaris, that settis creillis and
nettis in dammis, mylne landis, and watters destroyand reid fische, and fry of
fische, as said is, salbe a punct of dittay. And the pane both of causar of
creillis nettis, and of the myllaris ilk ane of them that dois in the
contrare, to incur the unlaw of reid fische, and to be takin of them, that
dois in the contrare. And that letters be writtin, as said is, to the
Schireffis, Stewartis, and Baillies to put this act to executioun, and see at
the samin be obseruit, and keipit under the pane of.xx. pund to be rasit vpone
the Officiaris, that faileis, as said is. And as tuiching the slauchter of reid
fische, at it be punist after the form of the statute declairand the unlaw
thairof.x. pund.

Anent the fre tennentis, that haldis of the Duke of Rothesay, and Stewart of
Scotland. Ca. xxxiij.
ITEM Anent the fre tenne^tis, that haldis of the Prince the Duke of Rothesay
and Stewart of Scotland, The Lordis of the articlis thinkis it ressonabill,
that all they fre tennentis salbe haldin to compeir and answer in the
Parliament, and Justice Airis with their suitis and presentis, as effeiris, ay
and quhill our Souerane Lord have ane sone, that sold be immediate betuix the
King and them, to answer for them in the said Parliament and Justice Airis.
And suit rollis to be maid thairupone, quhilk sall endure, quhill the Prince be
borne.

Of the money. Ca. xxxiiij.
ITEM Anent the article of the money, It is thocht expedient be the Lordis of
the articlis, that their be ane true substantious man master of the cuinie,
quhilk sall forge money, and cuinie to serve the Kingis liegis. And that cuinie
salbe in this manner, that is for to say, a grot till have course and gang
for.xiiij. d. and x. of them to wey ane ounce, and to be of the samin fynes, as
the Edward grot of Ingland, and that the said cuineour sall gif and pay for the
ounce of brint silver.xj.s.vj. d. to be geuin and for Paris silver, and the
silver wark of Bruges siclyke. And as for the silver wark of this Realm,
quhilk is brocht to the cuinie, that is not sa fine, the said cuineour sall
gif, and deliver thairfoir the verray auale to the awnar of the said silver.
And samekill as it is war, than Paris wark or silver wark of Bruges to be
defalkit and rebatit of the price of the said silver. And gif the said cuineour
and the sellar of the said wark can not aggre of the price, that their salbe
two true goldsmythis sworn be their greit aithis to see and examine the said
silver wark, and the valor their of, and to declair, quhat it is worth ilk
ounce. Of the quhilk modificatioun and price both the cuineour awnar and sellar
of the said silver sall stand content. And to have knawlege that the said
cuinie be keipit in wecht and fynes with the said Edward grot, this said
cuineour sall have a sign and takin maid in the prenting hauand differance fra
the first cuinie. And gif any of the new grotis be fundin war in wecht and
fynes, na the Edward grot, the cuineour to be punist thairfoir, and tyne his
life and gudis. And that to be examinit and seen at the nixt Parliament, and
sonar gif it plesis the King. And because it is menit to our Souerane Lord,
that his gold and silver cuineit in his Realm is be ignorant persounis
refusit, quhe^ the said gold or silver hes crak, or flaw, or be soldit, It is
ordanit, that the said gold and silver salbe ressaifit be all his liegis, Sa
that it keip all the wecht, and be good true mettell, supppois it be with crak
or flaw, or soldit, as said is in all times tocum.

Of undoing of Caupis in Galloway. Ca. xxxv.
ITEM Because it was menit and complenit be our Souerane Lordis liegis dwelland
in the boundis of Galloway, that certane gentilmen heidis of kin in Galloway
hes vsit to tak Caupis, of the quhilk tak their and exactioun thairof, our
Souerane Lord and his three Estatis knew na perfect nor ressonabill cause, for
the quhilk his hienes be auise of the last Parliament assignit, warnit, and
chargeit all the persounis, that clamit or allegeit to tak, raise, or intromet
wit any sic actioun of Caupis, tocum to the nixt Parliament, and their ostend
and schaw, quhat rycht they have to the taking of the samin. And now in this
present Parliament the saidis persounis making the said clames, hes been often
times incallit for the ostensioun, and schawin of their rychtis, as said is,
and nane hes co^perit nor schawin na rycht, nor titill of rychtis, to raise and
tak the said Caupis. Heirfoir our Souerane Lord willing and being of
intentiou^, to seclude and put away all sic abusiounis, evil use and
extorsiounis put on his pepill and liegis but ressonabill cause, Be authority
of his Parliament ordanit be to abusit, and left the taking of the said Caupis
in all times tocum. And na man to tak them of the Kingis liegis, under the
pane to be punist, as for reif, and ay in time tocum to be a punct of dictay in
the Justice Air.

Of Caupis in Carrik. Ca. xxxvj.
ITEM As tuiching the Caupis in Carrik, the Kingis hienes and his Estatis
foirsaid thinkis expedient and concludis, that all they quhilkis clames Caupis
be warnit be oppin proclamatioun to compeir in the nixt Parliament, bringand
with them sic euidentis and rychtis, as they will use for the taking of the
said Caupes, with certificatioun and they do not, that our Souerane Lord with
auise of his three Estatis will adnull all sic thing, and will ordane all sic
Caupis to be not takin in time tocum.

The process of recovering of annual rentis. Ca. xxxvij.
ALSVA it is thocht expedient be the Lordis of the articlis and Estatis, after
the informatioun and supplicatioun maid be the Prouest, Baillies, counsall, and
community of Perth, desyring of our Souerane Lord, that the constitutioun and
reule of the said Burgh be conformit to the Kingis Lawis and co^suetude of the
Burgh of Edinburgh, and Law of Burgh, anent the recuperatiou^ and obtening of
annual rentis in Burgh in default of solutioun, and payment of the annuallis
aucht to the Lordis awnaris, and proprietaris of the said annuallis: IT is
thocht expedient, that the process of the recovering of the said annual at the
feird court be obseruit and keipit in the Burgh of Perth, and vthe^s Burrowis
in time tocum, as it is vsit in the Burgh of Edinburgh according to the Law of
Burgh, notwithstanding any other use or consuetude, that they have had in the
said Burgh of lang process, and delay in times bypast.

Of tennentis inhabitantis the Kingis proper landis. Ca. xxxviij.
ITEM Because it is vnderstandin to the Lordis of the articlis the heuie
complaintis, that hes often times been maid to the King and his counsall be his
pure tennentis, mailaris, and inhabitantis his proper landis in diverse partis
of his Realm, that they ar greitlie hurt and oppressit be Lordis and gentilmen
in the cuntrie dwelling beside them, quhilkes hes na tak of our Souerane Lord
of they landis, constreineis and compellis them to do service, auarage,
carriage, schering, leding, laubouring ryding and traveling be their powaris
and autoriteis: and for the remeid heirof, It is now statute and ordanit, that
na Lord, Barrone, frehaldar, gentilman, nor vthers compel any of the Kingis
tenuentis, mailaris, and inhabitantis his proper landis, to do them any manner
of sic service be coactioun, or dreid under the pane to be pu^^it, as
oppressouris of the Kingis liegis. And to be a punct of dictay in the Justice
Air.

The change of the Castle of the Glume to be callit Campbell. Ca. xxxix.
OUR Souerane Lord of his royal authority, at the desire and supplicatioun of
his cousing and traist counsallour, Celene Earl of Ergyle Lord Campbell ane of
Lorne his Chancellar hes changeit the name of the Castle and place quhilk was
callit the Glume, pertening to his said cousing, and in this Parliament makis
mutatioun and changeing of the said name, and ordanis the samin Castle to be
callit in time tocum Campbell.

Of Halkarstoun to be callit the Tempill. Ca. xl.
ITEM Our Souerane Lord of his royal authority, and at the desire and
supplicatioun of Williame Lord of Sanct Ihonis his counsallour and Thesaurar,
hes changeit the name of the house and place, quhilk was callit of befoir
Halkarstou^ pertening to the said Williame, and makis mutatioun and change of
the said name. And ordanis the samin house to be callit in all tymis tocum the
Tempill.

Our Souerane Lordis reuocatioun. Ca. xlj.
ITEM It is thocht expedient, because their was ane statute maid in our
Souerane Lordis Parliament, that was haldin at Edinburgh on wednisday the.viij.
day of October the eir of God ane thousand four hundredth lxxxviij. eiris,
declairand all alienatiou^is of landis, heritageis, lang takkes, fewferimis,
officis, taleis, blanchferme landis maid of waird to be of nane auale, after
the secund day of Februar (quhilk was the day of our Souerane Lords, that now
is, estmin forth of Striuiling) unto the coronatioun of our Souerane, that now
is, maid be our Souerane Lordis father that now is, of good mind, to be of na
force nor effect, for certane causis contenit in the said act and statute: That
thairfoir all they quhilkis gat pretendit giftis of alienatiounis of
heritageis, lang takkis, fewfermis, officis, taileis, blanchferme landis sold
bring their letters and euidentis grantit heirupo^e to our Souerane Lord,
within.xl. dayis to be destroyit, certifeing them that bringis not, the King
will make them to be specially callit, and punist for their inobedience.

The remit of them that was in Dounbertane with the Lord Lyle. Ca. xlij.
ITEM It is statute, and ordanit be our Souerane Lord in this present
Parliament, that all persounis co^mounis on the south side of the watter of
Forth, that tuke part with Robert Lord Lyle, and Matthew Stewart in the halding
of the Castle of Dounbartane again our Souerane Lord, and all conuocatioun
maid thairupon agane our Souerane Lord, be fre remittit be the writing of this
act, and statute for that actioun allanerlie: Sa that they neid not to raise
nane other seillis. And gif it happinnis any of the said persounes to be
indictit for the said cause, That they sall find souertie to make satisfactioun
to the parteis compleineand, as effeiris of Law. etc.

their ar the statutis ordina^cis and conclusiounis takin in this present
Parliament, auisit, and concludit be the Lordis chosin to the articlis
thairupone. xviij. Maij the ei^ of God ane thousand four hundredth. lxxxj.

Of the fredomes of the halie Kirk. Ca. xliij.
IN the first to the plesour of Almychtie God, and to procure and obtene his
grace and fortunat expeditioun in all matters concerning our Souerane Lord and
his Realm, It is statute and ordanit in this present Parliament, that the
priuilegeis, liberteis, and fredomes of halie Kirk be obseruit, keipit,
mantenit, and defendit, as it hes been in our Souerane Lords progenitouris
times of good mind, quhome God assolie. And quhair it may be vnderstandin,
that any of the saidis priuilegeis, liberteis, or fredomes is hurt, or brokin
in any special punct in contrare the premissis, that the complaintis ar
schawin of any Prelat or Kirk man, that Justice sold be ministerit after the
form of their auld priuilegeis gra^tit to them of befoir.

The alliance and confederatioun of France to be confermit. Ca. xliiij.
ITEM It is ordanit and concludit, that the alliance and co^federatioun maid of
befoir of auld and new betuix the Realms of France and Scotland, the Kingis
and Princis of the samin be the auise, conclusioun, and deliverance of the three
estatis be renewit, reformit, and interpret in form of the auld alliance, and
confederatiou^ maid betuix them and their Realms and liegis of befoir. And
attour to obtene and procure vthers new franchessis and priuilegeis to the
honor and proffeit of our Souerane Lord, his Realm, and liegis, and to the
good of Merchandis, that our Souerane Lordis liegis vsand they partis have sic
fredome within the Realm of France and bounds of the samin, like as the
Frenchemen hes within our Souerane Lords Realm and boundis. And quhair the
samin priuilegeis and fredomes are not, nor hes not been obseruit, nor keipit in
times bygane, to require reformatioun of the samin, according to the form of
the said alliance. And commissiounis to be maid in dew form thairupone.

Ambaxat for our Souerane Lordis marriage. Ca. xlv.
AND as tuiching the article of our Souerane Lords marriage, his hienes hes
ordanit the Earl Bothueill, the Bischop of Glasgow, ane Lord and the Dene of
Glasgow, to pas in the Realm of France, Hispanie, or any other parts for the
said marriage in their may honorabill wise for the honor of our Souerane Lord
and his Realm in sic number, as plesis the saidis persounis to pas. And
thairupone to have full commissioun of marriage of our Souerane Lord to France,
Hispanie, or any other convenient placis or personage, that salbe seen
expedient to them for the time, and for the reuouatioun, interpretatioun,
eiking, and extensioun of the confederatiounis betuix the saidis Princis and
our Souerane Lord, and as at mair lenth salbe geuin in instructiou^is to be
maid to them thairupone be the auise of our Souerane Lord and his counsall.
And they to have to their expe^sis the soume of five thousand pu^dis, like as
was grantit in the Parliament of befoir. And to inform and extend the said
instructiounis, as salbe seen expedient. etc.

Ane Ambaxat to Denmark. Ca. xlvi.
ITEM It is ordanit and concludit, that Schir James Ogilwy of Erlie Knycht, ane
Clerk, and Rothesay Herald sall pas to the King of Denmark in their may
honorabill wise, as Ambaxatouris, for the renouatioun of the confederatioun
maid of befoir for the good of Merchandis, with full commissioun and
instructioun to be maid thairupone, and sic other matters, as salbe seen
expedient to our Souerane Lord, and his counsall, and to have to their expe^sis
four hundredth merkis to be euinlie rasit of the three Estatis, that is to say,
of ilk estate four scoir ten pund. And the excrescence to be allowit for the
inbringing thairof. And that certane of ilk estate compeir in the blak freiris
on Setterday after none to provide for the said taxt, and for the souer payment
thairof to be incontinent, and in likewise for the taxt grantit to our Souerane
Lordis marriage.

Anent breuis and landis falland in waird. Ca. xlvij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that na breifis nor vthers letters be geuin to
na party, bot after the form of the breifis of the Chancellarie vsit in all
times of befoir. And at the form of the Chancellarie be keipit and obseruit
without innouatiou^ or eiking of new terms. And gif any beis geuin vtherwayis,
that they be of na force nor effect, except the brief of summoundis of error.
Item it is statute and ordanit, that quhair any land or landis happinnis to
fall in waird to our Souerane Lord or any other Barron of this Realm,
spiritual or temporal or landis geuin in coniunctfestment, or life rent
alsweill to Burgh as to land, That the Schiref of the Schire or Baillies sall
tak siclyke souertie of the persoun or persounis, that gettis or hes sic
wairdis, that they sall not waist nor dastroy their biggingis, orchardis,
wodis, stankis, parkis, medowis, or doweatis, bot that they hald them in
siclyke kind, as they ar in the time, that he gettis and ressaiffes the samin,
he taka^d his ressonabill sustentatiou^ or using in neidfull thingis without
destructioun or waisting thairof. And ane ressonabill leuing to be geuin to the
sustentatiou^ of the air after the quantite of the heritage, gif the said air
hes na bla^cheferme, nor fewferme lands to sustene him on, alsweill of the
waird landis, that fallis in our Souerane Lordis handis, as any other Barrone,
spiritual, or temporal.

Of landis falland in waird or vtherwayis alterit, that the tennentis sall
remane thairwith, quhill the nixt witsonday. Ca. xlviij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that quhen any landis fallis in waird, or
quhen any Lady hauand terce or co^iunctfeftment, happinnis to deceis, or quhat
land be redemit or lousit be reuersioun, gift, selling, or wedsetting, or any
vtherwayis landis happinnis to be alterit, The tennentis, laubouraris, and
inhabitantis any of the said landis, sall remane un put forth, or remonit,
quhill the nixt term of witsonday followand, Payand to the Lord, that sall
enter to the said landis the mailis, and dewteis aucht and wont of the said
landis, quhilk bruiking sall induce na possessioun langar, than the said
witsonday.

Anent finding of lawborrois. Ca. xlix.
ITEM It is auisit, statute, and ordanit, for the eschewing of slauchter,
forthochtfellony, and debait, that sall happin betuix any persounis in time
tocum be complaint maid to our Souerane Lord, his Chancellar, or Justice, That
the Chancellar or President beand for the time, with auise of the counsall and
Justice with auise of his assessouris sall put, quhat pane of soume of money,
that they think expedient, the parteis and their actiounis beand considderit,
that the party compleineand salbe harmeles and and skaithles in his persoune
or gudis, but fraud, or gyle vtherwayis, than Law will. And quhat Judge or
Iugeis, that takis this souertie, that they act the samin or put in rememorance
in their buik, that it may be schawin to our Souerane Lord, and his counsall.
And siclyke panis to be put in slauchter, rebellioun, and other crymis.

Anent slauchter or demembring. Ca. l.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that quhair any man happinnis to be slane or
demembrit within the Realm, alsweill within Regalitie, as within the Ryaltie,
and in Burgh, as to land, Than incontinent without dilay als haiste he as the
Schiref, or Stewart, Baillie, or Officiar of Regalitie can be certifeit
thairof, outher be party compleineand, or any other way, he sall pas, and
persew the slayaris, or demembraris, ane or maa, and raise the Kingis horn on
him, and raise the cuntrie incontinent in his support, quhill he be ouertane.
And gif he may be gottin, he sall incontinent bring him to the King or his
Justice, or else keip him in sicker suirtie, quhill the King be certifeit of
him, and have answer, quhat he sall do thairto be our Souerane Lord, or his
Justice at his will, or how sone it plesis him, notwithstanding the.xl dayis,
or the three sons contenit in the auld Lawis: The party followand beand
present, or warnit to be their, gif he will persew the actioun. And gif it
happinnis the saidis trespassouris till eschew out of the Schirefdome
vnarreistit, or takin, than the Schiref sall write or send ane of his
Officiaris to the Schiref of the nixt Schirefdome, and certify him of sic men,
that hes done sic felony agane the King, and ar fugitive fra the Lawis. And
than sall he first persew him or them outthrow the Schirefdome in the samin
manner, as the the other did of befoir without dilay. And swa forth fra Schiref to
Schiref, quhill he be ouertane, or put out of the Realm. And gif he happinnis
to fle in the Regalitie out of the Rialtie, The Schiref sall incontinent
certify the Lord of the Regalitie, his Stewart, or Baillie, the quhilk sall
persew the trespassouris in like manner, as the Schiref dois, as is befoir said.
And quhair ever he happinnis to be ouertane, that the Schiref, Stewart, or
Baillies of the Regaliteis sall incontinent se^d him to the Schiref, or Baillie
of the nixt Schirefdome, quhilk sall ressaif him, and send him to the nixt
Schiref. And sa forth fra Schiref to Schiref, quhill he be put to the Schiref
of the Schire, quhair the deid was done. And their sall Justice be inco^tine^t
done, as is befoirsaid. And gif it be forthochtfellony, to die thairfoir. And
gif the saides Schireffis or Officiares beis fundin culpabill heirin, and he
have the office of heritage, he sall tyne it for three eiris. And gif he hes it
for terms, to tyne it for ever mair. And to abide, and underly ane assyse,
quhether he be culpabill or not.

That Justice Airis be haldin twyis in the eir. Ca. lj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit for the stanching of cummers, slauchters,
reiffis, thiftis, extorsiounis and oppressiounis of our Souerane Lordis liegis,
That thairfoir his Airis be set and haldin twyis in the eir, that is to say,
anis on the corn, and anis on the gers: Sa that Justice may be universally
execute throw the Realm, for the punitioun of the saidis crimes. And quhair it
salbe seen speidfull, that our Souerane Lord move his may Nobill persoun
thairto. And quhair it is not necessare, that our Souerane Lordis persoun move,
that be auise of his counsall he send siclyke persounis, as sall be seen
speidfull for the time, and the cuntrie, that they pas to. And that all our
Souerane Lordis liegis reddylie answer, rise, and cum to them in the
fortifeing of Justice, as they salbe chargeit be the Justice, under the pane to
be punist as fauouraris of the said trespassouris, and airt and part thairof,
and dictay to be taken thairupone, and to be a punct of dictay in time tocum.

The party that tynis his actioun sall pay his parteis coistis and ane unlaw
of.xl.s. Ca. lij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that quhair any party hes actioun and
summoundis agane vthers, and the defendour compeir not in proper persoun, or be
his procuratouris, he sall pay the coistis and skaithis of the party
compeirand, and ane unlaw of xl.s. to the Judge, within.xx. dayis after the
decreit of the deliverance be geuin thairupone, or they be hard in Judgment.
And faileing thairof, that letters be writtin to the Schiref of the Schire,
Stewart, or Baillie in Burgh or to land, for the executiou^ of the said
decreit, and to have for his office and feis.xij. d. of ilk pund sa recouerit,
to be takin of the party at the said decreit is geuin agane. And gif it
happinnis any of the saidis Schireffes and Officiaris to failie in their
officis, not makand the parteis to be payit after the form of the Kingis
letters within xx. dayis, of sit a soume, as beis decreitit and recouerit, as
said is: quhat Schiref or any other Officiar that beis negligent, as is
foirsaid, and makis not dew executioun of the saidis decreitis, after the form
of the letters and decreitis cummand to them thairupone, he that hes the
office in heritage, sall tyne the samin for three eiris, and he that hes the
samin in lyferent, sall tyne it for ever mair. And the coistis and skaithis of
the party, the Schiref or Officiar to be dettour thairfoir, and raise it vpone
him or them, togidder with the principal soume, that is recoucrit, and in
likewise the Prouestis and Baillies of Burrowis, to be secludit fra their
officis for ever mair, and to be dettours and pay the said soume with coistis
and expensis, as said is.

Of wappinschawing. Ca. liij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that ilk Schiref, Stewart, or Baillie of the
Realm gar wappinschawinges be maid four times in the eir in all placis
conuement within his Baillierie in this wise, That ilk gentilman hauand ten
pundis worth of land or mair be sufficiently harnest and anarmit with basnet,
sellet, quhite hat, gorget, or pissane, haill leg harnes, sword, speir, and
dagar, and gentill men hauand les extent of landis or vnlandit salbe armit at
their gudlie powar, after the sycht and discretioun of the Schireffis, and
Baillies, and sic persounis, as our Souerane Lord sall depute Co^missaris
thairto, and honest emen hauand sufficient powar, that lykis to be men of arms
to be harnest sufficiently after the discretioun of the saidis Schireffis and
Commissaris, and all other emen of the Realm betuix saxtie and saxtene sall
have sufficient bowis and schewis, sword, bucklar, knyfe, speir, or ane good ax
in steid of ane bow. And that all Burgessis and indwellaris in Burrowis of the
Realm in like manner be anarmit, and harnest, and make wappinschawingis, as said
is, four times of the eir. And that the Aldermen and Baillies be correct be
the Chalmerlane or his Deputis for the executioun of the said thingis. And that
all men of the Realm both to Burgh and to land spiritual me^nis seruandis,
and temporal be weill purwayit of the said barnes and wappinnis be the feist
of Midsomer nixt tocum, quhilk salbe the day of wappinschawingis under the
panis followand, that is to say, of ilk gentilman that defaultis at the first
wappinschawing.xl.s. and at the secund default other.xl.s. and at the third
default. x pund. And als mekill als often times, as he defaultis thairefter. And
of ilk bowman at the first fault.x.s. at the secund.x.s. and at the third.xl.s.
And sa forth als often times, as he beis fundin faltise thairefter.xl.s. And
after the faculty of their landis and gudis, that every man be furneist and
harnest in his body with quhite harnes, brigantinis, or good takkis, with
splentes, and gluiffis of plait and weill horst correspondand to their landis
and gudis be the discretioun of the Schiref, Commissar, or Officiar foirsaid.
And attour that in na place of the Realm their be vsit futballis, golf, or
other sic vnproffitabill sportis, bot for the commoun good of the Realm and
defense thairof. And at bowis and schuting be hantit and bow markis maid
thairfoir ordanit in ilk parochin under the pane of.xl s. to be rasit be the
Schiref and Baillies foirsaid. And of ilk parochin ilk eir, quhair it beis
fundin, that bow markis beis not maid, nor schuting hautit, as is befoir said.
etc.

Of the keiping of the dayis of trewis. Ca. liiij.
ITEM It is ordanit and concludit, that dayis of meting be set and appointit on
the Bordouris for conseruatiou^ and keiping of the trewis last takin, and at
scharp writing be send to the wardanis, Lieutennentis, and their Deputis for
the dew obseruatioun and keiping of the samin according to the said trewis: Sa
that na default be fundin in any of our Souerane Lordis liegis in that behalf,
for the good of peax and the commoun good of the Realm, and redres of all
attemptatis to be put to dew executioun, according to the said trewis. etc.

Of mettis mesuris and wechtis. Ca. lv.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit for the commoun good of the Realm, honor, and
proffeit of our Souerane Lords liegis, that the auld statutis and ordinancis
maid of befoir both to Burgh and to land alsweill of mettis and mesuris,
custumis, and vthers be obseruit and keipit after the tennour and form of the
actis and statutis maid thairupone, and under the panis contenit in the samin.

And that the Chalmerlanis provide, that this be obseruit and keipit, and
specially of wechtis, alsweill of walx and spice, and.xvj. ounce of the pund.

The sitting of the Sessiounis. Ca. lvj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the Chancellar with certane Lordis of
counsall or else the Lordis of the Sessioun sall sit for the administratioun of
Justice thryis in the eir, The first time to begin the morn nixt after Sanct
Michaell the Archangellis day in September, The secund time to begin on the
monu^day the first haill oulk of Lentrene, The third time to begin on the
monunday nixt after the birth of Sanct Iohne the Baptist: Sa that Justice may
be put to dew executioun to all parteis compleineand.

Of conuocatioun and gaddering in Burrowis. Ca. lvij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that within all Burrowis throwout the Realm,
na liggis nor bandis be maid, nor it conuocatioun, nor rising of co^mounis in
hindering of the commoun Law, bot at the command of their heid Officiaris. And
gif any dois in the contrare, and knawlege or taint may be gottin thairof,
their gudis to be confiskat to the King, and their lyfis to be at the Kingis
will. And that na man dwelland within the Burgh be fundin in man rent nor ride
in na rout in feir of weir with na man, bot with the King, or his Officiaris,
or siclyke under the samin pane. And als that na indwellar within Burgh purches
any outlordschip or maisterschip to landwart to rout nor ride to pley at bar or
any vtherway in the oppressioun of his neichtbour, bot soberly neichtbour to
neichtbour, under the samin pane. And that every man dwelland within Burgh
answer and obey to the Officiaris of the samin, as said is, quhen and in quhat
wise they salbe chargeit be the saidis Officiaris in defense of the Realm, and
liegis, and for the commoun good and weilfair of the Burgh in the
administratioun of Justice and Law under the pane foirsaid. And that the
Justice Clerk eirlie in the taking of the dictay inquyre vpone the said
punctis, and the brekaris thairof to be punist be the Justice, as other crymis
after the form of the said act.

Of Summoundis of error. Ca. lviij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, anent the brief of summou^dis of error, and
for the declaratioun of the samin, that quhat persoun obtenit summoundis of
error vpone a Judge of inqueist or persounis that past thairupone, That the
party be callit for his interes to compeir to ane certane day with
certificatioun, that quhether they compeir or not the Lordis will proceid after
the form of the summoundis, and do Justice to the party, not abide and the
secund, nor third summoundis, declairing that all persounis, that passis vpone
sic inqueistis compeir personally. Because it may depend vpone their
infamiteis. And quhair any persoun eallis other at his instance, and compeiris
not to follow his party, he sall pay the expensis of his party and ane unlaw
of.xl.s. to the Lordis alsweill in summoundis of error, as in other
summoundis, or he be hard in Judgment, to fullow his party thairefter, and to
abide the decreit to be geuin thairupone.

Anent the commoun good of all Burrowis. Ca. lix.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit anent the commoun good of all our Souerane
Lordis Burrowis within the Realm, that the said commoun good be obseruit and
keipit to the co^moun proffeit of the town, and to be spendit in co^moun and
necessare thingis of the Burgh be the auise and cou^sall of the town for the
time and Dekinnis of craftis quhair they ar. And inquisitioun eirlie to be
takin in the Chalmerlane Air of expensis and dispositsoun of the samin. And
attour that the re^tis of the Burrowis, as landis, sischinges, fermis, mailis,
mylnis, and watters eirlie reuenus be not set, bot for three eires allanerlie.
And gif any happinnis to be set vtherwayis, that they be of nane auale, force,
nor effect in time tocum.

Anent the copying of the actis and proclamatioun of the samin. Ca. lx.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that all Schireffis, Baillies, and Prouestis
of Burrowis, tak the copy of their actis and statutis for the fulfilling of the
samin. And to make them be oppinlie proclamit within their boundis under the
pane of the unlaw of the Parliament to be rasit vpone them.

Of refusing of gold that is crakit. Ca. lxj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that because it was statute in the last
Parliament, That all gold, that held wecht and tynes sold be taken in payment,
and notwithstanding the statute foirsaid, they refuse to tak gold that is
crakkit, THAT thairfoir it is statute and ordanit, that all sic gold be takin
without refuse, and quha sa dois in the contrare sall tyne the auale of the
penny be him refusit in this wise. That quhair the said gold beis geuin for
dettis, the refusar sall tyne the penny be him refusit, and that salbe ane
sufficient acquittance to the profferar of the said debt: And gif it be geuin
for gudis to be bocht, the refusar sall tyne the auale of the penny, that he
refusit for the said gudis.

IN PARLIAMENTO TEN TO APVD EDINBVRGH DIE MERCVRII VIcesimo sexto die Mensis
Iunij Anno Do. Millesimo Quadring entesimo Nonagesimo tertio praesente supremo
Do. nostro Rege Iacobo Quarto dei gratia Rege Scotorum, Cum tribus Regni sui
statibus and Dominis subscriptis. Haec acta and statuta, quae immediate
sequuntur, facta suerant and approbata in eodem Parliamento per dictum supremum
Dominum nostrum Regem, and tres status antedictos.

Of the halie Kirk. Ca. lxij.
ANENT the first article tuiching the liberty and fredome of halie Kirk, It is
auisit be the Lordis of the articlis and als statute and ordanit in this
present Parliament, that our Souerane Lord make the halie Kirk and Kirkmen to be
defendit and keipit in their auld priuilegeis and fredomes. And gif the Kirk or
Kirkmen be hurt or greuit contrare Justice, that they meme them to the King,
and they sall have reformatioun.

Of dispositioun of beneficis the sege vacand. Ca. lxiij.
ITEM Anent the priuilegeis of the Kirk of Scotland grantit be Papis to our
Souerane Lordis predecessoures and to his Realm, and that hes been possedit
and vsit in Princis times of good mind: In the first the dispositiou^ of all
beneficis alsweill of beneficis reseruit specially or generally, as they that are not reseruit be our Souerane Lord the sege vacand, IT is auisit be the
Lordis of the articlis, and als statute and ordanit in this Parliament, That
the samin priuilegeis be obseruit and keipit in all times tocum. And gif any of
our Souerane Lordis liegis attemptis to do in the contrare, that they be punist
with all rigor after the form of the actis and statutis of Parliament maid
thairupone of befoir. And that our Souerane Lord make the panis contenit in the
said actis be put to executioun on them, but any fauouris or exceptioun of
persounis.

That beneficis of auld vsit to be disponit within the Realm be disponit
within the samin. Ca. lxiiij.
ITEM Anent the beneficis religious and secular, quhilkis passis now to the
court of Rome, that war disponit in the Realm be electiounis, and vtherwayis
in the time of King James the first of may Nobill mind, That all they
Prelaceis, Abbaceis, Pryoreis, and other beneficis remane and be disponit in
all times tocum within the Realm, like as they war in the time of the said
King James the first. And at na persounis attempt to do in the contrare, under
the pane of proscriptioun and banissing, and never to bruke honor, digniteis
nor beneficis within the Realm of Scotland.

The bull anent the promotioun to beneficis elective to be obseruit and keipit.
Ca. lxv.
ITEM Anent the privilege grantit in favor of our Souerane Lord and his
Realm, quhilk is far in distance fra the court of Rome, that the Papis halynes
hes graciously grantit to abide the Kingis writing and commendatioun anent the
dispositioun and promotioun of all beneficis elective or vthers Prelaceis for
the space of.viij. Month, as the bull under the leid thairupone proportis: IT
is auisit be the Lordis of the articlis and als statute and ordanit, that our
Souerane Lord make the samin privilege and bull be obseruit and keipit, and
suffer na promotiou^is to gang throuch in the contrare. And that na manner of
persoun of our Souerane Lordis liegis, quhat estate or degree he be of, attempt
or make impetratioun in the contrare, without our Souerane Lordis writing and
co^mendatioun in special to that benefice or Prelacie, that salbe purchest and
vaik for the time, as said is. And quha sa dois in the contrare to incur the
panis of proscriptioun and banissing, and to be declairit rebel to our
Souerane Lord, and never to bruke honor, benefice, nor dignity within the
Realm. And that na manner of Merchand nor liege of his Realm make fynance or
fortify the persounis doand in the contrare under the pane of tinsall of life,
land, and gudis.

That na Legate be ressaiffit within the Realm, bot gif he be ane Cardinal or
native borne of it. Ca. lxvj.
ITEM Anent the bull and privilege grantit to our Souerane Lordis
progenitouris, and his Realm, that na Legate salbe ressaifit within the Realm,
bot gif he be ane Cardinal or native borne of the Realm: It is auisit and
ordanit be the Lordis of the articlis, and als statute and ordanit, that our
Souerane Lord cause and make the said bull and privilege be obseruit and keipit
in all time tocum, after the form and tennour of the said bull.

Of the Indult grantit to Sanctandros and Glasgow, for confirmatioun of the
electiounis to Abbaceis. Ca. lxvij.
ITEM Anent the Indult, privilege, and faculteis grantit be our halie father
the Pape perpetually to the sege of Sanctandros and Glasgow, the Bischoppis of
the samin segeis, and their successouris to confirm the electiounis of all
Abbaceis within their dioceis, as the said bullis and faculteis proportis, and
that the said Abbaceis confirmit be them sall neid na prouisioun of the court
of Rome: It is statute and ordanit in this present Parliament, that the said
Indult, bull, privilege, and faculty grantit to the said segeis, Ad perpetuam
rej memoriam be obseruit and keipit in all thingis in time tocum,
notwithstanding any pretendit renuntiatioun or resignatioun maid in the court
of Rome be any particulare persou^, without the auise and deliberatioun of the
Kingis hienes and Estatis: SEN the saidis priuilegeis war grantit for the
commoun good of the Realm and the said segeis, and mycht not be renuneit nor
geuin over without the consent of the King, and the three Estatis, and
Cheptouris of Sanctandros and Glasgow. And in likewise all other priuilegeis,
Indultis, and faculteis grantit to Glasgow and to all vthers Bischoprikis and
Prelaceis of the Realm be obseruit and keipit, that are for the good public
of the Realm. And that our Souerane Lord suffer nane of his liegis to laubour
nor attempt in the contrare.

Of the pleyis betuix the Bischoppis of Sanctandros and Glasgow. Ca. lxviij
ITEM Anent the contentioun and pley now dependand in the court of Rome betuix
the Bischoppis of Sanctandros and Glasgow, Off the quhilkis pleyis the expensis
is vnestiabill damnage to the Realm: HEIRFOIR it is thocht expedient be the
Lords of the artielis, that the Kingis hienes gar write his letters to both
the said Prelatis exhorting and praying them to leif their contentiounis litis
and pleyis contrare till vthers now mouit, and dependand betuix them in the
court of Rome. And for the cause and motiou^ of their pley, our Souerane Lord
sall gar be seen and vnderstandin, quhat is may proffitabill to be had and
desyrit of the co^moun good of the Realm. And sall send his writing to our
halie father the Pape conformand thairto, like as salbe seen expedient be the
King, and his Estatis spiritual and temporal. And command the party contrare
to ceis, and not to lauboure aganis the thing, that salbe seen proffitabill for
the weilfair and proffeit of the Realm, with certificatioun to the saidis
Prelatis, that gif they will not ceis, and leif the saidis pleyis in the court
of Rome, and be obedient to the devise and deliberatioun of our Souerane Lord,
and his three Estatis, his hienes will command and charge his liegis within this
Realm, that nane of them make fynance nor pay to them fermis, rentis, nor
mailis to the sustentatioun of the saidis pleyis and having of the money out of
the Realm. And in likewise certifeing them, gif any of them hes done in
times bygane in contrare the actis and statutis of this Realm and good
public of the samin, he will make the doar thairof be notit, knawin, and
punist, as effeiris, after the form and statutis of this Realm.

The Kingis Oratouris to charge all vthers to ceis their pleyis. Ca. lxix.
ITEM Anent all vthers parteis, that are contendand and pleyis in the court of
Rome vpone causis beneficial, It is auisit and ordanit be the Lordis of the
articlis, that the Kingis Oratouris and Ambaxatouris, that sall pas to the
court of Rome for his obedience, sall exhort and pray all the liegis of his
Realm both Clerkis and secularis, that hes pley dependand in the court of
Rome to ceis and leif their pleyis persecutiounis and litigatiounis. And all
sic parteis tocum within the Realm, bringing with them their rychtis, bullis,
writtis, and munimentis. And our Souerane Lord sall gar Justice be ministerit
to them be their Ordinar Judge, quhome it effeiris. And gif the Ordinar be
suspect and faileis in the administratioun of Justice, our Souerane Lord sall
with the auise of his counsall see, and limmit to the parteis contendand a
competent Judge, quhilk sall minister Justice to all parteis but specialitie.
And ordanis, that the act maid in sic matters be vmquhile our Souerane Lordis
may Nobill progenitouris of good mind King James the first, quhome God
assolie, be obseruit and keipit after the form and tenor of the samin.

Of taxatioun of beneficis to be maid after the auld taxatioun. Ca lxx.
ITEM Because their is ane notabill act maid be our Souerane Lords father,
quhome God assolie, that nane of the liegis of his Realm spiritual nor
te^porall make, nor cause to be maid hiear taxatiou^es of Prelaceis, Abbaceis,
or other benefices, quhatsu^euer at y^ getting of promotiu^is and contentiounis
for promotiounis in the court of Rome, bot after the auld taxatiou^, as is
co^tenit in the bulk of Bagimo^tes na hicar: Thairfoir conformand to she said
act, it is statute and ordanit in this present Parliament, that gif any
spiritual persoun laubouris or attemptis in the contrare of this act, they
beand knawin to our Souerane Lord and his counsall, that persoun spiritual
salbe vnhabill to bruke that benefice, or any other within the Realm of
Scotland, and not to be dispensit with the bruiking of beneficis. And temporal
men, that dois in the contrare, to tyne their life and gudis.

The troubill of the money and it be crakit. Ca. lxxj.
ITEM Anent the troubill and debait, that is ama^gis our Souerrane Lordis
liegis of the refusing of the money for the crakis and slawis being in the
gold, or the silver, quhilk is sufficient of fynes and of our Souerane Lordis
prent, and for the diversity of diverse cuiners of silver strikin be diverse
cuineouris, the said silver and grotis beand sufficient of fynes beirand prent
of our Souerane Lords straik: IT is be the auise of the Lordis of the articlis
chargeit and commandit be our Souerane Lord and the Estatis of the Parliament,
that all the Kingis liegis of his Realm but impediment ressaif and tak the
said money gold and silver, as said is, for any Merchandice or victuallis, or
other thing being to sell, notwithstanding the diversity of pre^tis of the
straik of sindrie cuineouris, alsweill the straik of Gilbert Fische, quhilk the
commoun pepill callis Berwyk grotis, as of v^quhile Leuingtoun and Iohne
currour. And gif any persoun or persounis refusis the samin contrare the
statutis maid thairupone in the last Parliament, The hauar of the said money
sall cum to the Officiaris or Baillies of the town, and sehaw the said money,
quhilk beand good and sufficient the said Officiaris sall gar him have the
Merchandice or pennyworthis fra the persoun, that refusis the said money. And
somekill of good money as he refusis, the sellar sall tyne to be the Kingis
escheit, and deliver the penny worthis to the byar. And gif the money, that was
offerit, gold or silver be falls cuinie and evil stuff, seen and understanding
^e the Officiaris of the town be the auise of the me^ hauand knawlege of the
money, the saidis Officiaris sall clip and brek the said falls money and cuinie
of evil stuff gold and silver: Sa that it make na mair troubill nor
dissreindschip amangis the Kingis liegis, and deliver the samin clippit money
agane to the awnar.

Ambaxat for the Kingis marriage. Ca. lxxij.
AS Tuiching our Souerane Lordis marriage, quhilk is proffitabill to all the
liegis of the Realm, It is thocht expedient to the Lordis of the articlis, and
als auisit be the Estatis of the Realm, that their be chosin now in this
Parliament ane Bischop, ane Earl, a Lord, a knycht. And the personage to be
chosin and nemmit be the Kingis hienes. And they to have commissioun to end and
conclude the said marriage in France or in any other Realm, quhair it salbe
thocht expedient to our Souerane Lord be the auise of the Estatis of his
Realm. And for their expensis to have the rest of the taxt, that was first
grantit to be inbrocht incontinent alsweill be the Clergy, as be the Barronis,
and Commissaris of Burrowis, togidder with ane thousand pund last gra^tit for
the said cause. And that the Archidene of Sanctandros, Master Richard
Robefone, and other two temporal Lordis, that salbe limmit thairto, sit and
tak count of the Prelatis, Schireffis, Co^missaris of Burrowis, and the
Collectouris, that war last. That is to say, Schir Stewin Lokkart, Thomas
Stewart, and Balder Blacader tocum, and make their comptis, and schaw quhome fra
they have ressaifit, and how mekill. And that na discharge geuin be the King
sall auale or be admittit, sen it was grantit be the Estatis of the Realm for
our Souerane Lordis marriage, and to na vthers. And quhat persoun, that
compeiris not, and make full count to be put in waird, and their landis, and
gudis to be prysit thairfoir. And attour the three Estatis hes grantit for the
augmentatioun of the said taxtis to give ane thousand pund for the honorabill
hamebringing of a Queen in this wise followand, that is to say, Off the Clergy
four hundredth pundis, of the Bartonis four hundredth pund, and for the
Burrowis two hundredth pund to be ressaifit incontinent.

That strangearis Merchandis, that cummis with Schippis cum to the principal
town. Ca. lxxiij.
ITEM It is auisit be the Lordis of the articlis, that for the defraude done to
our Souerane Lord in his custumis be strangearis, and alienaris of other
Realms, quhilkis cummis to this Realm and takis their ludgeing and Innis in
the town of Leith, and at vthers portis of the Realm, and chargeis their
gudis to the sey and vthers their Merchandice, not payand their custumis and
dewteis to our Souerane Lord in that wise, that their gudis ar vnenterit, as
effeiris, nor their Merchandice schawin to the custumaris, and Clerkis of the
cocket: IT is statute and ordanit, that in time to cum quhen any Schip of
alienaris or strangearis of other Realms cummis in the heuin of Leith, or any
other port within the Realm, The master or Merchandis of the said Schip sall
tak his ludgeing and Innis in the principal town of the said port, and enter
their gudis, as effeiris. And to charge na gudis nor Merchandice to the sey,
quhill it be seen be the custumaris and Clerkis of the cocket, quhat gudis and
Merchandice they send to the sey, and the custumis and dewteis payit thairfoir.
And the hoist of the Innis, quhair the said strangearis ar ludgeit, sall answer
to the King for their custumis and dewteis, gif the said strangearis passis
away vncustumit. And the said hoist sall gif count to the Kingis Officiaris and
custumaris, quhat gudis he hes forth effering to the quantity of the gudis,
that he enterit: Sa that it salbe cleirlie vnderstandin, that he have away
Merchandice and na money. And gif any beis fundin brekand this statute, takand
the money away, all the said money and his vthers gudis salbe the Burgessis
escheit. And that the Kingis hienes depute serchouris heirto, quhilkis sall
search the samin, as they will stand thairfoir to his hienes and his Estatis.

That na Cordonar, nor other craftisman tak na custumis of vthers. Ca. lxxiiij
ITEM It is thocht expedient, because it is cleirlie vnderstandin, That the
craftismen of Burrowis, sic as Cordownaris and vthers, takis of men of the
samin craft cummand to the market on the monounday a penny of ilk man, quhilk
is the cause of derth and exalting of their penny worthis, sic as schone was
wont to be sauld for. xij. d. or better schape, and other Merchandice, that is
exaltit for a penny to sax or aucht pennyis, quhilk is greit skaith to the
commoun proffeit: That thairfoir na manner of craftiman, na Cordownar tak any
manner of taxatioun penny nor other, than was wont to be takin of the auld Law.
And quha sa dois in the contrare, salbe repute as ane oppressor of the Kingis
liegis, and to be indictit thairfoir. And the Clerk of the Justice Air to tak
dictay thairupone: Sa that he, that is brekar heirof, sall by his life
thairfoir, as for commoun oppressioun.

Putting down of Dekinnis of craftis, and that na masonis nor wrichtis tak
payment for halie dayis. Ca. lxxv.
ITEM Because it is cleirlie vnderstandin to the Kingis hienes and his three
Estatis, that the using of Dekinnis of men of craft in Burrowis is rycht
dangerous, and as they use the samin, may be the cause of greit troubill in
Burrowis, and conuocatiou^ and rising of the Kingis liegis be statutis making
contrare the commoun proffeit and for their singular proffeit and auale,
quhilk seruis greit punitioun, and als belangand masonis and other men of
craft, that conuenis togidder and makis reule of their craft, sic as masonis,
and wrichtis, and vthers, that they sall have their fee alsweill on the halie
day, as for the wark day, or else they sall not laubour nor wirk, And als that,
quhat persoun of them, that wald begin ane other ma^nis wark, and he at his
plesour will leif the said wark, and than nane of the said craft dar not
compleit, nor fulfill the samin wark: It is heirfoir auisit, statute and
ordanit, that all sic Dekinnis sall ceis for ane eir, and have nane other
powar, bot allanerlie to examine the fynes of the stuff and wark, that beis
wrocht with the remanent of his craft. And als betangand masonis, wrichtis, and
other men of craft, that statutis, that they sall have ^ee alsweill for the
halie day, as for the wark day: That all the makaris and vsaris of the said
statutis sall be indictit as commoun oppressouris of the Kingis liegis be their
statutis, And that the Clerk of the Institiarie sall tak dictay thairupone, and
they to be punist as oppressouris, And in likewise of the makaris of the
statutis, That quhair any beginnis ane mannis wark, ane other sall not end it,
That all the makaris and vsaris thairof salbe punist, as oppressouris of the
Kingis liegis, and dictay to be takin thairupone, as is above writtin.

Anent the taking of multur of flower that cummis forth of other landis. Ca.
lxxvj.
ITEM Anent the complaint maid vpone the taking of multur of the flower, that
cummis forth of other landis to the port and heuin of leith: It is thocht
expedient, auisit, and ordanit, that all sic statutis ceis unto the nixt
Parliament. And that their be na multur takin for sic flower in times tocum,
nor of the flower, that cummis to the market, bot at it may cum to the market
and be sauld without multur or any other new taxatioun, than was vsit to be
takin of befoir. And that all manner of man be fre to bring and sell victual all
the dayis of the oulk, alsweil as on the market day. And this act to be
obseruie and keipit in all Burrowis of the Realm.

That the Justice Clerk tak forth all the statutis, that hes pane of dictay in
them. Ca. lxxvij.
ITEM Because their is money diverse statutis, quhilkis hes in the end of them
the pane of dictay, and hes not been in time bygane cleirlie speirit, at the
indictmentis taking, as they sold have been, throw the quhilk diverse
persounis, that hes brokin the said statutis, hes not been punist: It is
auisit, statute and ordanit, that the Clerk of the Iustitiarie tak forth of the
Kingis statutis all they statutis, that his pane of dictay in the end, and make
the samin be inquyrit ar the dictay taking vpone every punct: Sa that the
trespassouris and brekaris of the statutis may be punist in every Schire,
according to Justice, and to the effect of the samin statutis broken. And this
to be done incontinent, or the proclamatioun of any Justice Airis.

That na custumaris tak na mair taxatioun than is statute Ca. lxxviij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that na custumaris within Burgh tak any mair
taxatiounis, custumis, or dewteis, than is statute and visit in the auld Law.
And quha that dois in the contrare to be punist, as ane oppressor and brekar
of the Kingis Law, and dictay to be takin thairof. And in likewise they that
vsis falls mesuris and wechtis dissai^and the pepill to be indictit, as
falsaris. And dictay to be takin thairof be the Justice Clerk.

Of mureburne. Ca. lxxix.
ITEM Because it hes been statute of befoir, that settaris of mureburne sold
pay ane unlaw to the King, and because it is cleirlie vnderstandin, that the
pure bodyis, that dwellis in malingis and ar bot seruandis to their masters,
that aw the malinges, and dois it for their command: That thairfoir it is
statute and ordanit, that he that aw the maling be ressone, that he commandit
that to be done in forbiddin time, sall pay ane unlaw to the King of.xl.s. And
dictay to be takin vpone them both thairupone, and the persounis, that dois
the samin, to pay ane other unlaw.

That nane destroy herone sewis for three eiris. Ca. lxxx.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that quhair any heronis biggis or hes nestis
within Lordis, Barronis, or other landis within the Realm, that for the space
of three eiris nixt to cum, na manner of persoun or persounis, slay any of the
said heronis sewis, or destroy their nestis, eggis, or birdis, enduring the
said three eiris, with certificatioun, that it salbe a punct of dictay. And they
that beis convict thairof, sall pay.x. pund of unlaw to the King, and dictay to
be takin be the Justice Clerkis thairupone. And quhair it beis vnderstandin,
that for the plesour of the Kingis hienes any persounis keipis the said nestis,
and suffers na persounis to destroy them, they sall have thankis and fauouris
of our Souerane Lord, as effeiris, and ane unlaw to be geuin thairfoir.

Anent the making of Schippis and buschis. Ca. lxxxj.
ITEM Anent the greit innumerabill riches, that is tint in fault of Schippis
and buschis to be disponit for fisching, siclyke as vthers Realms hes, that are
merchand with the sey, and for the policy and conquest, that may be had
heirintill, and to cause idill men vaue^geouris, to laubour for their leuing
for the eschewing of vicis and Idilnes, and for the commoun proffeit and
universal weill of the Realm: It is thocht expedient be the Lordis of the
articlis, and als statute and ordanit in this present Parliament, that their be
Schippes and buschis maid in all Burrowis and townis within the Realm, and at
the leist of the said Schippis and buschis be of.xx. tun. And at the townis and
Burrowis have the said Schippis and buschis according to the substance of ilk
town, and to the number, as after followis, weill abileit with all necessare
graith for the said Schippes and buschis, and with marynaris, nettis, and other
graith convenient for the taking of greit fische, and small. And all the said
Schippis and buschis to be reddy maid and furneist to pas to fisching be
Fasterniseuin nixt tocum. And in ilk Burgh of the Rialtie, that the Officiaris
of the Burgh make all the stark idill men within their boundis to pas with the
said Schippes for their wageis. And gif the said idill men refusis to pas, that
they bancis them the Burgh. And into Burgh of Barronis, quhilk ar neir vpone
the sey, that the Schiref of the Schire compel the idill me^ within his
boundis to pas to the said Schippis for their waigeis. And gif they refuse, in
likewise to baneis them his Schire. And gif the Officiaris of the Burrowis or
Schireffis of the Schiris beis ^undin negligent, outher in the putting forth of
the said Schippis, and buschis, or compelling the idill men to pas in them for
their waigeis, or banissing of them of their Burrowis, or Schiris, gif they
refuse, as said is, they sall pay to the King ane unlaw of.xx. pund ilk ane of
them, that is to say, the Officiar of the Burgh for the time, and the Schiref
of the Schire. For the quhilk they salbe chargeit in the Checkar, and gif count
eirlie thairupone.

Of giftis and alienatiounis maid be our Souerane Lordis father. Ca. lxxxij.
ITEM It is statute, concludit, and ordanit in this present Parliament be the
haill three Estatis, That because they have auisit, considderit, and
vnderstandin, that our Souerane Lord, that last deceissit, quhome God assolie,
beand the time co^monit and displesit throw evil counsall, that was about him,
in the time a lytill befoir his deceis, analyit, and put away both of his awin
landis and possessioun pertening to his hienes in property, and als agane
justice and good conscience ressaifit and tuke resignatiounis of diverse landis,
and gaif infeftmentis in exheredatioun and disherysing of rychteous airis be
the solistatioun and persuasiou^ of the evil counsall, that was about him, as
said is, without any ressonabill cause to the displesour of God, contrare
Justice, and to the hurt of his saul: That thairfoir all the saidis
donatiounis and infeftmentis maid and geuin be him fra the secund day of
September in the eir of God ane thousand four hundredth four scoir seuin eiris
to the day of his deceis, sall be of nane auale force nor effect in time tocum,
bot at our Souerane Lordis hienes, that now is, salbe restorit and reintegrat
to all landis, rentis, possessiounis, that was be any manner of way analyit and
geuin be his father to quhatsumeuer persounis within the said time. And in
likewise that all resignatiounis ressaiffit be him and infeftmentis, that he
gaif to the exheredatioun and disherysing and putting of any landis and
possessiounis fra the rychteous airis, salbe of nane auale, force, nor effect,
in time tocum, Bot at our Souerane Lord and all vthers persounis, that was hurt
within the said time, salbe and is be vertew of this act restorit in integrum
to all rychtis, as they war of befoir the said day. And cassis and adnullis all
donatiounis, giftis, and infeftmentis maid after the resignationis within the
said time, and decernis them to be of nane auale, force, nor effect in
Judgment, nor without in time tocum.

That airis may revoke at their lauchfull age, and of our Souerane Lordis
reuocatioun. Ca. lxxxiij.
ITEM Sen it is leuit and permittit be the constitutiounis and ordinancis of
Lawis civil and cannone, That persounis constitute in outheid and tender age,
quhilkis ar greitlie dampnageit, and skaithit in their heritageis be imprudent
alienatiounis, donatiounis, venditiounis, and permutatiounis of the samin, may
at their perfectioun of age make reuocatioun, and reductioun of thingis done
prejudicial to them in their minoriteis and tender age:

The Kingis reuocatioun.
HEIRFOIR We James be the grace of God King of Scottis cleirlie vnderstandin,
that part of alienatiounis, donatiounis, and giftis of cure heritageis of our
Realm was maid be our progenitour of good memory, quhome God assolie, and
part in likewise be us in our outheid and imperfect age in hurt and prejudice
of the Crown of Scotland: and in likewise that in the time of our coronatioun
and taking of the Sceptoure of our Realm, we promittit and swore vpone the
haly Euangelis of our Lord Jesus our Salueour, that we sold observe and keipe
the rycht, honor, preeminence, and priuilegeis in landis, rentis,
possessiounis, dewteis, and other thingis thairto pertening, as is mair
expressly schawin in the Law of halie Kirk: And als sen it is senerycht
proffitabil to y^ Estatis of our Realm, that we have landis, Lordschippis, and
possessiounis, to the honorabill sustentatioun and vphalding of our dignity
royal: And als that we have powar, faculty, and substance, to the defense of
our liegis and Realm, quhilkis lyis on dry Bordouris to Ingland, that hes been
our Inimeis of auld: And for their considderatiounes and vthers in the time of
this our present Parliament, be the auise and counsall of the Estatis being in
the samin.

WE revoke, reducis, cassis, and adnullis all infeftme^tis, donatiounis,
alienatiounis, and dispositiounis be any manner of way in fee or franktennement
of the landis, Lordschippis, custumis, annuallis, fischingis, and Burrow malis
annexed to the Crown, or any part of them alsweill geuin be our father, as be
us to any persoun, or persounis to be reducit agane to us, and our Crown, be
vertew of the act and statute maid of the annexatiounis, and after the form of
the samin.

ALSVA We revoke in likewise all alienatiounis maid of any heritage annexed to
the Prince secund persoun of the Realm.

ITEM In likewise we revoke, cassis, and adnullis all donatiounis,
alienatiounis, fewfermis, and giftis quhatsumeuer in lyferent, or vtherwayis
maid in our nonage of the landis, custumis, or annual rentis, or any other
reuenuis, that our father had in his possessioun, the time of his deceis,
giftis of officis for termis, as Chalmerlanrie, Baillierie, custumarie, or
Clerk of Cocket maid for maa eiris, bot fra the t^ Checkar, to the count be
maid in the nixt Checkar following, with assedatioun, and takkis maid of our
landis for lang terms.

IN Likewise we revoke, and cassis all taileis maid fra the airis general to
the airis maill of any landis in our Realm.

ITEM We revoke all pretendit entres, seissingis, and possessiounis obtenit,
and vsit be any persoun of our Realm of the landis, Lordschippis, or
possessiounis, that war in our grandschiris or in our fathers handis, and
obtenit and takin out of our fathers handis or our awin handis, our father or
our self being within age, quhilkis mycht not be persewit, quhill our compleit
age be strenth of act of Parliament maid thairupone.

AND Attour we revoke all new infestmentis of landis geuin in blancheferme,
that war haldin of us in waird and releif of befoir.

MAirattour we revoke all Regaliteis, or confirmatioun of Regalitie, that had
na possessioun of Regalitie of auld, and all officis geuin be us in heritage or
be our father, sen the actis and statutis maid, that na Regalitie nor office
sold be geuin in heritage, without auise and deliberatioun of the haill
Parliament.

ITEM We revoke all alienatiounis maid of any heritage in our nonage, that war
lauchfullie cummin in our ha^dis be ballardrie, or any vtherwayis siclyke, and
lyferentis geuin be us in our minority, and nonage, as saidis.

ITEM We revoke all the new creatiounis of landis in Barronyis, and
annexatiounis, and vnionis of diverse landis in to a fee in prejudice of our dew
service aucht to us and our progenitouris of befoir. And in likewise the
dischargeis of service and suitis of courtis aucht of auld to our progenitouris.

ITEM We revoke all new infestmentis geuin of creatiounis of Barronyis, in the
landis and Lordschippis annexit to the Crown.

ITEM We revoke, reducis, cassis, and adnullis all giftis of patronageis and
aduocatiounis of Kirkis and beneficis, that pertenis to the Crown.

ITEM We revoke and cassis all thingis, that the commoun Law leiffis us to
revoke and reduce.

AND Generally we revoke, reducis, cassis, and adnullis all and quhatsumeuer
thingis done in detriment and harm of our saul and conscience, hurting of the
privilege and fredome of our Crown, prejudicial and in damnage of our
heritage to us our airis or successouris, with this additioun and
protestatioun: That suppois we of our fauouris and benevolence suffer any
persoun or persounis, to use or posseid any privilege or possessioun to the
vsaris and halders of the samin, bot it salbe leiffull to us to put our handis
thairto, quhen ever it sall pleis us, but any contradictioun be, vertew and
strenth of this our reuocatioun.

ITEM We revoke in manner foirsaid all confirmatiounis geuin, quhair the haill
landis or the mair part of them war analyit of befoir the giving of the said
confirmatioun, and the samin obtenit under color, we not knawing the
alienatiou^is, that the said landis war fallin to us be ressone of alienatioun,
as forfaltour.

VIGESIMO SEXTO IVNII ANNO DOMINI MILLES. QVADR. LXXXXIII. INDICTIONE
Pontificatus Alexandri Papae sexti Anno primo dictus supremus Dominus noster
Rex in Praetorio de Edinburgh. etc. Concessit, quod terrae datae Comiti de
Botiuile and Iohanni Ros militi non caderent sub reuocatione antedicta.

Of the bind of Salmound. Ca. lxxxiiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the auld statute maid anent the
barrelling of Salmound of the auld bind of Abirdene be obseruit and keipt after
the form of the samin, with this additioun, That quhair any Cowpar or
craftisman makis any barrellis of les bind, than the said auld bind and beis
convict thairof, sall pay.x.s. for ane unlaw, and dictay to be takin thairupone.

ITEM That the act and statute maid of befoir anent the Schippis, and making of
fische at the west coist be obseruit and keipit in all thing after the form of
the said act.

PARLIAMENTVM EXCEL LENTISSIMI PRINCIPIS ET DOM. NOSTRI metuendissimi Do.
Iacobi Quarti dei gratia Scotorum Regis Illustrissimi tentum and inchoatum apud
Edinburgh decimotertio die Mensis Iunij Anno Do. Millesimo Quadringentesimo
Nonagesimo Sexto.

The fredome of halie Kirk. Ca. lxxxv.
ANENT the first article tuiching the liberty and fredome of halie Kirk, It is
auisit be the Lordis of the articlis, and als statute and ordanit in this
preient Parliament, that our Souerane Lord make the halie Kirk and Kirkmen to be
defendit and keipit in their auld priuilegeis and fredomes, after the form of
the actis and statutis maid heirupone of befoir be his hienes and progenitouris
of may Nobill mind with all circumstance, as is contenit in the samin. And
gif the Kirk or Kirkmen be hurt or greuit contrare Justice, that they meine
them to the King, and they sall have reformatioun.

That na persounis pas forth of the Realm to purches any beneficis without
seif of our Souerane Lord. Ca. lxxxvi.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit for the weill and honor of our Souerane Lord,
the commoun good, and proffite universal of his Realm and liegis, and for the
eschewing of innumerabill skaith and dampnage, that his hienes, Realm, and
liegis daily incurris, and sustenis throw the exhorbitant coistis and expensis
daily done be Kirkmen vpone the impetratioun and purchessing, at the court of
Rome beneficis elective, and diverse vthers, that mycht be geuin and prouydit
within the Realm, contrare the actis of Parliament maid thairupone, and
contrare diverse faculteis and priuilegis, that our Souerane Lord and his
progenitouris of good mind hes had, and hes of the Kirk of Rome, and als in
purchessing and inbringing of nouelteis and innouatiounis in the Kirk without
the auisement of our Souerane Lord in utter heirschip and destituting of the
Realm of all money, and putting of our Souerane Lord and diverse vthers
patronis fra their possessioun and use of their saidis faculteis, priuilegeis,
and rychtis of dispositioun of beneficis: That for the remeid heirof in time
tocum, that nane of our Souerane Lordis, liegis spiritual nor temporal pas
forth of his Realm unto the time the spiritual persounis intimate the cause
of their passage to their Ordinaris, and that both spiritual and temporal
cum to his hienes, or his Chancellar, and schaw the cause of their passage:
That they may have license of him, and get their testimonialis thairupone. And
that they do, nor attempt to do nathing vtherwayis, than is contenit in their
said license, contrare the commoun proffeit of the Realm, actis and statutis
maid thairupone of befoir. And that they schaw and warn, quhairin they make
fynance, and with quhat persoun, that it may be vnderstandin, that they have na
money forth of the Realm. And quha sa dois contrare the premissis, till incur
the panis of proscriptioun, rebellioun, banissing, and putting of them to our
Souerane Lordis horn, and never to bruke, nor use worschip within his Realm,
bot to be demanit, as tratour and tratouris, and their beneficis, gif they any
have, to be vacant at the dispositioun of their Ordinaris, bot gif they be
lawit patronageis, and than the patron sall dispone thairupone. And all other
actis maid vpone this matter of befoir contenand any restrictioun for the
saluatioun of the commoun proffeit, to be nevertheless obseruit and keipit.

That all Barronis and frehaldaris, that are of substance put their eldest
sonnis and airis to the sculis. Ca. lxxxvij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit throw all the Realm, that all Barronis and
frehaldaris, that are of substance put their eldest sonnis and airis to the
sculis fra they be.viij. or.ix. eires of age, and till remane at the grammar
sculis, quhill they be compete^tlie foundit, and have perfect latin. And
thairefter to remane three eiris at the sculis of art and iure, swa that they
may have knawlege and understanding of the Lawis. Throw the quhilkis Justice
may reign universally throw all the Realm: Swa that they, that are Schireffis
or Iugeis Ordinaris under the Kingis hienes, may have knawlege to do justice,
that the pure pepill sold have na neid to seik our Souerane Lordis principal
auditour for ilk small injury. And quhat Barrone or frehaldar of substance,
that haldis not his sone at the sculis, as said is, haifand na lauchfull
essonie, bot faileis heirin, fra knawlege may be gottin thairof, he sall pay to
the King the soume of.xx. pund.

Of the money and buleoun. Ca. lxxxviij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that our Souerane Lord with auise of his
counsall ordane, and statute ane famous and wise man, that is expert, and
vnderstandis the manner and fassoun of cuinie to be master of the money, and
anent the stryking the form thairof, the fynes, and the course, and anent the
inbringing of buleoun, and serching to be maid of the samin, and of the out
passing thairof of the Realm: That the statutis and actis maid thairupone of
befoir be keipit. And that this master of money and sercharis have vpone them
the charge of causing and solisting of the saidis actis to be put to
executioun. And gif they be notit of indeligence or sleuth thairin, that they
be punist be the Kingis good grace, and his Lordis of counsall according to
their trespass, and to be depriuit of their officis, and vthers put in their
place. And that the custumaris of Burrowis make count at this present Checkar,
and in all times tocum of the inbringing of buleoun, according to the quantity
of their Merchandice past forth of the Realm, after the form of the said
actis. And that the said master of money and cuineouris under him pay to the
Merchandis for the said buleoun, or to any other persounis, that will sell
them fine stuff to cuinie, the prycis contenit in the said actis, and na les
under the pane of presoning of their persounis, and depriuatioun of their
officis.

Of the price gudnes and fynes of victuallis and all other manner of stuff
wrocht. Ca. lxxxix.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit for the remeid of the greit hurt, and
oppressioun done to our Souerane Lordis liegis throuch disproportioun of prycis
maid be craftismen and warkmen vpone all manner of stuff, that they wirk and
sellis far excedand the price of the stuff, they by: That thairfoir all
Barronis, Prouestis, and Baillies of Burrowis, and vthers, that hes the reule
and directioun of throuchfairis, and hostillaris throw all the Realm, make
deligent inquisitioun and tak knawlege of the price of victuallis, and all
other stuff wrocht be any manner of warkma^, according to the price of the said
victuallis and stuff, That they set and ordane certane price gudnes, and fynes
vpone breid, aill, and all other necessare thingis, that is wrocht and daily
bocht, and vsit be the Kingis liegis. And that they make certane preuaris and
examinatouris, to wait daily vpone the keeping heirof. And quhair any warkman
beis notit takand exhorbitant prycis for his stuff above the price and over
far disproportionate of the stuff, he byis, that he be punist be the saidis
Barronis, Prouestis, and Baillies, and vthers hauand the directiou^ and reule
of the said throuchfairis, and hostillaris be the taking of ane unlaw of the
court, that he is under, for the first time. And ane unlaw and escheiting of
the stuff, that beis exorbitantlie sauld, the secund time. And the third time
depriving and suspending of them fra their craft, and escheiting of the said
stuff sauld over deir, as said is.

That all Summoundis of error be rasit, and persewit within the space of three
eiris. Ca. xc.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that all Summoundis of error or inordinat
process, that are to be rasit be any persounis, that thinkis them hurt be the
determinatioun of inqueistis, or be process of Schireffis led in the serving of
breuis in time tocum, be rasit and persewit within the space of three eiris,
after the leding of the said process, and making of retouris, The parteis, that
allegeis them hurt being of lauchfull age and within the Realm: Sa that the
error and inordinat process mycht cum to their eiris. And gif any persounis
omittis to raise sic Summoundis and persewis them not with in the said termis,
The said termis being past, they sall never be hard in Judgment vpone that
actioun thairefter: Bot sall tyne their privilege of reductioun of the said
process, and error for all time tocum.

Nevertheless the Summoundis, that are now dependand and hingand betuix any
parteis, to be proceidit, as they war wont. And quhair that any persounis
thinkis them hurt be retouris or process, that are else led and maid in time
bygane, That they raise Summoundis thairupone within the space of three eiris,
and persew the samin. And faileing thairof, that they be never hard in
Judgment, as said is, bot to tyne their privilege of reductioun in all times
tocum.

PARLIAMENTVM EXCEL LENTISSIMI PRINCIPIS ET DO. NOSTRI DO. Iacobi Quarti
Scotorum Regis Illustrissimi tentum and inchoatum apud Edinburgh vndecimo die
Mensis Martij An. Do. Miillesimo Quing entesimo tertio.

Their ar the articlis after followand auisit and concludit in this present
Parliament.

Of the fredome of halie Kirk. Ca. xcj.
ITEM In the first it is auisit, statute, and ordanit, that the fredome,
liberteis, and priuilegeis of halie Kirk and other spiritual persounis be
obseruit and keipit in honor and worschip for the time of our Souerane Lord,
that now is, like as it hes been in times of his may Nobill progenitouris of
good mind of befoir.

Of the daily counsall. Ca. xcij.
ITEM It is auisit, statute, and co^cludit in this present Parliament, because
their hes been greit confusioun of Summoundis, at ilk Sessioun, Sa that laser
nor space at a time of the eit mycht not have been had for the ending of them,
And thairthrow pure folkis hes been dilayit, and deferrit fra eir to eir, throw
the quhilk they wantit Justice: Thairfoir for eschewing of the said confusioun,
that their be ane cou^sall chosin be the Kingis hienes, quhilk sall sit
continually in Edinburgh, or quhair the King makis residence, or quhair it
plesis him, to decyde all manner of Summoundis in civil matters, complaints,
and causis daly, as they sall happin to occur. And sall have the samin powar,
as the Lordis of Sessioun. And quhan they sall begin, and in quhat place, salbe
notifeit to the pepill be oppin proclamatioun at the Kingis pleasure.

That Justice and Schireffis be maid for the Ilis. Ca. xciij.
ITEM Because their hes been greit abusioun of Justice in the north partis, and
west partis of the Realm, sic as the north Ilis and south Ilis for lak and
fault of Justice Airis, Iusticis, and Schireffis, and thairthrow the pepill ar
all may gane wild: It is thairfoir statute and ordanit for the acquieting of
the pepill be Justice, that their be in time tocum Iusticis and Schireffis
depute in they partis, as after followis, that is to say, that the Iusticis and
Schireffis of the north Ilis have their sat and place for administratioun of
Justice in Innernes, or Dingwale, as the matters occurris, to be decernit be the
said Officiaris. And that ane other Justice and Schiref be maid and depute for
the south Ilis, and they partis, and to have his place and sat for
administratioun of Justice in the Tarbar of Lochkinkerane, at the will and
pleasure of the saidis Officiaris, as the matters occurris.

Of the Justice Airis of Ergyle, Lorne, Bute, and they partis. Ca. xciiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, because their hes been ane part of hie landis,
quhilk ar the landis betuix Badenoth and Lorne, and ar callit Dowart,
Glentowart, and als the Lordschip of Lorne, quhilkis hes been out of use to cum
to Justice Aires, and likewise Mawmor, Louchabir, and Ergyle: Thairfoir in time
tocum, that the said landis betuix Badenoth and Lorne callit Dowart, and
Glentowart, and als the Lordschip of Lorne cum and answer and underly the Law
in the Justice Air of Perth: Mawmor Louchabir foirsaid tocu^ to the Air of
Innernes. Ergyle, quhen it plesis the Kingis hienes, sall cum to Perth and the
Justice Air thairof, quhair euerilk hieland man and lawland man may cum, and
ask Justice with out perrell or danger. And that the Justice of the said
Lordschip of Ergyle with the boundis thairof have his place and sat in Perth
at the Kingis pleasure, as said is. And at that part of Cowale, that is not
within the boundis, nor Lordschip of Ergyle, and all the inhabitantis thairof
cum to the Air of Dounbertane. Item that the Air of Bute and Arane, Knapdale,
Kintyre, and mekill Cumray be haldin at the Burgh of Air, or Rothesay, and the
inhabitantis thairof tocum their, at the Kingis pleasure.

Of Schireffis to be maid in Ros and Cathnes. Ca. xcv.
ITEM Because their hes been greit lake and fault of Justice in the north
partis, as Cathnes, and Ros for fault of diuisioun of the Schirefdome of
Innernes, quhilk is over greit, and they partis ar sa far distant fra the said
Burgh of Innernes, throw the quhilk they may not be brocht haistelie thairto
without greit expensis, laubouris, and trauellis, quhairthrow greit enormitie
and trespass hes growin in they partis in default of Officiaris within them
self, that had powar to put good reule amang the pepill: Thairfoir it is
statute and ordanit in this present Parliament, that their be ane Schiref maid
of Ros, quhilk sall have full powar, and iurisdictioun, and Schirefschip within
the said boundis of Ros, and to sit, and have his place for administratioun of
Justice in Thane, or Dingwall, as the said Schiref thinkis expedient, for the
decisioun of causis, breuis, or any other sic thingis belangand to his office,
as the cause requyris. And in lykewse that their be ane Schiref maid, quhilk
salbe callit Schiref of Cathnes, quhilk sall have full iurisdictioun of
Schirefichip of all the haill diocie of Cathnes, and sall sit and have place
for administratioun of his office in Dornok or Vik, as he thinkis may
expedient for the causis occurrand. And all the Schirefdomes of Innernes, Ros,
and Cathnes, and the inhabita^tis thairof compeir to the Justice Air of
Innernes, quhen it beis cryit and ordanit.

That the gretest crime be specifeit in the remissioun. Ca. xcvj.
ITEM Because that their hes been in times bygane abusioun in the giving and
granting of remissiounis to persounis, that hes neidit the samin, and hes put
ane lycht cause for the special cause in the said remissioun, and under the
general clause hes comprehendit gretar crymis, than the special cause, quhilk
was expressit, quhilk is contrare to equity and Justice: Thairfoir it is
statute and ordanit, that quhair any persoun or persounis desyris to have
remissiounis in time toeum, and wald that remissioun sufficit to him, sall
expone and declair in the said remissioun the gretest cause, that he desires to
have the remissiou^ for. And in that caise the general claus sall suffice him
to comprehend crymis of les gravity, than the special cause. And gif he
expremis not the gretest crime in special, the general claus sall not saif
him fra ane gretar crime, na the special is.

That na remissioun salbe geuin for slauchtrr vpone forthochtfellony. Ca. xcvij.
ITEM Because the Kingis hienes hes considderit and vnderstandin the greit
slauchters, that hes been in his Realm, and the occasioun thairof in traist
and belief, to get remissiounis haistelie, quhairthrow the greit inconuenientis
of slauchter mouit and happinnit euerilk day mair and mair, Thairfoir of his
awin fre mind and motive hes desyrit, that his three Estatis in this present
Parliament wald set scharp reule thairfoir, and for the inoportunitie of
askaris in time tocu^, is content of the ordinance and deliverance to be maid
be them, Thairfoir be his awin auise and the said three Estatis: It is statute,
deuisit, and concludit, that their be na remissioun geuin fra thine forth for
slauchter to be co^mittit upon forthochtfellony in any time tocu^. And this
statute to endure unto the time our said Souerane Lord make special reuocatioun
of the samin.

Of the correctioun and examinatioun of Notaris. Ca. xcviij.
ITEM Anent the article of Notaris, because their hes been diverse and greit
complaintis maid be our Souerane Lordis liegis, that their is sa money falls
Notaris in y^ Realm, that it is dred throw their falset, that true men sall
not be sicker of their heritage nor Clerkis of their beneficis, and in other
civil actiounis, quhilk may cause ane greit diuisioun amang our Souerane
Lordis liegis: Their foir it is statute and ordanit in this present Parliament,
that all Bischoppes and Ordinaris make all the Notaris within their dioceis to
be callit at a convenient day and place befoir them, and make them be examinit
vpone their sufficience and knawlege. And als tak inquisitioun, how they have
demanit them and of their fame. And the persounis, that they find culpabill,
that they deprive them of their officis, and punis them for their faultis,
according to their demeritis. And the persounis, that they find acceptabill,
that they send them with their wrytingis to the Kingis hienes, quhilk sal
depute certane persou^is to examine them. And gif they be ganand to make them
Regal, gif they be not maid Regal of befoir. And als that the said Ordinaris
tak inquisitioun of all them, that vsis falls instrumentis. And in sa far as
belangis his office Ordinar, to punis them. And quhair it belangis not to his
office Ordinar, to send them to the King to be punist, as effeiris.

That Summoundis vpone recent spulie may be maid vpone. xv. dayis. Ca. xcix.
ITEM Anent recent spulie it is statutte and ordanit, that it salbe leiffull to
the party, quhilk is spuleit to Summound the spulearis vpone. xv. dayis befoir
the Lordis, sa that he make his Summoundis within. xv. dayis nixt after the
committing of the said spulie, notwithstanding the act maid of befoir, that all
Su^moundis sold be maid vpone xxj. dayis: And rychtswa to have powar to call
the said spulear befoir the Schiref, and that their sall be na exceptioun
dilatoure admittit agane that Summoundis, it beand lauchfullie indorsate.

Anent the expensis of Schireffis for their office. Ca. c.
ITEM Anent the expensis of Schireffis both Ordinar and Schireffis in that
part, to be takin for the executiou^ of their office in the distreineing of
persounis for soumis recouerit: It is statute, auisit, and ordanit, that the
said Schiref, quhilk sall execute his said office, sall have. xij. d. for ilk
pund for the executioun of his office: And that to be takin of the persoun or
persounis, that the soumis or dettis be recouerit on.

Of the expensis of process. Ca. cj.
ITEM Because in time bygane the Kingis liegis hes been gretumlie hurt be
parciall Schireffis and Officiaris for the denying of their process to be geuin
to the party, quhairthrow the party iniurit mycht have followit his actioun
of iniure, and foundit his intent, and the said Schireffis hes haldin their
process at sa greit soumes, that the party mycht not pay thairfoir, and for
that cause the party iniurit hes lost the persecutioun of his actioun, and
tint the samin for verray poverty, that he mycht not louse the said process: It
is thairfoir auisit, statute and ordanit, that in time tocum ilk sic Schireffis
and Officiaris, that hes process led befoir them outher be actioun of det or
breuis, that they gif the said process to the party vpone his expensis, and
that the party sall pay thairfoir for ilk act. iiij. d. allanerlie.

For keiping of money within the Realm. Ca. cij.
ITEM As to the taking of gold or silver, forth of the Realm, It is auisit,
statute, and ordanit, that the actis and statutis maid of befoir for the
halding of money within the Realm, be put to dew executioun with this
additioun: That it salbe ane punct of dictay vpone the takaris forth of the
samin. And als that the Kingis hienes depute certane serchouris in euerilk
town, quhilk hes ane port: The quhilkis serchouris sall have powar to search
the sailaris and passaris forth of the Realm, for having forth of money,
quhatsumeuer persoun he be, spiritual or temporal. And he sall have for his
feis the feird part of the money, that is takin be him, he bringand the the other
three partis to the King. And that napersounis nouther spiritual nor temporal
have mair money forth of the Realm bot xl.s. of the quhilkis he hes license be
other actis of befoir under the pane of escheit.

Anent steilaris of Pykis, brekaris of airdis and dowcatis. Ca. ciij.
ITEM Anent steilaris of pykis out of stankis, brekaris of dowcatis, orchardis,
or airdis, or steilaris of hyuis, and destroyaris thairof, And als anent them,
that slayis parkit Deir, Raise, or Rabuckis of Lordis proper woddis, at that be
ane punct of dictay in time tocum. And at the unlaw thairof be. x. pund
togidder with ane mendis to the party according to the skaith. And gif any
childer within age commit any of their thingis foirsaid, because they may not be
punist for nonage, their fathers or masters sall pay for ilk ane of them ilk
time committing any of the said trespassis foirsaid. xiij.s. iiij. d. or else
deliver the said child to the Judge to be leichit, scurgeit, and dung,
according to the fault.

Anent beggaris. Ca. ciiij.
ITEM Anent beggaris that the statute of King James the first maid vpone stark
beggaris be obseruit and kepit. And at the Schireffis, Prouestis, Baillies
within Burrowis both of Rialtie and Regalitie, spiritualitie, and temporalitie
see, that this act be execute and keipit. And that they thole nane to beg
within them, except crukit folk, seik folk, impotent folk, and waik folk under
the pane of payment of ane merk for ilk other beggar, that beis fundin.

Anent the making of Schippis for fisching. Ca. cv.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit anent buschis and Schippes to be maid for
fisching, at that act and statute maid thairupone of befoir be put to scharpe
and dew executioun, as effeiris.

Of the unlaw of grene wod and mureburne. Ca. cvj.
ITEM Anent the article of grene wod, because that the wod of Scotland is
utterly destroyit, The unlaw thairof beand sa lytill: Thairfoir it is statute
and ordanit, that the unlaw of grene wod to any man be selling or birning in
time tocum be five pund. And that both of Regalitie and Rialtie the auld unlaw
of grene wod to the destroyaris of it vtherwayis standand in effect, as of
befoir. And that the unlaw of mureburne after the Month of March be in
likewise five pund in all times tocum.

Of slanchter of reid fische. Ca. cvij.
ITEM Anent the slauchter of reid fische in forbodin time, because the lytill
unlaw thairof hes been the cause and occasioun, that the reid fische hes been
slane in greit number to the greit heirschip of the cuntrie and destructioun of
the commoun weill, And als anent the slayaris of smoltis in mylnda^mis clousis,
and be nettis, thornis, and cruuis: It is statute and ordanit, that the unlaw
thairof in time tocum be ten pund for the first time. The secund time, twenty
pund. And the third time tinsall of life to the committar. And als it salbe
leiffull to the Barrone both spiritual, and temporal, both in the Rialtie
and the Regalitie to proceid and sit, heirupone in their courtis, and to have
ane unlaw of ilk ane, that beis convict of any pu^ct foirsaid of. xxx.s. And
gif any persoun or persounis clamis to have sic priuilegeis to sla sic fische
in forbodin time be any of the wayis foirsaid, that all sic priuilegeis ceis
unto the time, that they cum befoir the King and Lordis, and schaw their said
privilege, that they may be considderit, quhether sic priuilegeis be for the
commoun weill, or not.

Of the diuisioun of Schirefdomes. Ca. cviij.
ITEM Because their hes been wanting of Justice in sindrie Schirefdomes, throw
the greitnes of the samin, Thairfoir it is statute and ordanit, that their be
diuisioun maid thairof in this wise, that Culros, and Tulialloun, Clakmannan,
and all the landis betuix it and Striuiling, quhilk come to the Airis of Fyfe
and Perth of befoir, that all they landis in time tocum cum to the Airis of
Striuiling. And that Tulialloun and Culros cum to the Schiref court of
Striuiling on this wise, that all the persounis put now to the Justice Air and
Schiref court of Striuiling pay their unlaw both in Schiref court and Justice
Air, siclyke as they payit befoir this union, without prejudice to them
thairin^ill.

ITEM That the Lenie, Lochbard, Brimmage, Skaithmoir, Kippane, Garden, and Sey
Beggis, quhilk was of the Schirefdome of Dounbertane, Perth, and Edinburgh of
befoir, be fra this time forth both of Justice Air and Schiref court of
Striuiling. Item that the landis of Buchquhannane, Fintre, Campsie, Strablane,
Buthram, Drymme, Inchcaleach and fra thine west be of the Schirefdome of
Dounber^ane, and compeir their both at Justice Air, and Schiref court in all
time tocum with the like conditioun, that the inhabitantis thairof pay their
unlaw both in Justice Air and Schiref court, as they did befoir this union
without any prejudice to them thairintill, as said is.

That hedgeis, parkis, and dowcatis, and cuningharis be maid. Ca. cix.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit anent policy to be haldin in the cuntrie, that
euerilk Lord and Lord make them to have parkis with Deir, stankis,
cuningharis, dowcatis, orchardis, hedgeis, and plant at the leist ane akir of
wod, quhair their is na greit woddis nor forrestis.

Of eirlie wappinschawing to be maid. Ca. cx.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit for the keiping of armor and harnes, that it
be not spilt, nor destroyit in time of peax, that all Scotland make their
wappinschawing vpone thurisday in witsonday wolk. And that ilk Officiar, as
Schiref, Baillie, Stewart, or vthers see at this act and statute be execute and
keipit.

That the heretouris and airis may be followit at the eiris end after the
deceis of their foirbearis. Ca. cxj.
ITEM Anent the exceptiounes proponit be heretouris, quhen they ar persewit for
dettis of their fathers or foirbearis, to quhome they succeid, allegeand that
their fathers mouabill gudis sold pay their debtis, and that the executouris
sold be callit thairfoir befoir them: It is auisit, statute, and ordanit,
that it sall be leiffull to the creditour to follow the air after the bypassing
of ane eir. Because the executouris sold be responsall for ane eir: at the end
of the quhilk he sold gif his count. And gif it pleis the air, he may and
sold be diligent and require the Ordinar within the said eir to ask count, and
he to see the count, and quhat beis fund remanent over the thingis pertenand to
their office, that he sold require the Ordinar, that he micht have cautiou^
and souertie for the releuing of his heretage in sa far, as the gudis restis
attour the count. And that the Ordinar sall cause him to have sufficient
cautioun thairof. And sa at the end of the eir the air sall answer to euerilk
creditour.

Anent the exceptiounis propronit anent wedowis in hindering of them of their
teircis. Ca. cxij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit anent the exceptioun proponit agane wedowis
persewand and followand their breifis of teirce, or the proffeit of their
teirce, quhilk is often times proponit agane they wedowis, y^ they war not
lauchfull wyfis to y^ persou^is their husbandis, be quho^e they follow their
said teirce: That thairfoir quhair the matrimony was not accusit in their
lyfetymes, and that the woman askand this teirce beand repute and haldin, as
his lauchfull wife in his life time salbe teircit, and bruke her teirce but any
impediment or exceptiounis to be proponit agane her, ay and quhill it be
cleirly decernit and sentence geuin, that scho was not his lauchfull wife, and
that scho sold not have ane lauchfull teirce thairfoir.

That all frehaldaris within ane hundredth merk of extent send their
procuratouris to the Parliament. Ca. cxiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that fra thine forth na Barrone, frehaldar,
nor vassal, quhilk ar within ane hundredth merkis of this extent, that now is,
be compellit to cum personally to the Parliament, bot gif it be that our
Souerane Lord write specially for them: And sa not to be vnlawit for their
presence, and they send their procuratoures to answer for them with the
Barrones of the Schire, or the may famous persounis. And all that are abone
the extent of ane hundredth merkes to cu^ to the Parliament under the pan^ of
the auld unlaw*

That all our Souerane Lordis liegis be reulit be his Lawis. Ca. cxiiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that all our Souerane Lordis liegis beand
under his obeisance, and in special the Ilis be reulit be our Souerane Lordis
awin Lawis, and the co^mun Lawis of the Realm and be nane other Lawis.

That all Officiaris within Burgh be changeit eirlie. Ca. cxv.
ITEM That all Officiaris, Prouestis, Baillies, and vthers hauand office of
iurisdictioun within Burrowis be changeit eirlie, and that nane have
iurisdictioun within Burgh, bot gif they use Merchandice within the said Burgh.

That na Merchand persew ane other in partis beond sey befoir any Judge, bot the
Conseruatour. Ca. cxvj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit for weill of Merchandice, and for the greit
exorbitant expensis maid be them vpone pleyis in the partis beond sey: That
thairfoir the Conseruatour of this Realm have iurisdictioun to do Justice
amang the saides Mercha^dis our Souerane Lordis liegis, that is to say, betuix
Merchand and Merchand in they partis beond sey. And that the said Conseruatour
proceid not vpone any matters, bot gif they be. vj. of the best and honestest
Merchandis of may knawlege of the Realm, that sall sit and have powar with
him, gif sa money may be gottin. And gif their be not to the number of. vj. that
their sit four Mercha^dis with him at the leist, that sall have siclyke powar
with him to minister Justice, and that na Merchand persew ane other befoir ane
other Judge beond the sey, nor do in contrare this act under the pane of. v.
pund, to be payit to the King of the persewar, and payment of the expensis to
the party persewit.

That the Conseruatour of Scotland cum hame eirlie, or send ane procuratour.
cxvij
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the Conseruatour of Scotland cu^ eirlie
hame or send ane responsall procuratour ^or him eirlie, that sall answer to
euerilk man vpone all thingis, that they have to say to him for all matters, and
make certificatioun to the King or his counsall of the sending of the said
procuratouris, and that under the pane of tinsall of his office and payment of.
xx. pund greit to the King.

That na market nor fairis be haldin vpone halie dayis, nor in Kirk, nor in
Kirk airdis. Ca. cxviij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, their be na market nor fairis haldin vpone
halie dayis, nor it within Kirkis nor Kirk airdis vpone halie dayis, nor other
dayis under the pane of escheit of the gudis.

That Merchandis and Burrowis bruke their auld priuilegeis. Ca. cxix.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that all the Merchandis of the Realm, and the
Burrowis bruke, and have their auld priuilegis, and fredomes gra^tit and geuin
to them be our Souerane Lords progenitouris of may Nobill mind be obseruit
and keipit to them, and that na persounis dwelland outwith Burrowis use any
Merchandice, nor it tap nor sell wine, walx, silkis, spicerie, wad, nor siclyke
stuff, nor it stapill gudes: And y^ nane pak nor pile in Leith, nor vthers
placis without the Kingis Burrowis under the pane of the escheting of the gudis
to the Kingis use, that beis tappit, sauld, pakit, or pilit agane this statute.

That Co^missaris and heidismen of Burrowis be warnit of taxatiounis of the
Realm. Ca. cxx.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the Co^missaris and heidismen of Burrowis
be warnit, quhe^ taxtis or co^tributiou^is ar geuin to have their auise
thairintill, as ane of the three Estatis of the Realm.

That na Burges be maid without consent of the greit cou^sall of the town. cxxj
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that in time tocu^ na Prouest, Baillie, nor
Alderman of any townis make Burgessis, nor gild brether without the consent of
the greit counsall of the town, and that the proffeit, that is taken for the
making of ilk Burges or gild be put to the commoun good, and wairit on the
commoun warkis.

That the auld act anent saillairis be put to executioun.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit for the weill of Merchandis, that the auld act
anent saillaris be put to scharp executiou^, and that the custumaris schaw to
the Officiaris of the town, quha dois in the contrare heirof. And that the
said Officiaris make this act to be put to dew executioun, as they will answer
to the King thairupone.

That na neichtbour usurp agane the Officiaris in Burgh. Ca. cxxij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that na neichtbouris craftismen, gentill men,
Burgessis, nor indwellaris in the Burgh usurp agane the authority of the
Kings Officiaris chosin in the Burgh, nor make leiggis nor bandis in contrare
the samin, under the panis contenit in the Lawis and statutis of the Burgh.

That nane house woll, skin. nor hydis in Leith. Ca. cxxiij
ITEM It is statute and ordanit for causing of the Kingis custumis tocum in
haill to him, as accordis, and to eschew the defrauding, that hes been done
thairof in times bygane, that na man house woll, hyde, nor skinnis in Leith,
nor other placis outwith fre Burrowis, under the pane of escheit.

That all Schireffs and Officiaris write the day, that they gif seizing to any
man in their court buke. Ca. cxxiiij.
ITEM Because the vassallis ar gretumlie hurt throw outlying of their over
Lordis, and for the no^entering to the superiority of their landis, after that
they raise their precept of seizing out of the Chancellarie: It is statute and
ordanit, that in time tocum all Schireffis, Stewartis, or Baillies, that genis
seizing be preceptis of our Souerane Lordis Chapel to any persounis, that they
write the day and eir, that they gaif the sesing, and bring the samin in their
court buke to the Checkar.

That it be leiffull to our Souerane Lord to set all his landis in few. Ca.
cxxv.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be our Souerane Lord and bis three Estatis in
this present Parlame^t, that it salbe leiffull to his hienes to set all his
proper landis both annexit, and vnannexit in few ferme to any persoun or
persounis, as he plesis: Swa that it be not in diminutioun of his rentall,
gressoumis, nor other dewteis, and to set them with sic clause, as he thinkis
expedient, according to the conditioun afoir said. And that the landis, that he
settis in his time, as said is, to stand perpetually to the airis after the
form of their co^ditiou^. And that this statute endure for the lyfetyme of the
King our Souerane Lord, that now is allanerlie: Swa that the landis, that he
settes in his time with the conditioun foirsaid, sall stand perpetually. And
after his deceis the annexatiou^is, quhilkes ar maid of befoir, sall return
agane to the awin nature: Swa that his successor sall not have powar to aualie
nor set in few, mair than they had befoir the making of this statute.

That it salbe leiffull to every man both spiritual and temporal to set
their landis in few. Ca. cxxvj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, because the Kings hienes is of will and mind
for policy of his Realm, to set his proper landis both annexit and vnannexit
in fewferme: Thairfoir he hes grantit to all his Estatis with their auise, yt
euerilk Lord, Barron, frehaldar quhatsu^euer spiritual or te^porall, sall have
powar enduring y^ dayis of his life, to set all their landis in fewferme or
a^nuell rent to any persou^ or persounis: Swa that it be not in diminutioun of
their re^tall, swa that the alienatioun swa maid of the may part of all their
landis salbe na cause of forfaltour, nouther to the settar, na to the takar
notwithstanding any statute or lawis maid in the contrare.

That the maltmakaris present their malt to the market. Ca. cxxvij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that all the maltmakaris of Leith, Edinburgh,
and other placis about Edinburgh, or other Burrow townis within the Realm
present their malt to the market in time tocum. And that ilk day be ane market
day for victuallis except the halie day. And that they sell not the said malt
quhill. ix. houris under the pane of escheit of all malt, that is sauld
vtherwayis. And that the Prouest and Baillies of ilk ane town see, that this
statute be keipit. And yt they have powar to escheit the samin, and answer to
our Souerane Lord eirlie thairfoir in his Checker, quhais handis that ever it
be fundin in. And that the maltmakaris tak na mair for the making of ane
chalder of malt, bot ane boll of beir. And quha dois in the contrare salbe
repute oppressouris of the Kingis liegis, and dictay taken thairupone to the
Justice Air.

That the inhabitantis of annexit and unite laudis to other Baronageis sall
answer to the Justice Airis, Schirefcourtis, quhair the landis lyis. Ca.
cxxviij.
ITEM Because it hes been ane defrauding in executioun of Justice, that quhair
lands hes been annexit and unite in ane Barronie, quhilkis landis lyis in
sindrie Schirefdomes, throw the quhilk the inhabitantis of the saidis landis sa
annexit hes never answerit in Schiref court nor Justice Air, in the Schirefdome
in the quhilk they ly, because the Lordschip, that they war annexit to, lyis in
ane other Schirefdome: Thairfoir it is statute, and ordanit in time tocum, that
euerilk Barronie and the inhabitantis thairof sall answer in Schiref court and
Justice Air, quhair the said Barronie lyis, and their be haldin to compeir
both be arreist of his Schiref Officiar, and Crownar, notwithstanding the said
annexatiounis. And the annexatioun sall suffice allanerlie for the Lord, that
hes the said landis annexit to gif their presence, and service in the place,
quhair they ar ordanit be the said annexatioun.

Of exceptiounis to be proponit agane the brief of inqueist. Ca. cxxix.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that because their hes been in time bygane
greit abusioun in the proponing of exceptiou^is friuole agane the brief of
inqueist, and peruertit the ordour and natour of it, as it war ane brief of
pley: Thairfoir for the eschewing of sic friuole exceptiounis in time tocum, It
is statute and ordanit, that na exceptioun auale agane the said brief of
inqueist, it beand cryit oppinlie vpone. xv. dayis with the indorsing of the
Officiar, that cryit it, contenand two witness, and his seill or signet, bot
their exceptiounis followand allanerlie: That is to say, agane the Judge, agane
the inqueist, and the exceptiounis of bastardrie, and that to be proponit in
the form of auld Law. And as anent the exceptioun maid anent the Summounding
of inqueist vpone. xv. dayis befoir, after the form of the statute of King
Robert, quhilk makis mentioun, that the inqueist sold be Summound vpone. xv.
dayis befoir: It salbe leifful notwithstanding the said statute to the Schiref,
or any other Officiar, that is Judge to the brief of inqueist to Summound the
said inqueist vpone quhat dayis he plesis or vpone schort time, notwithstanding
the said statute, and gif they be present in the Tolbuith onsummound, sa that
their be nane other lauchfull exceptioun agane them, it salbe leiffull to the
Schiref or Officiares to compel them to pas vpone the said inqueist. And
attour because their hes been ane abusioun in the crying of the Kingis breifis
in Stewartreis and Bailliereis, quhair they war cryit at ane hill, na
co^fluence of pepill being their, throw the quhilk na knawlege thairof mycht
cum to the party: Heirfoir it is statute and ordanit, that all manner of
breifis of inqueist salbe cryit at the market cross of the Burgh oppinlie in
plane market, quhen may confluence of pepill is gad derit: Sa that the crying
thairof may cum to the knawlege of the party defendar, quhair it sold be
seruit, and quhat day. And at the said brief be thryis cryit plainly togidder,
and betuix ilk crying the space of all the three cryingis. And at all Officiaris
of the town be warnit to compeir at the said proclamatioun to beir witness. And
gif it sall happin, that the antecessour of any clamand rycht, deceis sa neir
the termeof witsonday and Martymes, that the persewar may not get it vpone ane
market day for neirnes of the term of witsonday or Martymes, in that caise it
salbe leiffull to him to gar cry his brief upon any wolk day: Swa that he have
the Officiaris of the town and part of the honest persounis to the number of.
vj. persounis, saifand to our Souerane Lord his warning vpone. xl. dayis after
auld use and consuetude.

Of the process of the brief of rycht. Ca. cxxx.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, because their hes been greit abusioun of
Justice and greit expensis to the party persewand their land and heritage be
the brief of rycht, and other breuis pleidabill be the proponing of
exceptiounis friuole and borghis and recounteres, and falsing of domes throw
presuming of dilayis: That thairfoir in time tocum, quhair any dome is falsit
outher vpone dilatour or peremptour exceptioun or vtherwayis in the persute of
the brief of rycht, the party that fallis the said dome befoir the Schiref,
Stewart, Baillie, or any other Officiar, or their deputis sall cum within the
space of. xv. dayis to the Justice Clerk, and present his process of the falsing
of the said dome. And with auise of our Souerane Lord or his Justice their sall
incontinent thairefter be set ane Justice Air for the discussing and ending of
the said dome falsit vpone. xl. dayis. And the Justice be his precept or
Su^moundis direct to the Schiref sall warn both the parteis of the said day
limmit for the discussing of the said dome. And the frehaldars and sutouris
sall cum to the said Justice Air within the Schirefdome, or Stewartrie quhair
the said dome sall be discussit, and ward thairupone under the pane of the
unlaw of the court. And gif the said dome be falsit in the Justice Air anent
the said brief, or gif their be any other breuis pleidabill presentit to the
Justice and in the persute of them happinnis the dome to be falsit, in
likewise after the falsing of that dome within. xv. dayis thairefter, The
party, that falsis the dome sall cum to the Clerk of Regestrie, and of our
Souerane Lordis counsall, and present this process of falsing of dome. And
thairefter the said Clerk of counsall sall schaw the samin to our Souerane
Lord, quhilk sall depute. xxx. or. xl. persounis, or maa or fewar as plesis his
hienes, quhilk sall have powar as it war in ane Parliament, to decyde and
discus the said dome, and the parteis be warnit be our Souerane Lordis letters
of the day affixit for the discussing of the said dome: quhilk salbe set vpone.
xl. dayis, within the quhilk time it salbe leiffull to any of the parties to
gif in their ressounis. And gif their be ane dome falsit befoir the Prouest
Baillies within Burgh, or befoir ane Barrone or other frehaldaris, The party
falsar of the said dome sall cum in likewise, gif it be falsit, within the
Burgh to the Chalmerlane, and present him the process of the falsing of the said
dome, quhilk sall set ane court of the four Burrowis vpone. xv. dayis, and make
the said dome to be discussit. In likewise quhair the dome is falsit befoir the
Barrone or frehaldar in their courts, tha^ the falsar of the said dome sall
cum to the Schiref or other immediate superior of that court, quhilk sall set
his court vpone. xv. dayis, and make the said dome to be discussit, and warn
the parteis thairto, and gar the sutouris of the Schirefdome ward thairupone.
And gif it befalsit in the said court of four Burrowis, or in the Schiref
court, to have siclike process to the courtis immediate superior, as is abone
writtin. And the parties to have privilege to gif in their ressounis any time
within the day limmit for the discussing of the said domes. And this to have
process in all manner of domes falsing, alsweill breifis, as other civil matters.

That all mesuris and wechtis be of ane quantity, quhilk salbe statute in
Edinburgh be the Chalmerlane. Ca. cxxxj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that all mesuris and wechtis both pynt,
quart, firlot, peck, elnwand, stane, and pund be of ane quantity and mesure,
quhilk salbe ordanit in Edinburgh be our Souerane Lord, and his Chalmerlane,
and counsall. And at euerilk Burgh cum and fetch their mesure forth of
Edinburgh seilit, and maid, and keip the samin, and quhair their is any fermis
aucht in heretage of the auld met, that the said fermes be proportionat to the
quantity of the auld met, and payit with the new met to the auale of the auld
met proportionallie. And gif any persounis use any other mesuris, or wechtis in
time tocum, bot the mesuris and wechtis now to be maid, as said is, It salbe
ane punct of dictay, and they to be indictit thairof fra thine forth.

Of the hame bringing of buleoun, the auld act to be obseruit. Ca. cxxxij.
ITEM Anent the hame bringing of Buleoun, it is statute and ordanit, that the
auld actis and statutis maid thairupone be put to executioun, and obseruit and
keipit. And the custumaris to ressaif the said buleoun fra the Merchandis, and
to gif ^ompt thairof in the Checkar.

That all money have course in the Realm it being crakit or flawit. Ca. cxxxiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit because their is and hes been greit differance
and refuse in the taking of money, hauand course in the Realm, it beand outher
crakit or flawit: Thairfoir that in time tocum na manner of persoun, nor
persounis refuse to tak for their Merchandice any money, silver, or gold, it
haueand course in this Realm: Notwithstanding it beand auther crakit or flawit,
with certificatioun, that quha dois in the contrare sall tyne the silver, that
they refuse to be escheit to the King, and the byar to have the stuff, that he
sold have cofe with the said money.

That na Schiref, nor Officiar distreinie, or poynd any thing belangand the
pleuch in time of teiling. Ca. cxxxiiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that in time tocum na manner of Schiref, nor
Officiar poind nor destreinie the oxin, horse, nor other gudis pertening to the
pleuch, and that laubouris the ground the time of the laubouring of the samin,
quhair any other gudis, or land ar to be apprysit or poindit, according to the
commoun Law.

That the wordis of falsing of domes be changeit. Ca. cxxxv.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the wordis of falsing of domes be
changeit in this manner, that quhair any party thinkis him hurt, he sall use
their wordis: I AM GRETVMLIE HVRT AND INIVRIT BE THE SAID DOME, thairfoir I
appele and findis ane borgh in the Officiaris handis of the court to persew the
said appellatioun conformand to the Law maid of befoir, and within the time,
siclyke as is co^tenit in the said Law of the Realm.

QVODIE excellentissimus supremusque Dominus noster Rex in praesato suo
Parliamento cum consensu and assensu trium Regni sui statuum, ipsis, vt supra,
praesentibus, reuocauit, cassauit, annullauit, omnes and singulas donationes,
concessiones terrarum, praediorum, possessionum, aut aliarum rerum, acta,
statuta Parliamenti seu generalis consilij and quaecunque alia per eundem
supremum Dominum nostrum Regem, ac nomine suo temporibus retroactis
praeiudicialia, ac dampnum detrimentum seu laesionem eccleciae Catholicae,
animae suae, aut Coronae generantia. Et praedictas donationes, concessiones,
acta, statuta, and quaeunque alia, sic vt praemittit ur, reuocata pro non
factis haberi vult in futurum, and eadem de libris and scriptis cancellari and
deleri mandauit.

PARLIAMENTVM SVPRE MI DOMINI NOSTRI REGIS IACOBI QVARti tentum apud Edinburgh
octauo Maij Anno Domini Millesimo Quingentesimo nono.

Of the fredomes of the halie Kirk. Ca. cxxxvij.
IN the first it is statute and ordanit, the fredomes of halie Kirk and
liberteis thairof with all immuniteis, and priuilegeis, and of all spiritual
persounis, be obseruit and keipit in honor and worschip for the time of our
Souerane Lord, that now is, like as it hes been in times of his may Nobill
progenitouris of good mind of befoir.

Anent the deuisioun of Schirefdomes. Ca. cxxxvij.
ITEM Anent the article of the diuisioun of Schirefdomes, quhilk was ordanit be
ane act of Parliament maid in the Parliament haldin at Edinburgh, in the eir of
God ane thousand five hundredth and three eiris: It is now statute and ordanit,
that fra thine forth the said act of Parliament have strenth allauerlie anent
the courtis of Justice Airis both for suit, presence, and all things
concerning the Justice Airis. And as for the Schiref courtis, and all other
courtis, and doingis, that they cum to the townis and Schirefdomes, that they
come to and war of befoir the making of the said act of Parliament, and their
to answer, and gif suit and presence, and those Law, as they war wont to do,
except and the landis pertening to Schir Duncane Forrester, that is to say, the
landis of Garden, Discher, Kippane, Eon, and Gibbin eister to remane at the
Justice Airis and Schiref courtis of Striuiling, as they war of befoir the
making of this present act.

HIC FINIVNTVR STATVTA PARLIAMENTORVM IACOBI QVARTI.
Ane act maid be our said Souerane Lord King James the feird, anent the ward,
releif, and marriage of the airis of them that deceissis in the arm.
AT Twesilhauch in Northtumberland the xxiiij. day of August the eir of God ane
thousand syue hundredth threttene eiris, It is statute and ordanit be the Kingis
hienes with auise of all his Lordis being their for the time, in his oist in
this form, as followis, that is to say, gif any man beis siane or hurt to deid
in the Kingis army and oist be Inglisme^, or deis in the army enduring the time
of his oist, his airis sall have his ward, releif, and marriage of the King fre
dispensand with his age, quhat eild that ever he be of. And ordanis the Kingis
letters to be direct heirupone to the effect foirsaid necessare, as effeiris.

THEIR ar the true copyis of the actis of Parliamentis maid be our Souerane
Lordis Kingis, James the First, Secund, Third, and Feird, with auise of the
three Estatis of the Realm: Reuiseit and correctit be the Lordis Commissaris
depute thairto: And extractit forth of the bukis of Parliament be m^ Schir
James Balfour of Pettindreich Knycht, Clerk of our Souerane Lord and Ladyis
Regestrie counsall and Rollis under my sign and subscriptioun manual.

signature
Of^icium Regis, Legis, and Populi: LEX ANIMVS REGNI. REX EST LEX VIVA.
STVDETQVE LEGIBVS AC PARET POPVLVS. REGIT OMNIA NVMEN. ED. HENRYSONE
HIC FINIVNTVR STATVTA PARLIAMENTORVM REGIS IACOBI QVARTI ET SEQVVNTVR STATVTA
PARLIAMENTORVM REGIS IACOBI QVINTI.
PARLIAMENTVM EXCELLENTISSIMI PRINCIPIS ET DO. NOSTRI DOM. Jacobi Quinti Dei
gratia Scotorum Regis Illustrissimi tentum and inchoatum apud Edinburgh die
louis duodecimo die Mensis Iulij Anno Do. Millesimo Quingentesimo decimoquinto
per illustrem and magnificum principem Iohannem Ducem Albaniae. etc. praecicti
Do. nostri Regis and Regni tutorem and gubernatorem, vnacum Praelatis,
Baronibus, Proceribus, and Burgorum Commissarijs in speciali Commissione
contentis and ibidem perlectis in dicto Parliame^to congregatis treis Regni
status repraesentantibus. etc. Quo die sectis vocatis, curia affirmata absentes
patent in Rotulis.
Of the fredome of halie Kirk. Ca. j.
IN the first it is statute, that the fredomes, priuilegeis, and immuniteis of
halie kirk and vthers spiritual persounis be obseruit and keipit in honor and
worschip in the time of our Souerane Lord, and my Lord Governor, that now is,
as it hes been in times bygane.

Punitioun of thift and stouthreif, and masters or sustenaris of theifis. Ca.
ij.
ITEM Because the crime of thift and stouthreif, is sa commounlie vsit amang
the Kingis liegis, and for stanching of the samin, It is statute and ordanit in
this present Parliament, That quhair any of the Kingis liegis is plaintous, or
complenis vpone a theif, that hes reft or stollin his ge^r or his mennis, and
is in service or obeysca^^ of any man, and schawis the samin to the man, that
he is in service with, and wald attache him to the Law for the samin: This man,
that this theif or reifar is in service with, or findis him with him, or under
his obeisance, salbe haldin and oblist, to produce and bring him to the Law
befoir the Justice, Schireffis, or any vthers that hes cognitioun to do Justice
vpone sic persounis co^mittaris of sic crymis at days and placis affixit to
them to underly y^ samin: or else sall deliver the said theif, or reuar to the
co^plenar, to be brocht to the Law, and iustifeit, as said is. And gif his
master or sustenar of this theif or reuar refusis to do the samin: he salbe
haldin airt and partakar of his evil deidis, and salbe accusit thairfoir, as
the principal theif or reifar, and als sall restoir, and satisfy to the
co^plenar the gudis reft, or stollin fra him. And gif this co^plenar after that
he have attachit this theif, or deliuerit him, as said is, wald concord with
the said theif, and tak thiftbute and put him fra the Law, in that caice he
sall underly the Law, and be accusit thairfoir as principal theif or reuar.
And gif he attachis and accusis him of the said thift or reif, and beis fundin
innocent thairof, The said complenar salbe haldin and oblist to gif to the said
man, that he sclandaris innocentlie. x. pund for amendis of the said sclander.

IN PARLIAMENTO TENTO APVD EDINBVRGH VICESIMO QVARTO die Mensis Iulij Anno Do.
Millesimo Quingentesimo vicesimo secundo.
Anent the waird, releif, and marriage of the airis of them that deis in the
did mouit contrare Inglismen or the tratouris of the Realm. Ca. iij.
THE quhilk day my Lord Governor with auise of the three Estates of the Realm,
hes statute and ordanit in this present Parliament, That gif any man be slane,
or hurt to deid in Did or army aganis our auld Inimeis of Ingland, or
tratouris of Scotland, in persewing or defending now in time of weir mouit, or
to be mouit betuix this Realm, and the Realm of Ingland: In that caise, the
airis of them, that are slane sall have the waird, releifis, and mariageis of
the Kingis grace and my Lord Governor fre, dispe^sand with their age quhat
eild, that ever they be of: To be applyit to the utility of the wyfis, airis,
and barnis of them, that are slane, for the vphald and sustentatioun of the
saidis wyfis, airis and barnis: Swa that throw the deceis of their husbandis
they remane not allutterlie in poverty and desolatioun. And in likewise, all
the Lordis spiritual and temporal hes consentit and consentis, that all
persounis, that haldes landis of them, that beis slane, or hurt to deid, as
said is, sall have and bruke the privilege of the act. And alswa all vassallis,
and subuassallis, that haldis landis of Barronis, or other their over Lordis,
and happinnis to be slane or hurt to the deid in the said Did or army their
wyfis, airis and barnis to bruke the effect and privilege of the said act, as
is befoir writtin. And that letters be direct thairupone in dew form, as
effeiris.

Anent the takkis and steidingis of them that are slane, as said is. Ca. iiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be the haill three Estatis of Parliament, that
quhatsumeuer tennent, gentilma^ vnlandit, or eman haua^d takkis or steidingis
of any Lordis of Lairdes, spiritual or temporal, that happinnis to be slane
be Inglismen in our Souerane Lordis army or service, or gettis deidis woundis
in the samin, The wyfis and barnis of them, that sall happin to be slane, or
woundit to the deid, as said is, sall bruke their takkis, malingis, or
stedingis for their sustentatioun, during the space of five eiris nixt after
the slauchter or wounding to deid of the saidis tennentis gressoume fre: Payand
allanerlie, bot mailis, dewteis, and service aucht and wont.

IN PARLIAMENTO EXCELLENTISSIMI PRINCIPIS ET DO. NOSTRI DO. Jacobi Quinti Dei
gratia Scotorum Regis metuendissimi tento apud Edinburgh decimoseptimo die
Mensis Maij An. Do. Millesimo Quingentesimo tricesimo secundo per eundem tribus
Regni statibus praesentibus.
Of the fredome of halie Kirk. Ca. v.
THE quhilk day our Souerane Lord in this present Parliament, the three Estatis
of the Realm being gadderit, exponit: Sen he and his Nobill Progenitouris
Kingis of Scotland and liegis of the samin, hes been first, or at the leist
with the first, that ever acceptit the Cristin faith, and been may obedient
sonnis to our halie fathers the Papis of Rome, and the authority Apostolic,
without any manner of smot, violatioun, or defectioun: And our halie fathers the
Papis of Rome, hes been verray gracious and beneuolent to his hienes and
Realm, with all manner of priuilegeis and beneficis, and may of all Pape
CLEMENT now Pape of Rome, hes been mair gracious and beneuolent to his grace,
than to all his foirbearis: Quhairfoir to schaw him thankful and obedient sone
to his halynes and the Kirk of Rome, It is deuisit, statute, and ordanit with
auise and consent of the three Estatis of Parliament, That he sall keip,
observe, mantene, and defend the authority, liberty, and fredome of the sat
of Rome and halie Kirk, and sall never make, nor statute any actis,
co^stitutiounes, do, attempt, nor suffer to be done, nor attemptit any thing in
contrare thairof: And gif in times past any thingis hes been done, or in times
cumming any thing sall happin to be done in contrare the authority, fredome,
and liberty of halie Kirk, annullis, and decernis the samin now as than, and
than as now of nane auale, force, nor effect: And that nane of our Souerane
Lordis liegis be bund or oblist to obey the samin: Saifand alwayis the actis
fundit vpone our halie father the Papis priuilegeis, or them, that hes been
lang in louabill use keipit and obseruit in our Souerane Lord, that now is, and
his may Nobill progenitouris times.

The institutioun of the College of Justice. Ca. vi.
ITEM Anent the secund article concerning the ordour of Justice, Because our
Souerane Lord is may desirous to have ane permanent ordour of Justice, for
the universal weill of all his liegis: And thairfoir tendis to institute ane
College of cunning and wise men, both of spiritual and temporal estate, for
doing and administratioun of Justice in all civil actiounis: And thairfoir
thinkis to be chosin certane persounis, may convenient, and qualifeit
thairfoir, to the number of. xiiij. persounis, half spiritual, half te^porall
with ane president, The quhilkis persounis salbe autorizat in this present
Parliament, to sit and decyde vpone all actiounis civil, and nane vthers to
have voit with them, the place quhairto sit in, and of the feriate times.
unto the time the said college may be institute at mair lasar: And their
persounis to begin, and sit in Edinburgh, on the morn after Trinity Sunday,
quhill Lambnes: And thairefter to have vacance, quhill the. xix. day of October
nixt thairefter, and than to begin and sit, quhill Sanct Thomas euin afoir ule,
and thairefter to begin vpone the morn after Epiphanie day, and sit quhill
Palm Sunday euin, and thairefter to begin vpone the morn after Dominica in
albis, The Lordis to be sworn.
and sit quhill Lambnes: And their persounis to be sworn to minister Justice
equally to all persounis, in sic causis, as sall happin to cum befoir them,
with sic other reulis, and statutis, as sall pleis the Kingis grace to make, and
gif to them, for ordouring of the samin: The authorizing in Parliament.
The three Estatis of this present Parliament thinkis this article weill
consauit, and thairfoir the Kingis grace, with auise and consent of the saidis
three Estatis, ordanis the samin to have effect in all punctis: And now,
ratifeis, and confirmis the same, and hes chosin their persounis under writtin
to the effect foirsaid. Quhais processis, sentencis, and decreitis sall have
the samin strenth, force, and effect, as the decreit of the Lordis of Sessioun
had in all tymis bygane: The authority of the Chancellar and Lordis.
Prouyding alwayis, that my Lord Cha^cellar being present in this town, or any
other place he sal have woit, and be principal of the said cou^sall. And
siclyke other Lordis, as sall pleis the Kingis grace to inione to them of his
greit counsall, to have voit siclyke to the number of three or four. That is to
say, the Abbot of Ca^buskinneth President, Master Richard Bothuile, The uanus
of the Lordis of the ^ate.
Schir Iohne Dingwall, Master Henry Quhite, Master Robert Schanwell Vicar of
Kirkcaldie, Master Williame Gibsone, Master Thomas Hay, Master Arthoure
Boyce, the Lord of Balwerie, Schir Iohne Campbell, Master Adame Otterburne,
James Coluile of eist Wemis, the Justice Clerk, Master Francis Bothuile,
Master James Lawsone. And their Lordis to subscriue all deliuerancis, and nane
vthers, after they begin to sit, and minister Justice.

The Chancellar and president to ressaif the aithis of the Lordis absent.
ITEM The said day the Kingis grace hes committit his powar to my Lord
Chancellar and Abbot of Cambuskinneth President, coniunctlie and severally, to
ressaif the aithis of them, that are absent, chosin and namit to be of this
Sessioun, and in their absence the aithis of any other, quhome his grace will
name thairto, gif the saidis persounis chosin cummis not betuix this, and
Setterday nixt tocum. And in absence of my Lord of Cambuskinneth President, the
Kingis grace hes chosin the Abbot of Kinlos to minister thairin, quhill his
returning.

The Chancellar, President, and Lordis of the Sessioun to make the ordour, how
it salbe proccidit in their Sessioun.
ITEM His grace hes geuin command to the Chancellar, President, and Lordis of
the Sessioun, to auise, counsall, and conclude vpone sic reulis, statutis and
ordinancis, as sall be thocht be them expedient to be obseruit and keipit in
their manner and ordour of proceiding at all times. And as they devise conform
to ressoun, equity, and Justice, his grace sall ratify, and appreif the
samin. And ordanis the saidis Lordis of Sessioun to keip all their viij. dayis
cummand in auising and making of their reulis and institutis for the ordour of
Justice: And after the form of the samin, to begin and call matters on
monounday nixt tocum. And in the meintyme to deliver billis, and call
priuilegeit Summoundis, as they think expedient.

The diuisioun of the Realm quarterlie.
IN the first it is deuisit and ordanit, that the Lordis of the Sessioun sall
begin, quhair they left last in calling of the Tabill. And that the priuilegeit
Su^moundis of every quarter salbe tabulat with the vnpriuilegeit Summoundis of
that quarter: And all to be callit and have process both vpone priuilegeit and
vnpriuilegeit, quhill that diet or quarter be endit. And to begin quarter,
after quarter, as followis: And their Schiris to be in the first quarter, that
is to say, Forfar, Kincardin, Abirdene, Banffe, Elgin, Fores, Narne, Innernes,
and Crummartie. The secund quarter, Edinburgh, Linlithquho, Selkrik, Rokisburgh
Peblis, Berwyk, and Hadingtoun. The third quarter, Striuiling, Air, Renfrow,
Lanark, Wigtoun, Drumfreis, Kirkcudbricht, and Annerdale. The scird quarter,
Fyfe, Perth, Clakmaunan, Kinros, Dounbertane, Ergyle and Bute.

That all Summoundis priuilegeit be callit on monounday oulklie quhilk
followis, and horning all times.
ITEM It is deuisit and ordanit, that their Summoundis under writtin salbe
priuilegeit, and to be callit by the ordour of the diettis, that is to say:
Recent spuleis, calling of letters, redeming of landis, actis of adiuruals,
superiouris to heir them decernit to tyne their superioriteis, reductioun of
mordinat processis, that is to say, retreiting of Rolmentis of courtis led
befoir Schireffis, Barronis, Baillies, retreting of decreitis, and transfering
of decreitis. And their to be callit be them self, and to be callit oulklie
vpone monounday. And gif monounday beis halie day, to have process on the nixt
day thairefter. And all their to be callit, except letters, that concernis
horning, quhilkis sall have process at all times, as they cum.

That all the commoun matters be callit on all the dayis of the oulk, except
Friday for the Kingis matters, and strangearis, and the Quenis matters.
ITEM All other matters to be callit be the ordour of the Tabill vpone all the
dayis of the oulk, except Friday, quhilk is assignit for the Kingis matters, and
the matters of strangearis. And gif the Kingis grace nor strangearis hes na
matters a do vpone Friday, than the commoun Tabill to have process, and siclyke
the Quenis matters. And it salbe na exceptioun to allege, that the said Friday
is ordanit for the Kingis matters.

That all continuatiounis be callit at the dayis assignit thairto.
ITEM That all continuatiounis of process befoir the Lords, quhair actis ar
passit, be callit at the dayis assignit thairto, for expeditioun of witness and
eschewing of expensis.

Anentis deliverance of cognitioun to Schireffis.
ITEM It is deuisit and ordanit fra thine forth, That it be eikit in all
deliverance direct to Schireffis, or vthers Iugeis Ordinaris, that they admit
to the parteis their lauchfull defe^sis, and to minister Justice equally to
both the saidis parteis.

The counsalhous to be reparrellit.
ITEM That saitis be honestly maid and couerit with grene claith flokkit on
the Kingis, expensis, quhair the Lordis sall he, and salbe maid ane buird,
quadrangular, or round, about the quhilk their may sit. xviij* persounis
esilie. And that their be maid sat vpone sat, and ane bell to be hung to call
in Massaris, or parteis, as the Lordis requyris.

That all the Lordis enter in the Tolbuith at. viij. houris.
ITEM That all the Lordis sall enter in the Tolbuith and counsalhous at. viij.
houris in the morning daily, and sall sit, quhill. xj. houris be strikin.

That the counsalhous be ischeit after the entry of the Lordis.
ITEM Alsone as the Lordis be enterit in the Tolbuith, that ane Massar ische
the counsalhous, and him self sall stand at the dure, and lat na man enter. And
gif any Lord, or other man cummis to the dure, and desyris entres, that he
aduerteis the Lordis thairof. And gif they have any matter they will propone,
that silence he had, quhill they have done, and than to remove.

That na man pley bot parteis and their procuratouris.
ITEM That na man enter to pley bot parteis contenit in their Summoundis, and
their procuratouris, gif they will any have.

That billis be first red and continuatiounis, and syne the Tabill.
ITEM Incontinent after the Lordis be enterit, and sittin down, and all the
house be ischeit, that all billis be first red and exped. And gif their be any
actis of continuatioun of process begun, that the samin be nixt callit. And fra
thine the Lordis beginnis to call any matter, or act of continuatiou^, that na
bill be ressaifit nor red. And fra time, that any Summoundis be callit be the
Tabill, that na actis of continuatioun, be callit for that day. And that all
parteis or their procuratouris deliver to the Chancellar, or President their
billis, actis, and letters of continuatioun, or they enter in the Tolbuith, or
incontinent thairefter at the charge, or warning of ane Massar.

For examinatioun of witness.
ITEM That oulklie their be depute three of the Lords of the sat in their
tower, that is to say, the first oulk two spiritual and ane temporal, and
thairefter two temporal and ane spiritual: And swa forth oulklie, as they ar
put in bill and ordour to examine all witness. The quhilkis Lordis sall conuene
every day, as neid requyris, in the counsalhous at two after none with the
Clerk of the counsall, or ane of his Clerkis or wrytaris sworn and admittit be
the Lordis, and sall remane, quhill four houris in the examinatioun of witness,
or schortar, or la^gar, as neid beis. And all the parteis or their
procuratouris be warnit to bring their witness at the saidis houris.

That all matters be callit be the ordour of the Tabill.
ITEM That na matter be callit bot be the Tabill, conform to the statute above
writtin maid and deuisit thairupone.

That silence be had in the counsalhous.
ITEM That the Lordis be and sittin down, and billis begun to be red, that
silence be had amangis the Lords: And that na man commoun, or speik of any
matter, or round with his marrow, bot as he salbe requyrit, and speirit at be
the Chancellar or President. And as they command any two Lordis of the sat to
argune, or dispute any matter, that nane other interrupt them, quhill they have
done. And than the Chancellar, or President to require any other to argune the
matter. And quhen they have done, gif their be any other of the Lordis, that hes
any opinion, or argument to make, that they ask leif fra the Chancellar or
President, and than to argune, as they think expedient.

Of the giving of voitis and ordour thairof.
ITEM All argumentis and disputatiounis beand maid and the Lordis haldand
silence, my Lord Chancellar or President, sall ask, or require every Lordis
voit in that matter, as they ar in the ordour be the actis and bukis of
counsall: Quhais namis the Clerk of counsall sall reid and nem. And swa
ordourlie the Chancellar or President to ask every Lordis voit: And that nane
argune ane other in the giving thairof.

That ten Lordis sall remane with the President.
ITEM In auising and giving of all sentencis and decreitis, their be ten Lords
at the leist with the Chancellar or President. And that nane of the Lordis
chosin and admittit depart, or bide away without license askit and obtenit fra
the Chancellar or President in presence of the haill counsall for ressonabill
causis. And that they return agane at the day affixit to them. Item that all
publicatiounis of witness, and vthers attestatiounis, and examinatioun of process
be maid befoir the haill auditour.

Executioun of sentence to be maid be Heraldis, Purseuantis, and Massaris.
ITEM That all sentencis and decreitis of the Lordis be execute in times
cu^ming be the Schiref of the Schire, or his Deputis, quhair the parteis
dwellis, aganis quhome the saidis decreitis ar geuin, or sall happin to be
geuin: Or else be Heraldis, Purseuantis, or Massaris. And that nane tak mair for
the executioun of their office, bot after the form of the act of Parliament,
bot gif it be of benevolence of the party, under the pane of depriuatioun of
their office. And that they deny not to do their office, under the pane
foirsaid, alsweill to pure, as rich.

Of the Clerkis of the Signet.
ITEM That all Clerkis of the Signet be sworn to exerce their officis
lauchfullie and diligently. And nane of them sall reueill nor make manifest to
any man, quhat they write or dois for ane other, bot sall keip all clois and
secreit.

Anent payment for billis of complaint and Kingis letters.
ITEM That na Clerk of the Signet tak mair for the writing of ane bill
bot.viij. d. And for the writing of ane letter upon ane decreit of the Lords
and deliverance bot.xx. d. nor for nane other letter mair, than was vsit in our
Souerane Lordis time, quha last deceissit, quhome God assolie, under the pane
of tinsall of his office.

Anent the delivering of billis.
ITEM That na Clerk of the Signet enter in the counsall house for delivering of
any billis, bot that the deliverance be writtin be ane writar of the counsall.
And to provide, that nane frustrate ane other of his laubouris and proffeit,
That euerilk Clerk of the Signet, that wrytis any billis mark the samin with
his awin name in the bill writtin within, and the samin salbe deliuerit to him
agane, or the party, quhilk of them cummis to ask the said bill, they payand
to the wrytar of the deliverance four pennyis.

That Massaris keip counsall.
ITEM That all Massaris be sworn to exerce their office faithfully and
diligently, and they sall reueill nathing, that they sall happin to heir
commonit amangis the Lordis, under the pane of depriuatioun and infamitie.

Quhat massaris sall tak for their laubouris.
ITEM That na Massaris tak mair fra any party, that happinnis to obtene ane
decreit in the Sessioun bot ij. s. bot gif the parteis gifis mair of their awin
benevolence, under the pane foirsaid.

The number of Aduocatis and their namis.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that their be ane number of Aduocatis and
procuratouris chosin, and to be chosin to the number of ten persounis, that
salbe callit general procuratouris of the counsall, of best name, knawlege,
and experience admittit to procure in all actiounis, of quhome the namis
followis, That is to say, Master Robert Galbraith, Master Robert Leslie,
Master Henry Spittale, Master Iohne Lethame, Master Henry Lawder, Master
Thomas Kincragy, Master Thomas Marioribankis, Master Willilame Iohnstoun. And
gif any vthers cunning men will desire to be admittit to the office of
aduocatioun and procuratioun, they salbe ressaifit with advise of the saidis
Lordis for completing of the said number. And that their procuratouris
foursaidis procure for every man for their waigeis, bot gif they have
ressonabill excuse.

Aduocatis to be sworn.
ITEM That all the saidis Aduocatis and procuratouris chosin, or to be chosin
and admittit, salbe sworn to exerce faithfully and diligently the office of
aduocatioun and procuratioun.

That all Aduocatis pas forth of the counsalhous quhen the Lordis passis to
disputatioun.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that all Aduocatis and procuratouris sall
enter in the counsalhous at the calling of all Summoundis and actis, and remane
quhill the parteis have argunit and dispute their matters at the bar, and than
to remove quhe^ the parteis ar remouit, and than to enter agane at the giving
and pronuntiatioun of interloquutoris, quhen the parteis enteris.

Anent exceptiounis dilatouris.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit anent process and formalitie to be keipit be
aduocatis in pleying befoir the Lords, that ane dilatour exceptioun being
proponit, and repellit be ane interloquutor of the Lordis, that the Aduocatis,
procuratouris, or parteis be their selfis sall propone all the laif of their
dilatouris at anis. And that nane Aduocat nor procuratour within the bar stand
to pley, bot pas outwith with the party, except the Kingis Aduocat.

The Kingis good mind anent the Lordis of the Sessioun.
FOrsamekill as we for the greit affectioun, that we have for Justice to be
done, and equalie ministrat to all our liegis, hes in our last Parliament
chosin ane certane of persounis spiritual and temporal, to be vpone our
daily Sessioun, and to minister Justice equalie amang all our liegis, as said
is, after their conscience and understanding: Iuramen tum.
And all the saidis persounis ar sworn to do the samin. And als at our command
they have maid certane statutis and reulis to be obseruit, Statuta.
and keipit be them self and vthers in their doingis, and proceiding for
Justice in all times. The quhilkis statutis and reulis we have subscriuit with
our hand. Approbata.
Heirfoir we of our awin fre motive and proper will, ratifeis and appreuis be
their presentis all and sindrie the saidis statutis maid be our saidis Lordis of
Sessioun in every punct. The Kingis promitt not to cu^ in the co^trare.
Attour we promit to the saidis Lordis, That we sall not be any private writing
charge or command at the instance of any persoun, or desire them to do
vtherwayis in any matter that sall cum befoir them, bot as Justice requyris: Or
to do any thing, that may brek statutis maid be them at our command and doing
of Justice. Als we sall authorize, mantene, and defend all the saidis Lordis,
Protectioun for the Lordis of the sat.
their persounis, landis, and gudis fra all harm, wrang, hurt, and injury to
be done to them be any manner of persoun. And quha, that dois in the contrare
sal be punist with all rigor.

And because the saidis Lordis chosin vpone our Sessioun presentis our persoun
and beiris our authority in the doing of Justice, Na sinister informatioun to
be hard agane the Lordis vncallit.
We sall have them both spiritual and temporal in special honor and
mantenance. And we sall gif na credence to any man, that will murmr them or
any of them, be doing of wrang, or inhonestie. Bot they sall be callit befoir
us, and gif they be fundin culpabill, to be punist thairfoir after the quality
of the fault and demerite: And gif they be fundin clean and innocent, the
persoun complening salbe punist with all rigor, and never to have credit with
us agane. Attour because the saidis persounis man await daily vpone our said
Sessioun, The Lordis fre of all taxis and beiring of officis.
except at feriat times, and sold be thairfoir priuilegeit above vthers:
Heirfoir we have exemit, and be the tennour heirof exemis them, and every ane
of them both spiritual and temporal, fra all paying of tartis,
contributiounis, and other extraordinar chargeis to be vpli^tit in any times
cumming, and fra the beiring of any office or charge within Burgh or outwith,
bot gif it be their awin fre will and consent.

Item we grant to our saidis Lordis of Sessioun, that gif any persounis or
persoun dishonouris and lychtlyis them, or any ane of them in any manner of
way: The punitiou^ of the persounis, that faultis to the Lordis.
That they command and charge, and put that persoun or persounis in waird in
our Castle of Edinburgh, or any other our Castellis they pleis, to remane,
quhill they have maid satisfactioun for the fault at the said Lordis
considderatioun gif the fault be small and injurious. And gif it be greit,
quhill they aduerteis us thairof, that we may gar the famine be amendit, and
punisment maid thairfoir, as effeiris.

The Subscriptioun.
AND this our ratificatioun and approbatioun, promit and grant of all their
premissis We have subscriuit with our hand, And ordanis the samin to be put in
the bukis of our counsall, togidder with the statutis maid be our saidis Lordis
of Sessioun. Subscriuit in likewise with our hand at our Castle of Striuiling
the tent day of Iunij. And of our Regne the nynetene eir.

JAMES
Emendata and Descripta, vt est supra dictum. signature
TRALATITIVM. Legis obseruatio Regni conseruatio est. Moribus antiquis stat res
Albana virisque. ALIVD. Tu regere imperio populos STEVARTE memento, Ordinis
imper^que vetus sublimeque nomen. ED. HENRYSONE*
THE ACTIS AND CONSTITVTIOVNIS MAID BE THE RYCHT HIE AND mychtie Prince JAMES
the fyft King of Scottis, in his Parliament begunnin and haldin, At Edinburgh
the. VII. day of Iunij. THE eir of God M. D. and. XXXV. eiris.
The liberty and fredome of halie Kirk. Ca. vij.
AND first, it is statute and ordanit, that the fredome of halie Kirk, the
Immuniteis and priuilegeis of the samin, be obseruit, keipit, and defendit be
our Souerane Lord, with all liberteis in honor and worschip thairof, siclyke
and als frelie, as they have been in times of his may Nobil progenitouris
Kingis of Scotland, and the brekaris, and offendaris thairof to be punist with
all rigor.

For the eschewing of heresy within this Realm, and the panis thairof. Ca.
viij*
ITEM Our Souerane Lord, ratifeis and appreuis the statute maid of befoir be
his hienes, in his Parliament, haldin at Edinburgh the. xvij. day of Iulij. The
eir of God ane thousand five hundredth xxv. eiris. Aganis them that haldis,
disputis or reheirsis the damnabill opinionis of the greit heretic Luther, his
discipulis and followaris, or of any other heresy with new additioun, of the
quhilk act and additioun, the tenor followis. And our said Souerane Lord, for
the zele and lufe his hienes beiris to the Cristin faith and the halie Kirk
ordanis and statutis the said act of new.

ITEM IT IS Statute and ordanit, that forsame kill, as the dampnabill opinionis
of heresy ar spread in diverse countries be the heretic Luther, and his
discipulis: And this Realm and liegis thairof, hes fermly persistit in the
halie faith, sen the samin was first ressaifit be them, and never as it
admittit any opinionis contrare the Cristin faith, bot ever hes been clean of
all sic filth and vice: Thairfoir that na manner of persoun, strangear, that
happinnis to arrive with their Schip within any part of this Realm, bring with
them any bukis or warkis of the said Luther, his discipulis or seruandis,
dispute or reheirs his heresyis or opinionis, bot gif it be to the confusioun
thairof, and that be Clerkis in the sculis allanerlie, under the pane of
escheiting of their Schippes and gudis and putting of their persounis in
presoun. And that this act be publist and proclamit out throuch this Realm at
all portis and Burrowes of the samin, swa that they may allege na Ignorance
thairof. And that all other the Kingis liegis assistaris to sic opinionis, be
punist in sembla^^ll wise. And that nane of them have, use, keip or conceill
any (...) of the saidis heretikis or contenand their doctrine and opinionis,
bot that they deliver the samin to their Ordinaris within. x^ dayis, under the
panis foirsaidis. And the effect of the said act to strike upon them. And
letters to be direct to make publicatioun heirof in form, as effeiris.

Aganis them that sustenis the process of cursing above the space of. xl.
dayis. Ca. ix.
ALswa, because the damnabill perswasiounis of heretikis and their peruerst
doctrine, geuis occasioun to lychtlie the process of cursing, and vthers
censuris of halie Kirk: For remeid heirof, Our Souerane Lord in this present
Parliament, hes ratife it and appreuit, and of the new makis, constitutis, and
ordanis the act maid of befoir be his grace, with the auise of the three Estatis
of his Realm in his foirsaid Parliament, aganis them that sust enes
contempnandlie the process of cursing with new addirioun thairto, of the quhilk
act and additioun the tennour followis. ITEM IT IS statute and ordanit, that
because money and diverse the Kingis liegis of this Realm, lyis under the
horribill sentence of cursing, separate fra the suffrage and prayar of the
Kirk, and merit of the blude of Christ to the dampnatioun of their saulis,
evil exemple, pxrell and danger of the other good subditis of the Realm:
Thairfoir quhen any of our Souerane Lordis liegis, sustenis dampnablie the said
horribill sentence of cursing, for the space of. xl. day is, quhairupon
Captioun aucht to be geuin be the Law, The party at quhais insta^ce the
persounis ar cursit, sall have our Souerane Lordis letters, to poynd, apprise,
and distrenie their gudis mouabill and vnmouabill, for payment of the soumes,
for quhilkis they lay under the said sentence, and gif the saidis persounis
lyis under cursing be the said space, for non doing or fulfilling of any act or
deid, In that caice the persounis, their creditouris sall have letters in the
first, secund, third, and feird forms, according to the Ordinaris letters of
cursing. And this act alwayis to be na prejudice to them, that lykis to tak
Captionis. And albeit ane persoun may be under appellatioun, that may stop the
giving of sic letters in manner above wri^tin: It is declairit and ordanit, that
na appellatioun fra sentence of desertioun of appellatiounis befoir
interpoponit, sall stop the giving of sic letters.

For planting of woddis, forestis and orchartis. Ca. x.
ITEM For policy to be had within the Realm, in planting of woddis, making of
hedgeis, orchartis, airdis, and sawing of brom: It is statute and ordanit be
the Kingis grace and his three Estatis of Parliament, that the actis maid
thairupone of befoir be King James the secund, and vthers Our Souerane Lordis
progenitouris, be obseruit, keipit, and put to scharp executioun in all
punctis, with this additioun. That every man spiritual and te^porall within
this Realm, hauand ane hundredth pund land of new extent be eir, and may expend
samekill, quhair their is na woddis nor forestis, Plant wod and forest, and make
hedgeis, and having for him self, extending to three akers of land, and above or
under, as his heretage is mair or les, in placis may convenient, and that
they cause every tennent of their landis that hes the samin in tak or
assedatiou^, To plant upon their onser eirlie, for every merk land, ane tree:
Ilk Lord of ane hundredth pund la^d, under the pane of. x. pund, and les or
mair after the rate and quantity of their landis. And that inquisitiou^ be
maid eirlie heirupon, as the Kings grace sall think may expedient, and that
every man begin and cause planting to be maid the nixt seasone heirefter
following, under the panis foirsaidis, to be rasit and inbrocht to the Kingis
grace use be the Schiref of the Schire, or quhome it plesis his grace to direct
his commissioun to in that part, and that cognitioun be taken eirlie of the
brekaris of this statute, be every Schiref in his awin Schire, eirlie at his
heid court after Pasche.

The panis of the destroyaris of woddis, and makaris of mureburne in forbodin
time. Ca. xj.
ITEM For the punising of them, that destroyis grene wod incontrare the tenor
of the act above writtin: It is statute and ordanit for keiping of the samin,
That all destroyaris of grene wod, be cutting, peling, birning or felling, and
siclike of all new ha^ingis, salbe accusit thairfoir conform to the actis and
statutis maid thairupon of befoir, and the pane thairof salbe in times cu^ming,
for the first time. x. pund. The secund time. xx. pund. And the third time
deid. And siclyke the unlaw of mureburne after the month of March, inco^trare
the auld actis and statutis, salbe in times cu^ming for the first time. v.
pund. The secund time. x. pund. And the third time. xx. pund. And swa forth at
ilk time als often, as they be fundin culpabill. xx. pund. And gif they be not
responsall in landis or gudis for the said unlaw, their persounis to be put in
the Kingis grace presoun, to be punist for their fault enduring his grace will.
And to be callit heirfoir at particular dietis, or general Justice Airis, as
the Kingis grace sall think may expedient. And it sall not be lesum to the
Thesauraris or compositouris in times cumming to compone or fine with the
brekaris of this act for les, than the pane and unlaw contenit in the samin.

For keiping of forestis. Ca. xij.
ITEM For keiping of all forestis, woddis and parkes within the Realm for
wild beistis and hunting: It is deuisit, statute and ordanit, that all manner
of persounis clamand them to have officis of forestrie in heritage, or takkis
of the Kingis grace forestis, Salbe callit at sic day and place, as plesis the
Kingis grace for productioun and schawing of their rychtis and infeftmentis, be
the quhilkis they clame the saidis officis to pertene to them, to be seen and
considerit be the Lordis of counsall, and quhat claus they contene, swa that
good reule and ordour may be put to them, for keiping of the saidis forestis
in time cu^ming, with certificatioun, that quhidder they co^peir or not, The
Kings grace with auise of his Lordis, will dispone vpone the saides officis,
and make sic constitutiounis, as plesis his hicnes for the good keiping of the
samin, pasturing of wild beistis and hunting thairintill in times cu^ming. And
als ordanis letters to be direct, to command and charge all manner of perfounis
clamand the saidis officis, to pertene to them in heretage or takkes, that
they lat na manner of gudis, nolt, scheip, horse, meiris, or other cattle to be
pasturit within the Kingis grace forestis, under the pane of tinsal of their
officis, and escheting of their mouabill gudis. And gif any manner of persou^ be
fundin putting their gudes in pasturing in the saidis forestis, That they be
takin and brocht to the Kingis grace presoun and their gudis fundin in the
saidis forestis to be escheit to the keiparis thairof, and inbrocht the two
part to the Kingis grace use, and the third part to the keiparis of the saidis
forestis. And gif they be negligent and fundin culpabill, To be callit and
punist thairfoir in their persounis and gudis, and tinsall of their officis.
And gif their be any Barron or other laudit man outher spiritual or temporal,
that hes hauit woddes or forestis of their awin, It salbe leiffull to them and
the keiparis thairof, to escheit all sic gudis, chat beis fundin in manner
foirsaid within their forestis to their use.

For brekaris of dowcatis, cuningharis, parkis and stankis. Ca. xiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that all they that brekis dowcatis,
cuningharis, parkis, stankis, and takis or steilis forth of the famine, dais,
cuningis, dowis, pykis, fische, hyuis and beis, without special license of the
awnar thairof, Salbe callit and punist thairfoir, as for thift at particular
diettis. And this act to exte^d to them, that are art, part, or geuis
assistance to sic misdoaris.

For brekaris of airdis and orchardis. Ca. xiiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the actis maid of befoir, aganis them
that brekis other me^nis orchartis and airdis, be put to executioun in all
punctis. And to be callit thairfoir at particular diettis.

Of slaying of hairis. Ca. xv.
ITEM It is ordanit, that the act maid of befoir, for slaying of hairis, be
obseruit and keipit in all punctis.

The remeid for destructioun of housis, manner placis, woddis, forrestis,
orchardis, airdis, and having of landis fallin in waird. Ca. xvj.
ITEM Because, It is vnproffitabill and inutile, to make lawis and statutis for
policy to be had, without the samin be keipit: And because sic ordour and
prouisioun, as is deuisit for policy, may failie be falling of landis in
waird, or giving of the samin in coniunctfie or lyferent: Thairfoir the Kingis
grace with auise of his three Estatis Ordanis the act maid thairupon, be the
may excellent Prince, King James the feird his father of may Nobill mind,
to be obseruit and keipit in all punctis, ratifeis and appreuis the samin. And
that all Schireffis, Stewartis, Baillies, and other Officiaris, both in
Regalitie and Rialtie, and siclyke spiritual me^ within their landis and to
Burgh, put the samin to executiou^ in all punctis: (That is to say) All
Officiares within the Rialtie and Lordis of Regaliteis under the pane, of
refou^ding to the heritouris of sic landis fallin in waird at their perfect
age, of all da^nage and skaith, that they sall happin to sustene throw their
negligence (they being requyrit thairto be the persounis, that is in waird or
his freindis). And gif the wardatouris, Ladyis of co^iunctifie or lyferent of
sic laudis, refusis to find souertie conform to the said act (they being
requyrit thairto) be the Schiref, Baillie, Stewart, Prouest or Alderman in
Burgh, That the said Schiref and Officiaris, ilk man within his awin boundis,
charge them to find the said souertie conform to the said act personally, or
be oppin proclamatiou^ at the heid Burgh of the Schire, quhair the saidis
landis lyis within. xxj. dayis nixt after they be chargeit thairto, under the
pane of wanting of the proffeit of all sic waird landis, coniunctifie and
lyferentis, to be inbrocht to the Kingis use, ay and quhill the said cautioun
be sufficiently fundin. And that the Lordis auditouris of the Checkar and
Thesaurar for the time inquyre diligently in every Checkar at all Schireffis
and vthers Officiaris foirsaid, at the making of their comptis, gif the said
cautioun be sufficiently fundin, and get certificatioun thairof.

Of reid fische, Smoltis and of slaying of Salmound in forbodin time. Ca. xvij.
ITEM Our Souerane Lord, ordanis the actis maid vpone them that slayis reid
fische, Smoltis and Salmound in forbodin time, and the panis co^tenit in the
samin, to be put to scharp executioun with this aditioun followand (that is to
say): It sall not be lesum to the Thesaurar and compositiouris in times
cumming, to compo^e or fine in Judgment or out of Judgment with the brekaris of
the saidis actis for les than the pane and unlaw contenit in the samin. And
that dictay be taken vpone all them, that are airt and part, causaris or
resettaris of the slaying of the said reid fische, Smoltis and Salmou^d in
forbodin time, siclyke as vpone the principal slayaris thairof. And because
the lang delay of Justice Airis, geuis greit occasioun of the breking of the
saidis actis: Thairfoir the Kingis grace sall send ane co^missioun generally
with the Justice Clerk, and sic other persounis as sall pleis his grace to
depute thairto, for halding of particulare diettis eirlie in the placis quhair
the said fische at slane, and ordanis all sic persounis to be arreistit to the
first Air, to compeir under the pane of rebellioun and putting of them to the
horn, and gif they compeir not, to put them to the horn, and denunce them
our Souerane Lordis rebellis. And that sic ordour of arreisting of sic
persounis be keipit, as it war in ane general Justice Air.

Of Cruuis and aris. Ca. xviij.
ITEM That the act maid be our Souerane Lordis father, quhome God assolie, and
vthers his progenitouris, anentis the halding of cruuis and fische aris, be
obseruit, keipit, and put to executioun in all punctis, with this additiou^,
That the resettaris and assistaris to sic persounis incur siclyke pane as the
principalis. And that siclyke process be had aganis them, as is deuisit and
statute aganis the slayaris of reid fi^che, Salmound and Smoltis.

Of Buschis for fisching. Ca. xix.
ITEM Our Souerane Lord Ordanis the act and statute maid of befoir for making
of Buschis for fisching, to be obseruit, keipit and put to executioun in all
punctis.

For hostillaris and trauellaris in the country. Ca. xx.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the actis maid of befoir be King James
the first, and vthers our Souerane Lordis predecessouris be obseruit, keipit,
and put to executioun in all punctis. And for eschewing of exhorbitant prices
taken of the Kingis liegis trauelland throw the Realm, and of the prices of
victuallis, flesche and fische: It is ordanit, that letters be direct to
command and charge all Prouestis, Aldermen, Baillies and Officiaris of
Burrowis, both to Regalitie and Rialtie, and als Lordis and vthers Barronis
that hes Burgh in Barronie, and hostillaris on their lands, That they cause
hostillaris both to Burgh and to land, ilk man within him self, and boundis of
his office: To have honest chalmers and bedding for ressaifing of all
passingearis and strangearis, passand and trauelland throw the Realm, weill
and honestly acculterit, with good and sufficient stabillis, with hek and
mangeir, corn, hay, and stray for their horse, flesche, fische, breid and aill,
with other furnessing for trauellouris, to be sauld vpone ane competent price,
and siclyke stuff, as is sauld co^mounlie in the cuntrie about, quhair sic
hostillaris dwellis. And that they set eirlie pricis thairupone, as the said
hostillaris may leif and sustene their ludgeingis, under the pane to be callit,
and punist thairfoir at the Kingis grace will. And that dictay be taken
heirupone, vpone the brekaris of this statute, to be callit at general Justice
Airis, or other particulare diettis, quhen the Kingis grace plesis.

Of studis and stude placis. Ca. xxj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, for the commoun weill of the Realm, that all
manner of persounis, hauand studis and stude placis within this Realm, make the
samin to be plenist, with stude meiris, and greit stallownis, for furnessing of
horse to all manner persounis within the Realm.

That na man sell nolt nor scheip to Inglismen, nor s^ud victuallis, fische,
nor salt in Ingland. Ca. xxij.
ITEM Because ane greit part of the Realm, and specially neir the Bordouris,
hes been their money eiris bygane in our Souerane Lordis les age vnplenist, and
ane greit part of the inland spuleit of their gudis, and the samin had and
sauld in Ingland be the theuis and tratouris, quhairthrow all manner stuff hes
growin to ane greit price and derth: And now our Souerane Lord putting ordour
of Justice, rest and tranquillity amangis his liegis, and that plenty of
gudis may grow amangis them: Hes ordanit and statute, with the auise of his
three Estatis in Parliament, that na manner of man in time cumming, sell nolt,
scheip, or other cattle auld nor oung, to any Inglismen be him self, or any
other mediat persoun, nor have or send the samin in Ingland to be sauld, And
that na manner of man send into Ingland, victuallis, fische, or salt, under the
pane of confiscatioun of all their mouabill gudis. And that all wardanis,
Prouestis, Baillies of Townis, and keiparis of portis and hauinis within the
Realm, make diligence, search and seik the brekaris heirof, under the pane of
tinsall of their officis, and presoning of their persounis eir and day enduring
the Kingis grace will. And gif any Inglisman will cum into this Realm with
their Schippis, to by victuallis, fische, or salt, the Kingis grace sall grant
to them his saif conduct to do the samin, gif his grace thinkis the samin
expedient, and the said saif conduct being obtenit: It salbe les^m to all
Merchandis, and vthers within the Realm to sell sic Merchandice to the saidis
Inglismen for gold and silver, or to bertour with other gudis sufficient
Merchandice.

Foirstallaris. Ca. xxiij.
ALswa, It is statute and ordanit, that na Foirstallaris be fundin by and
victuallis, fische, flesche, or other stuff or the samin be presentit to the
market, nor it into the market or the time of day statute and ordanit thairto,
under the pane of presoning of their persounis, and escheting of all sic gudis
coft or arlit be them, that is to say, the two part to the Kingis grace, and
the third part to the Schiref or Officiar of the Schire, Prouest, Baillies and
Officiaris of the Burrowis, or to any other that findis them doing in the
contrare heirof.

For the stanching of maisterfull beggaris with additioun. Ca. xxiiij.
ITEM For refraning of the multitude of maisterfull and strange beggaris: It is
ordanit, that the act maid thairupone of befoir be King James the first,
appreuit and ratifeit be vthers our Souerane Lordis predecessouris, be
obseruit, keipit, and put to scharp executioun in all punctis, with this
additioun: That na beggaris be tholit to beg in ane parochin, that are borne in
ane other, and that the heidismen of ilk parochin, make takinnis and gif to the
beggaris thairof, and that they be sustenit within the boundis of that
parochin, and that nane vthers be seruit with almous within that parochin, bot
they that beiris that takin allanerlie, under the panis contenit in the said
act, and that the Justice Clerk make inquisitioun and tak dictay heirupone at
every Justice Air. And als ordanis letters to be direct to command and charge
the Prouest and Baillies of Edinburgh, and all vthers Prouestis, Baillies of
Burrowis, Schireffis, and vthers Officiaris of the Kingis, to put this act to
executioun in all punctis, and the samin to be publist at all placis neidfull,
swa that nane sall pretend Ignorance or allege they knew not the samin in time
tocum.

The remeid for delivering of them that fleis to gyrth. Ca. xxv.
ITEM For the mair haistie expeditioun and punissing of them, that committis
slauchter vpone forthochtfellony, and sleis to gyrth conform to the act of
Parliament maid thairupone of be foir, quhilk often times takis nane effect,
throw pretense of excuse of the masters thairof, spiritual men that will not
deliver the saidis trespassouris to our Souerane Lordis Officiaris, conform to
the tenor of the said said act: Heirfoir it is statute and ordanit be the
Kingis grace, with auise and consent of the three Estatis of Parliament, that
all maisteris of gyrthis within this Realm, sall make sufficient responsall men
Baillies or maisteris of gyrthis under them dwelland at the saidis gyrthis or
neir thairby, quha salbe haldin in all times cu^ming to deliver all co^mittaris
of slauchter vpone forthochtfellony, that sleis to gyrth, and vthers
trespassouris, that brekis the samin, and may not bruke the privilege thairof,
conform to the co^moun Law and act of Parliament foirsaid, to our Souerane
Lordis Officiares, askand and desirand them to underly the Law conform to the
said act of Parliament. And gif the saidis Baillies faileis thairintill, to be
rigorously punist for their contemptioun in their bodyis and gudis, at our
Souerane Lords will. And that all masters of gyrthis spiritual me^, send to
the Justice clerk, the namis of their Baillies and maisteris of gyrthis depute,
and to be depute be them, that quhen any sic crimes ar co^mittit and done,
that letters may be direct to all Schireffis, Baillies, or Stewartis, within
quhais boundis the saidis gyrthis ar, to charge the saidis Baillies or
maisteris, to deliver to them the saidis trespassouris, conform to the act of
Parliament.

Priuilegeis of Burrowis. Ca. xxvj.
ITEM Our Souerane Lord, with auise and consent of his three Estatis of
Parliament, ratifeis and appreuis the actis maid of befoir, grantit to
Merchandis within Burgh.

Anentis Merchandis, that sailis incontrare the actis maid of befoir. Ca. xxvij*
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, be the Kingis grace and three Estatis of
Parliament, that the act and statute maid be vmquhile our Souerane Lord King
James the third, And als ratifeit and appreuit, be vmquhile our Souerane Lord
that last deceist of good mind quhome God assolie, Twiching Merchandis passand
with their Merchandice forth of the Realm, to France, Flanderis or, any other
parts: That na Merchand sail, without he have ane half last of gudis of his
awin, or else in governance as factour to other Merchandis, Be put to executioun
in all punctis in time tocum, after the form and tenor of the samin. And
ratifeis and appreuis the said act and statute now in this present Parliament.
And attour ordanis the Prouest or Baillies of Burrowis, situat at ilk port of
the Realm, to search and seik the persounis, brekaris of the saidis statutis.
And that they dis^re^ie ilk persoun brekar thairof, for the sou^e of. xx. pund,
to be applyit on this wise, that is to say, The ane half to our Souerane Lordis
use, and the other half to the Prouest or Baillies for their laubouris: And
that they make count thairof eirlie in the Checkar. And gif the Prouest or
Baillies be negligent in the exercing of their officis and powar geuin to
them, They salbe oblist to pay the said pane of. xx. pund for every man, that
passis and sailis in contrare the said act at that port, quhair they have
iurisdictioun. And als it is ordanit, that na Schipper, maisteris, awnar of
Schippes, ressaif any Merchand to saill in their Schippis, without they have
the namis of them in tikkettis, subscriuit be the saidis Prouest and Baillies
handis, under the pane foirsaid for ilk persoun that they ressaif in their
Schip, and that our Souerane Lords custumaris or any vthers, that plesis
accuse the saidis Prouest and Baillies gif they be negligent in the premissis
eirlie at the Checkar. And letters to be direct heirupone in dew form as
effeiris. And als, that letters be writtin to the conseruatour of the natioun
in Flanders, contenand the effect of this act, chargeing him, to send hame the
namis of all Merchandis resortand their in every Schip incontrare the tenor
of the said act to the Thesaurar, under the pane of tinsall of his office.

That na Schip saill with stapill gudis fra Symonis day and Jude, quhril
Candelmes. Ca. xxviij.
ITEM Our Souerane Lord ordanis, the act maid be King James the secund, be the
quhilk it is ordanit, that na Schip be frauchtit out of the Realm with any
stapill gudis, fra the Feist of Symonis day and Jude, unto the Feist of the
purificatioun of our Lady callit Candelmes, be obseruit, keipit and put to
executiou^ in all punctis, with this additioun: That the pane of them, that
cu^mis incontrare heirof, salbe in times cumming. xx. pund, to be rasit of ilk
persoun brekaris of the said act, Except it salbe leiffull, to send any kind
of Merchandice forth of the Realm in the time foirsaid, in any Schippis, that
bringis in salt or wine.

Of the chesing of Officiaris in Burgh, and bringing of the comptis of their
commoun gudis eirlie in the Checkar. Ca. xxix.
ITEM Because all our Souerane Lordis Burrowis ar put to poverty, waistit, and
destroyit in their gudis and policy, and almaist ruynous, throw fault of using
of Merchandice, and that throw being of outlandis men, Prouest, Baillies, and
Aldermen within Burgh for their awin particulare weill in consuming of the
commoun gudis of Burrowis, grantit to them be our Souerane Lord and his
predecessouris Kingis of Scotland, for the vphald of honesty and policy
within Burgh: It is heirfoir statute and ordanit, that na man in time cumming,
be chosin Prouest, Baillies, or Alderman into Burgh, bot they that are honest
and substantius Burgesses, Merchandis, and indwellaris of the said Burgh, under
the pane of tinsall of their fredome, quha dois in the contrare. And that na
man dwelland within Burgh purches Lordschip out of Burgh in any his actioun or
querrell, to molest, troubill, or gif feir and dredour to his nychtbour and
party, under the pane contenit in the actis and statutis maid thairupone of
befoir. And that all Prouestis, Baillies and Aldermen of Burrowis, bring eirlie
to the Checkar at the day set for giving of their comptis, their count bukis of
their commoun gudis, to be seen and considderit be the Lordis auditouris, gif
the samin be spendit for the commoun weill of the Burgh or not, under the panis
foirsaidis. And that the saidis Prouest, Baillies, and Aldermen of every Burgh
warn eirlie.xv. dayis befoir their cumming to the Checkar, all they quha lykis
to cum for examing of the saidis comptis, that they may argune and impung the
samin, as they plei^^, swa that all murmr may ceis in that behalf.

That na man troubill nor molest, Prouest Aldermen, Baillies, and Officiaris
within Burgh. Ca. xxx.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that na man, Earl, Lord, Barro^e, or other of
quhatsumeuer degree about and adjacent nychtbouris to Burrowis, molest,
troubill, nor inquiet the Prouest, Aldermen, Baillies and Officiaris of
Burrowis and Merchandis thairof, in using of their Francheis, liberteis, and
priuilegeis grantit to them be our Souerane Lord and his predecessouris Kingis
of Scotland, and in contrare the actis and statutis maid thairupone, under the
pane to be callit and accusit, as commoun oppressouris of our Souerane Lordis
liegis, at general Justice Airis, or private diettis and Justice courtis, as
salbe thocht expedient be the Kingis grace: And that the Justice Clerk tak
inquisitioun and dictay heirof, as effeiris.

That na man ride, bot in sober manner. Ca. xxxj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that because their hes been greit
inconuenientis and troubill wrocht in the cuntrie, be greit persounis, throw
conuocatioun of the Kingis liegis at courtis and gadderingis: That thairfoir,
that na man tak vpone hand, to ride to sic courtis nor gadderingis with ma
persounis, than they may sustene in houshald daily, except that it salbe
leiffull to Schireffis, Stewartis, Baillies, and vthers the Kingis Officiaris,
to ride with greitar number, for the executioun of Justice, and forth beiring
of the Kingis authority. And quha sa dois in the contrare, salbe callit
thairfoir incontinent at our Souerane Lordis instance, to be punist thairfoir
in his persoun and gudis, at his hienes will.

For malt makaris. Ca. xxxij.
ITEM Because our Souerane Lords liegis inhabitantis in the Burgh of
Edinburgh, and vthers repara^d thairto, ar greitlie oppressed and iniurit, be the
mal makaris of Leith, and vthers within and about the said Burgh, in selling of
their malt to hie and exhorbitant price, for four, five, or sex schillingis
hiear, than they by the beir: Thairfoir it is statute and ordanit, that the
saidis malt makaris in time cumming, sall make and sell their malt for competent
winning, takand two schillingis allanerlie mair for the boll of malt, than the
boll of beit is sauld, and not above, with certificatioun, that quha cummis in
the contrare heirof, That the Pronest and Baillies of Edinburgh, sall escheit
the said malt: And the said malt makaris takand mair, than two schillingis for
the boll above the boll of beir, quhilk sall make the different price, salbe
callit and punist thairfoir, as oppressouris of the Kingis liegis, and
particular Justice courtis salbe set to them thairfoir. And our Souerane Lord
sall gif commissioun to sic as plesis his grace best, to call all the said malt
makaris, brekaris of this statute and act, befoir them in the Tolbuith of
Edinburgh, to do Justice upon them, as they think expedient: And to cause the
said act and statute, to be obseruit, and keipit in all punctis.

Of craftismen, broustaris, fellacis of salt and victual within Burgh. Ca.
xxxiij.
ITEM Because the greit oppressioun daily done upon our Souerane Lordis
liegis, be cordownaris, smythis, bartaris, browstatis, and all other
craftismen, sellaris of victual and salt, compelland them to pay for their
stuff and warkmanschip exhorbitant pricis, to the greit skaith of al our
Souerane Lords liegis, bringand sic derth in the cuntrie, that the samin may
not be sustenit, And for remeid heirof: It is statute and ordanit, that our
Souerane Lord, sall gif ane co^missioun to certane his Lordis and vthers,
quhome his grace plesis best to sit, and with them the Prouest of Edinburgh,
and make sic statutis and ordinance, as they sall think may expedient for the
co^moun weill, to cause all craftismen within the Town of Edinburgh, and
vthers of the Realm, to make good and sufficient stuff, and sell the samin of
ane competent price, and to tak competentlie for their warkmanschip and
laubouris, gif they wirk ane other mannis stuff and matter. And to make all
sellaris of victual or salt, to sell the samin of ane ga^and price without
derth: And quha dois in the contrare, to punis them with all rigor, and the
saidis Co^missares to do Justice vpone the brekaris of their ordinancis, als
often as they heir murmr or complaint thairof, and to punis them in their
gudis, as they find the greitnes of the fault, as effeires.

That na man saill into Flandaris, bot twyse in the eir. Ca. xxxiiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, for the honesty of the Realm, weill and
proffeit of all our Souerane Lordis liegis, and specially his Burrowis and
Merchandis of his Realm, that na Schip be frauchtit, nor Merchandis saill
thairin with their gudis and Merchandice forth of the Realm in Flanderis, bot
twyse in the eir, that is to say, to the Pasche market and Rude market, under
the pane of ilk persoun cummand in the contrare heirof.xx. pund, to be rasit
and inbrocht to the Kingis grace use.

The declaratioun of the pley, betuix the Lairdis of Blairquhane and Gylestoun.
Ca. xxxv.
THE quhilk day, in the matter referrit be the Lordis of Sessioun to the Lordis
three Estatis of Parliament, for interpretatioun of certane Lawis of the Realm,
schawin and producit befoir the saidis Lordis of Sessioun, in ane actioun mouit
befoir them, and it dependand be James Kennedy of Blairquhane, aganis Thomas
Makclellane of Gylestoun, for the mailis and dewteis of the landis of
Castelcruke and Killimanoch with the pertinentis, lyand within the Schirefdome
of Wigtoun, pertenand to the said Thomas in heretage, haldin of the said James
immediately in chief, and throw his being at the horn attour eir and day, The
mailes and dewteis of the saidis landis be the Lawis of the Realm, pertenis
and sold pertene to the said James for the said Thomas lyfetyme. And because
the saidis Lawis war variant in their selfis, and thairfoir war referrit to the
interpretatioun of the Estatis of Parliament, gif the samin concernis simpill
slauchter or not, and sold have place in that matter or not, as at mair lenth
is contenit in the act maid thairupon, of the dait at Edinburgh the feird day
of March, The eir of God ane thousand five hundredth.xxxiiij* eiris: Both the
saidis parteis bing personally present with their procuratiouris and
foirspeikaris, the saidis lawis and vthers their ressounis and allegatiounis
being hard, seen and understand, the Lordis of articulis being rypelie anisit
thairwith: Findis, that the use in times bygane, hes been, that the mailis and
dewteis of the landis of them that hes been eir and day at the horn haldin of
other superiouris than the Kingis grace, eir and day being bypast, returnit
agane to the superiouris of the said is landis for the lyftyme of them, that
sustenit sic process of horning eir and day, as saidis: Except crimes of treson
and lose majesty. And findis that the saidis Lawis, sold be sa interpreit and
vsit in times cumming.

Anentis Justice Airis, and particulare diettis for certane special crimes.
Ca. xxxvj.
ITEM Our Souerane Lord, with auise of his three Estatis of Parliament, ratifeis
and appreuis the act and statute maid of befoir in his hienes Parliament,
haldin at Edinburgh, the tent day of Iulij. The eir of God ane thousand five
hundredth and.xxv eiris, anentis the setting of Justice Airis to the secund Air,
as Air and court peremptour and other punctis contenit in the samin, with
correctioun and additioun, as after followis. ITEM IT IS Statute and ordanit in
this present Parliament, because the process of Justice Airis, is sa lang and
prolixt; that in money eiris, parteis that are hurt and greuit, gettis in
Justice, trespassis and crimes passis vnpunist, quhilk is occasioun of money
persounis to commit crimes, traisting na haistie punitioun nor correctioun:
That thairfoir in time tocum the process of Justice Airis and Justice courtis be
peremptour at the secund Air or court, swa that fugitiuis not compeirand at the
secund Air or court, sold be and salbe denuncit the Kingis rebellis and put to
his horn, and all their gudis his escheit. And als because money persounis
indictit to Justice Airis, ar chargeit with souertie to Justice courtis, vsis
to absent them and fle, and may absent them and fle, swa that Crownaris can
not apprehend them personally to arreist them: In that caice in all times
tocum, it sall suffice the Crownar to cum to the dwelling place of the
persounis indietit, and their make them warning and charge, that they compeir
in the Justice Air than nixt to follow, to answer to sic accusatiounis of
crimes, as salbe impute to them, and thairefter vpone the nixt Sunday or
Festuall day following the said charge, that the Crownar make oppin and public
intimatioun of his warning charge and premunitiou^ maid to the saidis persounis
be their namis in their paroche Kirkis, quhilkis chargeis, premunitiounis, and
intimatiounis, sall stand to them for sufficient arreistmentis, the Crow nar
preuand the samin be his aith and ane witness, as auld consuetude is. And in
likewise the Kingis Officiaris make and warning to private Justice courtis of any
persounis for any crimes not descruand rebellioun, in caice of non finding of
souertie, that they keip the samin ordour and process, quhilk salbe haldin and
repute for sufficient souertie fundin under the pane of Law, the actioun not
beand for slauchter nor mutilatioun. And ordanis the Justice general vpone any
manner of crimes, committit or to be committit, to set Justice courtis
particulair, quhen neid is, for punitioun of particulair faultis and crimes
that occurris, sic as recent slauchter, mutilatioun, fire, reuising of women.
And as for depredatiounis, maisterfull reiffis, and spuleis, that particulair
diettis be set thairfoir at the discretioun of the Lordis, the matter being
first ciuilie decydit befoir them. And because diverse persounis in times
bygane hes rasit siclyke letters to particulair diettis, and hes absentit both
them selfis and the letters, and hes not cum to persew their actiounis, and
thairthrow hes abusit the Justice, and brocht the cuntrie to greit expensis.
For remeid heirof: It is ordanit, that in times cumming the keiparis of the
Signet, sall answer na letters for calling of any persounis and parteis, to sic
particulair diettis, bot gif the samin be subscriuit with the Clerk writtar to
the Signet, and Justice Clerk and his Deputis. And that the Justice Clerk or
his Deputis, sall tak sicker souertie of the parteis purchessares of sic
letters, that they sall bring the samin agane to them or the day set thairto,
dewlie execute and indorsat, under the panis contenit in the letters, that the
party is callit vpone. And gif any persounis be callit vpone mutilatioun, and
the samin be fundin na mutilatioun, The party persewar, sall content and pay
the unlaw of.x. pund, les or mair to the party persewit, and expensis to the
assise, at the discretioun of the Justice and his assessouris. And gif ane
party callis any multitude for slauchter, mutilatioun, or other crimes at sic
particular diettis, quhairby the innocentis, ar put to greit troubill, charge,
and expensis, and it be fundin that the said multitude is innocent of the deid,
the party persewar, sall pay ane unlaw of.x. pund, les or mair to the party
persewit, and expensis to the assise at the sycht and discretioun of the
Justice and his assessouris, as they think cause. And gif the purchessaris of
sic letters be not responsall in gudis for payment of the said expensis, their
persounis salbe put in presoun, and their to remane, eir and day, and further
enduring the Kingis grace will.

The additioun of the act of cursing. xxxvd.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit for augmenting, strenthing and helping of the
act maid vpone cursit folkis, and giving of the Kingis letters thairupone, and
to meit friuole appellatiounis: That the Kingis letters sall have place to
poynd and distrenie. etc. Suppose it be dewlie appelit, eir and day being
bypast, the appelland not bringand hame his commissioun within eir and day,
Cessante iusto impedimento. And the party quhomefoir the Kings letters sall
happin to be geuin, findand sufficient cautioun befoir the Lordis of counsall,
to refound the gudis and geir, that sall happin to be poyndit be vertew of the
saidis letters, gif it sall happin the sentence quhairupone the saidis letters
salbe geuin, to be retretit be the Judge delegat, notwithstanding any
appellatioun thairfra, the party appelland beand warnit and callit, to heir
the souertie and cautioun taken. And that the party appelland schawand befoir
the saidis Lordis the sentence retractatour, letters be direct, to poynd the
saidis souerteis thairfoir.

Declaratioun of Parliament, gif the Kingis grace hes actioun or not, aganis
the airis of them, that committis crimes of lose majesty. Ca. xxxviij.
THE quhilk day, Master Henry Lauder Aduocat to our Souerane Lord, exponit in
presence of the Kingis grace, and three Estatis of Parliament, how that his
grace had rasit Summoundis vpone the airis of vmquhile Robert Leslie, to heir
his name and memory deleit and extinct for certane punctis and crimes of lose
majesty, co^mittit and done be him or his d^eceis, and thairfoir all his gudis
mouabill and vnmouabill, pertening to him the time of the committing of the
said crime, and sensyne to be decernit to pertene to his grace. And because it
is murmurit, that it is ane novelty to raise summoundis and move sic ane
actioun aganis ane persoun that is deid (howbeit the commoun Law directly
prouydis the samin) nottheles for stanching of sic murmr, and that his grace
tendes on na sort, to move or do any thing, bot that he may justly be the
auise of the three Estatis: Thairfoir desyrit the saidis three Estatis to auise
thairupone, and that his grace may have the censement of Parliament, quhither
that he hes ane actioun to persew sic summoundis or not. The haill Estatis,
spiritual, temporal, and Commissaris of Burrowis, all in ane voice but
variance or discrepance, hes deliuerit and concludit, that his grace hes good
just cause and actioun to persew the said summoundis, and all vthers siclyke
summoundis of tresoun done and committit aganis his persoun and commoun weill,
conform to the commoun Law, good equity and reason: Notwithstanding their is
na special Law, act nor prouisioun of the Realm maid thairupone of befoir.

Ratificatioun and pronunciatioun of the actis of the last Parliament* Ca.
xxxix.
ITEM The Kingis grace, with the auise and consent of the three Estatis of
Parliament, Forsamekill, as their was diverse statutis, constitutiounis, and
actis maid in the last Parliament, for the honor of God and halie Kirk, weill
of our Souerane Lord, zele of Justice, and concerning the co^moun weill of the
Realm, and liegis thairof, quhilk remanit at that time vnpronuncit and
autorizat be his grace and three Estatis: Thairfoir hes deuisit, statute, and
ordanit, that the saidis actis be now pronuncit in his hienes presence and three
Estatis, swa that the samin may be keipit in time tocu^, as Law in this Realm,
with authority of the haill body of Parliament, of the quhilkis statutis the
tenouris ar precedent.

The Kingis grace reuocatioun. Ca. xl.
WE James be the grace of God King of Scottis, vnderstandand cleirlie the
privilege of the commoun Law, actis and statutis of our Realm, prouidit and
geuin to the successouris of all manner of perfounis, to revoke, casse, and
adnull all thingis done be them in their outheid and les age, quhairthrow they
ar greit lie and heuylie dampnageit and skaithit in their heretageis, be
unprudent alienatiounis, donatiounis, and benditiounis of the samin. And that
they may at their perfect age revoke the samin, and all thingis done be them
prejudicial in their minority and les age. And thairfoir our predecessouris
Kingis of Scotland at their perfect age of.xxv. eiris past, hes in times bygane
maid reuocatioun of all sic thingis that hes been done be them in hurt and
detriment of their Crown, landis, rentis, and possessiounis pertening to the
samin, and other thingis quhairintill they be circumuentioun war dampnageit and
skaithit: maid their reuocatioun, cassand and adnulland, all sic giftis,
alienatiounis and donatiounis: Heirfoir we at our perfect age of.xxv. eiris by
runnin, beand for the time forth of our Realm in the partis of France, maid
our general reuocatioun schortlie at Rowane, the third day of Aprile, the eir
of God ane thousand five hundredth.xxxvij. eiris, as at mair lenth is co^tenit
in ane instrument maid thairupone, subscriuit with the hand of master George
Cuke Notar public, of the quhilk the tenor followis. We for certane greit
and ressonabill causis moving us, and hauand respect to the weill of our Crown
and commoun weil of our Realm, reuokis all manner of giftis, infeftmentis, and
dispositiounis quhatsumeuer we have maid or hes been maid be our tutouris and
gouernouris, for the time, during our minority and les age, in quhatsumeuer
cause or caice, that they may cum under reuocatioun be the commoun Law or
consuetude of our Realm: Protesting solempnitlie, that our absence forth of
the samin at this time, and the solempniteis requyrit on that behalf not being
done, be to us na prejudice anentis the said reuocatioun, with the quhilkis we
dispense and suppleis all faultis thairwith be our kingly powar and authority
ryall, and will that this stand for our general reuocatioun of all manner
thingis done be us or our saidis tutouris. And the samin to be extendit in the
may ampill and large form, as any vthers reuocatiounis maid be our may
Nobill father or our progenitouris Kingis of Scotland. The quhilk our said
general reuocatioun, We in this present Parliament, with the auise and consent
of our three Estatis, ratifeis and appreuis, and it as after followis, reuokis,
cassis and adnullis in general and als in special.

IN THE First, we revoke, cassis, and adnullis, all infeftmentis, do natiounis,
alienatiounis, and dispositiounis maid be us, our tutouris or gouernouris, or
regentis in our les age in any manner of way in fee, fewferme or franktenement
of any landis, lordschippis, custumis, annuallis, fischingis, Burrow mailis,
and Castle wairdis annexed to our Crown, or any part thairof, alsweill geuin
be our father, quhome God assolie, as be us: to any persoun or persounis,
incontrare the actis maid thairupone of befoir. To be reducit agane to us and
to our Crown, be vertew of the actis and statutis maid of annexatiounis, and
after the form of the samin.

ITEM We revoke all alienatiounis of any rentis, landis, and heretageis annexed
to the principality and to the Prince secund persoun of the Realm maid be us
in manner foirsaid.

ITEM In likewise we revoke, cassis, and adnullis, all donatiounes,
alienatiounis, fewfermis, and giftis quhatsumeuer, in lyferent or vtherwayis in
our nonage of the landis, rentis, annuellis, or any vthers reuenois, that our
father had in his possessioun the time of his deceis be gift or vtherwayis, and
of all officis, sic as Chalmerlanreis, Bailliereis and custumareis maid for maa
eiris, bot fra ane Checkar quhill the count be maid in the nixt Checkar after
followand. And als all assedatiounis and takkis maid for langar termis nor five
eiris.

ITEM In likewise, we revoke and cassis all taillies maid fra the airis
general to the airis maill of any landis within our Realm aganis the Law and
good conscience.

ITEM We revoke all new infeftmentis of landis geuin in blanch ferme, that war
haldin of us of befoir, be service of waird and releif.

ITEM We revoke all Regaliteis and confirmatiounis of the Regaliteis, and of
all officis geuin be us in heretage, or be our father aganis the actis and
statutis, that na Regalitie sold be geuin in heretage, without auise and
deliberatioun of the haill Parliament.

ITEM We revoke all alienatiounis maid of any heretageis in our nonage, that
become lauchfullie in our handis be reason of forfaltour, bastardrie or
vtherwayis, and lyferentis geuin thairof in our minority.

ITEM We revoke all new creatiounis of landis, Barroneis, annexatiounis and
vnionis of diverse landis into fee, in prejudice of our dew service aucht to us
and our progenitouris of befoir. And siclyke we revoke, all dischargeis of
service of suitis of courtis aucht of auld to our progenitouris.

ITEM We revoke all new infeftmentis geuin of creatioun of Barroneis in the
landis and lordschippis annexit to our Crown.

ITEM We revoke all giftis and confirmatiounis geuin be us of quhatsumeuer
landis and heretageis be evil and falls sucgestioun, be the expreming of ane
falls cause, quhair gif they had been expremit ane true cause and the verity,
we had not geuin the samin. And thairthrow we are greitumlie and enormlie hurt.

AND Generally, we revoke, cassis, and adnullis all and quhatsumeuer thingis
done be us in our les age in detriment and harm of our saul and conscience,
hurting of the privilege of our Crown, prejudicial to the samin, and to us in
our patrimony thairof. And quhat the commoun Law and consuetude of our Realm
leuis us to revoke. And this our reuocatioun to be of als greit effect and als
largel^e extendit in general and in special, as any reuocatiounis maid be any
our progenitouris Kingis of Scotland of befoir. And specially be our derrest
father of good mind, quhome God assolie, and King James the secund. And
protestis, suppose we of our fauouris and benevolence, suffer any persounis or
persoun to use or possede any priuilegeis or possessiounis of landis, rentis,
and officis, that are fallin under our reuocatioun: It sall make na rycht to the
vsaris or haldaris thairof. Bot it salbe leiffull to us to put our handis
thairto, quhen ever it sall pleis us, but any contradictioun, be vertew of our
said reuocatioun, actis and constitutiounis of our Realm maid of befoir.

IN THE PARLIAMENT BEGVNNIN AND HALDIN AT EDINBVRGH, the third day of December.
THE eir of God. M. D. and XL. eiris.
That all Schireffis, and vthers Officiaris be present personally at the three
heid courtis eirlie. Ca. xlj.
FIrst, for the mayntening of Justice, and putting of good ordour thairto, out
throuch all this Realm: It is statute and ordanit, that all Stewartis,
Baillies, and Schireffis, hald all their three heid courtis be them self in
proper persou^, without they have just and lauchfull excuse throw being in the
Kingis grace service, and to testify the samin be his grace writing, or throw
seiknes, that they may not travel, And that the Kingis grace authority be not
lychtlyit, and his liegis want detfull administratioun of Justice: It is
siclyke statute and ordanit, that all Barronis and frehaldaris, that aw suit
and presence into the saidis courtis, to be their personally, and the absentis
to be amerciat with all rigor. And quha that aw bot suit, that they send their
sutouris, honest and qualifeit men, habill to decyde vpone any cause conformand
to the auld Law. And that the saidis Schireffis, Stewartis, and Baillies admit
nane vthers, as he will answer to the Kingis grace. And quha that cummis to the
court, that he answer for him self, and remane quhill the samin be done and
endit, and to pas vpone inqueistis and assisis, and assist to the Kingis
Schireffis, Stewartis, and Baillies, in the administratioun of Justice, and
doing of their officis and service, conform to their infeftmentis, as they
will answer to the Kings grace vpone their vttermaist charge.

Of the setting of temporal courtis. Ca. xld.
ITEM Because our Souerane Lord hes been, and is of good will and mind to have
Justice schortlie done to all his liegis, swa that throw lang process his liegis
be not lang taryit and vexit in greit expensis: Thairfoir hes statute and
ordanit, that all Schireffis and temporal Iugeis, sall in times cumming in all
personal actiounis, set their court peremptourlie vpone.xv. dayis. And direct
their preceptis thairupone, and at that day proceid summarie and de plano. The
party being warnit vpone.xv. dayis, and make sic process in all thingis, as is
vsit befoir the Lordis of counsall and Sessioun, notwithstanding any auld
Lawis, and constitutiounis maid thairupone of befoir. And all vthers matters and
actiounis to have sic process, as they have had in times bygane.

Of deputis to Schireffis and vthers Officiaris. Ca. xliij.
ITEM That all Schireffis, and vthers Officiaris of the Kingis within this
Realm, make their deputis ane or maa, good and wise substantious men of best
fame, knawlege, understanding, and experience within the Schirefdome, and leist
suspect: for quho^e they sall answer for administratioun of Justice to all
persounis indifferently. And that they cause their Deputis to be maid, creat,
and sworn in plane court, and ane act maid thairupone. And gif they co^tinew
their Deputis langer than for ane eir, that they cause them eirlie to be
sworn to their officis, for the administratioun of Justice at the heid courtis
after Michaelmes.

Anentis the indorsing of letters and preceptis. Ca. xliiij.
ITEM That all Schireffis, Stewartis, and Baillies, cause their Mairis and
Officiaris, quha sall execute the Kingis letters and chargeis, or their awin
preceptis, to have ane Signet, and in it grauit the first letter of their name,
or first of their surname, or else sum other thing, that salbe universal knawin
to be their Signet, with the quhilkis they sall Signet all letters and
preceptis execute be them, and indorsat in times tocum. And that na
indorsatioun sall have faith nor be admittit, bot they that are Signet with the
saidis Signettis. And siclyke, that all Officiaris of the Kingis have their
Signettis in manner foirsaid: And Signet all letters and chargeis execute and
indorsat be them, under the pane of depriuatioun of them fra their officis,
that makis any sic executiounis without their Signettis foirsaidis. And gif any
of their executiounis wantis their Signet, the samin sall have na faith.

The ordour of Summounding of all persounis in civil actiounis. Ca. xlv*
ITEM For eschewing of greit inconuenientis and fraud done to our Souerane
Lordis liegis, be Sumounding of them at their dwelling placis, and often times
falsely, and gettis never knawlege thairof: It is statute and ordanit, that in
times cumming quhair any Officiar or Schiref in that part, passis at command of
the Kingis letters or the Schireffis, Stewartis, Barronis, or Baillies precept
to summound any party, gif they can not apprehend them personally, they sall
pas to the et or dure of the principal dwelling place, quhair the persoun to
be summound dwellis, and hes their actual residence for the time, and their
sall desire to have entres, quhilk gif it be grantit, they sall first schaw the
cause of their cumming: And gif they can not get the party personally, they
sall schaw their letters or precept befoir the seruandis of the house, or other
famous witness, and sall execute their officis and charge, and thairefter sall
offir the copy of the saidis letters or precept to any of the seruandis,
quhilk gif they refuse to do, that they affix the samin vpone the et or dure of
the persounis Summound And siclyke gif they get na entres, they first knokand
at the dure.vj. knokis, they sall execute their office befoir famous witness, at
the said house and dwelling place, and affix the copy vpone the et or dure
thairof, as said is, quhilk salbe lauchfull and sufficient Summounding and
delivering of the copy, and the party nor Officiar sall not be haldin to gif
any other copy, bot at their awin pleasure. And every Officiar in his
indorsatioun, sall make mentioun of his executioun in manner foirsaid. And the
party at quhais instance, the letter or precept is direct, sall pay to the
Officiar executour, the expensis of the copy affixit, as said is. And salbe
taxit and geuin agane to him at the giving of the decreit or sentence, gif he
happinnis to obtene. And gif the Officiar beis fundin culpabill in the
executioun of his office, he salbe put in our Souerane Lordis presoun, and
punist in his persoun and gudis, at the Kingis grace will.

The electioun of Notaris. Ca. xlvj.
ITEM Anent Scribis and Notaris, both to land and Burgh. Because it is
understand to the Kingis grace, that the multitude of them generis ane greit
confusioun, money falsettis ar committit. For remeid heirof: It is statute and
ordanit, that every Schiref, with sic persounis as sall pleis the Kingis grace
to adione to them, sall call befoir them, all Notaris that are lawit men
within his Schirefdome and boundis of his office, and examine them, and quha
that are haldin to be famous and abill me^ to execute the office, that they be
admittit be ane act in Judgment. And that the said Schiref have ane buke, and
gar them that are admittit write their subscriptioun and signis manual in the
said buke, siclyke as they subscriue all instrumentis, and as they will use in
times cumming, and to discharge all vthers except them that are wrytaris,
Notaris, and Scribis in our Souerane Lordis courtis of Justice, both civil
and temporal, quha salbe admittit be the Chancellar, President, and Lordis of
counsall, and quha after the said discharge makis any instrument, the samin
salbe of nane auale, and have na faith, it beand opponit be the party, and not
beand prouin in the contrare, that the said Notar is admittit, as said is. And
that all Ordinaris cause siclyke to be done vpone all Notaris, that are
spiritual men within their diocie. And quha that happinnis to be maid Notaris
in times tocum, that they use not the said office of Notarie, unto the time
they cum befoir the Schiref or Ordinar, and get their admissioun, subscriue and
put their signis in the saidis bukis, as they will use in times tocu^, with
certificatioun to them and they failie, their instrumentis salbe of nane
auale, and make na faith.

The giving of sesingis. Ca. xlvij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit for eschewing of inconuenientis of giving of
sesingis be private Notaris, quhais namis ar often times unknown, and their
protocollis can not be gottin, in caice the principal instrument be tint,
destroyit, substractit and haldin away, for eschewing heirof: That all sesingis
be geuin in times cumming be the Schiref Clerk or his Deputis, quhomefoir he
sall answer and be nane vthers, vpone all preceptis that passis be the
Chancellarie. And all vthers sesingis to be geuin be famous Notaris admittit
thairto, and be nane vthers.

Of the admissioun of Notaris. Ca. xlviij.
ITEM Because their is in the act precedand greit credence and faith to be
geuin to the Notaris and Clerkis of court: It is statute and ordanit, that all
Schireffis, Stewartis, Baillies and vthers both to Burgh and land, present
their Clerkis and Notaris in presence of my Lord Chancellar, President, and
Lordis of counsall, to be examinat, sworn and admittit: Prouyding alwayis,
that they change or cheis as they pleis. And quha that beis new chosin to be
presentit and admittit, as said is.

That the protocollis of all sesingis be presentit eirlie in the Checkar. Ca.
xlix.
ITEM Anentis the act of Parliament maid of auld, quhair it is ordanit, that
all Schireffis bring with them at their Checkar comptis anis in the eir ane
buke contenand all sesingis geuin be them, at the leist, the day, the month,
of the giving of the said sesing, and the name of the landis contenit in the
samin, be eikit in this manner, That the Clerk of court cum with the said
Schiref or his Deputis in every Checkar, and bring the said buke with him,
subscriuit with his awin hand and sign manual, that the samin may remane in
the Regestre. Swa that the Kingis grace may know his tennentis, and all vthers
hauand entres, may have recours thairto.

Of falls Notaris and witness. Ca. l.
ITEM For punischement of falls Notaris, and them that beiris falls witness, or
that inducis any man to beir falls witness. And siclyke of them that makis falls
instrumentis, or causis make any falls instrumentis, or vsis the samin
wittandlie, That all sic persounis in times cumming, be punist in their
persounis and gudis with all rigor, siclyke as it is prouydit be the
dispositioun of the commoun Law, both Canoun, Civil, and statutis of the
Realm.

Of Notaris Ordinar in the Shiref court, or vtherwayis. Ca. lj.
ITEM For eschewing of greit inconuenientis, that daily occurris in the
reducing of process led befoir Schireffis, Stewartis, and Baillies of Burrowis,
Regaliteis and Barroneis, quhair their is often times producit and schawin
instrumentis contrare to vthers, that is to say, the instrumentis and actis
maid be the Scribe of the court beirand ane way, and instrumentis taken in
vtheris Notaris handis, beirand ane other way, and often times allegiance, that
was never hard nor understand to the Judge, his assessouris or vthers members of
court: Thairfoir in times cumming it is statute and ordanit, that all
instrumentis, notis and actis be maid and taken in the handis of the Scribe, and
Notar Ordinar of the court, or his Deputis. And gif any party will have ane
Notar with him, for mair security, at that Notar pas and stand within bar, in
quhais handis it salbe leiffull to any party, to tak documentis, togidder with
the Notar of court. And that ilk ane of them be insert witness to other, with
ane part of the may famous persounis assessouris or vthers members of court
being within bar, with sic other honest men as ar present, with certificatioun,
gif this form and fassioun be not keipit, that the instrument takin in any
vthers Notaris handis, nor the scribe of court, sall have na faith. And gif the
Notar and Scribe of court refusis to gif instrumentis, actis, or notis to any
persounis desyrand the samin, he sall tyne his office, and salbe callit and
punist in his persoun and gudis at the Kingis grace will.

For giving of commissiounis in prejudice of the Ordinar. Ca. lij.
ITEM Anent the article, geuin in be the Schireffis, that quhair they have
their officis in heretage, and greitumlie hurt be giving of commissiounis to
vthers Officiaris, in casis pertenand to their officis. And for remeid
thairfoir: The Kingis grace with the auise of his Estatis, hes ordanit, that na
commissioun be geuin in times cumming for serving of breifis, apprysing of
landis, bot to the Judge Ordinar. And gif any party sall happin, to gif in any
complaint, for the getting of commissiounis, for any cause that is ressonabill,
the said commissioun sall not be grantit, unto the time the said Schiref,
Stewart and Baillie be warnit to heir the co^missioun geuin, or else to allege
ane ressonabill cause, quhy the samin sold not be geuin.

Of lesing makaris. Ca. liij.
ITEM Twiching the article of lesing makaris to the Kingis grace of his
Barronis, greit men and liegis, and for punischement to be put to them
thairfoir: The Kingis grace with auise of his three Estatis, ratifeis and
appreuis the actis and statutis maid thairupone of befoir, and ordanis the
samin to be put to executioun in all punctis. And als statutis and ordanis,
that gif any manner of persoun makis any evil informatioun of his hienes to his
Barronis and liegis, that they salbe punist in sic manner, and be the samin
panis, as they that makis lesingis to his grace of his Lordis, Barronis, and
liegis.

The act of annexatioun of landis to the Crown. Ca. liiij.
ITEM Because it is understand, and weill auisitlie considderit be the Kingis
grace, and three Estatis of his Realm, beand assemblit in this present
Parliament, that the patrimony of his Crown and reuenois thairof beand
augmentit, is the greit weill and proffeit, both to the Kingis grace and his
liegis: And thairfoir it is thocht expedient, that our Souerane Lord, followand
the good exempill of his predecessouris, sold annex to his Crown, for the
honorabill supporte of his estate ryall, in all auenturis and caice, both in
weir and peax, sic landis and lordschippis, as ar now presently in his handis,
that are not annexed of befoir, and the saidis landis being annexed, to remane
perpetually with the Crown, may nouther be geuin away in see, nor
franktenement, to any persounis, quhat ever estate or degree they be of, without
auise, decreit, and deliverance of the haill Parliament, and for the greit
ressonabill causis, concerning the weilfair of the Realm, first to be auisit
and degestlie considderit, be the haill Estatis. And albeit, it sall happin our
Souerane Lord, that now is, or any his successouris Kingis of Scotland, to
analie and dispone the saidis Lordschippis, landis, Castellis, townis,
douatiounis, and aduocatiounis of Kirkis and hospitallis with their
pertinentis, to the Crown, as said is annexed, that the alienatioun and
dispositioun, salbe of nane auale. Bot it salbe leiffull to the King for the
time, to ressaif they landis to his awin use, quhen ever it lykis his grace,
but any process of Law, and the takaris sall refound and pay all proffeitis,
that they have taken up of they landis agane to the King, for all the time that
they have had them, with sic, other restrictiounis as is content in the actis
of Parliament, maid be his may Nobill predecessouris Kingis of Scotland, in
the annexatioun to the Crown. And thairfoir his hienes, with auise and
counsall of his three Estatis, hes annexed to his Crown, to remane thairwith in
mane foirsaid, their landis after following. In the first, the landis and
Lordschippis of all his Ilis, south and north. The two Kintyris, with the
Castellis pertening thairto, and their pertinentis. The landis and Lordschip of
Orknay, etland, and the Ilis pertening thairto, and their pertinentis. The
landis and Lordschip of Douglas, with the Castle, Tower and fortalice thairof,
donatiounis and aduocatiounis of Kirkis and beneficis, and their pertinentis.
The landis and Lordschippis of Craufurdlindsay, and Craufurd Iohne. The landis
and Lordschippis of Bonkill, Prestoun and Temptalloun, with Towris, fortalices,
landis, rentis, aduocatiounis and donatiounis of Kirkis.

The landis of Dun^ire. The landis and Lordschip of Iedburgh Forest. The landis
and Lordschip of Kerymure, with all their pertinentis.

The superiority of all and haill the Erldome of Anguse, and all vthers
landis, rentis, and possessiounis, quhilkis pertenit to Archibald sumtyme Earl
of Anguse the time of the said Erlis forfaltour, and now being in our Souerane
Lordis handis be ressoun thairof. The landis and Lordschip of Glammis, that are
not haldin of the Kirk. The lands of Baky, Balmukiteis, Tannades, Drumgleis,
Langforgund and Balhelweis with the Towris, Fortalices, aduocatiounis and
donatiounis of Kirkis and their pertinentis. The landis of Raclewch,
Quhitcampt, over and nether Howclewch. The landis, Lordschip, and Barronie of
Auendale, with the Tower and Fortalices thairof, aduocatiounis and donatiounis
of Kirkis, their annexis and connexis, and all their pertinentis, siclyke as
vmquhile James Hammiltoun of Finnart Knycht had and brukit the samin, befoir
the time of his forfaltour. The landis and Lordschip of Liddisdale, with the
Castle of Armytage, aduocatioun and donatioun of Kirkis, and their
pertinentis. The landis and Lordschip of Bothuile, with the Tower, Fortalice,
and their pertenentis.

Wappinschawingis to be twyse in the eir. Ca. lv.
ITEM Twiching the first article anentis the wappinschawing, It is thocht
necessar, that wappinschawingis be maid twyse in the eir out throw all the
Realm, that is to say, in the monethis of Iunij and October, at sic day or
dayis and place, as sall pleis the Schiref, Stewart, Baillies, Prouestis, and
Aldermen of Burrowis, to assign after the quantity of the Schire, gif the
moustouris can not be all taken on ane day. And that they make warningis thairto
vpone the premunitioun of xx. dayis. And that the saidis moustouris be taken be
the Schiref of the Schire, Prouest, and Baillies of Burrowis, and Baillies of
Regalateis, and vthers Commissaris, quhome the Kingis grace plesis to assign
to them. And because they have been sa lang out of use of making of
wappinschawing: It is thocht expedient, that the samin be maid thryse for the
first eir. And the first time to be on the morn after Law Sunday nixt to cum.

That the army of Scotland be vnhorsit except greit Barronis. Ca. lvj.
ITEM Anentis the manner of cumming of all our Souerane Lordis liegis to weir,
horsit and vnhorsit: The Kingis grace vnderstandis the greit hurt, skaith and
dampnage done in cumming of multitude of horsemen throw destructioun of cornis,
medowis, and hereing of pure folkis. And als the greit impediment maid be them
in the hoist, quhair that all men man fecht vpone fute:

Thairfoir hes statute and ordanit, that na manner of man have horse with him,
bot be reddy to gang on fute, fra the place that pleis the Kingis grace to
assign to be the first meting and assembling of his army, except carriage horse
allanerlie. And gif any man cummis on horsbake, or bringis his horse with him,
except for his carriage, as said is, that he incontinent send his horse hame
agane with ane rinnand boy, and with na fensabill man or habill of persoun to
beir wappinnis, under the pane of deid: Prouyding alwayis, that albeit this act
is maid general, the effect thairof sall not be extendit to Erlis, Lordis,
Barronis, and greit landit men, bot that they and sic vthers, as salbe thocht
expedient be the Kingis grace or his Lieutennentis, sall pas on horsbake quhair
ever the Kingis grace mouis with his army.

The manner of harnes, wappinnis and armor. Ca. lvij.
AND as to the manner of harnes and wappinnis, and how every man sold be armit
and wappinnit:

It is statute and ordanit, that all our Souerane Lordis liegis have wappinnis
and harnes, as after followis. In the first, that every Nobill man, sic as
Earl, Lord, Knycht, and Barrone, and every greit landit man, hauand ane
hundredth pund of eirlie rent, be anarmit in quhite harnes, lycht or heuie as
they pleis, and wapinnit effeirand to his honor. And that all vthers of lawar
rent and degree in the lawland, have Iak of plate, halkrik, or brigitanis,
gorget or pesane, with splentis, panse of mailie, with gluuis of plate or
mailie. And that all vthers our Souerane Lordis liegis, gentilmen vnlandit and
emen, have Iakis of plate, halkrikis, splentis, sellate, or steilbonet, with
pesane or gorget. And every man with sword, and that na manner of wappinnis be
admittit in wappinschawingis, bot speiris, pikis stark and lang of.vj. eluis of
lenth, Leith axis, halbartis, handbowis and arrowis, crosbowis, culueringis,
two handit swordis. And every man to be anarmit, as said is, under the pane
of.v. pund, to be taken of every landit man. l.s. of every gentilman; and
xx.s. of every eman man, als often as they be fundin faltous in the premissis.
And because it is understand, that their wappinnis and harnes may not be
compleitlie gottin at the first wappinschawing, that is to say, on the morn
after Law Sunday nixt tocum: Thairfoir it is dispensit be the Kingis grace, at
they make their schawingis and monstouris, with sic harnes and wappinnis, as
they have, or may conveniently get agane the said day.

Of armor conform to every mannis rent and substance. Ca. lviij.
ITEM It is ordanit for wappinschawingis in Burrowis, that every man hauand
ane hundredth pundis worth of geir, be anarmit in quhite harnes, and wappinnit
as landit men foirsaid. And every man within ane hundredth pundis worth of
gudis, and that may spend ten pund, be anarmit as gentilmen landit, and emen*
men in manner foirsaid, and under the panis above writtin.

That all persounis present in wappinschawing be writtin with the manner of
their armor. Ca. lix.
ITEM That na fraud be maid in making of the saidis wappinschawingis, and that
the Kingis grace may know the ordour of his pepill: It is statute and ordanit,
that every Earl, Lord, Barrone, Lord, and vthers cummand to the saidis
wappinschawingis, gif the namis of the persounis that sall cum with them
thairto in bill to the Schiref, Baillie, Stewart, Lord, or Baillie of
Regalitie, Prouest, Alderman, and Baillies to Burgh, or to any vthers, quhome
it sall pleis the Kingis grace to gif commissioun to with them, and that they
roll their namis in ane buke, with the manner of their harnes and wappinnis,
eirlie in every wappinschawingis, selit with their awin seill, and subscriuit
with their handis, send and deliver the samin to the Kingis grace, to be keipit
and co^sidderit, be quhome his grace sall pleis to gif the cure thairof. And
that all Lordis and Baillies of Regaliteis, do siclyke eirlie within the
boundis of their officis.

The premunitioun of wappinschawingis. Ca. lx.
ITEM That all our Souerane Lordis liegis, be warnit to the saidis
wappinschawingis vpone. xl. dayis warning for the first time. And eirlie at
every time thairefter vpone. xx. dayis.

The chesing of Capitanis in every parochin. Ca. lxj.
ITEM That executioun may be had throw all the Realm, amangis all our Souerane
Lordis liegis, for exercing of their persounis in ordour, swa that be leiring
of ordour and bering of their wappinnis in time of peax, they may be the mair,
expert to put them selfis in ordour haistelie, and keip the samin in time of
neid: It is thocht that this article is verray necessar to be prouydit: And
Thairfoir statutis and ordanis, that every Schiref, Stewart, Baillies,
Proueit, Aldermen and Baillies of Burrowis, Lordis and Baillies of Regaliteis,
at every wappinschawing, concur and sit down, with the Kingis grace
Commissaris, that sall happin to be depute to them, and they togidder to
consult with the may habill persounis of the Schire, and after that they have
rollit the namis of every man with their harnes and wappinnis, cheis ane
habill man for every parochin or man, as it is of greitnes, or for smallar
parochinis ane, quha salbe Capitane, or Capitanis, to the cumpanyis of the
saidis parochinis, and sall leir them to gang in ordour and beir their
wappinnis, and sall (...) their saidis cumpanyis twyse at the leist in every
month of the (...) of Maij, Iunij, and Iulij, at quhat dayis they sall think
^aist expedient, vpone halie dayis befoir nune. And als in all vthers monethis
gif they may gudlie, and their exerce them in manner foirsaid. And that na man
disobey the saidis persounis, Capitanis to be depute and chosin, as said is,
under the pane to be punist at the Kingis grace will. And that the saidis
Capitanis be chosin als often, as beis se^e expedient be the Schiref of the
Schire, Commissaris and cou^sall admittit to him to that effect.

Ane general remissioun grantit be the Kingis grace to all his liegis. Ca.
lxij.
ALswa our Souerane Lord understanding the greit occasioun and evil exempill
for the time geuin, to his Lordis, Barronis, and all his liegis, to commit and
do the time of his les age sic offensis and crimes of treson and vtherwayis,
quhilk deseruis greit and hie punischement, quhilkis as his grace vnderstandis
be the good and true service done be them to him, sen his cumming to perfect
age, they wald not have done nor rommittit. And because his grace thinkis that
he will not be vnremembrand and vngrait, for the good and thankful service
done to him be his saidis Erlis, Lords, Barronis, and liegis of all degreis,
hes remittit and forgeuin, and be the tenor of this act, remittis and forgeuis
to all his saidis liegis, all manner of crimes of treson done be them in our
Soouerane Lordis time that last deceissit, and his predecessouris Kingis of
Scotland, and in his hienes awin time, unto the day and dait of this present
act. The intelligence with Archibald sumtyme Earl of Angus George Douglas his
brother, and vmquhile Archibald Douglas of Kilspindie their Eme, sen the time
of y^ giving of dome of forfaltourre, aganis them allanerlie exceptit). And
thairfoir exhortis and prayis presently, all his Barronis and liegis, to be
true and thankful subjects unto his hicues, as he sall not faill, to be good,
thankful and loving King to them. And that the copy of this act
sufficiently extractit, sal be sufficient remissioun, without any other
particular writing.

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF THE FOIRSAID EXCELLENT PRINCE and King, Haldin at
Edinburgh the.XIIII. day of March. THE eir of God. M. D. and.XL. eiris.
For the honor of halie Kirk. Ca. lxiij.
ITEM To the confusioun of all heresy, that all the Sacramentis be haldin and
honourit, as they have been in all times bygane within this Realm, conform to
the Lawis and doctrine of halie Kirk.

For worschip to be had to the Virgin Mary. Ca. lxiiij.
ALswa, that the Glorious Virgin Marie, mother of our blissit Saluatour Christ
Jesus, be over all this Realm reuerendlie worschippit and honourit, and that
prayaris be maid to her, to make intercessioun to God Almychtie, Father, Son,
and halie Gaist, for the successioun, heill, weilfair and prosperity of the
Kingis grace, his Queen our Souerane Lady, and their prosperous successioun,
peax, unity and concord betuix our said Souerane Lord and all Cristin Princis,
and betuix them all to resist to the Inimeis of the faith Catholic, and
betuix his grace, his Estatis and liegis, and that his hienes and pepill may
remane consta^tlie in the faith, and follow the Law of God, conform to the
statutis and doctrine of halie Kirk, ressaifit and keipit be his predecessouris
Kingis of Scotland, and pepill in all times bypast, sen they first ressaifit
the samin, and siclyke prayaris to be maid to all Sanctis, in special and
general, and that worschip be had to them.

That na man argune the Papis authority. Ca. lxv.
ITEM That na manner of persoun, argune, nor impung, the Papis authority, under
the pane of deid, and confiscatioun of all their gudis mouabill and vnmouabill.

The Kingis grace exhortatioun in plane Parliament, for reforming of the Kirk
and Kirkmen. Ca. lxvj.
ITEM That because the negligence of divine service, the greit unhonesty in
the Kirk, throw not making of reparatioun to the honor of God Almychtie, and
to the blissit Sacrament of the Alter, the Virgin Marie, and all halie
Sanctis, and als the unhonesty and misreule of Kirkmen, both in wit,
knawlege, and manners, is the matter and cause that the Kirk and Kirkmen ar
lychtlyit and contempnit. For remeid heirof: The Kingis grace, exhortis and
prayis oppinlie, all Archibischoppis, Ordinaris, and vthers Prelatis, and
every Kirkman in his awin degree, to reform them selfis, their obedientiaris
and Kirkmen under them, in habit and manners to God and man. And that they
cause in every Kirk within their di^cie, under their iurisdictioun, cure,
reule, reparatioun and reparaling, to be honestly and substantiouslie maid and
done, to the honor of god Almychtie, the blissit Sacrament and divine service,
every Kirk after the quality and quantity of the rentis. And gif any persoun
allegeand them exemit, and will not obey nor obtempre to their superior, in
that behalf: The Kingis grace sall find remeid thairfoir, at the Papis halines,
and siclyke aganis the saidis Prelatis, gif they be negligent.

That na private conuentiounis be maid to dispute of the Scripture. Ca. lxvij.
ITEM That nane hald nor lat be haldin in their housis, nor vtherwayis,
congregatiounis or conuenticulis, to commoun or dispute of the halie Scripturs,
without they be Theologis appreuit be famous vniuersiteis or admittit thairto,
be them that hes lauchfull powar. And in likewise, that na man, quhatsumeuer
state or conditioun he be, luge, ressaif, chereis, nor favor any heretic. And
in caice any ressaifis or knawis them quhair they ar, sall incontinent denunce
and accuse them, to the nixt lauchfull Officiar of Justice, under the pane to
be punist as heretikis.

Of persounis abiurit of heresy. Ca. lxviij.
ITEM Gif any heretikis, have been abiurit or vtherwayis, have been admittit
lauchfullie to penance and grace nane of them sall conuers nor commoun with
vthers of any matters tuiching our halie faith, under the pane to be haldin as
relapse. And alswa, that na persoun, that hes been suspectit of heresy,
howbeit they be ressaifit to penance and grace, sall in this Realm exerce,
have nor bruke any honest estate, degree, office, nor Indicature, spiritual nor
temporal in Burgh nor without, nor na wayis salbe admittit to be of our
counsall.

Of fugitiuis suspect and summound for heresy. Ca. lxix.
ITEM Quhair any beis suspectit of heresy, and lauchfullie summound to answer
of the samin, ar fugitive, that they salbe banist and condampnit as heretikis.
And it sall not be leiffull to na man to solist, procure, nor make supplicatioun
for their purgatioun, reductioun or grace, under the pane to be punist as
fauouraris to the heretikis, and the saidis persounis fugitiuis not to be
admittit to purgatioun, nor vtherwayis to reconciliatioun, nor it to remane or
co^uers in our Realm. Alswa we forbid to all our subiectis, quhatsumeuer
estate they be, to present requeistis, make any supplicatioun, defend, supply,
dite or write, counsall, help, procure or make aduocatioun, solicitatioun,
laubour or assist any wayis to na heretikis fugitiuis or banist thairfoir, or
other contaminate persounis, that are or have been of the said repreuit sect of
hereseis to have or impetrate any grace of their errouris, quhilk we will na
way be accordit to them, under the pane to be punist as assistaris to hereseis.

That nane dishonor the Imagis of Sanctis. Ca. lxx.
ALswa to stop the private congregatioun and conue^ticulis of heretikis, quhair
their errouris ar spread that any man that first reuelis incontinent, or accusis
any that hes keipit the said conuentiounis, gif he have been ane of them him
self, for the first time he salbe quite and absoluit thairof, swa that he be
ane good Cristin man, and have the rycht faith, promittand him never to
intromet with the said errouris in time cumming, In caice he be not of the said
congregatioun, than he sall have ane part of the confiscatioun of him that he
accusis, as the Lordis thinkis expedient to statute and ordand. And this to be
extendit to all them that reuelis or accusis any heretikis, to have ane part
of their confiscatioun. And that na man may pretend Ignorance heirof, that it
be commandit under panis, to all Schireffis, Prouestis, and Baillies of
Burrowis to publis be oppin proclamatioun their actis, at the heid placis of
their iurisdictioun, twyse in the eir.

That nane dishonor Imagis. Ca. lxxj.
AND Anentis Imagis of halie Sanctis, canonist and appreuit be the halie Kirk:
It is statute and ordanit, that nane brek, cast down, no any vtherwayis treit
Irreuerendlie, nor do any dishonor, nor Irreuerence to the saidis Imagis.

Ratificatioun of the Institutioun of the College of Justice. Ca. lxxij.
THE Kingis grace with auise of his three Estatis of Parliament understanding,
that the institutioun of his College of Justice, and actis maid thairupone, ar
rycht proffitabill to his grace and all the haill Realm. And thairfoir now
after his perfect age of.xxv. eiris, Hes ratifeit and appreuit, ratifeis and
appreuis for him and his successouris, the institutioun of the said College of
Justice, and actis maid for administratioun of Justice thairin. And als
ratifeis and appreuis, the confirmatioun, ratificatioun, approbatioun of our
halie father the Pape, of the erectioun of the said College, and of the gift of
all beneficis, rentis, geuin and to be geuin, ^^^gnit and to be assignit, to
the honest sustentatioun of the said College of Justice. And all priuilegeis,
grantit and to be grantit thairto, be our said halie father the Pape and his
hienes. And will and ordanis for the causis foirsaid, that the said College and
institutioun thairof remane perpetually, for the administratioun of Justice to
all the liegis of this Realm, and to be honourit siclyke as any other College
of Justice in other Realms. And attour, gifis and grantis to the President,
Vicepresident, and Senatouris, powar to make sic actis, statutis, and ordinancis
as they sall think expedient, for ordouring of processis, and haistie
expeditioun of Justice. And in absence of President and Vicepresident, will
that the eldest in ordour of the saidis Senatouris, be President for the time,
to the effect, that their may be na stop of Justice any time, throw absence of
the said President and Vicepresident.

Hagbutis and other small Artailierie to be furnist within the Realm. Ca.
lxxiij.
ALswa because the schot of gunnis, hagbutis, handbowis, and other small
artailierie now commounlie vsit in all cuntreis, both be sey and land in their
weiris, is sa felloun and vneschewabill to the pith of hie curage, of Nobill
and vaileant men, quhais actis and deidis can not be schawin, without contrare
prouisioun be had of instrumentis of weir and battle: It is Heirfoir statute
and ordanit be the Kingis hienes, with auise and consent of the three Estatis of
his Realm, that every landit man within the samin, sall have ane hagbute of
found, callit hagbute of crochert with their calmes, bullettis and pellokis of
leid or irne, with powder convenient thairto, for every hundredth pund of land,
that he hes of new extent. And he that hes bot ane hundredth merk land, sall
have two culueringis. And ilk man hauand forty pund land, sall have ane
culuering, with calmes, leid, and powder, ganand thairto, with trestis to be at
all times reddy, for schuting of the saidis hagbuttis* And that every man of
leuing foirsaid, sall have ane man or maa, as he may furneis, for schuting of
the saidis hagbutis and culueringis, and to leir vthers to schute the samin.
And that every man have the said artailiery effeirand to his leuing,
substantiouslie furneist, as said is, reddy within.xviij. monethis nixt after
the publicatioun of this act, under the pane of dowbling the price, that will
by ilk piece of the said artaillierie, to be applyit to the Kingis grace use,
for bying of the samin to him self. And the saidis.xviij. monethis being past,
that every man make his moustouris with the said artaillierie weill furneist,
as said is, at the nixt wappinschawing thairefter to the takaris and
ressaifaris of the saidis wappinschawingis. The quhilk being done, they sall
not be bundin to bring their said artaillierie to any wappinschawingis
thairefter, bot gif they be specialie requyrit their to, be the Kings grace
wryttinges, or be the Schiref, or vthers Iugeis Ordinar, under the Kingis
grace. And that this act be extendit, alsweill to the Lordis of Regalitie and
their tenentis, as to them of the Rialtie. And that every Kirkman, furneis
siclyke artaillierie in manner abone writtin, to be schawin at wappinschawings,
as said is, after the auale and quantititie of their temporal landis And that
their artaillierie, remane at the Castle, Abbay, or Mansioun of the Bischop,
Prelate, or Kirkman, to be keipit their and left to his successor, quha salbe
haldin to vphald the samin, for the defense of the Realm. And because it can
not be now cleirlie vnderstandin of the aua^e and quantity of every Burgh,
quhat artaillierie, and how mekill they may furneis: Thairfoir it is statute
and ordanit, that letters be writtin, to the Prouestis, Baillies, Aldermen of
every Burgh of this Realm, signifyand unto them this statute and ordinance
of the manner of furnessing of artaillierie, to be maid be the Barronis and
Kirkmen, chargein them thairfoir, to conuene their counsall, auise and
conclude, quhat artaillierie, and in quhat manner ilk Burgh may perfurneis and
refer agane to the Kingis grace within.xv. dayis nixt after they be chargeit
thairto, that his hienes may be auisit thairwith, with certificatioun, gif they
failie thairintill, his grace sall cause them to be taxt after the auale and
quantity of their commoun gudis and substance, for furnessing of the said
artaillierie. And ordanis, that Ladyis of coniunctfee and lyferent, sall
furneis effeirand to the quantity of their leuing, for support of the Barronis
and vthers landit men, in the perfurnessing of the said artaillierie.

For hame bringing of hagbuttis. Ca. lxxiiij.
ITEM Because nouther artaillierie nor harnes, can be furneist nor maid reddy
conform to the actis maid their upone, without the samin be brocht hame be
Merchandis: Thairfoir it is statute and ordanit, that every Merchand sailand
forth of this Realm, or sendand his gudis extending to ane last of gudis, sall
bring hame als often as he saillis, or sendis his gudis, at every time two
hagbuttis of crochert or maa, as his pak may furneis, with powder and calmes
for furnessing of the samin, or else als mekill metal, as will make the saidis
hagbuttis, with powder effeirand thairto And siclyke harnes, for furnessing of
our Souerane Lordis liegis, in manner foirsaid.

For inbringing of the Kingis grace property and casualiteis. Ca. lxxv.
ITEM For inbringing of our Souerane Lordis property and casualiteis eirlie to
his Checkar, swa that his Thesaurar and Comptrollar, may be weill furneist, for
perfurnessing of all sic thingis quhilkis pertenis to them to do. And that in
times cumming, sall have na cause to compleynie, bot in their awin default and
negligence: It is heirfoir statute and ordanit, that all Schireffis, Stewartis,
Custumatis, Chalmerlanis, and vthers intromettouris with our Souerane Lordis
property, Compeir at every Checkar, quhair it salbe haldin for the time, and
make their comptis and full payment, Eque with the Rollis, befoir their
departing, ilk ane for their awin part, sa far as they intromet with, or mycht
intromet, be ressoun of their office, doand their diligence thairto, under the
pane of warding of their persounis, their to remane enduring the Kingis will.
And as for the casualiteis, ordanis all Schireffis, Stewartis, Baillies, and
vthers, that aucht to make count, rekning, and payment of the samin, To compeir
eirlie in the Checkar, be them selfis or their sufficient Deputis, at the day
assignit to them be the precept, and their make count, rekning, and payment of
all sic casualiteis, and do their utter diligence thairto, be the
considderatioun of the Lordis auditouris, and depart not quhill, they have done
the samin, under the pane foirsaid.

Anentis committaris of slauchter, mutilatioun and resset of the Kingis
Rebellis. Ca. lxxvj.
ALswa anentis the executioun of the actis of Parliament maid of befoir, be our
Souerane Lordis progenitouris, vpone them that committis slauchter and
mutilatioun, and for apprehensioun of our Souerane Lordis liegis rebellis, and
diligence to be maid thairin be Schireffes and vthers Officiaris of the Realm,
both in Regalitie and Rialtie: It is statute and ordanit, that the actis maid
thairupone of befoir, be put to executioun in all punctis, and that all
Schireffis, Stewartis, Baillies, and all other Officiaris, both to Burgh and
to land, alsweill in the Regalitie as in the Rialtie, do their diligence to
search and seik all our Souerane Lordis rebellis and being at his horn, quhair
ever they may be apprehendit within their Bailliereis, tak and bring them to
our Souerane Lordis Justice, to be iustifeit for their demeritis, under the
pane of tinsall of their officis for three eiris, gif they have the samin in
heretage. And gif they have the samin for eiris, to tyne the samin for ever,
and to be accusit vpone their diligence in that behalf in the Justice Airis, or
at other particular diettis, as sall pleis the Kingis grace. And that na manner
of man within this Realm, wilfully or wittanlie, resset, supply, mantime,
defend, or do fauouris, to any of our Souerane Lordis Rebellis, and being at
his horn within their house, landis, boundis, or Bailliereis, under the pane of
deid, and confiscatioun of all their mouabill gudis, and to be callit and
accusit heirupone, outher at Justice courtis, or particular diettis, as saidis.
And gif the Officiaris of the Regalitie, beis fundin negligent (they being
requyrit heirto) it salbe lesum to the Kings Schireffis to put the said is
actis to executioun within the said Regalitie, after the form and tenor of
the samin: And that the Justice Clerk inquyre diligently heirupone, and tak
dictay, as effeiris.

For stanching of stouth, thift and reif. Ca. lxxvij.
ALswa because the crimes of thift, stouth and reif, is sa commounlie vsit
amangis the Kingis liegis, and for stanching of the samin: It is statute and
ordanit in this present Parliament, that quhair any of the Kingis liegis is
playntous, and complenis vpone ane theif, that he hes reft or stollin his geir
or his mennis, and is in service or obeisance of any man, and schawis the samin
to the man that he is in service with, and wald atteche him to the Law for the
samin. This man that this theif or reuar, is in service with, or findis him
with him, or under his obeisance, salbe haldin and oblist, to produce and bring
the theif to the Lawis, befoir the Justice, Schireffis, or any vthers that hes
cognitioun, to do Justice vpone sic persounis, committaris of sic crimes, and
dayis and placis affixit to them, to underly the samin, or else sall deliver
the said theif and renar to the complenar, to be brocht to the Law and
iustifeit, as said is. And gif the master or sustenar of this theif or reuar,
refusis to do the samin, He salbe haldin art and part takar of his evil
deidis, and salbe accusit thairfoir, as the principal theif or reifar. And als
sall restoir and satisfy to the complenar, the gudis reft and stollin fra him.
And gif this complenar, after that he have attachit this theif, or be deliuerit
to him, as said is, wald concord with the said theif, and tak thif^bute and put
him fra the Lawis, in that caice he sall underly the Lawis, and be accusit
thairfoir, as the principal theif or reuar. And gif he attachis and accusis
him of the said thift and reif, and beis fundin innocent thairof, the said
complenar, salbe haldin and oblist, to gif to the said man (that he sclanders
innocentlie) ten pundis for amendis of the said sclander.

For eschewing of victuallis derth of flesche and fische. Ca. lxxviij.
ALswa it is statute and ordanit, that na manner of persoun to Burgh nor to land
by any manner of fische in market, nor other placis, to pak or pele quhill. xj
houris of the day, and fra.xi. houris, to two houris after nune, it sall be
lesum to by fische, and pak or pele the samin, as they think may expedient.
And nottheles, that all our Souerane Lordis liegis cagearis, and vthers within
that time of the day, be seruit for their money of fische, to the furnessing of
the cuntrie. And siclyke, fra two houris after nune, to sax houris at euin, it
sall not be lesum, to by, pak, or pele, the saidis fische, bot that all our
Souerane Lordis liegis at the saidis times of day, may be seruit of all manner
of fische, and by the samin for their silver, for sustentatiounis of their house
and serving of the cuntrie about. And that na manner of persoun in this Realm,
Merchand or vthers, send or have any manner of quhyte fische forth of the samin,
bot it salbe lesum to strangearis to cum within this Realm to by the samin fra
Merchandis and fremen of Burrowis, with reddy gold and silver, or be bartouring
of sufficient Merchandice with the saidis Merchandis, or with the awnaris
thairof, for their sustentatioun necessaris of their housis allanerlie. And
quhair any persounis hes any fische pakkit or pelit, that they be reddy at all
times to sell the samin to all our Souerane Lordis liegis for furnessing and
sustentatioun of their house and the cuntrie, under the pane of confiscatioun of
the samin. And to stop the rising of pricis in mercatis within Burrowis: It is
statute and ordanit, that the Prouestis, Aldermen and Baillies of Burrowis in
every marcat day, pas and visie the mercatis, and set ane price on all manner
of fische, according to the ^yme. And that they diligently inquyre, gif any
manner of persoun gefis arlis or money on any manner of fische, that cu^mis to
the market, to the effect, that the samin may be sauld vpone ane hiear price,
that they tak and punische the saidis persounis, as coparis, foirstallaris, and
regratouris aganis the commoun weill.

Tuiching the Crown of wecht. Ca. lxxix.
ALswa anentis the article makand mentioun, that the Crown of the son, is
commounlie refusit within this Realm, it want and ane grane of the wecht,
howbeit the samin hes passage in other cuntreis, and specially in the Realm
of France, it weyand the Crown of the King: Thairfoir it is thocht expedient
for the commoun weill, that na manner of persoun within this Realm, refuse to
tak the said Crown of wecht in payment, or for change for other money after the
form of the Kingis grace proclamatioun, suppose the samin want ane grane
allauerlie, under the pane to be callit and accusit as brekaris of the said act
of Parliament. And because sindrie persounis hauand quhite money, will not
change for gold, bot takis thairfoir.xij. d. or mair for wissilling of the
samin, in hie contemptioun of our Souerane Lord and his authority: Heirfoir it
is statute and ordanit, that all manner of persounis, hauand quhite money, that
they reddylie change all manner of gold contenit in our Souerane Lordis cry, of
the prices contenit in the samin, without taking of any manner of money
thairfoir, under the pane foirsaid, and to be accusit as oppressouris of our
Souerane Lordis liegis. And that na manner of man tak vpone hand, for to ronge
the Crown of wecht, or any other gold of wecht, throw pretense of this act,
under the pane to be accusit and punist as falsaris of the Kingis grace money,
conform to the commoun Law and statutis of the Realm.

For stanching of derth of wine, salt and tymmer. Ca. lxxx.
ALswa tuiching the exhorbitant derth and pricis of wine, salt and tymmer: It
is statute and ordanit, that the Prouest, Baillies, and counsall of Burrowis,
quhair any Schippis or strangearis arriuis, or sall happin to arrive in times
cumming, ladin with wine, salt or tymmer, conuene with the Merchandis that aw
the saidis wine, salt and tymmer, and by or set ane price vpone the samin
ressonabill, that na manner of man, freman or vnfreman, by any of the saidis
wynis, salt or tymmer, bot fra the saidis Prouest and Baillies or awnaris
thairof, and the pricis being maid be them, as said is, na man to by quhill
the Kingis grace be first seruit, and his grace and Officiaris being contentit
for samekill as will pleis them to tak to our Souerane Lordis use allanerlie,
that all Nobill men of the Realm, sic as Prelatis, Barronis, and vthers
gentilmen of the samin be seruit of the samin prices. And thairefter all and
sindrie our Souerane Lordis liegis be seruit vpone the saidis prices. And gif
any man cummis incontrare heirof, or foirstallis the saides wynis, salt or
tymmer, the samin to be eschetit to the Kingis grace. And gif the Prouest,
Baillies and counsall beis fundin negligent in the exercing of their officis,
they to tyne the samin, and not to bruke office nor honor for the space of
three eiris th airefter. And gif any freman or other Scottis man, dwelland
within this Realm, bringis hame any wynis, salt or tymmer, vpone their awin
adventure, that the Prouest, and Baillies of Burrowis, at the enter of the
Schippis in the bukis of the town, see and considder their Merchand billis,
and how the saidis wynis, salt and tymmer was coft and sauld, and siclyke
considder their vncoistis and fraucht, and thairefter set ane competent price,
how the samin may be sauld, and as they ordane, that the samin be sauld, of the
samin price and na hiear. And that the Prouest and Baillies do diligence to
inquyre and get wit in dew time of eir, how wine, salt and tymmer is sauld and
coft in other cuntreis, that they may make the prices the better, effeirand to
the gudnes of the stuff.

Tuiching the hospitallis. Ca. lxxxj.
ITEM Anentis the hospitallis: It is deuisit, statute and ordanit, that the
actis of Parliament maid thairupo^e (...), our Souerane Lordis may Nobill
progenitouris be put to executioun in all punctis, and that certane visitouris
be maid, to the effect, that they may pas and consider the fundatioun of all
hospitallis, and to cause the samin be keipit conform to the first fundatioun,
and the saidis visitouris to be namit be the Kingis grace.

For policy in Edinburgh. Ca. lxxxij.
ALswa tuiching the reparatiounis and mending of deformiteis within the town
of Edinburgh, and specially, quhair their is commoun passage and entres,
quhairby all strangearis and vthers our Souerane Lordis liegis, passis and
repassis: It is thocht expedient, and als it is ordanit, that the Prouest,
Baillies and counsall of Edinburgh, gar warn and charge all manner of
persounis, that hes any landis, bigingis and waistis vpone the west side of
Leithwynde, That they within eir and day, big and repair honestly their saidis
waistis and ruynous housis. And that they begin to the samin within three
monethis, and that they end the samin within eir and day, or else sell the samin
to vthers to be biggit, within the said space. And to charge them that are
knawin personalie, and all vthers be oppin proclamatioun at the market croce of
Edinburgh, with certificatioun to them, and they failie, the saidis Prouest
and Baillies, sall cause the saidis landis, tenementis, and waistis to be
apprysit, and sall sell the samin to any that will by them, and pay the prices
thairof, to the awnaris. And gif na man will by them, It salbe leiffull to the
saidis Prouest and Baillies, to cast down the saidis waist landis, and with
the stuff and stanis thairof, big ane honest substantious wall, fra the port
of the nether bow, to the Trinity College. And it sall not be leiffull in
times cumming, to any manner persoun to persew them, nor their successouris
thairfoir, nor pretend any rycht or interes thairto in time tocum, nouther for
the principal land, nor for annuellis awing forth thairof. And because the
Eist side of the said wind, pertenis to the Abbot and Convent of Halyrudehous:
It is ordanit, that the Baillies of the Cannongait, gar siclyke be done vpone
the said Eist side. And als because of the vilitie, that cummis be s^aying of
flesche be the fleschouris dwelland on the Eist side and teming interellis of
beistis, generand corruptioun: It is thairfoir ordanit, that the samin be
forbidden, be the Prouest and Baillies of Edinburgh and Cannongait, under the
pane of confiscatioun of all sic flesche slane be them in manner foirsaid.

Anent the meill market of Edinburgh. Ca. lxxxiij.
ITEM Because the market of meill, and vthers victuallis of the town of
Edinburgh, is commoun vpone the hie gait to the sycht of all manner of
persounis, strangearis and vthers, and that ane multitude of vile, dishonest and
miserabill creaturis, conuenis to the said market daily, to get their
sustentatioun and leuing: Thairfoir it is thocht expedient, that the said meill
market be remouit of the hie gait, in sum honest, ganand and convenient place,
quhair the nychtbouris of the said town and vthers the Kingis liegis may
conuene, for selling and bying of sic victuallis in time tocum.

The panis of Iugeis that dois wrang. Ca. lxxxiiij.
SVA it is statute and ordanit, that for samekill as it hes been heuilie
murmurit to our Souerane Lord, that his liegis hes been greitlie hurt in times
bygane be Iugeis, both spiritual and temporal, quha hes not been allanerlie
Iugeis, bot plane solistaris, partial counsallouris, assistaris and part
takaris with sum of the parteis, and hes taken greit geir and prosseit:
Thairfoir it is statute and ordanit in times cu^ming, that all Justice
Schireffis, Lordis of Sessioun, Baillies of Regaliteis, Prouest and Baillies of
Burrowis and vthers Deputis, and all vthers Iugeis spiritual and temporal,
alsweill within Regaliteis as Rialtie, sall do true and equal Justice to all
our Souerane Lordis liegis, without any partial counsall, rewairdis or buddis
taking, forther than is permittit of the Law, under the pane of tinsall of
their honor, fame and dignity, gif they be taintit and conuictit of the
samin. And gif any manner of persoun murmuris any Judge, temporal or spiritual,
alsweill Lordis of the Sessioun as vthers, and preuis not the samin
sufficiently, he salbe punist in semblabill manner and sort, as the said Judge
or persoun quhome he murmuris, and sall pay ane pane arbitrall, at the will of
the Kingis grace or his counsall, for the infaming of sic persounis: Prouyding
alwayis, gif ane spiritual man faileis, that he be callit befoir his Judge
Ordinar.

Prouisioun and panis of them committand fraud in the alienatioun or
vtherwayis. Ca. lxxxv.
ITEM For eschewing of inconuenientis, that often and diverse times happinnis in
this Realm, of the new inuentie craft and fal^et committit and done daily be
them that fellis their landis or disponis the samin, ex titulo oneroso, that
puttis their barnis or other friend and persoun in state of the samin, befoir
the dait of the selling or giving thairof to vthers, as said is: Heirfoir it is
statute and ordanit, that quha sellis and disponis any landis or annual rentis
to any manner of persoun, for any cause quhair warrandice may fall, and puttis
vthers in private state thairof, not be resignatioun in the Kingis grace
handis, nor be confirmatioun with precept past forth of the Cha^cellarie, nor
be plane resignatioun in the ouerlordis handis, or confirmatioun of the
ouerlord, and the persoun, that happinnis to get their landis, and brukis the
samin peciablie eir and day be lauboring, manuring and vptaking of the mailis,
proffeitis and dewteis, and swakennit heretabill possessour thairof eir and
day: The persoun or persounis hauand private state and sesing of the saidis
landis, sall never be hard, to clame the samin, aganis the secund heritabill
possessour for any cause, bot to persew his interes aganis the principal geuar
and his airis. And the persoun sellar or geuar, to be callit and declairit
infame, at the Kingis grace instance, and to be punist in his persoun and
gudis, at the Kingis grace will and pleasure. And gif the ouerlordis ressaifis
dowbill resignatiounis wittanlie, to the effect abo^e writtin, they to be
punist siclyke. And this act to be extendit to them, that makis dowbill
assedatiounis, and dowbill assignatiounis.

The remeid aganis them, that lyis out of their landis, and will not enter, in
defraude of their creditouris. Ca. lxxxvj.
AND anent the remeid to be put, to the fraud daily co^mittit be heretouris
of them that are deid, and ar awand greit soumes of money to sindrie persounes
their creditouris, and the saidis airis fraud^ullie lyis forth, and will not
enter to their landis, swa that they may be distreineit for the saidis debtis,
in caice they be not distreineabill in vthers mouabill gudes Thairfoir it is
statute and ordanit, that letters salbe direct be deliverance of the Lordis of
counsall, and at the instance of any complenar, to command and charge the
saidis heretouris (they beand of perfect age) to enter to their landis, eir and
day being past, after the deceis of their father or predecessouris, quhome to
they succeid, to enter to the samin, within.xl. dayis nixt after their charge.
And faileing thairof, letters salbe direct to the Schiref of the Schire and his
Deputis, to appryse the saidis landis to the saidis creditouris, for the saidis
debtis (gif they be liquide). The quhilk process of apprysing, sall have als
greit strenth, force and effect, as the saidis airis, war enterit thairto, and
the saidis apprysit landis, to be haldin of the immediate superior thairof:
Prouyding alwayis, that it salbe lesum to the saidis heretouris and their
successouris, to redeem the saidis landis, within seuin eiris, conform to the
act of Parliament, maid thairupone of befoir, and after the tenor thairof in
all punctis.

Anent the privilege of Burrowis. Ca. lxxxvij.
ITEM It is deuisit, statute and ordanit, that the auld priuilegeis of
Burrowis, be obseruit and keipit, anentis Merchandis and Merchandice, conform
to our Souerane Lordis Lawis, statutis and actis of Parliament maid of befoir,
and ratifeis and confirms the samin in this present Parliament, with all
priuilegeis grantit to them be our Souerane Lord, and his may Nobill
progenitouris of good mind, quhome God assolie.

Of pakking and peling. Ca. lxxxviij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that na persoun use pakking nor peling of
woll, hydis, nor skinnis, lose nor laid outwith fre Burgh and privilege thairof.

Anent forth having of money of the Realm. Ca. lxxxix.
ITEM Our Souerane Lord, with auise of three Estatis of Parliament, ratifeis and
appreuis, the actis and statutis maid of befoir, anent the forth having of
money, forth of the Realm, be Prelatis, Kirkmen and vthers, in furnessing of
their expeditiounis and besynes, bot that the finance thairof, be maid be
Merchandis.

Of mesuris of fische. Ca. xc.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that ane bind and mesure be maid for Salmound,
hering and keling. And that the samin be keipit throw all the Realm. And that
the said mesure, be conform to the actis of Parliament, and to that effect,
that ilk cowpar have ane birning Irne of his mark, to mark ilk barrel, and
siclyke the town to have ane serchour, quhilk sall have the townis mark in
keiping, to birne ilk barrel, swa that our Souerane Lordis custume thairof be
not defraudit. And gif any fische, Salmound, hering, or keling, beis found in
sic barrellis vnmarkit, the samin to be escheit, and siclyke the tume treis,
that ane half to our Souerane Lord, and the other to the town.

The panis of them that tynis the pley. Ca. xcj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that gif any persou^ perfewes ane other within
Burgh, that the tynar of the cause, pay the winnaris expensis, to be modifeit
be the Judge, conform to the commoun Law, and daily practike of the Lordis of
counsall.

Anentis conductioun of craftismen. Ca. xcij.
ITEM Because it is heuilie murmurit, that all craftismen of this Realm, and
specially within Burrowis, vsis sic extorsioun vpone vthers our Souerane
Lordis liegis, be ressoun of their craftis and private actis and
constitutiounis, maid amangis them selfis contrare the commoun weill, and in
greit hurt, prejudice, dampnage and skaith to all the liegis of this Realm:

Thairfoir it is statute and ordanit, that in all times cumming, it salbe lesum
to all our Souerane Lordis liegis, that hes any biggingis or reparatiounis to
be maid, for the making of policy in this Realm, outher to Burgh or to land,
to cheis good craftismen, fremen or vthers, as he thinkis may expedient for
ordouring, bigging and ending of all sic warkis. And gif any craftismen
beginnis the said wark, and dilayis to end the samin, that the persoun that
causis to big the said wark, or reparatioun foirsaid, to cheis and tak vthers
in their placis als often as neid beis, to perfurneis and end forth the said wark
for policy of the Realm. And that na impediment be maid to sic craftismen,
vsand their craft, as said is, be any other of the said craft within this
Realm, under pane of tinsall of their fredome, and breking of the actis of
Parliament. And that the Prouest and Baillies of all Barrowis, tak inquisitioun
heirupone, and put this act to executioun in all punctis.

For drawaris of claith. Ca. xciij.
ALswa it is statute and ordanit anentis drawaris of claith, and litstaris of
falls colouris, That in every Burgh, their be ane qualifeit man chosin, to
seill all claith, and sall have for his laubouris of ilk steik seilling.xij. d.
And gif any drawaris of claith, beis apprehendit, that ane half of the saidis
gudis, to be our Souerane Lordis escheit, and the other half to the Burgh, and
the said drawaris within Burgh, for the first fault, to tyne their fredome for
eir and day: And for the secund fault for ever. And siclyke of them outwith
Burgh dingand calk, creische, ^^aland or cardand claith, that the samin be
eschetit, and they haldin to refound the skaith to the awnaris. And gif the
said scillar beis fundin culpabill, seilland insufficient color or drawin
claith, he to tyne his fredome, and to be punist in his persoun and gudis.

For foirstallaris. Ca. xciiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, gif any foirstallaris be apprehendit,
foirstalland any manner of Merchandice, victuallis, pultrie or gudis
quhatsu^euer within the fredome of Burgh, that the Officiaris of the said Burgh
escheit the samin, the ane half to our Souerane Lordis use, and the other half
to the Burgh, conform to the act of Parliament maid heirupone of befoir. And
that na other Officiar have powar thairto, within the boundis of fre Burgh.

Anentis wechtis. Ca. xcv.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that na Burgh have ane wecht to by with, and
ane other to sell different in wecht thair^ra, bot that all Burrowis have ane
universal wecht of the stane, both for bying and selling of all stuff in
time tocum.

Annexatioun of landis to the Crown. Ca. xcvj.
OUR Souerane Lord with auise and consent of his three (...)es, hes annexed the
lands under writtin, to remane perpetually with his grace and his
successouris, as patrimony of his Crown, with all clausis, restrictiounis and
prouisiounis, siclyke as is contenit in the annexatiounis of vthers maid be his
hienes in his last Parliament, and be his predecessouris Kingis of Scotland*
And will that the samin be haldin as for express in this present act. Off the
quhilkis landis the namis followis, that is to say. All and haill the landis of
Cromar, and Bray of Mar. All and sindrie the landis of Hinderland, with the
Tower and Fortalice of the samin and their pertinentis, aduocatiounis and
donatiounis of Kirkis and Chaplaureis. All and sindrie the landis and Barronie
of Eistwemis, Tower and Fortalice of the samin, aduocatioun and donatioun of
Kirkis, tennentis, tenandreis, partis, pendiclis, annexis, connexis and
pertinentis thairof. And all other and sindrie landis, quhilkis pertenit to
vinquhile James Coluile of Eistwemis Knycht, the time of his deceis, and now
pertening to our Souerane Lord, be ressoun of dome of forfaltour geuin
thairupone. And als the landis of Bukhaum, except samekill thairof, as pleis
the Kingis grace, to gif to the Abbot and Co^uent of Dumfermling in excambium
for ane part of their landis of wester Kinghorne beside the brint Island,
conform to the Charters to be maid thairupon. And als except it salbe lesum to
our said Souerane Lord, to set his said annexed landis in few, for augmentatiou^
of his eirlie rent, conform to the act of dissolutioun maid in this present
Parliament.

The dissolutioun of the union, for setting of fewis. Ca* xcvij.
ITEM Because it is thocht be the Kingis grace, and the haill three Estatis of
this Realm, that the setting of his andis both annexed and vnannext in few, is
to the greit proffeit of his Crown, swa the samin be maid in augmentatioun of
his Rentall: It is thairfoir statute and ordanit be our Souerane* Lord and his
three Estatis of this present Parliament, that it salbe lesu^ to his hienes, to
set all his proper landis, both annexed and vnannext in fewferme, to any
persoun or persounis, as he plesis, swa that it be not in diminutiou^ of his
Rentall, grassummes or any other dewteis, bot in augmentatioun of the samin,
and to set them with sic clausis, as he thinkis expedient, and to be geuin
according to the conditioun foirsaid. And that the Landis, that he settis in
his time, as said is, stand perpetually to the airis, after the form of their
conditioun. And that this statute endure for the lyfetyme of the King our
Souerane Lord, that now is, allanerlie, swa that the landis that he settis in
his time, with the conditiounis foirsaidis, sall stand perpetually. And after
his deceis the annexatiounis quhilkis ar maid of befoir, sall return agane to
the awin nature, swa that his successouris sall not have powar, to annalie nor
set in few mair than they had befoir the making of this statute.

HEIR FOLLOWIS CERTANE ACTIS AND CONSTITVTIOVNIS, MAID be our Souerane Lord
King James the fyft, with auise of his three Estatis, in diverse his Parliame^tis
in his les age. And now seen over agane be the Lordis of his Articlis, and
fundin be them, good and ressonabill. And thairfoir ordanit be our said
Souerane Lord, to be collectit, ratifeit and appr^uit be his hienes, and
ordanit to be insert in the bukis of his present Parliament, to be geuin forth
with the laif of his actis of Parliament. And nottheles, the strenth and effect
of them to have been sen the first constitutioun.
That na faith be geuin to euidentis selit, without subscriptioun of the
principal or Notar. Ca. xcviij
ALswa it is statute and ordanit, that because mennis selis may of adventure be
tint, quhairthrow greit hurt may be generit to them that aw the samin: And
that mennis selis may be feineit, or put to wryttingis after their deceis, in
hurt and prejudice of our Souerrane Lordis liegis: That thairfoir, na faith be
geuin in time cumming, to any obligatioun, band, or other wrytting under ane
seill, without subscriptioun of him that aw the samin and witness, or else gif
the party can not write, with the subscriptioun of ane Notar thairto.

Anentis birning of Cornis, rasing of fire, and renysing of women. Ca. xcix
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the committaris of the crimes of fire
rasing and reuysing of women, be put under souertie to the Law, like as the
crimes of slauchter and mutilatioun. And in caice of non finding of souertie,
to denunce them Rebellis, like as men slayaris. And als because the birning of
cornis in barn airdis, is sa greit offense aganis the commoun weill: That
thairfoir, their be never respect nor remissioun geuin in time tocum, to any
persounis that birnis cornis in stakis or barnis, bot the committaris thairof,
to be iustifeit to the deid, or banist the Realm for ever.

Anentis them that brekis or passis contrare the Kingis grace priuilegeis
grantit to him be the sat of Rome. Ca. c
ITEM Anentis the article maid to provide, how the auld actis and statutis,
maid aganis them that dois co^trare the Kingis privilege, grantit to his
predecessouris and successouris, be the sege of Rome, and specially temporal
men, that are contrare the saidis actis in lychtlying of the Kingis authority,
makis finance and furnessing to the persounis brekand and hurtand our Souerane
Lords privilege, quhat ordour salbe takin aganis Scottis Clerkis, remanand in
Rome, that standis contrare our Souerane Lordis privilege: It is statute and
ordanit in this present Parliament, that the statutis and actis maid thairupone
of befoir aganis them passand contrare our Souerane Lordis privilege, be
obseruit and keipit in time tocum. And that dictay be takin vpone the brekaris
of any of the saidis actis to vnderlie the Law for the samin, the third day of
the nixt Justice Air of the Schire, quhair the brekaris dwellis, or vpone.xv.
dayis warning, befoir our Souerane Lordis Justice principal or his Deputis,
quhen and quhair they salbe summound thairto, be our Souerane Lordis letters,
swa that Justice salbe extremely done vpone them passand incontrare the
privilege grantit to the Kings hienes, and brekand the actis and statutis maid
thairupone, after the form and tenor thairof.

The nerrest of the kin, to have the gudis of them that deis vntestat, without
prejudice of the Quot. Ca. cj.
ITEM Anent the article proponit, forsamekill as often times oung persounis deis,
that may not make testamentis, the Ordinaris vsis to gif their executouris
Datiuis to their gudis, quhilkis intromettis thairwith, and withdrawis the
gudis fra the kin and freindis, that sold have the samin be the Law: It is
statute and ordanit, be the three Estatis of this present Parliament, that
quhair any sic persounis deis within age, that may not make their testamentis,
the nerrest of their kin to succeid to them, sall have their gudis, without
prejudice to the Ordinaris anent the Quot of their testamentis.

That na Legate be ressaifit in this Realm. Ca. cij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, be the three Estatis of this present
Parliament, that na Legate nor Legatioun, be ressaifit in this Realm, bot be
auise of our Souerane Lord, and vnderstandin be them for the commoun weill of
the samin, conform to the auld actis of Parliament maid thairupone of befoir.

The market dayis for selling of breid in Edinburgh. Ca. ciij.
ITEM Because of the greit repair in Edinburgh throw resorting of our Souerane
Lord, his liegis and vthers strangearis, and it is necessar, that they be
prouydit of breid, good and sufficient stuff: Thairfoir it is statute and
ordanit, that their be ouklie three market dayis for selling of breid within the
said town, that is to say, monounday, wednisday and friday ouklie, vpone the
quhilk dayis, it salbe leiffull to all our Souerane Lordis liegis, both to
Burgh and to land, to cum vpone the said market dayis, to the said town, and
sell their breid for reddy money, without troubill or iniuris, to be done to
the persounis cummand with their breid, to the effect foirsaid.

Three market dayis for selling of flesche. Ca. ciiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that their be three market dayis ouklie in the
said town, for selling of flesche, That is to say, Sunday, monounday, and
turisday ouklie all manner of persounis, both to Burgh and to land, salbe fre
to cum and sell flesche for reddy money, for the furnessing of our Souerane
Lord and his liegis, and vthers repairand to the said town.

For talloun. Ca. cv.
ITEM Forsamekill, as it was statute and ordanit of befoir, that na talloun
sold be had forth of the Realm, for the eschewing of derth of the samin,
nottheles the talloun is caryit forth in greit quantity, quhilk hes rasit
exceidand derth in the cuntrie, puttand the stane of talloun, to ane dowbill
price or abone: Thairfoir it is statute and ordanit in this present Parliament,
that na persoun nor persounis, tak vpone hand in time tocum, to carry any
talloun forth of the Realm, under the pane of tinsall of all their gudis
mouabill, cummand incontrare heirof. And that all custumaris at every port of
the Realm, quhair Schippis ar frauchtit, make serchouris, to search and seik
all Schippis, and quhair any talloun beis Schippit or brocht to the Schippis;
to be caryit forth of the Realm to escheit the samin, that is to say, that ane
half to their awi^ use, that apprehendis the talloun, and that other half to
our Souerane Lordis use. And that the custumaris make count heirupone eirlie in
the Checkar. And als that they aduerteis our Souerane Lordis Thesaurar of the
persounis awnaris of sic talloun eschetit, swa that he may inbring the remanent
of their gudis mouabill to our Souerane Lordis use, for their contemptioun. And
in likewise, that na manner of man, fleschour nor vthers, to Burgh nor to land,
tak vpone hand, to rynde, mylt nor barrel talloun, under the pane of tinsall
of all their gudis.

Of them that counterfatis the Kingis money. Ca. cvj.
ITEM Forsamekill, as diverse wickit evil auisit persounis, feineis and
counterfatis our Souerane Lordis money, quhilk may return to the greit
dampnage of this Realm, without remeid be prouydit thairfoir in time:
Thairfoir it is statute and ordanit, that all Prouestis, Aldermen, Baillies and
Officiaris of Burrowis, search and seik vpone all market dayis and other times
necessare, all persounis that can be apprehendit, hauand falls money, or
cou^terfatis the Kingis Irnis of cuinie. And bring or send them to our
Souerane Lordis Justice, to be Iustifeit for their demeritis, after the form
of the Lawis of the Realm, maid vpone falls cuineouris.

Anentis them, that takis placis of Bischoppis and Abbais after their deceis.
Ca. cvij.
SVA in the first, for the honor of God and halie Kirk, our Souerane Lord with
auise of the three Estatis, ordanis that the fredomes, priuilegeis and
Immuniteis of halie Kirk, and all spiritual persounis, be obseruit and keipit
in honor, worschip and dignity, for the time of our Souerane Lord, that now
is, like as hes been in the time of his may Nobill progenitouris of good
mind, quhome God assolie of befoir, with this additioun, That forsamekill, as
quhen Prelatis, sic as Bischoprikis or Abbais, happinnis to waik, the
nominatioun thairof, pertenis to our Souerane Lord, and the prouisioun of the
samin, to our halie father the Pape: Nevertheless, evil disposit persounis in
troublus times, hes put handis and takin Bischoppis Castellis, Palices, and
Fortalices at their awin hand, be their awin authority, and but our Souerane
Lordis command, consent or letters, at times quhen Bischoprikis waikis and
vthers, and in likewise enteris in Abbais and takis them, and puttis the samin
in keiping in secular mennis handis, but consent, command or letters of the
Kingis grace, and als but command, auise or desire of the Conuentis of sic
Abbais, in hie displesure of God Almychtie, our halie father the Pape, and in
hie contemptioun of our Souerane Lordis authority, quhairthrow the Kirk and
Kirkmen ar heuylie hurt and dampnageit: Thairfoir it is statute and ordanit in
this present Parliament, that quhatsumeuer persoun or persounis, in any time to
cum takis any Bischoppis placis, Castellis or strenthis, or enteris be their
awin authority in Abbais, to hald tha placis, but our Souerane Lordis command,
letters or chargeis, or desire of the Conuentis thairof, at times quhen sic
Bischoprikis or Abbais waikis, or any other time, they not waikand, but the
Kingis authority, they sall incur the crime of treson and lose majesty, and
salbe callit thairfoir at the Kingis pleasure vpone their forfaltour, and to
tyne their lyuis, landis, heretagers, and gudis mouabill, and vnmouabill,
honor and officis, because the Kingis grace is haldin and bundin, to defend
the halie Kirk and Kirkmen, in their just actiounis.

The Kingis grace ordinance for imprentin of his actis of Parliament. Ca. cviij.
HEIR our Souerane Lord hes ordanit, that the actis of Parliament maid be his
hienes, be publist out throw all his Realm. And that all Schireffis,
Stewartis, Baillies, Prouestis and Baillies of Burrowis, and vthers his liegis,
may have the copyis thairof, and pretend na Ignorance throw misknawing of the
samin: Hes ordanit his Clerk of Registre, to make ane autentyk extract and copy,
of all the saidis actis, sa far as concernis the commoun weill, under his
subscriptioun manual, to be Imprentit, be quhat Prenter it sall pleis the said
Clerk of Registre to cheis. And it sall not be lesum, to any other Prenter, to
Imprent the samin within this Realm, or without the samin, or bring hame to be
sauld, for the space of* vj. eiris nixt to cum, under the pane of confiscatioun
of the samin: Prouyding alwayis, that the said Prenter to be chosin be the said
Clerk of Registre, as said is, have our said Souerane Lordis special license
thairto.

Thomas Dauidson than chosin Prenter, first Imprentit their the viij. dayof
Februar the eir of God ane thousand five hundredth xlj. eiris.

Their ar the true copyis, of the actis of Parliament, maid be our Souerane Lord
King James the fyft. Extractit forth of the bukis of Parliament, at command of
the act maid thairupone, be Master James Foulis of Colintowne, Clerk of our
Souerane Lordis Registre, counsall and Rollis, under his sign and
subscriptioun manual.

IACOBVS FOVLIS.

DISTICHON.
FAMA secunda ferat, Iacobum ad sydera quintum,
QVO regnante, bonum coelitus omne venit,
ALIVD.
PACE bonus, belloque potens, Iustiss^mus orbis.
HOC regnum quintus, Rex Iacobus habet.

HIC FINIVNTVR STATVTA PARLIAMENTORVM REGIS IACOBI QVINTI. ET SEQVVNTVR STATVTA
PARLIAMENTORVM EXCELLENTISSIMAE PRINCIPIS MARIAE SCOTORVM REGINAE.
IN PARLIAMENTO EXCELLENTISSIMAE PRINCIPIS ET DO. NOStrae Mariae Reginae
Scotiae tento apud Edinburgh Decimo tertio die Men sis Martij Anno Do.
Millesimo Quingentesimo Quadragesimo secundo Per Magnificum Principem Iacobum
Comitem Arraniae Dominum Hammiltoun Tutorem ac Gubernatorem Regni tribus Regni
statibus presentibus.
QVARTA dies Parliamenti. 15. Martij. 1542.

Passing of signatouris throw the seilis, after the Kingis deceis. Ca. j.
MY Lord Governor with auise of the three Estatis of Parliament, ratifeis and
appreuis the act maid at Edinburgh the.xviij. day of Ianuar last bypast,
tuiching the passing of all signatouris concerning infeftmentis throw the
Selis: And siclyke of the respectis, remissiounis and vthers, as is contenit in
the said act, and after the form and tenor of the samin: And prorogattis the
term contenit in the said act, for rasing of the saidis Seilis: siclyke all
summoundis to be rasit under the quarter Seill, quhill the first day of August
nixt tocum. Off the quhilk act the tenor followis. At Edinburgh the.xviij. day
of Ianuar, the eir of God ane thousand five hundredth.xlij. eiris. The quhilk
day it is thocht necessare and expedient be the Lordis of counsall at the
command of my said Lord Governor for the commoun weill, and weill of sindrie
Lordis, Barronis and landit men, and vthers our Souerane Ladyis liegis, quha
obtenit befoir the deceis of our Souerane Lord, quhome God assolie, signatouris
of new infeftmentis of their landis be resignatioun, alienatioun,
confirmatioun, and als remissiounis, and maid compositiounis thairfoir with
consent and auise of the Thesaurar, and was subscriuit be our said vmquhile
Souerane Lord, and his Thesaurar, quhilkis as it are not past the Seilis:
Quhairfoir the saidis Lordis ordanis and statutis, that all new infeftmentis
and signatouris foirsaidis, sall pas ordourlie throw all our said vmquhile
Souerane Lordis Seil is, and to be of als greit strenth, walour and effect, as
and they had been rasit afoir his grace deceis. And albeit the greit Seill, and
privy Seill ar now changeit, and diverse preceptis war direct of befoir, that
is to say, to David Cardinal of Sanctandros, kepar of the privy Seill, and
fra the said privy Seill direct to Gawin Archbischop of Glasgow, Chancellar
for the time, That the saidis preceptis be answerit be the keiparis of the
saidis Seilis, and they to be of als greit strenth walour and effect, as they
war direct to Iohne Abbot of Paslay, now keipar of the privy Seill, and to the
said David Cardinal of Sanctandros, now Chancellar and keipar of the greit
Seill:

And als ordanis, that all preceptis of sesingis else rasit, vpone infeftmentis
grantit be vmquhile our said Souerane Lord, that are else past the greit Seill,
and siclyke that are to be past vpone the signatouris and preceptis foirsaidis,
salbe sufficient, and of als greit walour, strenth and effect, for giving and
taking of the saidis se^^ngis (notwithstanding our said vmquhile Souerane
Lordis deceis) as they had been put to executioun, and sesing taking thairupone
afoir his grace deceis. And that letters be direct throw all the Realm, to
public this constitutioun, and to warn all manner of persounis, that hes
rasit any signatouris and preceptis thairupone in manner foirsaid, that they cum
and pas under the saidis Seillis ordourlie, as effeiris, betuix this and the
Feist of Pasche nixt to cum, with certificatioun and they failie, the saidis
signatouris and preceptis rasit thairupone, salbe of na force, nor effect, fra
the said day forth, and sall not be answerit of the saidis Seilis, the said day
being bypast.

IN PARLIAMENTO TENTO APVD EDINBVRGH. etc. DECIMO QVINto die Mensis Decembris
Anno Do. Millesimo Quingentesimo Quadragesimo tertio.
Ratificatioun of the institutioun of the College of Justice. Ca. ij.
THE quhilk day the Quenis grace with auise of my Lord Governor and three
Estatis of the Realm, ratifeis and appreuis the institutioun of the College of
Justice with all priuilegeis, fredomes and liberteis geuin and grantit to the
samin in siclyke manner, form and effect, as it was in vmquhile our Souerane
Lordis time, that last deceissit, and sensyne.

IN PARLIAMENTO TENTO APVD EDINBVRGH. etc. QVARto die Mensis Augusti Anno. Do.
Millesimo Quingentesimo Quadragesimo sexto.
Aganis the inuadaris and downecastars of Kirkis, Kirk mennis placis, and
reifaris of the Iowellis. Ca. iij.
MY Lord Governor and three Estatis of Parliament, ratifeis and appreuis be
Censiment of Parliament, the act maid at Striuiling the.xj. day of Iunij, the
eir of God ane thousand five hundredth.xlvj. eiris, anentis the taking of
spirituallmen in their housis and placis, as is contenit in the said act. Off
the quhilk the tenor followis. The quhilk day my Lord Governor with auise of
the Quenis grace, and Lordis of counsall vnderstandand, that throw the
occasioun of this trublous time, and greit inobedience maid both to God and
man, in the committing of diverse enorme and exhorbitant crimes: It is dred and
feirit, that evil disposit persounis will inuaid, destroy and cast down, and
withhald Abbais, Abbay placis, Kirkis, alsweill paroche Kirkis, as vthers
Religigious placis, Freiris of all ordouris, Nunreis, Chapellis, and vthers
spiritual mennis housis, aganis the Lawis of God and man, and incontrare the
liberty and fredome of halie Kirk, and actis of Parliament maid thairupone,
obseruit and keipit in all times bygane, And for esschewing and stopping of all
sic inconuenientis: It is deuisit, statute and ordanit, That letters be direct
over all partis of this Realm, and to all Schireffis, Stewartis, Baillies and
their Deputis, and to Prouestis, Baillies, Aldermen of Burrowis, and to vthers
Officiaris of the Quenis Schireffis in that part, Chargeing them to pas to the
market croces of all Burrowis within this Realm, and their be oppin
proclamatioun, command and charge all and sindrie our Souerane Ladyis liegis,
that nane of of them tak vpone hand to cast down or destroy any of the saidis
Kirkis, Religious placis, and vthers Kirkis and Kirkmennis housis foirsaidis,
or to withhald, intromet or tak the samin at their awin hand be way of deid in
any time cumming: Or to spulie the Iowelis, or ornamentis of the Kirk ordanit
for Godis service, and dedicat to the samin, under the pane of tinsall of life,
landis and gudis. And gif any sic Kirkmennis housis or placis be else takin be
quhatsumeuer persounis, ordanis the takaris and withhalders of the samin, to
restoir and deliver the samin agane to the awnaris thairof, and their
factouris, under the said pane. And ordanis this act to be ratifeit in
Parliament.

IN PARLIAMENTO TENTO DECIMO QVARTO AVGVSTI ANNO DO. Millesimo Quingentesimo
Quadragesimo sexto.
Anent the laying forth of tennentis. Ca. iiij.
THE quhilk day my Lord Governor and three Estatis of Parliament, ratifeis and
appreuis in this present Parliament, the act maid at Striuiling the elleuint
day of Iunij, the eir of God ane thousand five hundredth. xlvj. eiris, maid
anentis the laying forth of tennentis be their over Lordis, as at mair lenth is
contenit in the said act. Off the quhilk the tenor followis: The quhilk day my
Lord Governor with auise of the Quenis grace, and Lordis of counsall
vnderstandand, that their is greit conuocatiounis maid in the Realm, for
putting and laying of men forth of their takkis and steidingis, and siclyke to
resist to the Lordis of the ground, their Baillies, and Officiaris to lay them
forth, quhilk is the occasioun of greit troubill, slauchter amangis our
Souerane Ladyis liegis: Thairfoir it is statute and ordanit, that letters be
direct to all Schireffis, Stewartis, Baillies and their Deputis, and to vhers
Officiaris of the Quenis Schireffis in that part, to pas to the market croces
of the heid Burrowis of the Schiris, and their be oppin proclamatioun, command
and charge, all and sindrie our Souerane Ladyis liegis, of quhatsumeuer degree
they be, that nane of them tak vpone hand, to make any conuocatioun for putting
and laying forth of any tennentis, bot that they be their Baillies and
Officiaris lay forth the saidis tennentis gudis ordourlie, conform to the
Lawis of the Realm, obseruit and keipit in times bygane: Nor it that na manner
of tennentis make any conuocatioun or gaddering, for resistance to their Lordis
of the ground, their Baillies and Officiaris, in the executioun of their
officis, under the panis contenit in the actis of Parliament maid aganis them,
that makis any gadderingis or conuocatioun, with certificatioun to them, that
dois in the contrare, that they salbe callit at particular diettis, and salbe
punist thairfoir with all rigor, as accordis. And gif any persoun thinkis
them offendit be vthers, ordanis them to call outher criminallie or ciuilie,
and Justice salbe ministerit, as accordis.

Monctoun Hall.
actis anent the dispositioun of beneficis, wardis, releif and marriage, and of
possessiounis of them, that happinnis to die in the army.

Anent Kirkmen. Ca. v.
AT Monctoun hall the.viij. day of September, the eir of God ane thousand five
hundredth and.xlvij. eiris. The quhilk day my Lord Governor, with auise and
consent of the Prelatis, Kirkmen, Erlis, Lordis, Barronis, and all vthers
patronis of beneficis, both spiritual and temporal vnderstandand, that the
haill body of the Realm is passand fordward at this time, to resist our auld
Inimeis of Ingland cumming in this Realm to inuaid the samin, ordanis, That
quhatsumeuer Kirkman, that happinnis to be slane in this present army, hurt to
the deid, or takis seiknes in the samin, and deis in the said seiknes gangand,
remanand or cummand thairfra, That the nerrest of the said Kirkmenis kin sall
have the presentatioun, prouisioun and collatioun of his benefice for that time
alla^erlie: And the samin to be disponit to the nerrest of his kin, that
happinnis to be slane, or deceis in manner foirsaid, may habill thairfoir. And
the proffeitis of their beneficis, with the frutis specially on the ground,
with the annat thairefter to pertene to them and their executouris, alsweill
Abbottis, Priouris, and all vthers Religious men, as all other Kirkmen.

Anent the waird, releif and marriage.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that quhatsumeuer persoun or persounis,
happinnis to be slane, hurt to the deid, or tak seiknes in our Souerane Ladyis
army, now ordanit in reddynes to pas fordwart for defense of the Realm, and
resisting of our auld Inimeis of Ingland, now gadderit to inuaid the samin, and
deis in the said seiknes, gangand, remanand or cummand thairfra, That their air
or airis sall have their waird, nonentres, releif and marriage, fre of our
Souerane Lady, dispensand with their minority and les age, quhat eild that
ever they be of, without payment of any teind penny. And siclyke of all vthers
Lordis, spiritual and temporal, both of wassalis and subuassalis: Prouyding,
that the Airis foirsaidis persew and obtene enteres of their ouerlordis, within
three termis after the deceis of their fathers, or of quhatsumeuer other
persounis, quhome to they ar to succeid, for the causis foirsaidis. And gif the
saidis airis be of les age within tutorie, and beis not enterit to their landis
and heretage befoir their age of.xiiij. eiris, quhilk may be throw negligence
of their tutouris and vthers their freindis: Our Souerane Lady priuilegeis and
grantis to them, that they may enter within three termis, nixt after their
compleit age of.xiiij. eiris, as said is. And this to be extendit to the Mediat
air, that is to succeid to the persoun, that happinnis to deceis in our
Souerane Ladyis army, in manner foirsaid. And because it may happin the said
persoun, that happinnis to deceis in the said army, may have maa lauchfull
barnis of his body by his air: Thairfoir ordanis, that the proffeitis of his
waird landis be taken up be their mothers, gif their be na tutouris
testamentaris, als lang as scho remanis wedo, and faileing thairof, be the
nerrst and lauchfull tutouris of the saidis barnis, to be distribute for the
sustentatioun of the said air, and to the utility and proffeit of the remanent
of his brether and sisters, to the perfect age of the said air or airis, That
is to say, gif the air be male of.xxj. eiris, and gif they be famell of.xiiij.
eiris, the proffeit of the said airis marriage being ay fre to him self, his
saidis mother tutour and governor findand sufficient cautioun befoir the
Lordis, that they sall make count and rekning of their intromissiou^ befoir the
Lordis of counsall, or in the Checkar eirlie. And gif the airis of the
persounis, that happinnis to die, as said is, have any fewis, that they enter
siclyke to their few landis, haldin of quhatsumeuer persounis, spiritual or
temporal, within the termis foirsaidis, without any payment of the dowbling of
the few.

Anent possessiounis.
THE quhilk day my Lord Governor and all the Nobill men, Barronis, frehalders
and gentilmen, being conuenit and assemblit togidder, to pas fordwart for
defense of this Realm, and resisting of our auld Inimeis of Ingland, now
instantly approchand to my Lord Governor and his army: Hes deuisit, statute
and ordanit, alsweill be my Lord Gouernouris awin consent, as be consent of the
Nobill men, both spiritual and temporal: That gif it sall happin (as God
forbid) any Earl, Lord, Barrone, frehalder, wassall, subuassall, fewaris,
mailaris, takkismen, rentellaris, and possessouris or commounis to be slane, or
tak seiknes, quhairthrow they happin to deceis at this present army, That
their airis, executouris or assignayis, sall frelie have their awin wairdis,
releifis and mariageis in their awin handis, to be disponit thairupone, as they
sall think expedient. And siclyke their wyfis, harnis, executouris or
assignais, sall bruke their takkis, steidingis, rowmis and possessiounis,
alsweill of Kirklandis, as of temporal mennis landis, and enter thairto, and
remane thairwith, frelie for the space of five eiris, without any gressume, or
enteres silver, payand allanerlie mailis and dewteis, vsit and wount. And the
said act alsweill to extend vpone Kirkmennis wassallis, and temporallis, as
vpone the Quenis.

IN PARLIAMENTO TENTO APVD EDINBVRGH XXIX. DIE MENSIS Maij Anno Do. Millesimo
Quingentesimo Quinquagesimo primo.
Aganis them that sustenis the process of cursing, for the space of ane eir, or
communicatis, being excommunicat. Ca. vj.
THE quhilk day my Lord Governor, with auise of the three Estatis of
Parliament, hauand respect to the Nobill Catholic and Christin actis and
statutis, maid be vmquhile our Sovereign Lord King James the Fyft that last
deceissit, quhome God assolie, for conseruatioun and halding of his liegis in
the true and godly faith ever hiddertillis, not only be him, bot also be his
may Nobill progenitouris, inuiolablie obser^it and keipit, sen they first
ressaifit the samin, and in special sic statutis, ordinancis and actis, maid
anentis them, that wilfully, obstinatlie or arrogantlie incurris the panis of
cursing be any manner of way, and lyis under that dampnabill stait lang time,
schawand their ungodly life to vthers the faithful liegis of this Realm,
hauand na regard to be participant of the merit of the blude of Christ, nor
of the suffrage of halie Kirk, quha throw their arrogance obstinate and
inobedience wilfully throw color and pretense of deuotioun, to schaw their
hie Ipocresie, cummis to the halie buird of God and ressaifis their Sacrament,
lyand under the said Censuris of cursing, in the evil exempill to the vthers
good true simpill Catholic pepill: And for remedy heirof, and for eschewing
of sic evil abominabill, peruersit and detestabill vicis in times cumming, to
the effect, that the liegis of this Realm may live in true faith in our
Souerane Ladies time, that now is, as they have done in her may Nobil
progenitouris tymis: Hes statute and ordanit, that quhatsumeuer persoun or
persounis, ar denuncit cursit, for any manner of cause in their paroche Kirk
oppinlie and publiclie on ane solempnit day, in time of divine service befoir
nune, befoir the parochin or personally quhair ever they be, befoir famous
witness, and lyis thairin obstinatlie be the space of ane eir, or ressaifis the
body of God, blist and halie Sacrament, under the said cursing, vnrecounsallit
to the bosum of halie Kirk, that all their gudis mouabill throw that deid, sall
fall in our Souerane Ladyis handis be ressoun of escheit, and that the samin be
inbrocht to her use, quhair ever they may be apprehendit, to be disponit at her
grace pleasure: Prouyding alwayis, that they, at quhais instance sic persounis
ar denuncit cursit for sowmis of money, for fulfilling of any deid, salbe first
satifeit and payit of all sowmis, or other thingis that they may craif, be
vertew of the saidis letters of cursing, of the saidis escheit gudis, and
thairefter the remanent to pertene to our Souerane Lady. And that letters be
direct to make publicatioun heirof at all placis neidfull.

Anent fauouraris of declairit tratouris, or beiraris of feid for slauchter
committit vpone them. Ca. vij.
THE quhilk day, forsamekill as my Lord Gouernouris grace, and three Estatis of
Parliament, hauand respect to the greit, heavy and abominabill crime of treson
and lose majesty, committit be diverse and sindrie our Souerane Ladyis liegis
within this Realm, and outwith the samin, for quhilkis sic tratouris hes been
callit, accusit, and be the three Estatis declairit tratouris in Parliament:
Notwithstanding sic tratouris swa banist and fugitive, without license or
tollerance of our Souerane Lady or my Lord Gouernouris respect, remissioun or
supersedere cummis and resortis agane within this Realm, and hantis and
repairis amangis our Souerane Ladyis liegis, like as they nor nane of them had
committit any offense aganis our Souerane Lady my Lord Governor, the Realm,
nor the authority, and ar resset, fortifeit and mantenit be our Souerane Ladyis
liegis, their assistaris, fauouraris, mantenaris, and art and part takaris with
them in their tressonabill deidis, hauand na regaird towart our Souerane Lady
my Lord Governor, nor the authority: And in times cumming to schaw that foul
abommabill crime of lose majesty and treson, and for punischement of the
committaris thairof, their assistaris, fauouraris, mantenaris, ressettaris,
fortifiaris, and part takaris of all sic tratouris, and their company, and to
avoid the company of vthers our Souerane Ladyis true and faithful subiectis:
It is deuisit, statute and ordanit be my Lord Governor, and three Estatis of
Parliament, that in caice any sic declairit tratour or tratouris, happinnis to
be handillit, takin, apprehendit or slane vpone suddantie, or vtherwayis put to
deid, than and in that caice, it sal not be leiffull to the kin, freindis,
assistaris, fortifiaris, mantenaris, fauouraris, or art and part takaris with
sic tratouris on na wise, fra the time that siclyke tratour or tratouris
happinnis to be handillit, apprehendit or slane frathyne forth, to move any
questioun, pik, gruge or querrell, or beir any rancour, hatrent or inuie aganis
the persoun or persounis, committaris of the slauchter of siclyke persounis
tratouris, nor to persew nor inuaid them for bodylie harm, slaucther or
vtherwayis, to iniure them in word or deid for that cause, nouther for times
bygane nor tocum, under the pane of treson, with certificatioun, to
quhatsumeuer persoun or persounis, that cummis in the contrare of the
premissis, that he salbe callit and accusit vpone treson, like as the committar
of the principal crime salbe in like manner punist, conform to the Lawis of
the Realm with all rigor.

Anent them that schutis with gu^nis at Deir and wild foulis. Ca. viij.
THE samin day, forsamekill, as it was deuisit, statute and ordanit of befoir,
that nane of our Souerane Ladyis liegis sold tak vpone hand to schute with
half hag, culuering or pistolate, at Deir, Ra, wild beistis or wild foulis,
under the pane of died: Notwithstanding our Souerane Ladyis liegis daily and
continually incontrare the tenor of the actis maid thairupone, incurrand the
panis contenit in the samin, schutis with half hag, culuering and pistolate at
the saidis wild beistis and wild foulis, quhairthrow the Nobill men of the
Realm can get na pastyme of halking and hunting, like as hes been had in times
bypast, be ressoun that all sic wild beistis and wild foulis ar exilit and
banist be occasioun foirsaid. And for remeid heirof: It is deuisit, statute and
ordanit be my Lord Gouernouris grace, and three Estatis of Parliament, it as of
befoir, that nane of our Souerane Ladyis liegis, of quhatsumeuer degree he be
of, tak vpone hand to schute at Deir, Ra or other wild beistis or wild
foulis, with half hag, culuering or pistolate in any times tocum, under the
pane of deid, and confiscatioun of all their gudis for their contemptioun, and
quhat persoun or persounis, that happinnis to tak or apprehend any manner of
persounis cummand incontrare this present act and statute, and bringis him to
the Schiref of the Schire or his Deputis, the takar sall have the escheit of
all the persounis gudis he apprehendis, and salbe rewardit vtherwayis, as
accordis, for his laubouris.

The act maid anent the annuellis of landis brint be our auld Inimeis of
Ingland within Burrowis. Ca. ix.
AT Edinburgh the elleuint day of September, the eir of God ane thousand five
hundredth and.lj. eires, In presence of the Lordis of counsall, compeirit ane
may Reverend Father in God, Iohne Archibischop of Sanctandros, Commendatour
of the Abbay of Pas^ay. etc. For him self and the remane^t of the Clergy of
this Realm on that ane part: And the Proueit and Baillies of the Burgh of
Edinburgh on that other part, and gaif in their articlis vnderwrittin,
subscriuit be the hand of Master Iohne Lauder Archidene of Tewiotdale Notar
public, and desyrit the samin to be insert in the bukis of counsall, and the
saidis Lordis to interpone their authority to the samin. The quhilk desire the
saidis Lords thocht ressonabill, and ordanit the saidis articlis to be
Registrate in the saidis bukis of counsall, and to have the strenth of ane act
and decreit of the Lordis thairof, and hes interponit, and interponis their
authority to the samin: And decernis and ordanis letters executorialis to be
geuin heirupone, for dew executioun of the saidis articlis, and every punct
thairof as efferis. Quhairof the tenor followis.

Off the articlis and fundamentis to be auisit vpone, twiching the brint landis
and tenementis within the Burgh of Edinburgh, and vthers Burghis and townis
within the Realm of Scotland, brint be the auld Inimeis of Ingland.

ITEM The first article, quhair the Chaplane be the sycht of the masoun, wricht
and master of wark, and vthers discreit men sworn thairto, will contribute
and pay the part of the expensis, for the rait of their annual and maill of
the house, as it payis presently, that they sall have their haill annuell,
after the bigging of the house.

ITEM The ground annual appeiris to be payit, quha ever big the ground, and
faileing thairof, that the annuellar may recognosce the ground.

ITEM In all other annuellis, to auise gif the awnaris lattis the ground to be
vnbiggit, quhat salbe the Chaplanis part gif he may recognosce the samin or
not, or compel the awnar to big the samin: And gif he may do nouther? gif he
may call for warrandice, after the form of his iundatioun.

ITEM Gif samekill restis vnbrint of the haill tenement, that aw the annuell,
as will pay the samin, gif the annuell may be craifit compleitlie?

ITEM To auise, gif the Chaplane hes the annuell under reuersioun, and
contributis with the biggar, conform to the first article, to considder how
lang thairefter, the annuell salbe vnredimabill, or samekill as is contribute,
to be eikit in the reuersioun.

ITEM Quhair the Chaplane was Lord of the tenement, and the samin haillelie
brint, and the patron requyrit to big the samin, refusis and will not, and may
not, siclyke the Chaplane may not, quhether it salbe lesum to the Chaplane to
set the samin tenement in few, and require the patron for his consent, and gif
he refusis, gif he may be compellit thairto, or gif the Chaplane may set the
samin by his auise and consent, or not?

ITEM Quhair the haill tenement after it be biggit be set in few within the
auale thairof, for the vphald of the samin, and beis brint, gif the fewar may
be compellit to big the samin vpone his awin expensis, or not? and quhat salbe
the Chaplains part in that caice. etc.

ITEM Gif the coniunctfear or lyferentar of tenementis, quhilkis payis annuell
to the Kirk, and is brint, as said is, gif they may be compellit be the
Chaplane, and airis of the said tenement, to concur and big the samin for their
interes, and gif they be disassentand thairto, quhat salbe lesum to the air,
and Chaplane to do in that behalf?

Heir followis the prouisioun, ordinance and conclusioun, maid to the articlis
abone expremit, and to be in all times cumming obseruit and keipit, anentis all
annuellis of the brint landis and tenementis be the auld Inimeis of Ingland,
within the Burgh of Edinburgh, and vthers Burghis and townis within the Realm
of Scotland, awand alsweill to spiritual men as temporal men, concordit and
aggreit vpone, betuir the Lordis of the articlis of Parliament, and the Prouest
and Baillies, and counsall of the said Burgh of Edinburgh for them, and the
remanent Burghis and townis of this Realm, to have the strenth of actis,
statutis and ordinancis of Parliament in all time tocum.

ITEM In the first anent the first article, geuin in be the annuellaris of the
Burgh of Edinburgh, and vthers Burghis within this Realm: It is concordit,
statute and ordanit, that gif the annuellar be the Judgment or sycht of the
masoun, wrycht and master of wark craftismen in the reparrelling of the
tenement, quhilk is astrictit to the annuell, and vthers discreit men sworn
thairto, will contribute and pay the part of expensis, according to the rait of
the annuell and the male of the housis, quhilkis it geuis now presently, that
the samin annuellares quhatsumeuer they be, spiritual or temporal, sall have
the haill annuell of the nixt term, immediately following the bigging and
reparing of the tenement or house, and salbe fre to poynde and distrenie fra
that time, alsweill for the bygane, as tocum, call and recognosce thairfoir
according to Justice: Prouyding alwayis, that gif any questioun or pley sall
happin to rise anent the expensis of the bigging betuix the annuellar and the
heretour, the samin salbe decydit and discussit befoir the Lordis of our
Souerane Ladyis sat of Justice vpone ane simpill supplicatioun, but outher
diet or tabill.

ITEM Anent the secund and seuint articlis, quhilkis ar coincident, It is
statute and ordinat, that quhether the annuell be redemabill or vnredemabill,
the annuellar hauand the ground annuell vpone any brint land quhilk is, or beis
reparellit be the awnar thairof, that makis na contributioun to the bigging of
the samin, sall want the saxt part of the annuell, the few annuellaris sall in
likewise want the fyft part of their annuellis, the tope annuellaris sall in
likewise want the fourt part of thairis, and the awnar of the brint land, quha
hes biggit and reparrellit the samin, sall not be haldin to pay mair of the
saidis annuellis respective, than cummis to the residew thairof, the saidis
saxt, fyft and fourt partis respective being defasit: Prouyding alwayis, that
it salbe lesum to the annuellaris, notwithstanding the defaisance maid
presently, gif they pleis to by in agane, and redeem fra the said awnar of the
samin land, samekill of the said annuell, as they sall happin to want be
particular redemptioun, as the saidis annuellaris may cum to, and it war never
sa lytill, payand proportionablie for ilk merk geuin down to the proportioun
and rate thairfoir the sowme of ten pundis Scottis money, but any langar process
allanerlie, the awnar being requyrit to ressaif his money, salbe sufficient
warning, and the annuellar to be answerit fra the nixt term of samekill as he
payis money for, as effeiris reallie, and with effect, the awnar being requyrit
and refusand: And in that caice, the money to be deponit in the Prouest and
Baillies handis of the town, gif they be both temporal: Bot gif they be
spiritual and temporal, or both spiritual, in the Officiallis handis of
Loutheane being for the time, and their to remane to his utility and proffeit,
that sold have the samin, and defaisance of payment in manner foirsaid, to be
maid continually fra the bigging of the tenementis, astrictit to the annuellis.

ITEM The third article, It is ordanit, that gif the awnaris of the brint
landis and tenementis, tholis the samin to ly vnbiggit two eiris after the dait
of their presentis, It salbe lesum to the annuellaris to persew their annuellis
respective, conform to the nature and rate of every annuell, as is abone
expremit: Or to recognosce the tenement for non payment of the samin, the
saidis two eiris being furthrunning, and to use their process for non payment
thairof, as accordis of the Law, and practik of this Realm.

ITEM Anent the fourt article, It is ordanit, that quhat kind of annuell that
ever it be, the samin lyand vpone the haill tenement, gif samekill restis
vnbrint of the haill, as will pay the samin annuell, the awnar hauand by the
annuell twyse als m^kill, as the annuell extendis to of eirlie proffeit, the
haill annuell salbe payit: Vtherwayis it salbe proportionabill effeirand to the
third penny of the eirlie auale of the tenement, that standis, and quhair the
laif beis biggit to have siclyke interpretatioun, conform to their present
articlis.

ITEM Anent the first article, it is deuisit and concludit, that in caice the
annuellar contribute with the awnar of the brint renement, to the reparatioun
thairof, conform to the first article of the samin, the annuellar sall have
the reuersioun augmentit, to the quantity extending to the third part of the
sowme, vpone the quhilk the annuell is wodset: Swa that, quhill the principal
sowme and half samekill with it be payit, the annuell to be vnredemabill, That
is to say, in caice the annuell ly vpone two hundredth merkis, it is not to be
redemit, quhill three hundredth merkis be payit, in caice foirsaid.

ITEM Anent the saxt article, It is prouydit and concludit, that gif any
Chaplane be haill Lord of the brint tenement, unit to his Chaplanrie as
patrimony thairof, and the patron of the Chaplanrie being requyrit to big the
samin, and nouther will not, or else may not, and in likewise the Chaplane is
not of puissance to do the samin, It salbe lesum for policy, and eschewing of
deformity of the town, to set the samin in few, to the utility and proffeit
of his Chaplanrie to any, that will offer may thairfoir, without the patronis
consent, gif he refusis to gif his consent: Prouyding alwayis, that the patr
one be first requyrit to tak the samin in few him self, and he to be in that
caice preferrit to any other, geuand als mekill to the Chaplane thairfoir, to
the evident utility of the Chaplanrie as any other will, without collusioun
and the patron refusand, the Chaplane to be fre to do thairwith, as is abone
writtin.

ITEM As to the seuint article, It is answerit and concludit, as is contenit in
the response and conclusioun maid to the secund article abone writtin, because
they war concludit togidder.

ITEM As to the aucht article, It is statute and ordanit, that gif their beis
any coniunctfear or lyferentar of any brint land, considderatioun being taken
and had be the Prouest and Baillies of the Burgh, quhat fre male the samin
payit befoir the birning, It salbe lesum to the proprietar of the land to big
the samin gif he plesis, payand the said coniunctfear or lyferentar, during
their lyfetyme, the third part of the fre male, the quhilk the said land payit
befoir the birning: Bot gif the coniunctfear or lyferentar pleis to big the
samin, they to be preferrit to the proprietar, and to bruke the samin during
their life. And thairfoir sall the proprietar and land both be bundin and
oblist to them for to refound the third part of the money, quhilkis they
deburse in bigging of the saidis tenementis in necessare and proffitabill
expensis, to be forth cummand to be geuin to them the time of their deceis,
and thairefter to their executouris and assignayis, the land being alsweill
biggit as of befoir, and nychbourlyke.

IN PARLIAMENTO TENTO APVD EDINBVRGH PRIMO FEBRVARII Anno Do. Millesimo
Quingentesimo Quinquagesimo primo.
Anent the prices of wynis. Ca. x.
THE quhilk day, forsamekill as my Lord Governor, and three Estatis of
Parliament, being remembrit of the monysaid actis of Parliament, and diverse
vthers actis and statutis maid in general counsall, and vtherwayes, for
suppressing of derth in this Realm of viuers and wynis, like as in the saidis
actis and statutis maid thairupone is at mair lenth contenit: Notwithstanding
the multiply of wynis daily cummand within this Realm at the eist and west
seyis, the prices thairof decayis not, bot the said derth remanis, and the
occasioun thairof is understand to consist in our Souerane Ladies liegis, that
foirstallis and byis the samin in privy manner, and how sone the samin ar coft,
puttis the samin in secreit housis, and not in oppin tauernis, selland the
samin vpone hiear prices nor the commoun tavern dois: And beside the samin,
sic wynis, as ar sauld in co^moun tanernis, ar commounlie be all tauernaris
mixed with auld corrupt wynis, and with watter, to the greit appeirand danger
and seiknes of the byaris, and greit perrell of the saulis of the sellaris: And
for remeid heirof, and to eschew sic inconuenientis in time cumming: It is
deuisit, statute and ordanit be my Lord Governor, and three Estatis of
Parliament, That nane of our Souerane Ladyis liegis tak vpone hand to by any
wynis, that is cummin, or sall happin to cum at the eist and northland seyis,
fra this day forth of any derrar prices nor xx. pund the twn of Burdeous wine,
and the Rochell wine for.xvj. pund the twn, and that nane of them sell the
samin of any derrar price nor.x. d. the pynt of Burdeous wine, and the Rochell
wine for viij. d. the pynt, within the boundis foirsaidis. And that na wynis
that is cum in at the west seyis, or is to cu^in be bocht of any derrar price
nor. xvi pund the twn of Burdeous wine, and the Rochell wine for.xij. or.xiij
pund the twn, and that nane of them sell the samin of any derrar price
nor.viij. d. the pynt of Burdeous wine, and.vj. d. the pynt of Rochell wine,
under the pane of escheting of all the saidis wynis, that they sall happin to
by, togidder with the rest of their gudis mouabill for their co^te^ptioun. And
that na manner of tauernaris tak vpone hand to make any ^i^tiou^ with any auld
wynis and new wynis of this eir, or put any watter in the samin, under the pane
of escheting of the punschoun, y^ sic auld wine or watter salbe put into,
togidder with the rest of all and sindrie the wynis being the awnaris of sic
ane tavern, and tinsall of their fredome for ever. And in like manner, that
nane of our Souerane Ladyis liegis byaris of sic wynis, and hauaris of
tauernis, tak vpone hand to huird, or hyde any sic wynis cost be them in their
housis and privy placis, bot that they put the samin in their commoun tauernis
and woltis thairof, to be sauld indifferently to our Souerane Ladyis liegis,
vpone the pricis befoir expremit, under the panis foirsaidis: Prouyding
alwayis, that the Burgh of Sanct Iohnstoun sall have license to sell the wynis
coft be them.ij. d. of the quarte derar, nor other Burrowis adjacent unto
them.

Of the prices of wild and tame meitis. Ca. xj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the act and ordinancis maid vpone the
prices of all wild foulis, and tame soulis, be obseruit and keipit, and vpone
the byaris and sellaris thairof, to be put to executioun in all punctis, after
the form and tenor thairof, and the panis contenit in the samin to be execute
vpone them, of the quhilk the tenor followis. The quhilk day, forsamekill as
the Quenis grace, my Lord Governor and Lordis of secreit counsall, hauand
respect to the greit and exhorbitant derth rysin in this Realm, vpone the
wild and tame foulis, for putting of ordour heirto, and remedy heirof: It is
deuisit, statute and ordanit be the Quenis grace, my Lord Governor and Lordis
of secreit counsall, That the wild meit, and tame meit vnderwrittin, be sauld
in all times cumming of the prices following, That is to say, in the first the
cran v.s. Theswan.v.s. The wild guse of the greit vind.ij.s. the claik quink
and rute, the price of the piece.xviij. d. Item the pluwer and small mure
foul, price of the piece.iiij. d. The blak cok and the gray hen, price of the
piece.vj. d. the dosane of poutis.xij. d. Item the quhaip vi. d. Item the
cuning.ij.s. unto the Feist of Fasterniseuin nixt tocum, and fra thine
forth.xij. d. Item the laproun.ij. d. Item the wodcok.iiij. d. Item the dosane
of lauerokis, and vthers small birdis, the price of the dosane.iiij. d. Item
the snype and qualie, price of the piece.ij. d. Item the tame guse.xvj. d. Item
the capone.xij. d. Item the hen and pultrie.viij. d. Item the chikin.iiij. d.
Item the gryse.xviij. d. And for observing and keiping of this act,
quhatsumeuer persoun or persounis, alsweill byar as sellar, that brekis the
samin, and dois in the contrare heirof, That all his gudis salbe takin and
eschetit to our Souerane Ladyis use, and their persounis punist at my Lord
Gouernouris will and plesoure.

The articlis and punctis concludit vpone assurit Scottismen with Ingland. Ca.
xij.
ITEM It is desyrit to be concludit in this present Parliament, quhair
Scottismen vnassurit with Ingland, raid vpone Scottismen assurit with Ingland,
the time they war assurit, and tuke their gudis and geir, quhether gif they
assurit persounis spuleit have just actioun and place to ask restitutioun of
their gudis, and amendis for the dampnageis done to them, or not? It is
concludit, decernit and declairit be the Quenis grace my Lord Governor with
advise of the three Estatis of Parliament, That quhair our Souerane Ladyis
chargeis and proclamatiounis or my Lord Gouernouris private letters, or command
was direct, chargeing all and sindrie assurit persounis of this Realm with
Ingland, and that sat under their assurance, to discharge them of the said
assurance, and leif the opinioun of Ingland, and to cum to the obedience of our
Souerane Lady, my Lord Governor and the authority, within ane certane term
prefixed thairto, contenit in the said letters, and wald not leif the opinioun
foirsaid, bot assistit to Ingland, Inglismen and their company, That they
Scottismen assurit in manner foirsaid, sall have na place nor actioun to persew
the persounis Scottismen vnassurit, for the spoliatioun of their gudis, or
satisfactioun of any other dampnageis done to them thairefter. And quhair na
letters, chargeis, proclamatiounis, nor vthers private wryttingis, nor command
of my Lord Gouernouris grace war direct, chargeing sic assurit persounis, to
leif the opinioun of Ingland, and to cum to the obeisance of our Souerane Lady,
my Lord Governor and the authority, nor na sic chargeis come to their eiris,
that they Scottisme^ assurit, as said is, sall have place and actioun to persew
the persounis vnassurit, that spuleit for restitutioun of their gudis, and
amendis for the dampnage and skaith sustenit be them, gif the spulearis had na
special command, nouther in writ nor word of my Lord Governor, to ride vpone
sic assurit persounis.

The secund article vpone assurit persounis. Ca. xiij.
ITEM To the resolutioun maid vpone the secund article, makand mentioun, quhair
men assurit or vnassurit, raid in particular pineounis, and small companyis of
Inglismen, the Scottismen being the greitest number, and inuadit the Scottisme^
vnassurit, brint their housis, spuleit their gudis, and hereit them
thairthrow, quhether gif the persoun spuleit and hereit, hes just actioun to
persew sic Scottismen spulearis, for restorance of their gudis agane, and
satisfactioun for the dampnageis done to them, or not? It is decernit and
declairit be the Quenis grace, my Lord Governor, with auise of the three
Estatis of Parliament foirsaid, that all sic persounis spuleit, hurt or
dampnageit in manner foirsaid, hes just actioun and place to persew the
spulearis, and to desire restorance of their gudis, and satisfactioun of their
dampnageis, as accordis of the Law.

The third article vpone assurit persounis. Ca. xiiij.
ITEM As to the resolutioun to be taken vpone the third article, b^irand in
effect, quhair any Scottismen assurit be Ingland, and raid with the army
thairof, vpone any Scottismen vnassurit, for birning of their placis, slauchter
of them selfis, their wyfis and barnis, and spuleit them of their gudis, or
birning of their cornis, downcasting of their housis, and vthers
destructiounis, quhether gif it be leiffull to any Scottisman spuleit in that
sort with the army of Ingland, to persew any Scottisman, being in company
with the army of Ingland, the time of the spoliatioun and destructioun
foirsaid, for spoltatioun of their gudis, and satisfactioun for the dampnageis
sustenit be them, or hes just cause and actioun to suit thairfoir: It is
concludit and declairit be the Quenis grace, my Lord Governor, and three
Estatis foirsaidis, That sic persounis vnassurit, brint, hereit and destroyit
be Scottismen assurit, and being in company with the army of Ingland, and come
with them, and war with them the time of the spoltatioun, birning and
destructioun foirsaid, hes just actioun and cause to persew all assurit
persounis Scottismen, that raid in manner foirsaid, for restitutioun and
deliverance of their gudis spuleit fra them, and satisfactioun and amendis for
the dampnageis and hurtis, as accordis.

The declaratioun of my Lord Anguse. Ca. xv.
ITEM It is declairit in this present Parliament, that forsamekill as Archibald
Earl of Anguse, George Douglas of Pettendreich Knycht his brother, vmquhile
Archibald Douglas of Kilspindie their Eme, and their part takaris, was be our
Souerane Lord that last decessit, banist, forfaltit and declairit thairthrow
Inimeis to this Realm, and thairefter they remanit for saiftie of their lyfis
in the Realm of Ingland, and was with the Lieutennentis, wardanis and
Capitanis of Ingland in time of weir, and vthers times inuaidand this Realm
and liegis thairof, be fire and sword, and peax being tretit, was comprehendit
in the samin: And now they being restorit, and their forfaltour reducit, in
caice of any of the liegis of this Realm wald persew them for heirschippis,
slauchters, skaithis or dampnageis, done the time they war forfaltit, and being
with Ingland or vtherwayis: It is declairit, that they, nor nane of them, nor
their part takaris, and accomplices being forfaltit with them, are not, nor sall
not be haldin to answer to any liegis of this Realm, for na inuasioun of them
be fire, sword, slauchter, heirschippis nor dampnagers done be them the time
foirsaid, that they war forfaltit, nor the lieges foirsaidis may not, nor sall
not, have actioun to persew them for any of the premissis. And this to remane
as act of Parliament, declairand the cause foirsaid, to remane as Law in time
cumming: Prouyding, that this act be not extendit to na vthers Rebellis of
times bygane, nor tocum, bot to the saidis Earl of Anguse, George Douglas, and
their vmquhile Eme Archibald, because they war specially comprehendit in the
peax.

The act anentis them, that sweir is abominabill aithis. Ca. xvj.
ITEM Because notwithstanding the often and frequent prechingis, in detestatioun
of the grievous and abominabill aithis sweiring, execratiounis, and
blasphematioun, of the name of God, sweirand in vane be his precious blude
body, passioun and woundis. Devil stick, cummer, gor, roist or ryfe them, and
sic vthers vgsume aithis and execratiounis aganis the command of God, it the
samin is cum in sic ane ungodly use amangis the pepill of this Realm, both
of greit and small Estatis, that daily and hourlie may be hard amangis them
oppin blasphematioun of Godis name and majesty, to the greit contemptioun
thairof, and bringing of the Ire and wraith of God vpone the pepill, heirfoir,
and for eschewing of sic inconuenientis in times cumming: It is statute and
ordanit, that quhatsumeuer persoun or persounis, sweiris sic abominabill
aithis, and detestabill execratiounis, as is afoir reheirsit, sall incur the
panis after following, als often as they failie respective, That is to say, ane
Prelate of Kirk, Earl or Lord, for every fault to be committit for the space
of three monethis nixt tocum, That is to say, unto the first day of Maij,
exclusive, xii. d. Ane Barrone or beneficit man constitute in dignity
ecclesiastic iiij. d. Ane landit man, frehalder, wassall, fewar, Burges and
small beneficit men.ij. d. Ane craftisman, eman, a seruand man and all
vthers.i. d. Item the pure folkis that hes na geir to pay the pane foirsaid, to
be put in the stokis or presonit, for the space of four houris, and women to be
weyit and considderit conform to their blude or estate of their parteis, that
they ar cuplit with. And this pane to be dowblit vpone every committar, after
the outrinning of the saidis three monethis, for the space of other three
monethis thairefter, That is to say, fra the first day of Maij, unto the first
day of August exclusive, and from the first day of August, unto the first day
of November exclusive, the pane to be triplit, that is to say, for every
penny.iij. d. And fra the said first day of November, to the first day of
Februar thairefter, quhilk makis the eir co^pleit, the pane to be quadruplit,
that is to say, for every penny.iiij. d. effeirand to their estate. And fra
the completing of the said eir, the first fault of ane Prelate, Earl or Lord,
to be.iiij.s. the secund fault.viij.s. and the third fault.xvj.s. and for the
feird fault to be banist, or put in waird for the space of eir and day, at the
will of the Prince, and siclyke of all other Estatis after their quality
foirsaid, to be punischit effeirandlie. And this foirsaid pane to be applyit to
the pure folkis, be them that salbe depute collectouris thairof.

Anent them that perturbis the Kirk the time of deuin^ service. Ca. xvij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, aganis all persounis quhilkis co^tempnandlie
makis perturbatioun in the Kirk, the time of divine service, and precheing of
the word of God, stopand the samin to be hard and seen be the deuote pepill,
and will not desist and ceis thairfra for na spiritual monitioun, that the
Kirkmen may use vpone them: Thairfoir quhatsumeuer persoun makis perturbatioun
or impediment in the Kirk in manner foirsaid, sall incur the panis as after
followis, That is to say, for the first fault, ane Prelate, Earl or Lord ten
pund, ane Barrone or persoun constitute in dignity ecclesiastik five pund, ane
wassall, frehalder, Burges or small beneficit man forty schillingis, and
vthers.xx. schillingis, and pure folkis that hes na gudis, to be put in presoun
for.xv. dayis, to fast breid and watter, and for the secund fault the dowbling
thairof, and for the third fault warding of their persounis, or banissing for
eir and day, and ordanis the Dene of Gilde, Kirk masters and rewlaris, to gar
leiche barnis, that perturbis the Kirk in manner foirsaid.

Anent them that knawis them selfis under process of cursing. Ca. xviij.
ITEM That because money persounis wittanlie knawand them selfis under the
process of cursing, and beand ^hargeit to remove fra divine service, wilfully
enteris them selfis thairto, and will not remove, quhairthrow they stop the
remanent Christin pepill fra divine service, and incurris the greit cursing of
the Law, fra the quhilk nane may absolve bot the Papis halines:

Thairfoir it is statute and ordanit, that quha sa ever beis notit and
conuictit to have remanit in the Kirk the time of divine service, after that he
have been warnit and chargeit to remove beand under process of cursing, denuneit
vpone him dewlie, outher oppinlie in his paroche Kirk or personally, to be
punist as perturbaris of the Kirk of God, and to incur the panis of the
foirsaid last act.

Anent cursit persounis, that compellis preistis to say Mess in their
presence. Ca. xix.
ITEM Quhatsumeuer persoun beand under process of cursing, dewlie denuncit vpone
him in manner foirsaid, compellis any Kirkman to say Mess in his presence,
quhilk knawis the compellar to be under process of cursing, and wald not say
Mess in his presence, without he war compellit thairto, The compellar for his
said contemptioun, after that he be notit and convict thairof, to tyne all his
mouabill gudis, and the samin to be applyit to our Souerane Ladyis escheit.

Anent them, that maryis two wyfis or husbandis. Ca. xx.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that quhatsumeuer persoun maryis two sindrie
wyfis, or woman maryis two sindrie husbandis, leuand togidder vnde^orsit
lauchfullie, contrare the aith and promeis maid at the solempnizatioun and
contracting of the matrimony, and swa ar of the Law periure and infame:
Thairfoir, that the panis of periuring be execute vpone them with all rigor,
That is to say, confiscatioun of all their gudis mouabill, warding of their
persounis for eir and day, and langar enduring the Quenis will, and as infame
persounis, never habill to bruke office, honor, dignity nor benefice in time
tocum.

Anent adulteraris, Ca. xxj.
ITEM Anent persounis that are maryit, and ar oppin, manifest, commoun and
incorrigibill adulteraris, and will not desist and ceis thairfra, for feir of
any spiritual iurisdictioun, or Censuris of halie Kirk, to the greit perrell
of their awin saulis:

Thairfoir it is statute and ordanit in this present Parliament, that all sic
incorrigibill adulteraris, after that the process of halie Kirk, sa far as the
samin may extend to, be vsit vpone them for their inobedience and
contemptioun, be denuncit our Souerane Ladyis Rebellis and put to her horn,
and all their mouabill. etc. And swa na appellatioun interponit fra the said
Censuris of halie Kirk, to suspend the horning.

Anent malt makaris. Ca. xx^.
ITEM Anent the article proponit, twiching the greit exhorbitant derth rasit in
this Realm be malt makaris, and the greit oppressioun maid be them daily and
continually, vpone our Souerane Ladyis liegis, quhairthrow this Realm is not
gudlie seruit, like as the samin hes been in times bygane, and for remedy
heirof, and stanching of the pretendit murmr maid be sic malt men, anent the
making of the prices of all malt, sauld commounlie in this Realm: It is
deuisit, statute and ordanit, be my Lord Governor, with auise of the three
Estatis of Parliament, That because of the greit derth of fewall presently
occurrand, every malt man sall have of every boll of malt maid be him, for
his laubouris and fewall.iiij.s. of ilk boll of malt, mair nor the boll of beir
is commounlie sauld, to the effect, that our Souerane Lady, my Lord Governor,
and liegis of this Realm, may be honestly and substantiouslie seruit, as
accordis, vpone the prices foirsaidis. And the said act and ordinance for the
space of ane eir to endure.

Anent ferryaris. Ca. xxiij.
ITEM Forsamekill, as the Quenis grace my Lord Governor, and three Estatis of
Parliament, hauand respect to the greit and heavy oppressioun done to the liegis
of this Realm, and specially be ferryaris of Kinghorne, Quenis Ferry and
Dundie, in taking of their fraucht fra them, and that the Quenis lieges,
notwithstanding the wechtie chargeis and expensis debursit to sic ferryaris, are not seruit as appertenis to be done, and for remedy heirof, in respect of the
derth of viuers, dispensis with the act maid heirupone of befoir for ane eir:
It is statute and ordanit, that na manner of persoun, awnar of any boitis, at
the ferryis foirsaid, tak vpone hand to tak any fraucht fra any of our Souerane
Ladyis liegis for their portage, bot as after followis, that is to say, gif any
persoun wald have ane boit be him self, at the ferrie of Kinghorne, that he tak
for his fraucht and portage.x.s. And quhair company conuenis at the said
ferrie, the horse and man to pay for their portage.xij. d. And the man or woman
be him self but horse, to pay for their portage.vj. d. And at the ferryis of the
Quenis ferrie and Dundie, gif ane man desyris ane boit be him self, to pay for
his portage.iiij.s. And ever ilk man and horse.viij. d. And ilk man or woman be
them self.iiij. d. under the pane of deid, and confiscatioun of all their
gudis, with certificatioun to them, and they do the contrare, that they salbe
callit to particular diettis, and Justice courtis, and salbe punist thairfoir
with all rigor, as brekaris of the actis of Parliament.

Anent the slauchter of Lambis and Lapronis. Ca. xxiiij.
ITEM Forsamekill, as the derth of scheip, cuningis, and wild meit daily
incressis, and that throw the slauchter of the oung Lambis, Lapronis and oung
poutis of pertrik or wild foul, and to eschew sic derth in time cumming: It
is deuisit, statute and ordanit be my Lord Governor, with auise of the three
Estatis of Parliament, That na manner of persoun nor persounis, tak vpone hand
to by any Lambis to slay, and bring to market to be sauld, and that na Lambis
be slane be quhatsumeuer persounis, except in Nobillis and greit Barronis
housis to their meit, for the space of three eiris, and under the pane of
confiscatioun of all sic persounis gudes, and punissi^g of his persoun at my
Lord Gouernouris will. And that na manner of persoun tak vpone hand to slay any
Lapronis or oung poutis, except gentilmen and vthers Nobillis with halkis, or
by the samin in market or vtherwayis, during the said space, under the pane
foirsaid.

Anent beggaris. Ca. xxv.
ITEM Forsamekill, as their hes been diverse and sindrie actis maid of befoir,
and specially be King James the Fyf^ of good mind, quhome God assolie, for
stanching of beggaris. Notwithstanding in default of dew executioun of the said
act, the beggaris daily and continually multipleis and resortis in all placis
quhair my Lord Governor and vthers Nobillis conuenis: Swa that nane of them
may pas throw the streittis for raming and crying vpone them, contrare the
tenor of the saidis actis, for eschewin of the quhilk: It is deuisit, statute
and ordanit be my Lord Governor, with auise of the three Estatis of Parliament,
that the said act maid thairupone of befoir, be put to dew executioun in all
punctis, after the form and tenor of the samin, and that letters be direct to
make publicatioun be oppin proclamatioun at the market croces of all Burrowis of
this Realm, chargeing all Officiaris contenit in the said act to do the samin,
betuix this and the last day of March nixt tocum, conform to the said act,
and under the panis contenit in the samin, of the quhilk the tenor followis.
Item for refraning of the multitude of maisterfull and strange beggaris, It is
ordanit, that the act maid thairupone of befoir be King James the First,
appreuit and ratifeit be vthers our Souerane Lords predecessoures, be obseruit
and keipit, and put to scharp executiou^ in all punctis, with this additioun,
That na beggarris be tholit to beg in ane parochin, that are borne in ane other,
and that the heidismen of ilk parochin make takinnis and gif to the beggaris
thairof, and they to be sustenit within the bou^dis of that parochin, and that
nane vthers be seruit with almus within that parochin, bot they that beiris
that takin allanerlie, under the panis co^tenit in the said act. And that the
Justice Clerk make inquisitioun, and tak dictay heirupone at every Justice Air,
and ordanis letters to be direct to command and charge the Prouest and Baillies
of Edinburgh, and all vthers Prouestis, Baillies of Burrowis, Schireffis and
vthers Officiaris of the Kingis, to put this act to executioun in all punctis,
and that the samin be publist at all placis neidfull, swa that na man sall
pretend Ignorance, or allege he knew not the samin in time tocum.

Anent falls Notaris. Ca. xxvj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be my Lord Governor, with auise of the three
Estatis of Parliament, that the actis and statutis maid of befoir aganis falls
Notaris and witness, corrupparis and seducearis of them in writ, temporal or
spiritual courtis to be obseruit and keipit in all punctis, and ratifeis and
appreuis the samin of new, with this additioun, That all sic persounis salbe
punist in their persounis and gudis with all rigor, videlicet, prescriptioun,
banissing and dismembring of hand or tongue, and vthers panis prouydit be the
dispositioun of the commoun Law, both Canoun, Civil and statutis of the
Realm. And this act to be extendit to all manner of euidentis, actis,
obligatiounis, acquittancis or other wryttingis quhatsumeuer, and the makaris,
feinearis, vsaris, seducaris, cor^upcaris, and falsaris thairof, alsweill as to
^als Instrumentis.

Anent craftismen. Ca. xxvij.
ITEM Forsamekill, as my Lord Governor, and three Estatis of Parliament,
regardand the exhorbitant prices that every craftisman within Burgh, rasis
vpone our Souerane Ladyis liegis, in all sic thingis as pertenis to their
craft, swa that the prices ar dowblit and triblit be money of them, to the
greit hurt of the saidis liegis, quhilk is considderit to be of practik be the
Dekinnis of every craft, and the fault thairof is always in the Prouest and
Baillies of every Burgh, that ouerseis the saidis Dekinnis craftismen, and
correctis them not, conform to the act of Parliament: Thairfoir it is statute
and ordanit, that all Prouestis and Baillies of fre Burrowis with all
diligence, conuene the saidis Dekinnis and craftismen afoir them, and their on
every thing pertening to craftismen, to statute and ordane ressonabill prices
eff^^rand to their craft, and that the samin be put in writ and producit af^ir
the Lordis of the articlis in the nixt Parliament, to be haldin the third day
of April nixt tocum, to be considderit, be them, gif they be ressonabill, and
gif swa be, to be authorisit, and gif they be vnressonabill to be reformit. And
siclyke, that effeirand to the prices of victuallis, that the saidis Prouest
and Baillies cause the hostillaris to tak ane ressonabill price for ane manis
dennar and suppar, that they may hald their awin, and the Quenis liegis be not
sa greuit and hurt throw the greit prices, takin far abone all custume and use,
as hes been in this Realm afoir their dayis, and as beis statute heirupone in
Burgh, that the samin be deliuerit to the Schiref of the Schire to gar the
saidis prices be keipit to landwart. And gif any of the saidis Dekinnis or
hostillaris obeyis not the ordinance of the saidis Prouest and Baillies, that
they deprive them of their officis and privilege, and after they be depriuit,
gif they mell farther thairwith, to be callit to underly the Law to particular
diettis, afoir the greit Justice, as for contempning and breking of the actis
of Parliament, and to be punist in their persounis and gudis with all rigor.

Anent the examinatioun of Notaris. Ca. xxviij.
ITEM Because the act concerning Notaris, maid be the Kingis grace, King James
the Fyft, quhome God assolie, hes not hiddertillis been put to dew executioun:
Thairfoir it is thocht expedient be my Lord Governor, and three Estatis of
Parliament, that the said act be put to executioun in all punctis, after the
form and tenor of the samin, betuix this and the last day of March nixt
tocum, with this additioun following, That is to say, that every Schiref
within the boundis of his office, betuix this and the said day, bring or send
all Notaris temporal men, and the Ordinaris, to bring or send all spiritual
Notaris to the Burgh of Edinburgh, and their present them to the Lordis of
counsall, to be examinat be them, gif they be habill, worthy and qualifeit
for the said office of Notarie, and their to be admittit be them thairto,
suspendand fra the said last day of March forth all Notaris, unto the time of
their admissioun foirsaid, with certificatioun to them, that vsis the office
of Notarie, fra the said day forth, befoir they be admittit in manner foirsaid,
That their Instrumentis sall have na faith, and them selfis sall be punist as
falsaris of the Law.

Anent slaying of Hairis. Ca. xx^^.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the act maid of befoir for slaying of
Hairis in forbodin time, be obseruit and keipit in all punctis, after the
tenor thairof.

Anent slaying of Dais and Raise. Ca. xxx.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be my Lord Governor, with auise of y^ three
Estatis of Parliament, y^ the act maid be King James the third, and ratifeit be
our Souerane Lord of good mind, quhome God assolie, aganis them that slayis
Dais or Raise, their calfis or ^iddis, be put to executioun in all punctis,
after the form and tenor of the samin.

Anent the ordouring of every mannis house. Ca. xxxj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the act and ordinance maid befoir in
counsall, anentis the eschewing of derth, and the ordouring of every mannis
house in his coursis and discheis of meit, be obseruit and keipit in all
punctis, after the form and tenor thairof, and under the panis contenit in
the samin, of the quhilk the tenor followis. The quhilk day, forsamekill as
the Quenis grace, my Lord Governor, and Lordis of secreit counsall, hauand
respect to the greit and exhorbitant derth ryssin in this Realm of victuallis
and other stuff, for the sustentatioun of mankind, and daily encressand and
vnderstandand, that the occasioun thairof is the cause of the supers^uous cheir
vsit commounlie in this Realm, alsweill amangis small as greit men, to the
greit hurt of commoun weill of the samin, and dampnage to the body, quhilk
makis ane man vnhabill to exerce all leiffull and good warkis necessare. And
for remeid heirof, and stanching of sic derth and exhorbitant prices
foirsaidis: It is deuisit and ordanit, that na Archibischop Bischop nor Erlis,
have at his meis bot.viij. discheis of meit, nor na Abbot, Lord, Priour nor
Deine, have at his meis bot.vj. discheis of meit, nor na Barrone nor frehalder
have bot four discheis of meit at his meis, nor na Burges nor other
substantious man, spiritual nor temporal, sall have at his meis bot.iij.
discheis, and bot ane kind of meit in every dische. And for observing and
keiping of this act and ordinance foirsaid, It is deuisit and ordanit, that
quhatsumeuer Archibiscop, Bischop or Earl, beis fundin brekand the samin, that
he sall content and pay to my Lord Governor and the authority, at every time
he faileis, ane hundredth pund for every failie. And gif any Lord, Abbot,
Priour or Deine, faileis and brekis the said act, he sall content and pay for
every failie, ane hundredth markis, and gif any Barrone or frehalder faileis,
he sall pay at every time and failie.xl. pund. And gif any Burges or other
substantious man, spiritual or temporal faileis, he sall pay at every time
and failie.xx. markis in manner foirsaid. And gif any other small persoun or
persounis, wald presume to brek this present act and ordinance, or do in the
contrare thairof, he salbe takin and punist in his persoun and gudis at my Lord
Gouernouris will for their contemptioun. And quhatsumeuer other persoun or
persounis, of quhatsumeuer estate, degree or conditioun, that ever they be of,
that faileis and brekis this act and ordinance, that he salbe repute and
haldin, as ane man geuin to his voluptuositie, and contempnar of the authority,
and not to the commoun weill, and howbeit, that any man of greiter Estate, nor
ane Burges cum in Burgh to any Burges ludgeing, It sall not be lesum to the
said Burges to make any maa discheis bot effeirand to the Estate of the master
awnar of the said ludgeing, without that the Lord, Barrone or strangear make his
awin prouisioun and tabill, alwayis within the ordinance foirsaid: Prouyding
alwayis, that this present act and ordinance stryke not vpone ule and Pasche,
patroun dayis, mariageis nor bankettis to be maid to strangearis of other
Realms, and the said bankettis to be maid allanerlie be Archibischoppis,
Bischoppis, Erlis, Lordis, Abbottis, Priouris, Deinis, Barronis, Prouestis and
Baillies of Burrowis. And in likewise, prouyding, that na Scottisman make banquet
to any other Scottisman bot in manner foirsaid. And for the mair sure keiping of
the said act and ordinance, Ordanis, that the Schiref of the Schire and their
Deputis, Prouestis, Aldermen and Baillies of Burrowis, ilk ane within his awin
boundis and iurisdictioun, to tak inquisitioun of the brekaris of the samin,
and roll their namis, and deliver the samin to my Lord The saurar, to the
effect, that the persounis brekaris and contempnaris of the said act may be
callit to Justice Airis or particular diettis, as my Lord Governor and
counsall sall think may expedient, and punist in manner foirsaid.

Anent paking and peling. Ca. xxxij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the actis maid of befoir anentis paking
and peling, be our Souerane Lord, quhome God assolie, and his progenitouris, be
obseruit and keipit in all punctis, after the form and tenor thairof.

Anent foirstallaris. Ca. xxxiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be my Lord Governor, with auise of the three
Estatis of Parliament, that the actis and statutis maid of befoir, aganis
regrataris and foirstallaris of mercatis, be obseruit and keipit in all
punctis, after the form and tenor of the samin, and under the panis contenit
thairintill.

Anent the having of quhite fische forth of the Realm. Ca. xxxiiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be my Lord Governor, with auise of the three
Estatis of Parliament, That all actis and statutis maid be our Souerane Lord
and his predecessouris, anentis the having of quhite fische forth of the
Realm, be obseruit and keipit in all punctis, after the form and tenor
thairof.

Anent Prentaris. Ca. xxxv.
ITEM Forsamekill as their is diverse Prentaris in this Realm, that daily and
continually prentis bukis concerning the faith, ballattis, sangis,
blasphematiounis rymes, alsweill of Kirkmen as temporal, and vthers Tragedeis,
alsweill in latin as in Inglis tongue, not seen, vewit and considderit be the
superiouris, as appertenis to the defamatioun and sclander of the liegis of
this Realm, and to put ordour to sic inconuenientis: It is deuisit, statute
and ordanit be my Lord Governor, with auise of the three Estatis of Parliament,
That na Prentar presume, attempt or tak vpone hand, to prent any bukis,
ballattis, sangis, blasphematiounis, rymes or Tragedeis, outher in latin or
Inglis tongue in any times tocum, unto the time the samin be seen, vewit and
examit be sum wise and discreit persounis depute thairto be the Ordinaris
quhatsumeuer. And thairefter ane license had and obtenit fra our Souerane Lady,
and my Lord Governor, for Imprenting of sic bukis, under the pane of
confiscatioun of all the Prentaris gudis, and banissing him of the Realm for
ever.

Anent Monsieure Dosell. Ca. xxxvj.
THE quhilk day, It was put in remembrance to my Lord Gouernouris grace, and
three Estatis being present in Parliament, how that Monsieure Dosel, the may
Christin Kingis Lieutennent and Ambaxatour, was haistelie to depart of this
Realm to his master, and that his good service done in their partis, both in
time of peax and weir, sold be writtin to the said may Christin King, not
allanerlie thankand his grace of the samin, bot alswa suppleand to thank and
reward the said Monsieure Dosell: And thairfoir it was concludit be the three
Estatis, that my Lord Secretar sold make letters in our Souerane Ladyis name,
my Lord Gouernouris and thairis, to the said may Christin King, in ampill and
effertuous manner, to the effect foirsaid.

Ratificatioun of the contract maid betuix my Lord Governor and Schir James
Hammiltoun. Ca. xxxvij.
ITEM The three Estatis of Parliament, hes ratifeit and appreuit the contract
maid betuix my Lord Gouernouris grace, and Schir James Hammiltoun of Craufurde
Iohne Knycht, quhilk is Registrate in the bukis of counsall in all punctis, and
ordanis the samin to have the strenth of ane act of Parliament.

Ratificatioun of the act maid betuix the Quenis grace and my Lord Governor.
Ca. xxxviij.
THE quhilk day, the three Estatis of Parliament, hes ratifeit and appreuit, and
be the tenor heirof, ratifeis and appreuis, the act maid betuix the Quenis
grace, mother to our Souerane Lady on that ane part, and my Lord Gouernouris
grace on that other part, of the dait, at Striuiling the.xviij. day of
November, the eir of God ane thousand five hundredth.xliiij. eiris, in all
punctis and articlis, quha^^ of the tenor followis. At Striuiling the.xviij.
day of November, the eir of God ane thousand five hundredth.xliiij. eiris. The
quhilk day my Lord Governor, the Quenis grace, and haill counsall hes
dischargeit, cassit and annullit, dischargeis, cassis and annullis all actis
and ordinancis maid of befoir at quhatsumeuer conuentiounis at Striuiling, or
quhatsumeuer other place, suspendand my Lord Governor fra administratioun of
his office of gouernament and tutorie, and decernis the samin to have been fra
the beginning, and to be in all times cumming of nane auale, force nor effect,
togidder with the pretendit summoundis rasit aganis my Lord Governor, for
depriuatioun of him fra his office of gouername^t and tutorie, and dischargeis
the samin for now and ever. Attour, my Lord Governor, with auise of the Quenis
grace and counsall, Hes declairit, and declairis, that the Nobill men and all
other persounis, that was at the making of the saidis actis, ordinancis and
summou^dis, or hes been with her grace sensyne in counsall or vtherwayis,
aganis my Lord Governor and his authority, hes committit na fault nor crime,
and thairfoir my Lord Governor and counsall foirsaid, dischargeis them
thairof, for now and ever, and that they never salbe callit nor accusit
thairfoir, nor incur any dampnage, skaith or hurt in their persounis, landis,
beneficis and gudis, and gif his grace hes consauit any displesure or rancour
aganis any manner of persoun or persounis, for the causis foirsaidis, he
remittis the samin hartfullie, and forther ordanis ane declaratioun heirof to
be maid in Parliament.

HIC FINIVNTVR STATVTA EXCELLENTISSIMAE PRINCIPIS MARIAE REGINAE SCOTORVM FACTA
PER MAGNIFICVM PRINCIPEM IACOBVM COMITEM ARRANIAE DO. HAMMILTOVN etc. REGNI
GVBERNATOREM. ET SEQVVNTVR STATVTA PALIAMENTORVM EXCELLENTISSIMAE PRINCIPIS
MARIAE TENTORVM PER SERENISSIMAM PRINCIPEM DO. MARIAM REGINAE MATREM DOTARIAM
ET GVBERNATRICEM REGNI.
PARLIAMENTVM EXCELLENTISSIMAE PRINCIPIS MARIAE REGINAE Scotorum tentum apud
Edinburgh vicesimo die Mensis Iunij Anno Do. Millesimo Quingentesimo
Quinquagesimo quinto, Per Magnisicam and excellentem Principem Mariam Reginam
Do. No. Reginae matrem dotariam ac Gubernatriceni Regni praesentibus tribus
Regni statibus.
Anent the liberty of halie Kirk. Ca. j.
IN primis, It is statute and ordanit be the Quenis grace Dowriar and Regent,
with auise of the three Estatis of Parliament, that the fredome of halie Kirk
and immuniteis and priuilegeis of the samin be obseruit, keipit and defendit be
our Souerane Lady, with all liberteis in honor and worschip thairof, siclyke
and als frelie, as they have been in times of her may Nobill progenitouris
Kingis of Scotland, and the brekaris and offendaris thairof to be punist with
all rigor.

Anent the making and delivering of reuersiounis. Ca. ij.
ITEM In likewise it is statute and ordanit, that all reuersiounis, to be maid
in time tocum, and all bandis and obligatiounis for making, seiling, and
delivering of reuersiounis be maid under the seill and subscriptioun of the
promittar and geuar thairof. And gif the party can not subscriue to subscriue
the samin with his hand led at the pen be ane Notar. And gif any Instrument or
other kind of wrytting be maid for giving of reuersiounis, or beirand and
contenand reuersioun, That wrytting or Instrument sall make na faith, bot gif it
be insert with consent of the parteis in Judgment in the bukis of sum ordinar
Judge: Except gif it happinnis within Burgh, that the time of resignatioun of
landis in the Baillies handis the Clerk of the Burgh Notar to the sesing giving
be the said resignatioun be requyrit than instantly of Instrument in his
handis of the reuersioun befoir the samin witness requyrit in the Instrument of
sesing, and gif^s his Instrument thairupone: Quhilk sall make faith as
sufficient reuersioun. And als that all dischargeis of reuersiounis in all
times to cum be seilit and subscriuit in manner abone writtin. And gif the
party can not subscriue to subscriue the samin with his hand at the pen led be
ane autentik Notar, and seilit with his seill, as is abone writtin.

Anent warning fra redemie landis and the pant for non removing. Ca. iij.
ITEM In likewise It is statute and ordanit, that gif any persounes hauand
rycht be reuersioun to redeem lands or other possessiounis, makis or causis
make lauchfull warning to all parteis, fra quhome the saidis landis or other
possessiounis aucht and sold be redemit, to compeir at ane certane day in the
place nemmit in the said reuersioun, for ressaifing of the s^wmes of money and
takkis, gif any be specifeit thairin, and at the day warnit fulfilling all
thingis, as accordis, conform to the reuersioun for his part, gif the parteis
warnit, as said is, compeiris, and refusis to grant the saidis landis or
possessiounis lauchfullie redemit, or absentis them selfis, gif their be na
takkis to rin after the redemptioun of the landis or possessiounis, or the
takkis being run out, the haifar of the rycht to the reuersioun causand
lauchfull warning to be maid to the parteis foirsaidis, and all vthers
occupyaris befoir any witsonday term after the redemptioun, to fly and remove
fra the saidis landis and possessiounis, the redemptioun in manner abone
specifeit being fundin lauchfull, and the landis be vertew thairof decernit
lauchfullie redemit: In that caice, the parteis, quha sold have grantit the
redemptioun of the saidis landis refusit and absentit, salbe callit as violent
possessouris thairof fra the term of witsonday, befoir the quhilk lauchfull
warning was maid to remove, as said is, siclyke as the landis and possessiounis
had been grantit lauchfullie redemit the day of the redemptioun.

Anent the additioun maid to the act of slauchters. Ca. iiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that gif any persoun or persounis slayis ane
other, the persoun being chargeit to find souertie within sax dayis, and findis
not the samin, or souertie being fundin compeiris not at the day, and swa he
put to the horn, and any time thairefter within eir and day, he offeris of new
to underly the Law, and to find souertie thairupone, the panis salbe dowblit,
souertie being fundin, and he relaxit. And gif he compeiris not at that day,
and of new beis denuncit Rebel, his relaxatioun maid and geuin be vertew of
the last souertie fundin, sall na wise help him anent the tinsall of the
lyferent of his landis, bot he sall tyne the samin, as he had not been relaxit
fra the first horning. And this to be extendit to all relaxatiounis maid within
eir and day after the first horning, and to art and part of the slauchter with
the panis ay dowblit. And attour, all alienatioun, contract, obligatioun and
vthers thingis quhatsumeuer, that salbe done be him, to be null and of nane
auale in the self, without any process of reductioun, during the time of his
relaxatioun vpone his souerteis, fundin after the first horning: Swa that he
compeir not at the day, and enter to the quhilk, he findis souerties, siclyke
as and he had annalyit, contractit, oblist or done other thingis, beand Rebel
and at the horn. And this act to be extendit in the fauouris of vthers
superiouris, alsweill as unto the Quenis grace. And gif it happinnis any
persoun or persounis committaris of slauchters, for non finding of souerteis,
or souertie being fundin for non comperance, beis denuncit Rebellis and put to
the horn, and thairefter passis to gyrth, and offeris to find souertie to
abide the Law, for the forthochtfellony, in that caice souertie being fundin,
and they compeirand at the day, and acquit of the forthochtfellony, to be
restorit agane to the gyrth, and the act foirsaid to have na place aganis
them, bot vpone the secund horning.

Anent process to be had aganis persounis passand forth of the Realm. Ca. v.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that gif any persoun or persounis beis
summound and warnit lauchfullie aucht dayis befoir their departing forth of the
Realm, and passis forth of the samin thairefter, Nisi reipublicae causa the
party persewar sall have process vpone his first summounding be continuatiounis
in siclyke manner, as and his party had not past of the Realm be warni^gis
on.xv. dayis, langar or schortar, as the persewar sall desire, makand warning
at the dwelling place of the defendar, gif he any hes: And faileing, that he
have na dwelling place, nor hes not constitute procuratouris, to be warnit at
the market croce of the heid Burgh of the Schire, quhair he had may resort
befoir his departing. And this act to have place in civil actiounis
allanerlie, bot not aganis witness.

The ordour for summoning of parteis to compeir befoir the Justice or vthers
Iugeis. Ca. vj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that any persoun summound to compeir befoir
the Justice, his Deputis, or vthers Iugeis within this Realm, hauand powar of
Iusticiarie in criminal causis, the copy of the saidis letters or precept,
quhairby he is summound, salbe deliuerit to him, gif he can be personally
apprehendit, and faileing thairof, salbe deliuerit to his wife or seruandis, or
affixt vpone the et of his dwelling place, gif he any hes, and thairefter oppin
proclamatioun being maid at the heid Burgh of the Schire, ane other copy to be
affixt vpone the market croce: Prouyding alwayis, that gif their be man
persounis nor two contenit in the letter, being all callit vpone ane deid and
crime, in that caice, two copyis to be deliuerit to two of the principal
nemmit in the saidis letters, or than geuin to their wyfis, seruandis, or
affixt vpone their ettis or dwelling placis, gif they any have, and ane copy
left and affixt vpone the market croce, quhair the publicatioun is maid, to be
sufficient to the haill persounis, quhatsumeuer they be contenit in the saidis
letters.

Anent the giving of sesingis. Ca. vij.
ITEM Forsamekill, as in vmquhile our Souerane Lordis time, that last
deceissit, It was statute and ordanit, that all sesingis quhilkis passis vpone
preceptis of the Chancellarie, to be geuin be the Schiref Clerk or his Deputis:
Sen the quhilk act their is be occasioun of weir and greit troublis diverse
sesingis geuin be vthers Notaris vpone preceptis past forth of the said
Chancellarie: Thairfoir the three Estatis of Parliament, dispensis with that
fault of all sesingis geuin be vthers Notaris, sen the making of the foirsaid
act, and ordanis the said act to be publist, and have effect in time cumming,
with this additioun, That vpone all preceptis past forth of the Chancellarie,
the Schiref, Stewart or Baillie, alsweill the Regalitie as Rialtie, or other
Deputis, salbe requyrit to pas to gif sesing with the Schiref Clerk and his
Deputis. And gif the Stewart, Baillie or their Deputis refusis to pas and gif
sesing, than the party haisar of that precept to put any other Baillie to gif
sesing, as he sall think may expedient.

Anent the ordant for giving of curatouris to minouris. Ca. viij.
ITEM Because it is understand, that be the giving of curatouris to minouris be
sindrie Iugeis, their hes been greit skaith sustenit be the saidis minouris:
Thairfoir it is statute and ordanit, that in all times cumming, quhen any minor
passis the eiris of his tutorie, and desyris curatouris, That he cum befoir his
Judge Ordinar, and desire of him ane summoundis or edict to warn two at the
leist of the may honest and famous of the minouris kin, and all vthers hauand
interes, quhilk salbe warnit lauchfullie, That is to say, the special
persounis personally, or at their dwelling placis, geuand ane copy to their
wyfis or seruandis, or affixand it on their ettis or duris and vthers haifand
interes generally at the market croce of the heid Burgh of the Schire, quhair
the saidis minouris hes their landis or gudis, to compeir at ane certane day,
vpone.ix. dayis warning at the leist, to heir and see the curatouris desyrit be
the said minour, to be geuin to him unto his perfect age of.xxj. eiris, and
cautiou^ fundin, de fideli administratione, quhilkis beand geuin in manner
foirsaid, they sall not be reuokit, nor dischargeit, nor vthers chosin to the
minour, unto the time they be callit befoir the Lordis of counsall, or vthers
Iugeis Ordinar, at the will of the barn, to heir and see them dischargeit,
and reuokit for ressonabill causis. Quhilkis being fundin of verity, they than
to be dischargeit, and vthers curatouris geuin in their placis be the ordour
foirsaid with cautioun, and na vtherwyse.

Anent citting of flesche in Lentrene and vthers dayis forbiddin. Ca. ix.
ITEM Forsamekill, as their is diverse insolent and evil geuin persounis, not
regardand the Law of God, and constitutioun of halie Kirk, bot in hie
tontemptioun thairof, and to the greit sclander of the Christin pepill eittis
flesche in Lentrene, and vthers days forbiddin be our halie mother the Kirk
and Lawis thairof: Thairfoir for the repressing and punischement of the quhilk,
it is statute and ordanit, that na persoun nor persounis, contempnandlie and
wilfully without dispensatioun or requyring of license of their Ordinar, their
Persoun, Vicar or Curat, eit flesche planelie or priualie in the saidis dayis
and times forbiddin, under the pane of confiscatioun of all their gudis
mouabill, to be applyit to our Souerane Ladyis use, and gif the eittaris hes na
gudis, their persounis to be put in presoun, their to remane eir and day, and
forther enduring the Quenis grace will, but prejudice of the spiritual
punitioun, conform to the commoun Law.

Anent redemptioun of landis. Ca. x.
ITEM Because their is diverse and sindrie reuersiounis maid and geuin for
redemption and outquyting of landis, beirand and contenand gold and silver of
certane special valor and price, and the said gold and silver is not now to
be gottin, quhairthrow the haifaris of sic reuersiounis hes been often times
differrit fra redemptioun of their landis: Thairfoir it is deuifit, statute and
ordanit, anent all reuersiounis beirand and contenand gold and silver, or ather
of them of certane special valor that price or cuinie. And gif sic gold and
silver can not be had nor gottin within the Realm, the haifaris of they
reuersiounis may redeem the landis specifeit thairin, be vertew of their saidis
reuersiounis, geuand gold and silver, haifand course for the time, beand of the
samin valor, wecht and fynes, as the gold and silver specifeit in the saidis
reuersiounis, conform to the commoun Law. And this act to be extendit to all
and quhatsumeuer reuersiounis bygane and tocum. etc.

Anentis resignatiounis ad perpetuam remanentiam. Ca. xj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that all resignatiounis to be maid be
vassallis in time tocum, of their propirteis in the superiouris handis, ad
perpetuam remanentiam beand maid be procuratorie, the said procuratorie salbe
seilit and subscriuit be the vassallis handis, and gif he can not write, to be
subscriuit with his hand at the pen, led be ane autentik Notar and seilit, as
said is. And gif the said resignatioun beis maid be the vassal personally, ad
perpetuam remanentiam That the Instrument thairof be seilit with the seill of
the resignar, and subscriuit with his hand at the pen, led be ane Notar in
manner foirsaid, and na resignatioun ad perpetuam remanentiam to have faith in
time tocum, vtherwayis than is abone specifeit.

Anent the warning of tennentis. Ca. xij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that in all times cumming the warning of all
tennentis and vthers, to flit and remove fra landis, mylnis, fischingis and
possessiounis quhatsumeuer, salbe vsit in manner following, That is to say,
lauchfull warning being maid any time within the eir.xl. dayis befoir the Feist
of witsonday, outher personally or at their dwelling placis, and at the ground
of the landis, and ane copy deliuerit to the wife or seruandis, and faileing
thairof, to be affixit vpone the ettis or duris of the dwelling placis of the
saidis landis, gif any be, and thairefter the samin precept of warning to be
red in the paroche Kirk, quhair the landis lyis, vpone ane Sunday befoir nune,
the time of the hie Mess, and ane copy left and affixit vpone the may
patent dure of the Kirk.xl. dayis befoir the term, and na forther laying forth
of stressis, and remowing vpone wednisday, to be vsit in time tocum. And gif
the party warnit in manner foirsaid, remouis not at the term, in that caice,
the warnar sall incontinent, or sa sone as plesis him, cum to the Lordis of
counsall or to the Schiref of the Schire, or vthers Iugeis Ordinaris hauand
iurisdictioun, schawand his precept of warning, ordourlie execute and indorsat
and sal have letters or precept to charge the parteis warnit and possessouris
of that ground, to compeir befoir the saidis Lordis, Schireffis or their
Deputis, or vthers Iugeis Ordinaris foirsaidis, hauand iurisdictioun, vpone sax
dayis warning or langar, at the will and desire of the persewar, to heir and
see them decernit to remove, desist and ceis, conform to the precept of
warning and executioun thairof, or else to schaw ane ressonabill cause, quhy
they sold not do the samin, with certificatioun to them and they failie, that
letters salbe direct simpliciter vpone them in the said matter. At the quhilk
day gif they compeir not, the Lordis, Schireffis or vthers Iugeis Ordinar
hauand iurisdictioun sall decerne them to remove, desist and ceis fra they
landis. And gif they compeir, and instantly schawis sufficient tytill to bruke
the landis, in that caice, the samin Judge to proceid and do Justice, as
accordis of the Law. And gif the party compeiris and schawis na thing, bot
makis allegiance, and offeris him to impreif the indorsingis, in that caice, he
sall not be hard in Judgment, bot gif he find sufficient cautioun to the warnar
than instantly, that gif his allegiance being fundin releuant, be not
sufficiently verifeit and prouin be him, that the proffeittis, dampnage and
interes, quhilkis the said warnar or any vthers hauand interes, hes sustenit,
or sall happin to sustene, be the dilay of the foirsaid allegiance, be
refoundit to him. And to the effect, that this ordour may have sufficient
process in all times tocum: It is deuisit, statute and ordanit, that all
Schireffis and vthers Iugeis Ordinar, hauand iurisdictioun, as said is, be
their selfis or their sufficient Deputis, be reddy to sit be fensit courtis,
all the lauchfull.xv. dayis after immediately the Feist of Trinity Sunday, for
doing of Justice in the saidis causis, in manner abone specifeit. And gif the
Schireffis or Iugeis Ordinaris, hauand iurisdictioun in manner foirsaid, and
their Deputis faileis, to be reddy in granting of preceptis, and doing of
Justice for observing of this ordour, in that caice, they sall pay to the
party their haill dampnage, interes and expensis but prejudice of the actioun,
aganis the violent occupyaris and possessouris foirsaidis. And als that na
aduotatioun of causis be takin be the Lordis fra the Judge Ordinar, except it be
for deidlie feid, or the Schiref principal, or the Judge Ordinar be party, or
the causis of the Lordis of counsall, and their Aduocattis, Scribis and members.

The act maid anentis the slauchters of parteis in persute and defense of their
actiounis and causis. Ca. xiij.
ITEM Because of the odious crimes of slauchters, daily committit within this
Realm, and specially the slaying of parteis persewand and defendand their
actiounis: For punischement of the quhilk, the three Estatis of Parliament, hes
declairit, statute and ordanit, abone the panis contenit in the actis of
Parliament maid for slauchters of befoir, That gif outher the defendar or
persewar slayis vthers after the rasing of the summoundis or precept, and
lauchfull executioun thairof, during the time of the pley dependand befoir the
giving of the decreit, the committar of the slauchter, gif it be the defendar,
salbe condempnit in the haill actioun, at the instance of the nerrest of the
kin of him, that is slane hauand richt thairto, without any probatioun of the
libell persewit, except summar cognitioun to be takin of the slauchter. And gif
the persewar slayis the defendar, in that caice, the nerrest of the kin of the
defendar, that micht be persewit for that actioun sall, have absoluitour fra
the libell of the persewar, and the process of transferring respective in this
cause to be vpone.xxj. dayis warning without diet, tabill or continuatioun of
other summoundis. And gif the slayar hes landis or lyferentis, and beis
denuncit Rebel, and put to the horn for the said slauchter, the slayar
incontinent after the denunciatioun sall time his lyferent of his landis for
his lyfetyme without any forther disay for eir and day thairefter.

And gif the slayar hes na landis, the Quenis grace Regent promittis to gif na
respect nor remissioun in our Souerane Ladyis name to the slayar during her
time: Prouyding alwayis, that the actioun be not coft or vtherwayis purchest,
or maid be the persewar for cummers of party, bot be their awin proper actioun
proceidit vpone ane good ground and foundament, at the sycht and discretioun of
the Lordis of counsall. And this act unto the Feist of Martymes, the eir of God
ane thousand five hundredth.lvj. eiris to endure allanerlie.

Anent the having of talloun, victuallis and flesche forth of this Realm. Ca.
xiiij.
ITEM Because ane greit part of the liegis of this Realm, and vthers
strangearis, hes their diverse eiris bygane caryit forth of the samin victuallis
and flesche, quhairthrow greit derth daily incressis: Thairfoir it is statute
and ordanit now, that nane of our Souerane Ladyis liegis nor strangearis in
time cumming carry any victuallis, talloun or flesche forth of this Realm to
other partis, except samekill as salbe their necessare victualling for their
vayage, under the pane of escheting of the said victual or flesche, to our
Souerane Ladyis use, togidder with the rest of all their gudis mouabill to be
applyit and inbrocht to our Souerane Ladyis use, as escheit:

Prouyding alwayis, that it salbe leiffull to the inhabitantis of the Burrowis
of Air, Iruin, Glasgow, Dumbertane and vthers our Souerane Ladyis liegis
dwelland at the west seyis, to have bakin breid, browin aill, and aquauite to
the Ilis to bertour with other Merchandice. And this act to be extendit to the
masters and skipparis of sic veschellis, as ressaifis sic victuallis, flesche
and ^alloun, as to the awnaris of the saidis gudis.

Anent the cumming to the bar for defense or persute in criminal causis. Ca.
xv.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that gif any persoun or persounis being callit
to underly the Law befoir the Justice, his Deputis, or other hauand powar to
sit in criminal actiounis compeirand at the day, they ar callit to, quhat
number that ever they be of, being all callit on ane crime, They sall have
allanerlie with them at the bar sax of their may honest, wise, substantious
freindis, habill to gif counsall with their Aduocattis to defend. And the
party persewar of that crime to have with them four of their freindis
allanerlie: Swa that be multitude of freindis cummand to the bar the getting of
ane assyse sall not be stoppit. And the brekaris of this act to be punist in
this manner, That is to say, the Justice, or vthers Iugeis foirsaidis to charge
the brekaris to enter their persounis in waird, under the pane of Rebellioun,
and putting of them to the horn, and gif they dissobey to put them to the
horn. And gif they obey and enteris in waird, their to remane during the
Quenis grace will.

Anentis nulliteis. Ca. xvj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that all nulliteis be ressaifit and have
process be way of exceptiounis or replyis, and all tytillis, contractis,
infeftmentis, or vthers thingis quhatsumeuer, that are null of the Law, to be
declairit in time cumming null, and of nane auale be exceptioun or reply in
that samin instance, they ar producit: Prouyding alwayis, that the party,
aganis quhome the said exceptiounis or reply of nullitie is proponit, have
siclyke day to call his warrant befoir the answering thairto, as he mycht or
sold have had, in caice he had been callit be way of actioun, to have hard his
tytill, contract, infeftment, or other thing producit be him declairit null of
the Law.

Anentis liggis and band^s. Ca. xvij.
ITEM Because it is thocht aganis all Law and obedience of subiectis towart
their Princis the making of particulare liggis, outher in Burgh or to land, and
giving and taking of bandis of manrent, and mantenance respective: Thairfoir it
is statute and ordanit, that all liggis maid in times bygane be null, and of
nane auale. And all bandis of manrent and mantenance in likewise, be null, and
of nane auale, except heretabill bandis geuin of befoir, or geuin for asythment
of slauchters in time bygane. And dischargeis all making of ligges or bandis in
time tocu^, and that the ressaifaris and gifaris thairof in times bygane be fre
ather of other in time cu^ming, and of any proffeit be lyferent of landis,
takkis, teindis, bailliereis or eirlie payment grantit or geuin for the saidis
bandis of manrent, to return to the gifaris, as the samin had never been
geuin. For the declairing heirof, the brukaris of the saidis lyferentis of
landis, takkis, teindis, bailliereis or eirlie proffeit for bandis of manrent
sall answer to the gifar thairof, for the said band vpone.xxj. dayis warning,
but diet or tabill, befoir the Lordis of counsall, to heir and see the saidis
lyferent of landis, takkis, teindis, bailliereis or eirlie proffeit geuin for
the saidis bandis, be decernit to return agane to him be this act. Quhilkis
being declairit be the saidis Lordis, to return to the gifaris, They sall make
their lauchfull warning.xl. dayis befoir the Feist of witsonday nixt
thairefter, and intromet with their awin, as accordis. And quhatsumeuer persoun
or persounis, that makis liggis, or geuis or takis band of manrent and
mantenance respective in any time cumming, they salbe punist be putting of
their persounis in waird, their to remane during the Quenis grace will.

Anentis Notaris. Ca. xviij.
ITEM The Quenis grace Dowrear, and Regent of this Realm, and the three Estatis
of Parliament of the samin, considdering the greit and money falsettis daily
done within this Realm be Notaris, and that our Souerane Lord King James the
Fy^t, and in likewise our Souerane Lady in her Parliament haldin at Edinburgh,
the first day of Februar, the eir of God ane thousand five hundredth.lj. eiris,
maid actis for ordouring of Notaris, and punischement of falsaris, quhilkis as
it hes taken na dew and effec^ull executioun: Thairfoir it is statute, and
ordanit, that all Notaris within this Realm, both spiritual and temporal,
be causit to cum be their Ordinaris, Schireffis, Stewartis and Baillies
respective, to the Burgh of Edinburgh, their to compeir personally befoir the
Lordis of counsall, or that the saidis Lordis direct their letters, requyring
and chargeing all Notaris within this Realm to compeir befoir them, as said
is, bringand with them their creatiounis and haill protocollis, betuix this
and the Feist of witsonday nixt to cum, at sic dayis as salbe appointit and
assignit be the saidis Lordis, to be examinat, and their creatiounis viseit be
them, their protocollis producit to be markit be the saidis Lordis, and the
leuis numberit, and the blankis markit, and the said protocoll buikis not to be
seen nor red, bot to be markit in presence of the said Notar, and deliuerit
agane to him but any inspectioun. And as they be fundin qualifeit and admittit
be the saidis Lordis of counsal, to use the office of Notarie thairefter.

And that na Notar, be quhatsumeuer powar he be creat, use the office of
Notarie within this Realm in time cumming, bot gif he first present him self
to the saidis Lordis, schawand his creatioun, and be admittit be them as
qualifeit thairto. And that na Notaris that sall happin to be dischargeit be
the saidis Lordis, or not admittit be them heirefter, use the office of
Notarie, under the pane after specifeit. And attour, it is ordanit, that all
Notaris to be admittit, as said is, geuand Instrumentis, and requyrand witness
thairto, they sall require the saidis witness quhair they dwell, or tak sum
other evident takin of them, and insert the samin in their saidis
Instrumentis, that the witness may be knawin, being present at that time.
Forther, gif any Notaris beis convict of falset, and not admittit be the Lordis
in manner foirsaid, and use the office of Notarie, they salbe punist, as
followis, that is to say, their haill mouabill gudis to be escheit, and applyit
to our Souerane Ladyis use, and they to want their rycht hand, and to be banist
the Realm for ever. And forther they salbe punist to the tinsal of their life
inclusiue, as the quality of the cause requyris, be sycht and discretioun of
the Judge, and the causaris of they falsattis to be done, to ressaif the samin
punischement in their persounis and gudis. And because in the act maid be our
Souerane Lady in her Parliament foirsaid all Notaris war suspendit fra the last
day of March thairefter, unto the time of their admissioun be the Lordis
foirsaidis, it being co^sidderit, that the said act tuke not as it dew
executioun: Thairfoir the Quenis grace Regent, with the auise of the three
Estatis, dispensis and suppleis any fault be that part of the said act, in all
Instrumentis geuin sensyne, and all Instrumentis to be geuin unto the Feist of
witsonday nixt tocum foirsaid.

Anentis woll, and other stapill gudis custumabill. Ca. xix.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that na persoun nor persounis send nor carry
woll, skin, hydis or other stapill gudis custumabill, forth of this Realm be
land in the Realm of Ingland, under the pane of escheting of the samin, to be
inbrocht to our Souerane Ladyis use. And als the brekaris of this act to be
punist in their persounis at her grace will, and gif they gudis caryit, can not
be apprehendit, the away takar and hauar thairof forth of the Realm, as said
is, sall pay als mekill as the valor of they gudis caryit, to our Souerane
Lady, he being convict of the crime, and to be punist in manner above writtin.

Anentis all mesouris and wechtis. Ca. xx.
ITEM Forsamekill, as be vmquhile our Souerane Ladyis may Nobill
predecessouris Kingis James the First and Feird, It was statute and ordanit,
that all mesouris, both pynt, quart, fyrlot, peck, elnwand, stane and pund, to
be of ane quantity to by with, and that na Burgh have ane wecht to by with,
and ane other to sell, different in wecht thairfra, bot that all wechcis,
mesuris and mettis for bying and selling to be universal both to Burgh and to
land, in all times thairefter, quhilkis actis as it hes not been put to dew
executioun: Thairfoir it is statute and ordanit in this present Parl^ament,
that their persounis under writtin, or any three of them, that is to say,
Williame Bischop of Dumbla^e, Robert Bischop of Orknay, Master Abraham
Creichtoun Prouest of Dunglas, Schir Williame Hammiltoun of Sanchar Knycht,
Schir Richard Maitland of Ledingtoun Knycht, Master Thomas Marioribankis of
Ratho, and Thomas Meineis Prouest of Abirdene, conuene in the Burgh of
Edinburgh, and cause the elnwand the quart, pynt, fyrlot, peck stane and pund,
be brocht to them fra the townis of Striuiling, Linlithquo, Lanerk, and be the
samin as they find to make ane universal wecht of the stane and pund, ane
universal mesoure of the quart, pynt, fyrlot, peck, elnwand, conform to the
act maid be King James y^ Feird thairupone, except the watter met to remane
according to the use of the cuntrie, to be direct forth to the haill liegis of
this Realm, with the quhilkis they salbe haldin to by, sell, met, mesoure,
wey, ressaif and deliver, and be na other met, mesoure nor wecht, and quha dois
in the contrare heirof, salbe punist for falset, conform to the Law. And this
ordour to be maid be the persounis foirsaidis, or any three of them, betuix
this and the Feist of Alhallowmes nixt tocum, but any forther dilay, and
thairefter publicatioun to be maid in all partis of this Realm, as accordis.

Anentis the giving of sesingis vpone preceptis not past forth of the
Chancellarie. Ca. xxj.
ITEM Anent the giving of sesingis vpone preceptis, that passis not forth of
the Chancellarie, to quhatsumeuer persoun or persounis: It is statute and
ordanit, that the takaris of the sesing, ather air, vassal or subuassall
within eir and day present his sesing to the Schiref Clerk of the Schire quhair
the landis lyis, he to insert the samin in his court bukis, at the leist the
day and month of the giving of the said sesing, the name of the landis
coutenit in the samin, the name of the Notar and witness contenit thairintill,
and that the said Clerk bring with him in euerilk Checkar the said court
bulkes, and gif the dowbill in that part thairof, subscriuit with his hand and
sign manual, to remane in the Register, togidder with the dowbill of his awin
protocoll, conform to the act maid be King James the Fyft, that all persounis
hauand interes may have recours thairto: Prouyding alwayis, that the Clerk tak
na mair for the inserting of the said Instrument in his court buik bot.ij.s.
for his laubouris.

Anent punischement of falls witness. Ca. xxij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, quhair any witness deponis falsely, or any
manner of persoun or persounis, inducis them to beir falls w^^nes, That all sic
persounis in times cumming (...) punist be p^^^^ing of their toungis, and
escheting of all their gudis to our Souerane Ladyis use, and declairit never to
be habill to bruke honor, office or dignity fra thine forth, and forther
punischeme^t to be maid in their persounis, at the sycht and discretioun of the
Lordis, according to the quality of the fault.

Anent the wod of Falkland. Ca. xxiij.
ITEM Forsamekill as be our Souerane Ladyis letters direct to the Schiref of
Fyfe, and his Deputis, for taking of cognitioun, gif the wod of Falkland was
auld faileit, and decayit in the grouth thairof, and habill to faill
allutterlie: It was fundin be ane assyse, that the said wod of Falkland for the
may part thairof was auld, faileit, and decayit, and ^e^t to be cuttit down
for the co^moun weill of the Realm* and to be parkit, hani^ and keipit of new
for policy thairof: Thairfoir it is statute and ordanit be the Quenis grace,
and the three Estatis ^oirsaidis, that the said wod of Falkland be cuttit, and
of new parkit agane, keipit, and ha^it for rising of oung grouth thairof, to
the greit policy, and weill of the samin.

Anentis the liberteis and priuilegeis of Burrowis. Ca. xxiiij.
ITEM The quenis grace dowrear and Regent of this Realm, with a^se of the
haill three Estatis of Parliament, understanding cleirlie, that the Estate of
Burgessis their money eiris bygane be greit troubill of ^eiris hes suste^t
infinite skaith both in their landis, and gudis, and als that their priuilgeis
grantit to them be our Souerane Ladyis may Nobill progenitouris, and actis
of Parliament maid thairupone, hes not been obseruit, nor keipit to them, as
accordis: Thairfoir the Quenis grace Regent, with auise of the three Estatis
foirsaidis hes ratifeit, and appreuit, and ratifeis and appreuis all
priuilegeis and actis of Parliament grantit and maid in fauouris of Burrowis,
Burgessis, and Merchandis. And hes statue and ordanit, that letters be direct
be the Lordis of counsall at the instancis of all Burrowis, vpone their
priuilegeis and actis of Parliament maid thairupone in all times tocum, for
putting of the samin to dew executioun with all rigor aganis them, that dois
or cummis in the contrare of their saidis priuilegeis, and actis foirsaidis,
without calling of any party.

Anent the slaying of wild beistis, wild foulis, halking and hunting. Ca. xxv.
ITEM Forsamekill, as in vmquhile our Souerane Ladyis may Nobill
progenitouris times, specially King James the First, the Secund, and the
Third, and als our Souerane Ladyis may Nobill Father King James the Fyft, and
now in her gracis awin time diverse actis of Parliament hes been maid, for
stanching and repressing of the slaying of wild foulis, and wild beistis, and
schuting at them with culueringis, half hag, and pistolate: Quhilkis actis the
three Estatis of Parliament hes ordanit to be publist and put to executioun with
all rigor in times cumming, with this additioun: That na man tak vpone hand to
ride or gang in their nychtbouris cornis, in halking or hunting, fra the Feist
of Pasche, unto the time that the samin be schorne. And that na man ride nor
gang vpone quheit na time of the eir. And that na pertrik be takin unto the
Feist of Michaelmes. And that na persoun range other mennis woddis, parkis,
haningis within dykis, or browmis, without license of the awnar of the ground,
under the pane of refoundiment of the dampnage and skaith to the parteis, vpone
quhais cornis they gang or rydis, or quhais woddis, parkis, haningis within
dykis, or browmis they sall happin to range. And. x. pund for the first fault
to our Souerane Lady. xx. pundis the nixt, and the third fault escheting of
their gudis mouabill. And all other panis anentis the punctis contenit in our
Souerane Ladyis actis and her may Nobill progenitouris maid of befoir to be
execute with all rigor, conform to the samin.

Anent the dischargeing of Dekinnis and chesing of visitouris. Ca. xxvj.
ITEM Because it hes been cleirlie understand to the Quenis grace Regent and
the three Estatis, that the chesing of Dekinnis and men of craft within Burgh
hes been rycht dangerous, and as they have vsit them selfis in times bygane,
hes causit greit troubill in Burrowis, commotioun, and rising of the Quenis
liegis in diverse partis, and be making of liggis and bandis amangis them
selfis, and betuix Burgh and Burgh, quhilk deseruis greit punischeme^t:
Thairfoir the Quenis grace Regent, with auise of the three Estatis foirsaidis,
hes statute and ordanit, that their be na Dekinnis chosin in times cu^ming
within Burgh, bot the Prouest, Baillies, and counsall of the Burgh to cheis the
may honest man of craft of good conscience, ane of every craft, to visie
their craft, that they laubour sufficiently, and that the samin be sufficient
stuff and wark. And their persounis to be callit visitouris of their craft, and
to be electit, and chosin eirlie at Michaelmes be the Prouest, Baillies, and
counsall of Burgh. And that they thairefter gif their aith in Judgment to visie
lelilie and trewlie their said craft, without any powar to make gaddering or
asse^bling of them, to any private conuentioun, or making of any actis, or
statutis, bot all craftismen in times cumming to be under the Prouest,
Baillies, and counsall. And their visitouris chosin, sworn, and admittit to
have voting in chesing of Officiaris and vthers thingis, as the Dekinnis
votitin of befoir. And that na craftismen bruke office within Burgh in times
cumming: Except two of them may honest and famous to be chosin eirlie vpone
the counsall. And they two to be ane part of the auditouris eirlie to the count
of the commoun gudis, according to the actis of Parliament maid thairupone of
befoir. Ane quhasa ever cummis in the contrare of this act, to be punist be
warding of their perso^nis be the space of ane eir, and tinsall of their
fredome within Burgh, and never to be ressaifit thairefter, as fre men unto the
time they obtene the favor and benevolence of the Prouest, Baillies and
counsall, quhair the fault is committit, and the third part of their gudis to
be eschetit, and applyit to our Souerane Ladyis use for their contemptioun.

Anentis the commoun passage in Burrowis. Ca. xxvij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be the Quenis grace Dowrear, and Regent, with
the auise of the three Estatis of Parliament, that all commoun hie gaittis, that
fre Burrowis hes been in use of precedant outher for passage fra their Burgh or
cumming thairto, and in special all commoun hie gaittis fra fre dry Burrowis
to the portis and hauinnis nixt adjacent, or procedant to them, be obseruir
and keipit, and that nane make them impediment, or stop thairintill. And gif
any dois, to be callit and accusit for oppressioun, and punischit thairfoir,
according to the Lawis.

Anent Burrowis of the west cuntrie. Ca. xxviij.
ITEM The haill Burrowis of the west cuntrie, sic as Irwin, Air, Dumbertane,
Glasgow, and other Burrowis at the west partis hes eirlie in all times bygane
resortit to the fisching of Loch Fine, and vthers Lochis in the north Ilis, for
making of heiring, and vthers fischeis, and after the completing of their
besynes at their plesoure partit frelie but payment of any manner of exactioun:
Except the payment of the fischearis allanerlie, nottheles certane cuntrie men
adjacent and dwelland beside Lochfyne hes rasit ane greit custume of every
last of maid hering, that are taken in the said Loath, of als greit valor, as the
Quenis grace custume: Suppois the saidis Burrowis bring the said hering for
furnessing of their awin housis and the cuntrie: Quhilk custume was never payit
of befoir: Quhairthrow the saidis fre Burrowis ar heuylie hurt. And for remedy
heirof: It is deuisit, statute and ordanit, that all sic customis and
exactiounis be dischargeit, and not rasit, nor vpliftit fra the persounis
foirsaidis of any hering or fischeis takin be them in the Lochis foirsaidis
for furnessing of their housis, bringing of the samin within this Realm
allauerlie, under the panis to be callit, as oppressouris, and punist
thairfoir, conform to the Lawis of this Realm.

Anentis horning vpone Kirkmen for taxt. Ca. xxix.
ITEM Forsamekill as in time bygane the Kirkmen and spiritual Estate of this
Realm, hes been requyrit to make payment of their part of the taxt, grantit be
the Estatis of this Realm to our Souerane Ladyis predecessouris, and her
hienes in her time, for the forth setting of the commoun weill of this Realm,
under the pane of Rebellioun and putting of them to the horn, and for non
payment thairof sum of them was denuncit Rebellis, and put to the horn,
nevertheless the Quenis grace for mantenance of the liberty of halie Kirk, and
priuilegeis of the spiritual Estate, with auise of the three Estatis of
Parliament hes statute and ordanit: That na process of horning pas upon any
Kirkmen for non payment of their taxtis to be grantit in times cumming:
Prouyding alwayis, that the Lordis of the spiritualitie provide and find sum
other sure and ressonabill manner how the samin salbe inbrocht to our Souerane
Lady, and her grace payit thairof.

Anentis Lambis. Ca. xxx.
ITEM For the eschewing of the derth of scheip, quhilk daily incressis within
this Realm, in time to cum: It is statute and ordanit the Quenis grace and
three Estatis foirsaidis, That na Lambis be slane within this Realm, nor na
manner of persounis tak vpone hand to by any Lambis to slay, and bring to
market, to be sauld for the space of three eiris nixt tocum, under the pane of
confiscatioun of all the persounis gudis doand in the contrare, and
punischement of their persounis at the Quenis grace plesoure.

Anentis feryaris. Ca. xxxj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the act maid anent feryaris at the portis
and passageis of this Realm, be put to dew executioun in all punctis, and the
brekaris thairof to be punist, according to the panis contenit in the samin
with all rigor.

Anentis the slauchter of poutis, pertrikis. etc. Ca. xxxij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that na poutis, pertrik, pluwer, mure foul,
duke, draik, teill, or goldeme be slane unto the Feist of Michaelmes eirlie,
under the pane of. x. pundes to be takin and payit be the doar and brekar of
this act to our Souerane Lady, and applyit to her use. And that every Earl,
Lord, Barrone, frehaldar, and vthers gentilmen, ilk ane within their awin
bou^dis tak the brekaris of this act, and hald them unto the time they find
cautioun for payment of the said soume, and this act for the space of three
eiris to endure.

Anentis planting of woddis, parkis, forrestis, and orchardis* Ca. xxxiij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be Quenis grace, with auise of the three Estatis
of Parliament, that the actis maid be vmquhile our Souerane Lord of good mind,
quhome God assolie, anentis planting of woddis, forrestis, orchardis, and
parkis, and the panis of destroyaris of woddis, committaris of mureburne in
forbodin time, and for keiping of the forrestis to be of new publist ever all
partis of this Realm, and be put to dew executioun in all punctis. And the
brekaris thairof to be punist, according to the panis contemt thairintill.

Anentis goldsmythis, makaris of gold, and silver warkis. Ca. xxxiiij.
ITEM Forsamekill as their is greit fraud and hurt done un to the liegis of
this Realm be goldsmythis, that makis silver and gold of na certane fynes, bot
at their plesoure: quhairthrow their is sum silver wark maid and set forth of
sic basnes of alay, videlicet of sax and seuin pe^ny fine, express aganes the
honor and public weill of the Realm: Thairfoir it is statute and ordanit be
the Quenis grace, with auise of the three Estatis of Parliament, That na
goldsmyth make in wark, nor set forth outher of his awin silver, or other mennis
silver under the just fynance of elleuin penny fine, under the pane of deid,
and confiscatioun of all their gudis mouabill. And that every goldsmyth mark
the silver wark, that he makis with his awin mark, and with the townis mark*
And gif he makis any silver abone the said fynes, that he with his mark make ane
prent of the just puncte of the fynes, that it is, that it may be kend till all
men, quhat fynes it is of. And als that na goldsmyth make in wark, or set forth
outher of his awin gold, or other mennis gold under the just fynes of. xxij.
carate fine under the panis foirsaidis.

Anent the dispositioun of wine, salt, and tymmer. Ca. xxxv.
ITEM Forsamekill as it was statute, and ordanit of befoir be ane act of
Parliament maid be vmquhile our Souerane Ladyis derrest father, that the
Prouest, Baillies, and counsall of Burrowis, quhen any Schippis happinnit to
arrive at any portis ladin with wine, salt, and tymmer, sold conuene with the
Merchandis, that aw the saidis wine, salt, and tymmer, and by or set ane price
of the samin ressonabill, that na manner of man, fre man nor vnfreman, by any of
the saidis wynes, salt, or tymmer, bot fra the saidis Prouest, or Baillies, or
awnaris thairof: And the prices maid be them, as said is, the Prince for the
time to be first seruit, and their Officiaris co^tentit of samekill, as they
tak to the Princis use allanerlie: And all Prelatis, Erlis, Lordis, Barronis,
and vthers gentilmen, to be seruit of the samin prices, like as the said act
mair largely proportis: Nottheles the Nobill men, sic as Prelatis, Erlis,
Lordis, Barronis, and vthers gentilmen are not seruit, according to the said
act, bot ar constra^it to by the samin fra Merchandis vpone gretar prices
incontrare the tenor of the sid act: Thairfoir it is statute and ordanit be
the Quenis grace Regent, with auise of the three Estatis of Parliament, that the
prices beand maid in manner foirsaid, that they sall incontinent pas to the
market croce of that Burgh, and their be oppin proclamatioun declair the prices
of the gudis foirsaidis, as they ar maid. And that nane of the gudis foirsaidis
be disponit be the space of four dayis, to the effect, that they may be
aduerteist and seruit, according to the said act.

Anentis steiling of Halkis, Hundis, Pertrikis, Dukis, and slauchter of Dais,
Raise, hunting of Deir, taking of Cunningis and foulis. Ca. xxxvj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be the Quenis grace, with auise of the three
Estatis of Parliament, that the actis maid be King James the Third and Fyft,
anentis the steiling of Halkis, Hundis, Pertrikis, Dukis, and slauchter of
Dais, Raise, hu^ting of Deir, taking of Cuningis, and foulis, be of new publist
and the samin be put to dew executioun, and the brekaris thairof to be punist
conform to the panis contenit thairintill. And this act to be extendit
alsweill vpone the steilaris of Behyuis, fruit treis, peilaris of barkis of
treis within woddis, and the foularis lyand at wait with their nettis, as to
the slayaris of Dais, and Raise foirsaidis. And the samin pauis to be execute
vpone them with all rigor accordingly.

Anentis liberty of Merchandis at the west seyis. Ca. xxxvij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the act maid be King James the Feird
anentis the cumming of Schippis to fre Burrowis at the west seyis, be publist
of new, and the samin to be put to executioun in all punctis, after the form
and tenor thairof, and the brekaris of the samin to be punist conform to the
panis contenit thairin, with this additioun, That na persoun tak vpone hand to
by any Merchandice fra the saidis strangearis, bot fra fremen at fre portis of
the Burrowis foirsaidis, under the pane of confiscatioun of all the gudis, that
they by, togidder with the rest of their mouabill gudis, to be applyit to our
Souerane Ladyis use, gif they do in the contrare.

Anentis beggaris. Ca. xxxviij.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that the act of Parliament maid be King James
the First, and eikit be vmquhile our Souerane Lord King James the Fyft, quhome
God assolie, for stanching of maisterfull beggaris, be obseruit and keipit in
all time cumming, and to be of new publist at the market croces of every
Schire within this Realm. And that every Schiref, Stewart, Baillie, alsweill
Regalitie as Rialtie, and their Deputis, Prouestis, Aldermen, and Baillies of
Burrowis gar put the samin to dew executioun, ilk ane of them within the
boundis of their officis, under the panis contenit in the saidis actis.

Anentis the speiking evil of the Quenis grace or frenchemen. Ca. xxxix.
ITEM Forsamekill, as diverse seditious persounis hes in times bypast rasit
amangis the co^moun pepill murmuris, and sclanders speiking aganis the Quenis
grace, and sawing evil brute anent the may Christin King of Frances
subiectis send in this Realm for the commoun weill, and suppressing of the
auld Inimeis forth of the samin, tending throw rasing of sic rumoris to steir
the hartis of the subiectis to hatrent aganis the Prince, and seditioun betuix
the liegis of this Realm, and the may Christin Kingis liegis foirsaidis: And
for eschewing of sic inconuenientis, as mycht follow thairupone: It is deuisit,
statute and ordanit, that gif any persounis in times cumming be hard speikand
sic vnressonabill commoning, quhairthrow the pepill may tak occasioun of sic
privy conspiracy aganis the Prince, or seditioun aganis the may Christin
Kingis subiectis foirsaidis, the samin being prouin salbe punist* according to
the quality of the fault in their bodyis and gudis at the Quenis grace
plesoure. And in caice the heirar thairof report not the samin unto the Quenis
grace or her Officiaris to the effect, that the samin may be punist, as
accordis, that he sall incur the saidis panis quhilkis the principal speikar
or rasar of sic murmuris deseruis.

Anentis Robert Hude and Abbot of vnressoun. Ca. xl.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit, that in all times cumming, ^a manner of persoun
be chosin Robert Hude, nor Lyti^ Iohne, Abbot of vnressoun, Quenis of Maij, nor
vtherwyse nouther in Burgh nor to landwart in any time tocum. And gif any
Prouest, Baillies, counsall, and community chesis sic ane Personage, as Robert
Hude, Lytill Iohne, Abbottis of vnressoun or Quenis of Maij within Burgh, the
chesaris of sic sall tyne their fredome for the space of five eiris, and
vtherwyse salbe punist at the Quenis grace will, and the acceptar of siclyke
office salbe banist forth of the Realm. And gif any sic persounis, sic as
Robert Hude, Lytill Iohne, Abbottis of vnressoun, Quenis of Maij beis chosin
outwith Burgh, and vthers landwart townis, the chesaris sall pay to our
Souerane Lady x. pundis, and their persounis put in waird, their to remane
during the Quenis grace plesoure. And gif any women or vthers about (...) treis
singand, makis perturbatioun to the Quenis liegis in the passage throw Burrowis
and vthers landwart (...), the women perturbatouris for skafrie of money or
vtherwyse salbe takin, handellit, and put vpone the Cukstulis of every Burgh,
or town.

THEIR ar the true copyis of the actis of Parliamentis of our Souerane Lady
Queen Marie, halom be ane Nobill and Mychtie Prince James Duke of Chastelhera^t
Lord Hammiltoun and Governor of the Realm. And be ane mychtie Princes Marie
Queen Dowrear, mother to our Souerane Lady, and Regent of the Realm, viseit,
sychtit and correctit be the Lordis Commissionaris depute thairto, and
extractit forth of the bukis of Parliament

be me Schir James Balfour of Pettindreich Knycht, Clerk of our Souerane Ladyis
Register counsall, and Rollis, under my Sign and subscriptioun manual
handwritten signature

IN MARIAM REGINAM.
Viuida foeminea depicta in Imagine Virtus
Cur sexus faciem debilioris amat?
Cur Musae, and Charites formam sibi quae^ue dearum,
Et cum Iustitia, sumpserit alma Fides?
Nempe erat in fatis, MARIAE quam in pectore casto,
Sanctius has alibi non potuisse coli.
IN EANDEM.
Number dea sit dubitas, quae Scotis imperat oris
Tam been quae leges, tam been bella regit?
PER THO. CRAIGVM.
THE ACTIS OF THE LAST PARLIAMENT HALDIN AT EDINburgh in the eir of God ane
thousand five hundredth three scoir three eiris, the feird day of Iunij.
The act of Obliuioun. Ca. j.
OUR Souerane Lady of the greit affectioun and lufe, that her grace beiris
toward her subiectis, and for co^seruatioun and contening of them, and every
ane of them in sinceir amity and mutual lufe: And for eschewing of all
pleid, discord, actioun, questioun, querell; or debait, that may heirefter, or
mycht in time bygane arryse, or be mouit be ather of them, aganis vthers, for
any cause, or occasioun done, or committit be any of them to or aganis vthers,
during the time of the lait troublis in her Maiesteis absence, or for any cause
that her grace may have, or move aganis them, for the transgressioun of the
Lawis of her hienes Realm, or any vthers ressauit within the samin, sen and
fra the saxt day of March, in the eir of God ane thousand five hundredth lviij.
eiris, unto the first day of September, exclusive, the eir of God ane thousand
five hundredth.lxj. eiris: And for ane commoun pea^, vnioun, reconciliatioun,
and quietness to be perpetually obseruit be the haill liegis and inhabitantis
of this Realm, swa that they may at their vttermaist powar, with ane
uniformity of mind, obey and serve her Majesty in all sortis, as becummis
may humbill and faithful subiectis, to the glory of God, her hienes
contentment and commoun wealth of their native cuntrie: Be The auise, counsall,
and deliberatioun of her grace three Estatis, presently conuenit, hes fund
proffitabill and necessare for the good gouernament and administratioun of the
Realm, and commoun wealth thairof, that ane statute, Law and ordinance, of
perpetual Obliuioun be maid and establissit, like as her hienes be the auise
and consent of the haill three Estatis of her Maiesteis Realm, conuenit in this
present Parliament, makis and establissis ane Law of Obliuioun: That all deid,
occasioun, counsall, and pretense, of quhatsumeuer wecht, or quality, that may
be allegeit, or appeir to have been done, maid, geuin, pretendit or assistit
to, be quhatsumeuer persoun or persounis, her Maiesteis subiectis and liegis,
of quhatsumeuer quality, state, or conditioun, they be of, contrare the Lawis
of this Realm, statutis, ordinancis, constitutiounis thairof, for quhatsumeuer
vthers Lawis ressauit or vsit in the samin, in any times bygane, to
quhatsumeuer effect, sen, and fra the said saxt day of March, the eir of God
ane thousand fine hundredth.lviij. eiris, to the said first day of September,
exclusive, the eir of God ane thousand five hundredth lxj. eiris, and the
memory thairof with all actiounis civil or criminal, that may result
thairthrow, To be expyrit, buryir, and extinct for ever: Euin as the samin had
never been maid, done, counsallit, thocht, pretendit, nor assistit to, swa that
they nor their airis, nor successouris may be indictit, persewit, summoundit,
accusit, followit, or conuenit thairfoir ciuilie, or criminallie befoir her
hienes, or her gracis successouris, nor three Estatis of Parliament, nor other
Judge or Iugeis criminal or civil, spiritual or temporal, quhatsumeuer
within this Realm, or outwith the samin, in any time tocum be her hienes, her
gracis successouris, or their Aduocattis, nor be any her gracis subiectis, or
any vthers manner of persounis quhatsumeuer, Dischargeing expressie be this
present Law of Obliuioun, the Estatis foirsaid, Justice general, his Deputis,
Lordis of the College of Justice and Sessioun, all Schireffis, Stewartis,
Baillies, alsweill of Regaliteis as Rialteis, Prouestis Baillies and counsall
of Burrowis, Legattis, Archibischoppis, Bischoppis, Abbottis, Cominendatouris,
Priouris, and all vthers Iugeis, Magistratis and Officiaris, of quhatsumeuer
estate, degree, or conditioun they be of, of any indicting, arreisting,
summounding, accusing, following, calling, persewing, conuening, or proceiding
aganis quhatsumeuer persoun or persounis, her hienes subiectis and liegis, of
quhatsumeuer quality, estate, degree, or conditioun they be of, for the
premissis, or any punct thairof, or depending thairupone any manner of way, and
of their officis and iurisdictioun their anent, for now and ever. And forther,
it sall not be leiffull be act of Parliament, or vtherwayis heirefter, to make
any derogatioun of this present Law, statute and ordinance of Obliuioun, nor
cum in the contrare of the samin, directly or indirectlie, without the
express auise and consent of the haill persounis, and every ane of them that
hes, or may pretend to have interes, privilege, or favor, be ressoun of this
Law of Obliuioun foirsaid.

Our Souerane Lady with auise of her grace three Estatis being willit and
myndit, that na persoun nor persounis subiectis of her maiesteis Realm being
unworthy of the privilege and favor of the act, and statute of the Law of
Obliuioun have, bruke, ioyis, nor use the privilege thairof for sic
transgressioun, deid, or attemptate done or committit be them, or any of
them, (...) the saxt day of March, the eir of God ane thousand five
hundredth.lviij. eiris, to the first day of September, the eir of God ane
thousand five hundredth.lxj. eiris. Hes statute and ordanit, and be their
presentis statutis and ordanis, that letters be direct, publist, and proclamit
at all heid Burrowis of this Realm* alsweill within Regaliteis as Rialteis,
commanding and chargeing all and sindrie our said Souerane Ladyis liegis, of
quhatsumeuer degree, estate, or quality they be of, hauand or pretendand to
have actioun, outher criminal or civil for any deid, cause or occasioun done,
committit or assistit to, fra the foirsaid saxt day of March, the eir of God
ane thousand five hundredth.lviij. eiris, to the first day of September, the eir
of God ane thousand five hundredth.lxj. eiris, that they, and every ane of
them, intent and persew the actioun, quhilk they pretend to have, alsweill for
recovering, as for reductioun of decreittis else geuin vpone deidis done within
the time foirsaid befoir the Iugeis Ordinar, and competent. And gif the party
persewit be him self or his procuratouris will or may allege, that the persewar
sold not be hard in respect of the Law of Obliuioun foirsaid, Than and in that
caice the Judge civil sall ceis of forther proceiding in that cause, and the
parteis defendar and persewar sall cum to the Lordis and personnis
vnderwrittin: That is to say, Nobill and mychtie Lordis, James Duke of
Chastellarant, Lord Hammiltoun. etc. Archibald Earl of Ergyle Lord Campbell and
Lorne Justice general. etc. James Earl of Murray Lord Abirnethy and
Strathnarne. James Earl of Mortoun Lord Dalkeith Chancellar. etc. Williame Earl
Merchell Lord Keith. etc. Alexander Earl of Glencarne Lord Kilmawris. etc.
Iohne Lord Erskin, Patrik Lord Ruthwen. Ane Reverend Father in God Henry
Bischop of Ros President of the College of Justice and Sessioun. Ane Venerabill
Father in God Mark Commendatour of the Abbay of Newbottill, Schir Richard
Maitland of Lethingtoun Knycht keipar of the privy Scill, Master James
Makgill of Rankelour nether Clerk of Registre, Schir Iohne Bellenden of
Auchinnoull Knycht Justice Clerk, Williame Maitland of Lethingtoun oungar
Secretar, Master Robert Richardsoun Commendatour of Sanct Marie I Will
Thesaurare, Schir Iohne Vischart of Pittarro Knycht Comptrollare, Master Iohne
Spens of Condie Aduocat to our Souerane Lady, Master Thomas Mak^alea^e
Commissionar for the Burgh of Edinburgh, Master James Halyburtoun Tutour of
Peteur Prouest of Dundie, and Iohne Erskin of Dun Prouest of Moutros: And gif
in their supplicatioun to the haill Lordis foirsaid, gif they chance to be
present togidder, and faileing thairof, to the saidis Chancellar, President,
Clerk of Registre, or Advocate within this Burgh of Edinburgh, beira^d the
tenor of the persute and allegiance of the Law of Obliuioun, for the defendar
or persewar for reductioun, and the saidis Lordis or any sax of them, three of
the saidis Erlis or Lordis alwayis being of the said number. Quha sall gif
their declaratioun vpone the said exceptioun proponit ciuilie, and put the
samin in writ in the Registre, quhidder the defendar or persewar to reduce be
worthy and sold bruke, loyis, and have the privilege of the said Law. And as
they declair, the samin to be obseruit, videlicet, gif they be not worthy, the
Law to be na sufficient exceptioun to them, and the Iugeis quhome befoir the
saidis exceptiounis sall happin to be proponit, sall incontinent thairefter
proceid according to the declaratioun of the saidis Lordis, to be schawin to
them extract and drawin forth of the Registre autenticklie subscriuit be the
Clerk of Registre or his Deputis, and na vtherwayis, and do Justice to the
saidis persewaris or defendaris, and admit or repel the said exceptioun, or
admit protestatiounis as the Law requyris. And siclyke gif any persoun or
persounis, callis or persewis vthers criminallie, or intendis to do the samin,
for any crime done within the time foirsaid, the party quha is chargeit to
underly the Law, find and souertie sall cum with the copy of letters or
summoundis, quhairby he is chargeit to schaw the samin to the saidis Lordis, or
any sax of them, Three of the saidis Erlis or Lordis being of them* Quha sall
declair quhidder the party defendar be worthy of the said Law or not, and as
they declair, the Justice to proceid, or to desist fra proceiding, as the
ordinance to be maid and geuin thairupone be the saidis Lordis sall beir,
subscriuit, as befoir is specifeit. And in caice of inlaik of any of the number
of the saidis Lordis, chosin to the effect foirsaid, within the space
vnderwrittin, It salbe lesum to the remanent, than being on live to elect and
cheis sa money vthers in their placis, quha sall declair the said Law in manner
foirsaid, within the time and space within reheirsit: Prouyding alwayis, that
quhatsumeuer of our Souerane Ladyis liegis, had, hes, or pretendis any actioun
criminallie or ciuilie, or reductioun of decreitis else geuin in manner foirsaid,
quhair of the deid was done, committit or assistit to, fra the foirsaid sax day
of March, the eir of God ane thousand five hinders.lviij. eiris, to the said
first day of September, the eir of God ane thousand five hundredth.lxj. eiris,
that they intent and persew the samin befoir the Justice his Deputis, the
Iugeis Ordinaris alsweill in Regalitie as Rialtie, betuix this and the first
day of August, the eir of God ane thousand five hundredth.lxiiii eiris:
Declairand be their presentis, that quha that persewis not within the said
space, they their airis, executouris or assignayis sall never be hard to persew
the samin, or have actiou^ thairto aganis them, quha will allege the foirsaid
Law of Obliuioun: Notwithstanding, quhatsumeuer iurisdictioun, priuilegeis,
Lawis, or constitutiounis, quhilkis the saidis persou^is or any of them had,
hes, or may pretend or acclame, as grantit be our said Souerane Lady, her grace
predecessouris, or other Judge or Iugeis quhatsumeuer. And siclyke ordanis this
declaratioun aganis minouris, or vthers quhatsumeuer, that may pretend
privilege of na prescriptioun be the Lawis of this Realm, or other
quhatsumeuer Lawis, that they make persute to their saidis actiounis, within the
space and time foirsaid, videlicet the saidis minouris, with au^se of their
tutouris, or curatouris: Prouyding alswa in likewise, that in caice the saidis
minouris be hurt be negligence of their saidis tutouris and curatouris in their
saidis actiounis, quhilkis they had, or pretendis to have, for quhatsumeuer
deid, cause or actioun, done or committit, during the space foirsaid, that the
saidis tutouris and curatouris, salbe haldin to answer for the dampnage and
skaith sustenit, and to be sustenit be saidis minouris thairthrow, and they to
have sufficient actioun aganis them, for recovering thairof, as done in their
default and negligence, and sall have na actioun aganis the principal persoun,
committar of the said deid, at any time heirefter. And vthers persounis, that
may pretend privilege in manner foirsaid, never to have ane actioun in likewise
in time cumming.

Anentis cruuis and airis. Ca. ij.
THE Quenis Majesty, and three Estatis of this present Parliament, ratifeis and
appreuis the act maid be her hienes may Nobill Gudschir, King James the
Feird, of good memory, of the quhilk the tenor followis. Item it is statute
and ordanit, that all cruuis and fische dammis that are within salt watters,
that ebbis and flowis, be allutterlie destroyit and put down, alsweill they
that pertene to our Souerane Lord, as vthers throw all the Realm. And anent
cruuis in fresche watters, that they be maid in sic largenes, and sic dayis
keipit, as is contenit in the actis and statutis maid thairupone of befoir,
with this additioun following, That is to say, that all cruuis and airis, that are set of lait vpone sand and schauldis far within the watter, quhair they war
not of befoir, that they be incontinent taken down and put away, and the
remanent cruuis, that are set, and put vpone the watter sandis, to stand still
quhill the first day of October nixt tocum, and incontinent after the said
first day, to be destroyit and put away for ever. And for executioun of this
act, ordanis every Earl, Lord, Barrone, and every gentilman landit, within
his awin boundis, to cause remove, destroy, put down, and tak away the saidis
cruuis and airis in manner foirsaid, respective, under the pane of ane hundredth
pundis to be takin up of their gudis, that puttis not this act to dew
executioun, and the said soume to be inbrocht and applyit to our Souerane
Ladyis use, and that every Schiref, Stewart, Baillie, alsweill Regalitie, as
Rialtie, their Deputis, and vthers Iugeis within their awin iurisdictiounis,
tak good attendence, and see, that as is contenit in this present act be done,
and put to executioun in all punctis, according to the tenor of the samin, and
faileing thairof, that every Schiref, Stewart, Baillies, alsweill of
Regaliteis, as Rialteis, and vthers Iugeis within their awin iurisdictioun, as
said is, vptak and inbring the said pane of ane hundredth pundis of every Earl,
Lord, Barrone, gentilman landit, or vthers negligent in the premissis, and make
count thairof eirlie in the Checkar, and gif the saidis Schireffis, Stewartis,
Baillies of Regaliteis, or Rialteis beis fundin negligent in executioun of
their officis anent this act, that the foirsaid soume be vpliftit of them
selfis, and inbrocht to our Souerane Ladyis use, and that but prejudice of the
panis to be execute vpone the foirsaidis Earl, Lord, Barron, gentilman, or
other contrauenaris of the foirsaid act: Prouyding alwayis, that this act on na
wayis be extendit to the cruuis and aris being vpone the watter of Sulway.

Anentis the carrying and having of gold silver forth of the Realm. Ca. iij.
ITEM The Quenis Majesty, with the auise of the three Estatis in this present
Parliament, hes ratifeit and appreuit, and ratifeis and appreuis all actis maid
of befoir be her hienes predecessouris, anentis the carrying and away taking of
gold and silver forth of this Realm, in all punctis, with this additioun, That
na manner of persoun nor persounis, pretend or tak vpone hand to tak away or
carry forth of this Realm, any gold or silver in any time heirefter, under the
pane of escheting of the samin, and of all the remane^t of their mouabill gudis
that dois in the contrare, and for observing heirof, and trial to be had
thairupone: Siclyke ordanis, that quhatsumeuer persoun or persounis, that will
cum, reuele and schaw the samin, and gif up their namis, that offendis this Law
and act, that persoun or persounis, sall have the feird part of the said gold
and silver, and remanent of their mouabill gudis, the samin being tryit be
their reueling. And in caice the reuelar be partinar of the away taking and
carrying of the said gold and silver forth of this Realm, in that caice, he
salbe fre of all panis, dangearis and perrell that he may incur be this act:
And sall have for his rewaird, as is befoir reheirsit, like as he had been na
partinar thairof. And this act for y^ space of five eiris to endure: Prouyding,
that all Merchandis and vthers passand forth of this Realm, according to the
Lawis of the samin, may have samekill gold and silver allanerlie, as may be
their necessare expensis, quhill they cum to the partis beond sey, quhair they
have their necessare besynes ado.

Anentis the hamebringing of falls cuinie, gold, silver, layit money, or other
money quhatsumeuer, and using of the samin within this Realm. And als anentis
forgearis and makaris thairof within the samin. Ca. iiij.
ITEM Our Souerane Lady, with auise of the three Estatis in this present
Parliament, hes ratifeit and appreuit, and ratifeis and appreuis all actis maid
of befoir, twiching the hamebringing of falls cuinie of gold or silver, layit
money, or other money quhatsumeuer within this Realm, and siclyke anentis the
makaris, forgearis of falls cuinie within the samin, with this additioun
following. That quhatsumeuer persoun or persounis, that will cum, reuele and
declair the namis of the hamebringaris of siclyke falls cuinie, outher of gold
or silver, or other layit money, or of the makaris, forgearis and feinearis
thairof within this Realm, that, that persoun or persounis sall have that ane
half of the escheit of all his landis, and gudis mouabill and vnmouabill, of
the said persoun or persounis, offendaris of this present act and Law, the
samin being tryit be his reueling. And for the scharp executioun heirof, that
good attendence be geuin be the Serchouris, and vthers Officiaris throw all the
Realm, and that the Conseruatour in Flanders in likewise be aduerteist to make
knawlege be had, gif any sic falls cuinie cummis forth of they partis to this
Realm.

For eschewing of derth of viuers and victuallis. Ca. v
ITEM The Quenis Majesty, with auise of the three Estatis in this present
Parliament, hes ratifeit and appreuit, and ratifeis and appreuis, the act of
Parliament maid of befoir be King James the Secund of Nobill memory, and
vthers his hienes predecessouris, for repressing of derth of victuallis, and
for thresching of cornis, and to put away the halding of stakkis over eir, in
all punctis, with this additioun following: That na persoun nor persounis, of
quhatsumeuer degree, estate, or conditoun they be of, tak vpone hand to hauld
stakkis in their barnis or barn airdis, in any time tocum, langar nor the.x.
day of Iulij, bot thresche forth their saidis stakkis to be sauld commounlie to
our Souerane Ladyis liegis, vpone ressonabill prices, under the pane of
confiscatioun to our Souerane Ladyis use, of the stakkis that beis fundin
standand langar nor the said day. And this act for the space of three eiris to
endure, that is to say, for the croppis of the eiris of God ane thousand five
hundredth.lxiij. lxiiij. lxv. eiris. And ordanis all vthers actis maid be her
hienes Majesty, or her predecessouris, for repressing of derth of victuallis
of befoir, alsweill concerning girnalling thairof, as vtherwayis to be put to
executioun, and the brekaris thairof to be punist with all rigor.

Anentis the making of salt within this Realm. Ca. vj.
ITEM Because the Quenis Majesty, hes be her prudencie, and moyene, brocht
certane strangearis of excellent ingyne within this Realm, quha hes accordit
to laubour, discover, and manifest ane new manner of making of salt different
from the fassoun vsit of befoir within the samin, quhilk inuentioun is thocht
to be verray proffitabill for the hail inhabitantis of this Realm, and
intertening of the trafique of Merchandis: Thairfoir it is statute and ordanit
be her Majesty with auise of the three Estatis of Parliament, that nane of her
hienes subiectis tak vpone hand for the space of fyftie eiris nixt and
immediately following heirefter, to make, or cause be maid any salt of the new
fassoun, and manner inuentit, or to be vsit be the saidis strangearis, different
from the fassoun now, and of befoir vsit within this Realm, without special
license had and obtenit of her hienes, and successouris thairupone, under the
pane of deid, and confiscatioun of the landis, ground, and housis, quhair the
said salt sall happin to be maid, and the saidis fyftie eiris being bypast, gif
it happinnis any persoun or persounis, to make salt, or cause salt to be maid,
according to the said new fassoun, and different from the fassoun now vsit,
That that persoun or persounis sall pay samekill as the saidis strangearis
sold pay for every hundredth bollis, comptand five scoir bollis allanerlie in
this caice for the hundredth, during the said space of fyftie eiris, or any part
thairof, That is to say.vij. bollis and ane half to the Quenis grace Majesty,
and ane boll to the Conseruatour, to be depute for keiping of the salt, that
beis maid in manner foirsaid.

Anentis gleibis and mansis. Ca. vij.
ITEM Because it is vnderstandin to our Souerane Lady, and three Estatis of this
Realm, That the Persounis, Vicaris, and vthers Kirkmen within the samin, hes
set in few, or lang takkis ane greit part of their mansis and gleibis,
quhairthrow their is na sufficient dwelling place for them that seruis, and
sold serve, and minister at the Kirkis, to remane thairat for the instructioun
of the parochinaris, for remeid heirof: It is statute and ordanit be our said
Souerane Lady, with the auise of the Estatis foirsaid, that na Persoun, Vicar,
nor other Ecclesiastical persoun, set in few, or lang takkis any of their
mansis or gleibis, pertening to the saidis Kirkis, without special license and
consent of the Quenis grace in writ. And alswa it is statute and ordanit, That
they that are appointit, or to be appointit to serve and minister at any Kirk
within this Realm, have the principal man's of the Persoun or Vicar, or
samekill thairof as salbe fundin sufficient for staiking of them: To the
effect, that they may the better await vpone the charge appointit, and to be
appointit to them, quhidder the saidis gleibis be set in few or tak of befoir,
or not, or that ane ressonabill and sufficient house be biggit to them beside
the Kirk, be the Persoun or Vicar, or vthers hauand the saidis mansis in few or
lang takkis, and this to be done betuix and the first day of November nixt
tocum. And forther samekill land to be annexit to the saidis dwelling placis of
them, that seruis and ministeris at the Kirk, as salbe heirefter with good
auisement appointit.

Anentis Vitchcraftis. Ca. viij.
ITEM Forsamekill as the Quenis Majesty and three Esiatis in this present
Parliament being informit, that the hauy and abominabill superstitioun vsit be
diverse of the liegis of this Realm, be using of Vitchcraftis, Sorsarie and
Necromancie, and credence geuin thairto in times bygane aganis the Law of God:
And for avoiding and away putting of all sic vane superstitioun in times tocum:
It is statute and ordanit be the Quenis Majesty, and three Estatis foirsaidis,
that na manner of persoun nor persounis, of quhatsumeuer estate, degree or
conditioun they be of, tak vpone hand in any times heirefter, to use any manner
of Vitchcraftis, Sorsarie or Necromancie, nor gif them selfis forth to have
any sic craft or knawlege thairof, thairthrow abusand the pepill: Nor that na
persoun seik any help, response or co^sultatioun at any sic vsaris or abusaris
foirsaidis of Vitchcraftis, Sorsareis or Necromancie, under the pane of deid,
alsweill to be execute aganis the vsar, a^usar, as the seikar of the response
or consultatioun. And this to be put to executioun be the Justice, Schireffis,
Stewartis, Baillies, Lordis of Regaliteis and Rialteis, their Deputis, and
vthers Ordinar Iugeis competent within this Realm, with all rigor, having
powar to execute the samin.

Anentis adultery. Ca. ix.
ITEM Forsamekill as the abominabill and filthy vice and crime of adultery hes
been perniciouslie and wickitlie vsit within this Realm in times bygane be
sindrie liegis thairof, hauand na regaird to the commandementis of God* bot to
their awin sensuality and filthy lustis and plesoure thairof. And for
eschewing of the samin in times cumming: It is statute and ordanit be the
Quenis Majesty, and three Estatis in Parliament, That all notoure and manifest
committaris of adultery in any time tocum, after the dait heirof, salbe punist
with all rigor unto the deid, alsweill the woman as the man doar and committar
of the samin, after that dew monitioun be maid to abstene fra the said manifest
and notoure crime. And for other adultery, that the actis and Lawis maid
thairupone of befoir, be put to executioun with all rigor. And als declaris,
that this act on na wise sall preiudge any party to persew for diuorcement for
the crimes of adultery befoir committit, conform to the Law.

Anentis the rasing of bandis of men of weir. Ca. x.
IT is statute and ordanit be the Quenis Majesty, and three Estatis in
Parliament, that na manner of persoun nor persounis, of quhatsumeuer quality,
estate, conditioun or degree they be of, liegis of this Realm, attempt to do or
raise any bandis of men of weir on horse or fute, with culueringis, pistolatis,
pykis, speiris, Iakkis, splentis, steilbonetis, quhite harnes, or other
munitioun bellicall quhatsumeuer for daily, oulklie, or monethlie vaigeis in
any times to cum, without special license in writ had, and obtenit of our
Souerane Lady and her successouris thairto, under the pane of deid, to be
execute vpone the rasaris of the saidis bandis, as alswa vpone them, that
conuenis and rysis in bandis.

Anentis the reparrelling and vphalding of paroche Kirkis and of Kirk airdis of
the samin, for burial of the deid. Ca. xj.
IT Is statute and ordanit for vphalding and reparrelling of paroche Kirkis and
Kirk airdis of the samin, for burial of the deid within this Realm, That the
Lordis of secreit counsall put ordoure thairto, and auise and consult how the
samin salbe done and vphaldin in times tocum. And quhatsumeuer ordoure that
they sall happin to tak for reparrelling and vphalding of the saidis Kirkis and
Kirk airdis thairof: The Quenis Majesty, with the auise of the three Estatis of
this Realm in this present Parliament, hes declairit, and declairis, that
quhatsumeuer ordoure beis maid and set forth be the saidis Lordis of secreit
counsall, and executioun to be declairit be them thairupone, to be sufficient,
and of als greit strenth and effect, as and the samin had been expreslie
contenit in this present act.

Anent tennentis, and other lauchfull possessouris of Kirk landis, and setting
of fewis of the samin Kirk landis for the space of three eiris heirefter. Ca.
xij.
THE Quenis grace hauand considderit the grievous complaintis maid to her hienes
be the lauchfull possessouris, occupyaris and tennentis of the Kirk landis, and
that diverse of the liegis of this Realm hes takin fewis of the saidis Kirk
landis sen the saxt day of March, the eir of God ane thousand five hundredth
fyftie aucht eiris and hes warnit them, and intendis to warn, be vertew of
the saidis fewis or lang takkis the lauchfull and kyndlie possessouris of the
saidis Kirklandis to remove, for remeid heirof: Her hienes with auise of the
three Esratis in this present Parliament, hes statute and ordanit, that na
kyndlie lauchfull possessour, tennent or occupyar of any of the saidis Kirk
landis be remouit fra their kyndelie rowme, steiding, or possessioun be the
allegeit fewaris or takaris of the samin in lang takkis, sen the said saxt day
of March, the eir of God ane thousand five hundredth fyltie auchteiris: Bot
that the lauchfull possessouris, tennentis and occupyaris of the said Kirk
landis, may bruke and ioyis their saidis takkis, rowmis, and possessiounis but
violence of any eiris bygane be warning to remove, be any of the saides
allegeit tytillis of fewis or lang takkis, set sen the said saxt day of March,
the eir of God ane thousand five hundredth fyftie aucht eiris, or be any warning
to be maid be vertew of the foirsaidis tytillis heirefter, unto the Feist of
witsonday, the eir of God ane thousand five hundredth three scoir sax eiris,
without license of our said Souerane Lady else obtenit, or tobe obtenit in writ
thairupone. And nevertheless that the saidis occupyaris kyndlie tennentis and
possessouris pay their maillis, fermis and dewteis, according to their takkis,
or use of payment of befoir. And attoure it is in likewise statute and ordanit
be the Quenis grace, with auise of the Estatis foirsaidis, That na Elect,
Postulate, Archibischope, Bischope, Abbot, Pryoure, Commendatoure, Priores,
Dene, Archidene, Persoun, Vicar, or other persoun brukand Beneficis, or
pretendand them selfis to bruke the samin, as Kirkmen of quhatsumeuer estate,
degree or conditioun they be of, within this Realm set fra thine forth any of
their Kirk landis in few or lang takkis to any persoun or persounis for the
space of three eiris nixt to cum, videlicet, unto the Feist of witsonday, the
eir of God ane thousand five hundredth three scoir sax eiris, without the Quenis
grace license else obtenit, or to be obtenit in writ thairupone.

Anentis mesouris and wechtis. Ca. xiij.
ITEM Forsamekil as in our Souerane Ladies may Nobil predecessouris King
James the Fyft and Feird times, respective, It was statute and ordanit, that
all mesouris, pynt, quart, fyrlot, peck, eluwand, stane and pund, to be of ane
quantity and mesoure, and that na Burgh have ane wecht to by with, and ane
other to sell with, different in wecht thairfra, bot all wechtis, mesouris and
mettis, for bying and selling to be universal, both to Burgh and to land in
all times thairefter, quhilkis actis as it hes not been put to dew executioun:
Thairfoir it was statute and ordanit in the Parliament haldin at Edinburgh the
twenty sax day of Iunij, the eir of God ane thousand five hundredth fyftie five
eiris, that their persounis vnderwrittin, or any three of them, That is to say,
Reverend Fathers in God Williame Bischop of Dumblane, vmquhile Robert Bischop
of Orknay, Master Abraham Creichtoun Prouest of Dunglas, vmquhile Schir
Williame Hammiltoun of Sanchquhare Knycht, Master Thomas Marioribankis of
Ratho, Schir Richard Maitland of Lethingtoun Knycht, and Thomas Meineis Prouest
of Abirdene, Sold have conuenit in the Burgh of Edinburgh, and their to have
causit the eluwand, the quart, pynt, fyrlot, stane and pund, be brocht to them
fra the townis of Striuiling, Linlithquho, Lanark, and be the samin as they
stand, to have maid ane universal wecht of the stane and pund, ane universal
mesoure of the quart, pynt, fyrlot and eluwand, conform to the act maid be the
said King James the Feird thairupone, except the watter met to remane according
to the use of the cuntrie, To have been directit forth to the haill liegis of
this Realm, with the quhilkis they sold have been haldin to by, sell, met,
mesoure, wey, ressaif and deliver, and be na other met, mesoure and wecht. And
quha did in the contrare heirof, sold have been punist for falset, conform to
the Law. And this ordour to have been maid be the persounis foirsaid, or any
three of them, betuix the dait of the said act and Alhallowmes nixt thairefter,
but any forther dilay, like as the samin act proportis. And because it is
understand be the Quenis grace, and three Estatis in this present Parliament,
that the said act tuke nane effect, nor the foirsaidis persounis contenit
thairin performit not the contentis of the said act, swa that the samin mycht
have takin full effect: And thairfoir her hienes with the auise of the Estatis
foirsaidis statutis and ordanis, it as of befoir, that all mesouris, pynt,
quart, fyrlot, peck, elnwand, stane, and pund be of ane quantity and mesoure,
and that na Burgh have ane wecht to by with, and ane other to sell with
different in wecht thairfra: Bot all wechtis, mesouris, and mettis for bying
and selling be universal, both to Burgh and land, in all times heirefter
equally, that ane with the other, and to the effect, that this present act,
and actis foirsaidis maid heirupone of befoir may be put to forther executioun,
That their persounis vnderwrittin, That is to say, ane Reverend Father in God
Williame Bischop of Dumblane, Master Abraham Creichtoun Prouest of Dunglas,
Schir Richard Maitland of Lethingtoun Knycht, Master James Makgill of
Rankelour nether Clerk of Registre, Schir Iohne Bellenden of Auchiunoull
Knycht, Thomas Meineis of Petfoddellis Prouest of Abirdene, Conuene in the
Burgh of Edinburgh, and cause the eluwand, the quart, pyne, fyrlot, stane and
pund, to be brocht to them fra the townis foirsaidis, and be the samin, as
they find to make ane universal wecht of the stane of the wecht.xvj. pund,
trois wecht allanerlie, the pund, and other smallar wechtis equivalent thairto.
And siclyke ane universal mesoure and met of the quart, pynt, fyrlot, and
eluwand, conform to the wechtis and mesouris vsit in the saidis townis
respective, according to the sta^dis thairof: Except the watter met to remane
as of befoir. And as the foirsaidis persounis, or any three of them directis
forth the foirsaidis mettis, mesouris and wechtis, that the haill liegis of
this Realm salbe haldin to by, sell, met, mesoure, wey, ressaif, and deliver,
and be na other wecht, mesoure, nor met, and as they find, that they make ane
met, mesoure, and wecht of the foirsaidis stane, fyrlot, quart, pynt, and pund,
and vthers smallar mesouris effeirand thairto of brass, to remane in the
Register, that every heid Burgh of this Realm have the just mesoure and
quantity of the samin in semblabill mettell, to be vsit universally in this
Realm, quha salbe haldin to gif and deliver the just mesoure and quantity
thairof in manner above writtin to every Schire nixt adjacent to them, to be
vsit in manner befoir reheirsit universally, and na vtherwayis. And this ordour
to be maid be the persounis foirsaidis, or any three of them betuix this and
the first day of October nixt to cum. And after the said day, to make
publicatioun and intimatioun to all and sindrie our Souerane Ladyis liegis, of
quhatsumeuer estate, degree, or conditioun they be of, that cummis in the
co^trare heirof, they salbe punist as committaris of thift to the deid.

Anentis schuting at wild beistis and wild foulis. Ca. xiiij.
ITEM The Quenis Majesty, and three Estatis in this present Parliament,
understanding that it was deuilit, statute and ordanit, that nane of our
Souerane Ladyis lieges sold schute with half hag, culuering or pistolat, at
Deir, Ra, and other wild beistis, under the pane of deid. And notwithstanding
our said Souerane Ladyis subiectis, daily and continually incontrare the
tenor of the saidis actis, schutis with half hag, culuering and pistolat, at
the saidis wild beistis, and wild foulis: Quhairthrow the Nobill men of the
Realm can get na pastyme of halking and hunting, like as hes been had in times
bypast, be ressoun that all sic wild beistis and wild foulis ar exilit and
baneist, be the occasioun foirsaid. And for remeid heirof: The Quenis Majesty,
and three Estatis foirsaidis, hes statute and ordanit, it as of befoir, that
nane of our Souerane Ladyis liegis, of quhatsumeuer estate, degree or conditioun
they be of, tak vpone hand to schute at Deir, Ra, or other wild beistis, or
wild foulis, with half hag culuering or pistolat, in any times to cum, under
the pane of deid, and confiscatioun of all their gudis to our Souerane Ladyis
use, that cummis in the contrare. And quhatsumeuer persoun or persounis, that
happinnis to apprehend, or tak any manner of persounis contrauenand this present
act and statute, and bringis them to the Schiref of the Schire or his Deputis,
the takar sall have that ane half of the escheit of all that persounis gudis he
apprehendis, and salbe rewardit vtherwayis, as accordis for his laubouris.

Anent the admissioun of Notaris, and prorogatioun of the samin. Ca. xv.
ITEM Forsamekill as it was statute and ordanit of befoir be ane act maid in
the Parliament haldin at Edinburgh the.xxij. day of Iunij, the eir of God ane
thousand five hundredth.lv. eiris, That all Notaris within this Realm, both
spiritual and temporal, sold have been causit to cum be their Ordinaris and
Schireffis, Stewartis, Baillies, respective, to the Burgh of Edinburgh, their
to have compeirit personally befoir the Lordis of counsall, or that the saidis
Lordis sold direct their letters, requyring and chargeing all Notaris within
this Realm, to compeir befoir them, as said is, bringing with them their
creatiounis and haill protocollis, betuix the said xxij. day of Iunij, and the
Feist of witsonday nixt thairefter, at sic dayis as sold be assignit and
appointit be the saidis Lordis to be examinar, and their creatiounis viseit be
them, their protocollis producit, to be markit be the Lordis, and the leuis
numberit, and the blankis in likewise to be markit, and the saidis protocoll
buikis not to be seen nor red, bot to be markit in presence of the Notar, and
deliuerit agane to him but any inspectioun: And as they war fundin qualifeit to
be admittit be the Lordis of counsall, to use office of Notarie thairefter: And
that na Notar, be quhatsumeuer powar he be creat, use the office of Notarie
within this Realm thairefter, bot gif he first presentit him self to the
saidis Lordis, schawand his creatioun, and be admittit be them as qualifeit
thairto: And that na Notaris, that sold happin to be dischargeit be the saidis
Lordis, or not admittit be them, thairefter soulde use the office of Notarie,
under the panis after specifeit. And attour it was ordanit, that all Notaris to
be admittit, as said is, geuand Instrumentis and requyrand witness thairto, they
sold require the saidis witnessis, quhair they dwelt, or sum other evident
takin of them, and insert the samin in their said Instrument, that the witness
may be knawin being present at that time. Forther, gif any Notar beis convict
of falset, or not admittit be the Lordis in manner foirsaid, and use the office
of Notarie, they salbe punist, as said is, that is to say, their haill mouabill
gudis to be eschetit and applyit to our Souerane Ladyis use, and they to want
their rycht hand, and to be baneist the Realm for ever, And forther, sold be
punist to the tinsall of their life inclusiue, as the quality of the cause
requyrit, be sycht and discretioun of the Judge, And the causaris of the
falsettis to be done, to ressaif the samin punitioun in their persounis and
gudis: And because in ane other act maid be our Souerane Lady in the Parliament
foirsaid, all Notaris war suspendit to the last day of March thairefter, unto
the time of their admissioun be the Lordis foirsaidis, It being considderit,
that the said act tuik not than dew executioun: Thairfoir the Quenis grace with
auise of the three Estatis, dispensit and suppleit any fault be that part of the
said act, and all Instrumentis geuin sensyne and thairefter, unto the Feist of
witsonday nixt after the dait of the said act, as at mair lenth is contenit in
the samin: And it being now understand to the Quenis Majesty, and three Estatis
of this Realm in this present Parliament, that the said act hes not been
dewlie obseruit nor universally cum in use, and that be ressoun the samin come
not to the knawlege of the haill liegis of this Realm, quhairthrow they may be
preiudgeit and hurt be taking and ressaifing of sic Instrumentis, by the tenor
of the foirsaid act: Thairfoir, and for other ressonabill considderatiounis,
the Quenis hienes and three Estatis foirsaidis, hes dispensit and dispensis with
the said act, and declairis all Instrumentis taken and maid be quhatsumeuer
Notar or Notaris, sen the dait of y^ said act, to be sufficient and vaileabil
in the self, swa the saides Instrume^tis be maid be Loyal Notaris not improuin
nor defamit befoir the making of siclyke Instrumentis, like as her Majesty and
Estatis foirsaidis dispensis with the samin act and contentis thairof, anent
all Instrumentis maid in any times bygane be Loyal Notaris, as said is, sen
the twenty two day of Iunij, the eir of God foirsaid, and to be maid heirefter
quhill the first day of March nixt to cum, in this instant eir of God ane
thousand five hundredth threscoir three eiris. And in the meintyme ordanis
letters to be direct to command and charge all Notaris, quhilkes are not as it
examinat, and admittit be the Lordis of counsall, according to the tenor of
the faid act, be oppin proclamatioun at the market croce of the heid Burrowis
of all Schiris within this Realm, to compeir within the Burgh of Edinburgh,
and their to be examinat be the saidis Lordis in manner foirsaid, betuix and the
said first day of March nixt tocum, with certificatioun to them and they
failie, the panis contenit in the said act salbe execute vpone them with all
rigor, And all Instrumentis takin in Notaris handis not admittit and examinat
be the saidis Lordis befoir the said day to be null and of nane auale, and to
have na faith thairefter.

Item because our Souerane Ladyis liegis ar greitumlie hurt be unworthy and in
sufficient Notaris not qualifeit, as effeiris, to be in making of Instrumentis
and vthers writtingis according to their officis: It is statute and ordanit be
our Souerane Lady, with the auise of the three Estatis, that na persoun tak
vpone hand to use nor exerce the office of Notarie be na manner of creatioun to
be maid in any time to cum fra this day forth, under the pane of deid, without
they be maid and creat be the Quenis Maiesteis special letters, and thairefter
examinat and admittit be the Lordis of Sessioun and College of Justice, quha
sall tak their aithis for dew and lauchfull using of the said office of
Notarie, and cause Register their Sign and subscriptioun, quhilk they sall use
in all times after their said admissioun. And gif any persoun or persounis,
attemptis or dois in contrare heirof, in creating or making Notaris, or using
of the said office vtherwayis nor said is, they salbe punist to the deid, and
their Instrumentis, nor notis to make na faith.

Anent giving of sesingis. Ca. xvj.
ITEM Forsamekill as in vmquhile our Souerane Ladyis derrest Fathers time that
last deceissit, It was statute and ordanit, that all sesingis, quhilkis passis
vpone preceptis of the Chancellarie, to be geuin be the Schiref Clerk or his
Deputis, sen the quhilk act their is be occasioun of weiris and greit troublis,
diverse sesingis geuin be vthers Notaris vpone preceptis past forth of the said
Chancellarie: Thairfoir our Souerane Lady with auise of the three Estatis of
Parliament, dispensit with that fault of all sesingis geuin be vthers Notaris,
sen the making of the foirsaid act, and ordauit the said act to be publist and
have effect in times cumming, with this additioun, That vpone all preceptis
past forth of the Chancellarie, the Schiref, Stewart, or Baillie, alsweill
Regalitie as Rialtie, or their Deputis sold be requyrit to pas and ^if
sesingis with the Schiref Clerk, and his Deputis, and gif the Schiref, Stewart,
or Baillie, or their Deputis, re fusit to pas and gif sesing* than the party
hauar of that precept, to put any other Baillie to gif sesing, as he sall think
may expedient, as at mair lenth is contenit in the said act, of the dait
the.xx. day of Iunij, the eir of God ane thousand five hundredth fyftie five
eiris: And now the Quenis grace and three Estatis of this Realm vnderstandand,
that the said act hes not been dewl^^ obseruit, nor universally cum in use,
and that be ressoun the samin come not to the knawlege of the haill liegis of
this Realm, quhairthrow they may be preiudgeit and hu^t be taking of sic
sesingis, by the ordour of the said act: Thairfoir, and for other ressonabill
consideratiounis, the Quenis hienes and three Estatis foirsaidis, hes dispensit,
and dispensis with the said act, and declairis all sesingis taken and geuin be
quhatsumeuer persoun or persounis, sen the daittis of the saidis actis,
respective, be autentick Notaris, to be sufficient and vaileabill in the self,
swa that the Notaris geuaris thairof be Loyal, not improuin nor defamit befoir
the giving of sic sesingis, like as her Majesty and Estatis foirsaidis
dispensis with the samin act and contentis thairof, anent all sesingis (...) in
any times bygane, the Clerkis and Notaris thairof beand Loyal, as said is, sen
the said.xx. day of Iunij, in the eir of God foirsaid, and to be maid
heirefter, quhill the first day of March nixt tocum, in this instant eir of
God ane thousand five hundredth three scoir three eiris.

Anent resignationnis maid ad perpetuam remanentiam. Ca. xvij.
ITEM Forsamekill as it was statute and ordanit of befoir be ane act maid in
the Parliament haldin at Edinburgh the.xx. day of Iunij, the eir of God ane
thousand five hundredth fyftie five eiris, That all resignatiounis to be maid be
vassallis of their proprieteis in the superiouris handis, ad perpetuam
remanentiam, being maid be procuratorie, the said procuratorie sold be seilit
and subscriuit be the vassallis handis, and gif he could not write, to be
subscriuit with his awin hand at the pen led be ane autentick Notar, and seilit
with his seill, and gif the said resignatioun beis maid be the vassal
personally, ad perpetuam remanentiam, that the Instrument thairof be seilit
with the seill of the resignar, and subscriuit with his awin hand, and gif he
can not write, to be subscriuit with his hand at the pen, led be ane Notar in
manner foirsaid, and na resignatioun ad remanentiam to have strenth in times
tocum, vtherwayis nor is above specifeit: And it being now understand to the
Quenis Majesty, and three Estatis of this Realm, that the said act hes not
been dewlie obseruit, nor universally cum in use, and that be ressoun the
samin come not to the knawlege of the haill liegis of this Realm, quhairthrow
they may be preiudgeit and hurt in making and ressaifing of sic resignatiounis,
by the tenor of the foirsaid act: Thairfoir, and for other ressonabill
consideratiounis, the Quenis hienes and three Estatis foirsaidis, hes dispensit,
and dispensis with the said act, and declairis all resignatiounis maid in the
superiouris handis, be quhatsumeuer vassal, tennent or other persoun ad
perpetuam remanentiam, sen the dait of the said act, to be sufficient and
vaileabill in the self, notwithstanding the said act, swa that the samin may be
verifeit and prouin to have been maid be Instrumentis, or other autentick
writtingis or sufficient probatioun, that wald have maid faith and sufficient
and lauchfull verificatioun thairof, be the use and consuetude of this Realm,
obseruit and keipit in siclyk caices anent the making of resignatiounis ad
perpetuam remanentiam, befoir the making of the said act, like as her grace and
Estatis foirsaidis, dispensis with the said act and contentis thairof, anent
all resignatiounis ad remanentiam maid in any time bygane, sen the said.xx. day
of Iunij, and to be maid heirefter, quhill the first day of March nixt tocum,
in this instant eir of God ane thousand five hundredth three scoir three eiris.

That five or sax of the principal Burrowis be warni^ for concluding of weir,
peax, or taxatiounis. Ca. xviij.
ITEM The Quenis grace being of will and mind, that all Prouestis, Aldermen,
Baillies, counsall and community, and inhabitantis of Burrowis of this Realm,
be rather augmentit in their priuilegeis maid be her grace and her
predecessouris to them, nor diminisit thairintill: Hes statute and ordanit be
the auise of the three Estatis of this present Parliament, that five or sax of
the principallis, Prouestis, Aldermen, and Baillies of this Realm, sall in all
times tocum be warnit to all conuentiounis that sall happin the Quenis grace
and her successouris to conclude vpone peax or weir, with quhatsumeuer her
hienes confederatis or Inimeis, or making or granting of general taxatiounis
of this Realm. And that her hienes or counsall sall not conclude nor decerne
vpone peax, weir, nor taxatiounis foirsaidis, without five or sax of the saidis
principallis, Prouestis, Aldermen, and Baillies of Burrowis be warnit thairto
lauchfullie, as effeiris.

Anent the stancheing of tumultis within Burrowis. Ca. xix.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be our said Souerane Lady, with auise of the
three Estatis foirsaidis, for stancheing and suppressing of tumultis, vproris
and troublis, that hes happinnit within Burrowis in all times bypast: That nane
of our Souerane Ladyis liegis presume, pretend, or tak vpone had to make any
privy conuentiounis nor assembleis within Burgh, put on armoure, cleith them
selfis with wappinnis, or make sound of trumpet or talberone, or use
culueringis, displayit banners, anseineis or vthers instrumentis bellicall
quhatsumeuer, in any time heirefter, without the special license of our said
Souerane Lady, and her hienes Magistratis within the Burgh, quhair the said
tumult and uproar chansis to be, had and obtenit thairto, under the pane of
deid: Prouyding, that the rasing and conuening of the inhabitantis of the
saidis Burrowis be the Magistratis, for executioun of repressing of
malefactouris be Justice, be not comprehendit under this act.

That na coillis be had forth of the Realm. Ca. xx.
ITEM Our Souerane Lady and Estatis foirsaidis, hauand consideratioun of the
greit multitude of coillis continually caryit forth of this Realm, not only
be strangearis, bot alswa be the liegis and inhabitantis of the samin, quhilk
is now becummin the co^moun ballast of empty Schippis, and geuis occasioun of
may exhorbitant derth, and scantnes of fewall within the samin:

Thairfoir it is statute and ordanit, that na manner of persoun, stra^gear nor
liege, nor inhabitar in this Realm, tak vpone hand to transport, carry or tak
forth any coillis be Schip, Crayar or any bait, or other veschell quhatsumeuer,
in any time heirefter, under the pane of tinsall and confiscatioun of the
Schip, coillis and all the gudis that the awnar of the coillis hes within the
said Schip, to our said Souerane Ladyis use, except sa money as ar neidfull for
fire during the time of their vayage.

That beif and muttoun cum to the market with skin and birne. Ca. xxj.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be our said Souerane Lady, with auise of the
three Estatis foirsaidis: That all beif muttoun, weill and like bestiall slane
to landwart, and Burgh, or presentit to fre Burrowis or fre mercatis, bring
with them in all times cumming their hyde, skin, and birne, under the pane of
confiscatioun, and escheting of siclyke bestiall, and gudis, as wantis the said
hyde, skin and birne, to be applyit to our Souerane Ladyis use.

The ratificatioun of the priuilegeis of Burrowis. Ca. xxij.
ITEM Our said Souerane Lady with auise of her saidis three Estatis in this
present Parliament, ratifeis appreuis, and confermis all actis of Parliament,
statutis, priuilegeis, and immuniteis quhatsumeuer geuin and grantit be our
said Souerane Lady, or vthers her predecessouris quhatsumeuer, in fauouris of
the Burrowis, Prouestis, Aldermen, Baillies, Communiteis, and indwellaris
within the samin, with all letters and executoriallis, that hes past or may pas
thairupone, geuand express command be their presentis to the Lordis of our
Souerane Ladyis College of Justice and Sessioun, to gif and direct sic
ressonabill letters as they or any of them will desire, or hes had of befoir:
Commanding and chargeing all our Souerane Ladyis liegis and subiectis, that
nane of them tak vpone hand to attempt, or pretend to attempt, violate or brek
the foirsaidis Lawis, actis of Parliament, statutis, ordinancis, immuniteis, or
vthers priuilegeis quhatsumeuer, geuin and grantit in fauouris of the saidis
Burrowis, under the panis contenit in the samin, and under all pane and
offense, that they and every ane of them may incur aganis our Souerane Ladyis
authority royal thairthrow.

Anent the letters of Marque. Ca. xxiij.
OUR Souerane Lady understanding the intollerabill skaith sustenit their money
eiris bygane, be the Merchandes of her hienes Realm, throw granting of letters
of Marque to vmquhile Robert Bartoun of Ouerbarntoun, and Andro Bartoun, and
certane vthers their colligis, vpone the King of Portingall and his subiectis,
and of the ungodly taking of gudis, had throw culloure and pretense of the
saidis letters of Marque, betuix the liegis and subiectis of her Maiesteis
Realm, and the foirsaid King of Portingall, his liegis and subiectis thairof.
For remedy to be had thairintill: Ordanis special letters to be direct to make
publicatioun at the market crocis of the haill heid Burrowis of this Realm, to
all our Souerane Ladyis liegis, that nane of them tak vpone hand any wayis to
mell or intromet with any of the saidis Portingallis gudis or geir thairefter,
chargeing them quha dois in the contrare, that they, and ilk ane of them,
salbe haldin as violent spulearis and intromettaris with the saidis Portingall
gudis, and forther, to incur the danger and perrell of the Law, anent the
restorance thairof to the parteis dampnifeit their throw, be pretense of the
saidis letters of Marque.

Ane prouisioun to be maid for the Instructioun of the outh. Ca. xxiiij.
ITEM Forsamekill as it was menit to the Quenis grace, and Lordis of Articlis
in name of all, that within this Realm ar desirous that leirning and letters
storeis, that they ^ald tak tent to the waisting of the patrimony of sum of
the fundatiounis maid in the Collegeis of the City of Sanctandros, and vthers
placis within this Realm, for the interteniment of the outh, and that lew
sciences, and specially they that are may necessare, That is to say, the
toungis and humanity ar in ane part not teicheit within the said City, to the
greit detriment of the haill liegis of this Realm, their childrene and
posterity: Desyring thairfoir the Quenis Majesty, and Lordis foirsaidis, to
auise and rypelie considder, that the rentis and fundatiounis of the saidis
Collegeis mycht be employit to sic men of knawlege and understanding, quha hes
the toungis and humanity for Instructioun of the outh, and other science,
according to the Instructioun of the saidis Collegeis, and for weilfair of the
haill liegis of this Realm and their posterity: Thairfoir the Quenis grace,
and Estatis foirsaidis, hes geuin and grantit, like as they be the terour
heirof geuis and grantis full commissioun and powar to James Earl of Murray
Lord Abirnethy. etc. Ane Reverend Father in God Henry Bischop of Ros President
of the College of Justice and Sessioun, Williame Maitland of Lethingtoun oungar
Secretar to our Souerane Lady, Master James Makgill of Rankelour nether Clerk
of Register, Schir Iohne Bellenden of Auchinnoull ^nycht Justice Clerk, Master
Iohne Spens of Condie Aduocat to our Souerane Lady, Master George
Buchquhannane, Master Iohne Vinrame Pryour of Portmouth, and Iohne Erskin of
Dun to cognosce, visie and considder the patrimony and rentis of the saidis
Collegeis, quhat the samin extendis to eirlie, and superplus thairof, how and
in quhat manner, and be quhat rentis and eirlie proffeittis, their may men of
cunning and understanding be had within the said City, and vthers placis,
quhair Collegeis ar for Instructioun of the outh, in the foirsaidis sciencis of
the tongue and humanity, to the weilfair of the haill liegis of this Realm and
their posterity. And to declair their opinioun and auise, quhat ordoure salbe
vsit in the saidis Collegeis, toward the Instructioun of the outh and vthers,
and as they find thairintill to report the samin to our Souerane Lady, and
three Estatis in the nixt Parliament, togidder with their awin Iugementis and
opinioun, how, and in quhat manner the samin may be (...) done and vsit.

For sending of Ambassador to the King of Denmark. Ca. xxv.
ITEM It is statute and ordanit be the Quenis grace and three Estatis
foirsaidis, for advancement of the honor and estate of the Burrowis of this
Realm, and Merchandis within the samin, quha hes their traveling in the eist
partis, and ar may heuylie hurt and extremely handillit be the lait
impositioun and custume rasit vpone them be the King of Denmark, his
Officiaris and subiectis, quha causis be taken in the passing and hame cumming
of their Schippis, the fyft penny of all their gudis, quhairof befoir na th^^g
was crauit and desyrit of them and their haill Schip, bot ane Rois Nobill
allanerlie, without any forther troubill, serching or demand of any inuenture
of their gudis, of the quhilk they ar now compellit ^o rander just inuenture,
and in caice be negligence any thing be omittit forth of the said inuenture,
their haill gudis ar escheit may extremely, but favor: That ane man of
honor be send to the said King of Denmark vpone the expensis of the Burrowis,
with letters supplicatouris direct be the Quenis Majesty for renewing of the
auld ami^^e and kyndnes betuix our said Souerane Lady her liegis and subiectis
of this Realm, and the said King of Denmark, his dominioun and liegis thairof,
and for obtening of sic liberteis, priuilegeis and fauo^iris, as war had and
vsit betuix our said Souerane, her liegis and subiectis, and the said King of
Denmark, his liegis and subiectis thairof, and specially for dischargeing of
the saidis innouatiounis of custume, and bringing hame of aikin tymmer, quhilk
is laitlie inhibite to be sauld to the inhabitantis and liegis of this Realm,
swa that they may use all the saidis liberteis grantit to them in times
cumming, as they have done of befoir, within the boundis and dominiounis of the
sad King of Denmark, and ordanis our Souerane Ladyis Secretar to extend the
saidis letters to be direct to the said King of Denmark in may ampill form
for weill of the saidis Merchandis, as effeiris.

Their.xxv. actis nixt precedant war in the eir of God ane thousand five hundred
lxv. eiris, extractit forth of the buikis of Parliament, at command of our
Souerane Lady be Master James Makgill of Rankelour nether Clerk of our said
Souerane Ladyis Registre, counsall and Rollis, under his Sign and
subscriptioun manual.

signature

PARLIAMENTVM EXCELLENTISSIMAE PRINCIPIS MARIAE REGINAE Scotorum tentum apud
Edinburgh.xv. die Monsis Decembris An. Do. Millesimo. Quingentesimo Sexagesimo
Quarto Praesentibus tribus Regni statibus.
Anent the confirmatioun of fewi^. Ca. j.
THE quhilk day the Quenis Majesty having considderit the eirnest suit of her
subiectis maid to her hienes for her grace confirmatioun to be obtenit vpone
infeftmentis of fewferme of the Kirk landis, set be the Prelates of her hienes
Realm, sen the.viij. day of March, the eir of God ane thousand five hundredth
fyftie aucht eiris in time of troubill, contrare the tenor of her graces
letters of inhibitioun, publist and proclamit in diverse partis of her Realm,
and als of vthers infeftmentis of Kirk landis obtenit befoir the said.viij. day
of March, and now is auisit, and intendis to grant sic confirmatiounis,
willing that the samin be sure to sic as sall obre^e them: Thairfoir her
hien^s with auise of her three Estatis in Parliament, will, grantis, statutis
and ordanis, that all confirmatiounis to be grantit be her Majesty of the said
infeftmentis, salbe als lanchfull and of als greit strenth and auale, as gif
the samin had been obtenit and purchest fra the Pape or sat of Rome, and of
als greit strenth and effect, as any other confirmatiounis of sic infeftmentis
obtenit be any vthers persounis within this Realm be authority of the Pape, or
sait Apostolic in any times bygane: Prouyding that the infeftmentis of Kirk
landis obtenit be any persoun or persounis, sen the said.viij. day of March
not dewlie confirmit be her hienes, be of nane auale force, nor effect.

Extractit forth of the bukis of Parliament, at command of our Soueranis Lord
and Lady, ^t me Schir James Balfoure of Pettindreich ^nycht, Clerk of their
hienes Register, counsall and Rollis, under my Sign and subscriptioun manual.

signature

Heir endis the actis and Constitutiounis of the Realm of Scotland maid in
Parliamentis haldin be the rycht excellent, hie, and mychtie Princis Kingis
James the First, Secund, Third, Feird, Fyft, and in the time of Marie now Queen
of Scottis, viseit, and correctit be the Lordis depute be special Commissioun
thairto and extractit forth of the Registers be the Clerkis of our Soueranis
Register respective.
CVM PRIVILEGIO AD DECENNIVM.

Imprintit at Edinburgh be Robert Lekpreuik, the.xij. day of October the eir of
God ane thousand five hundredth three scoir sax eiris.

THE ACTS OF THE SCOTTISH PARLIAMENT, THAT WERE CANCELLED IN THE PRINTED COPIES,
BEARING THE DATE OF NOVEMBER 28, 1566; NOW REPRINTED, FROM THE PERFECT COPY,
THAT BEARS THE DATE OF OCTOBER 12, 1566.
THE person, who has caused these cancelled leaves of the Acts of the Scottish
Parliament to be reprinted, had always doubts about the probability of there
being a new edition of those Acts printed by Lekprevick, in so short a space of
time as from the 12th of Oct. 1566 to the 28th of Nov. of the same year, (which
are the dates that the supposed different editions bear); but unwilling to
controvert an opinion that had obtained so general belief, among those who were
most likely to judge accurately on the subject, he would not hazard his own
opinion, till he should have an opportunity of collating and comparing these
supposed different editions. This he was enabled to do by the favor of Mr.
George Chalmers, who is possessed of a very fine copy of what has hitherto been
supposed to be the first edition, and which he obligingly lent for the purpose
of collation. -- When this collation took place, with what is called the second
edition, it was found they were one and the same edition, and differed in
nothing but the cancelled leaves here reprinted. The Acts principally concern
the religion of the country; why they were cancelled requires no explanation,
to any one acquainted with the history of those times, when the Catholic power
was so much on the decline, and the Protestant party had become so prevalent.

G. N.

IN PARLIAMENTO EXCELLENTISSIMI PRINCIPIS ET DO. NOSTRI DO. JACOBI Quinti Dei
gratia Scotorum Regis metuendissimi tento apud Edinburgh decimo septimo die
Mensis Maii An^ Do. Millesimo Quingentesimo tricesimo Secundo per cundem tribus
Regni Statibus praesentibus.
Of the fredome of halie Kirk. Ca. v.
THE quhilk day our Soverane Lord in this present Parliament, the three Estatis
of the Realm being gadderit, exponit: Sen he and his Nobill Progenitouris
kingis of Scotland and liegis of the samin, hes been first, or at the leist
with the first, that ever acceptit the Cristin faith, and been may obedient
sonnis to our halie fathers the Papis of Rome, and the authority Apostolic,
without any manner of smot, violatioun, or defectioun: And our halie fathers the
Papis of Rome, hes been verray gracious and benevolent to his hienes and
Realm, with all manner of privilegeis and beneficis, and may of all Pape
CLEMENT now Pape of Rome, hes been mair gracious and benevolent to his grace,
than to all his foirbearis: Quhairfoir to schaw him thankful and obedient sone
to his halynes and the kirk of Rome, It is devisit, statute, and ordanit with
avise and consent of the three Estatis of Parliament, That he sall keip,
observe, mantene, and defend the authority, liberty, and fredome of the sat
of Rome and halie Kirk, and sall never make, nor statute any actis,
co^stitutions, do, attempt, nor suffer to be done, nor attemptit any thing in
contrare thairof: And gif in times past any thingis hes been done, or in times
cumming any thing sall happin to be done in contrare the authority, fredome,
and liberty of halie kirk, annullis, and decernis the samin now as than, and
than as now of nane avale, force, nor effect: And that nane of our Souverane
Lordis liegis be bund or oblist to obey the samin: Saifand alwayis the actis
fundit upone our halie father the Papis privilegeis, or them, that hes been
lang in ^ouabill use keipit and observit in our Souverane Lord, that now is,
and his may Nobill progenitouris times.

THE ACTIS AND CONSTITUTIOUNIS MAID BE THE RYCHT HIE AND MYCHTIE Prince JAMES
the fyft King of Scottis, in his Parliament begunnin and haldin, at Edinburgh
the VII day of Junii. The eir of God M. D. and XXXV. eiris.
For the eschewing of heresy within this Realm and panis thairof* Ca. viii.
ITEM Our Soverane Lord, ratifies and apprevis the statute maid of befoir be
his hienes, in his Parliament, haldin at Edinburgh the xvii day of Iulii. The
eir of God ane thousand fyve hundredth xxv. eiris. Aganis them that haldis,
disputis or reheirsis the damnabill opinionis of the greit heretic Luther, his
discipulis and followaris, or of any uther heresy with new additioun, of the
quhilk act and additioun, the tenor followis. And our said Soverane Lord, for
the zele and lufe his heines beiris to the Cristin faith and the halie kirk
ordanis and statutis the said act of new.

ITEM IT IS Statute and ordanit, that forsamekill, as the dampnabill opinionis
of heresy ar spread in diverse countries be the heretic Luther, and his
discipulis: And this Realm and liegis thairof, hes fermly persistit in the
halie faith, sen the samin was first ressaifit be them, and never as it
admittit any opinionis contrare the ^ristin faith, bot ever hes been clean of
all sic filth and vice: Thairfoir that na manner of persoun, strangear, that
happinnis to arrive with their Schip within any part of this Realm, bring with
them any bukis or warkis of the said Luther, his discipulis or servandis,
dispute or reheirs his heresyis or opinionis, bot gif it be to the confusioun
thairof, and that be Clerkis in the sculis allanerlie, under the pane of
escheiting of their Schippis and gudis and puttin^ of their persounis in
presoun. And that this act be publist and proclamit out throuch this Realm at
all portis and Burrowis of the samin, swa that they may allege na Ignorance
thairof. And that all ather the Kingis siegis assistaris to sic opinionis, be
punist in semblabill wise. And that nane of them have, use, keip or conceill
any bukis of the saidis heretikis or contenand their doctrine and opinionis,
bot that they deliver the samin to their Ordinaris within.xl. dayis, under the
panis foirsaidis. And the effect of the said act to strike upon them. And
letters to be direct to make publicatioun heirof in form, as ^ff^irs.

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF THE FOIRSAID EXCELLENT PRINCE AND KING, HALDIN at
Edinburgh the XIIII day of March. The eir of God M. D. and XL. eirs.
For the honor of halie Kirk. Ca. lxiii.
ITEM To the confusioun of all heresy, that all the Sacramentis be haldin and
honourit, as they have been in all times bygane within this Realm, conform to
the Lawis and doctrine of halie kirk.

For worschip to be had to the Virgin Mary. Ca. lxiiii.
ALswa, that the Glorious Virgin Marie, mother of our blissit Salvatour Christ
Jesus, be over all this Realm reverendlie worschippit and honourit, and that
prayaris be maid to her, to make intercessioun to God Almychtie, Father, Son,
and halie Gaist, for the successioun, heill, weilfare and prosperity of the
kingis grace, his Queen our Soverane Lady, and their prosperous successioun,
peax, unity and concord betuix our said Soverane Lord and all Cristin Princis,
and betuix them all to resist to the Inimeis of the faith Catholic, and
betuix his grace, his Estatis and liegis, and that his hienes and pepill may
remane consta^tlie in the faith, and follow the Law of God, conform to the
statutis and doctrine of halie kirk, ressaifit and keipit be his predecessouris
kingis of Scotland, and pepill in all times bypast, sen they first ressaifit
the samin, and siclyke prayaris to be maid to all Sanctis, in special and
general, and that worschip be had to them.

That na man argune the Papis authority. Ca. lxv.
ITEM That na manner of persoun, argune, nor impung, the Papis authority, under
the pane of deid, and confiscatioun of all their gudis mouvabill and unmouvable.

The Kingis grace exhortatioun in plane Parliament, for reforming of the Kirk
and Kirkmen. Ca. lxvi.
ITEM That because the negligence of divine sevice, the greit unhonestie in the
kirk, throw not making of reparatioun to the honor of God Almychtie, and of
the blissit Sacrament of the Alter, the Virgin Marie, and all halie Sanctis,
and als the unhonestie and misreule of kirkmen, both in wit, knawlege, and
manners, is the matter and cause that the kirk and kirkmen ar lychtlyit and
contempnit. For remeid heirof: The kingis grace, exhortis and prayis oppinlie,
all Archibischoppis, Ordinaris, and uthers Prelatis, and every kirkman in his
awin degree, to reform them selfis, their obedientiaris and kirkmen under
them, in habit and manners to God and man. And that they cause in every kirk
within their diocie, under their jurisdictioun, cure, reule, reparatioun and
reparaling, to be honestly and substantiouslie maid and done, to the honor of
god Almychtie, the blissit Sacrement and divine service, every kirk after the
quality and quantity of the rentis. And gif any persoun allegeand them
exemit, and will not obey nor obtempre to their superior* in that behalf: The
kingis grace sall find remeid thairfoir, at the Papis balines, and siclyke
agains the saidis Prelatis, gif they be negligent.

That na private conventiounis be maid to dispute of the Scripture. Ca. lxvii.
ITEM That nane hald nor lat be haldin in their housis, nor utherwayis,
congregatiounis or conventiculis, to commoun or dispute of the halie Scripturs,
without they be Theologis apprevit be famous universiteis or admittit thairto,
be them that hes la^chfull powar. And in likewise, that na man, quhatsumever
state or conditioun he be, luge, ressaif, chereis, nor favor any heretic. And
in caice any ressaifis or knawis them quhair they ar, sall incontinent denunce
and accuse them, to the nixt lauchfull Officiar of Justice, under the pane to
be punist as heretikis.

Of persounis abjurit of heresy. Ca. lxviii.
ITEM Gif any heretikis, have been abjurit or utherwayis, have been admittit
lauchfullie to penance and grace nane of them sall convers nor commoun with
uthers of any matters tuiching our halie faith, under the pane to be haldin as
relapse. And alswa, that na persoun, that hes been suspectit of heresy,
howbeit they be ressaifit to penance and grace, sall in this Realm exerce,
have nor bruke any honest estate, degree, office, nor Judicature, Spiritual
nor temporal in Burgh nor without, nor na wayis sal be admittit to be of our
Counsall.

Of fugitivis suspect and summound for heresy. Ca. lxix.
ITEM Quhair any beis suspectit of heresy, and laucbfullie summound to answer
the samin, ar fugitive, that they sall be banist and condampnit as heretikis.
And it sall not be leiffull to na man to solist, procure, nor make supplicatioun
for their purgatioun, reductioun or grace, under the pane to be punist as
favou^aris to the heretikis, and the saidis persounis fugitivis not to be
admittit to purgatioun, nor utherwayis to reconciliatioun, nor it to remane or
co^vers in our Realm. Alswa we forbid to all our subjectis, quhatsumever
estate they be, to present requeistis, make any supplicatioun, defend, supply,
dite or write, counsall, help, procure or make advocatioun, solicitatioun,
laubour or assist any wayis to na heretikis fugitivis or banist thairfoir, or
uther contaminate persounis, that are or have been of the said reprevit sect of
hereseis to have or impetrate any grace of their errouris, quhilk will na way
be accordit to them, under the pane to be punist as assistaris to hereseis.

That nane dishonor the Imagis of Sanctis. Ca. lxx.
ALswa to stop the private congregatioun and conve^ticulis of heretikis, quhair
their errouris ar spread that any man that first revelis incontinent, or accusis
any that hes keipit the said conventiounis, gif he have been ane of them
himself, for the first time he sal be quite and absolvit thairof, swa that he
be ane good Cristin man, and have the rycht faith, promittand him never to
intromet with the said errouris in time cumming, In caice he be not of the said
congregatioun, than he sall have ane part of the confifcatioun of him that he
accusis, as the Lordis thinkis expedient to statute and ordand. And this to be
extendit to all them that revelis or accusis any heretikis, to have ane part
of their confiscatioun. And that na man may pretend Ignorance heirof, that it
be commandit under panis, to all Shireff^s, Provestis, and Baillies of Burrowis
to publis be oppin proclamatioun their actis, at the heid places of their
jurisdictioun, twyse in the eir.

That nane dishonor Imagis. Ca. lxxi.
AND Anentis Imagis of halie Sanctis, canonist and apprevit be the halie kirk:
It is statute and ordanit, that nane brek, cast down, nor any uthe^wayis treit
Irreverendlie, nor do any dishonor, nor Irreverence to the saidis Imagis.

IN PARLIAMENTO TENTO APUD EDINBURGH, etc. QUARTO DIE MENSIS AUGUSTI. Anno. Do.
Millesimo Quingentesimo Quadragesimo Sexto.
Aganis the invadaris and downecastars of Kirkis, Kirkmennis placis, and
reifaris of the Iowellis. Ca. iii.
MY Lord Governor and the Estatis of Parliament, ratifeis and apprevis be
Censiment of Parliament, the act maid at Striviling the xi day of Iunii, the
eir of God ane thousand fyve hundredth.xlvi. eirs, anentis the taking of
spiritual men in their housis and placis, as is contenit in the said act. Off
the quhilk the tenor followis. The quhilk day my Lord Governor with avise of
the Quenis grace, and Lordis of counsall understandand, that throw the
occasioun of this trublous time, and greit inobedience maid both to God and
man, in the committing of diverse enorme and exhorbitant crimes: It is dred and
feirit, that evil disposit persounis will inwaid, destroy and cast down, and
withhald Abbais, Abbay placis, Kirkis, alsweill paroche Kirkis, as uthers
Religious placis, Freiris of all ordouris, Nunreis, Chapellis, and uthers
Spiritual mennis housis, aganis the Lawis of God and man, and incontrare the
liberty and fredome of halie Kirk, and actis of Parliament maid thairupone,
observit and keipit in all times bygane, And for eschewing and stopping of all
sic inconvenientis: It is devisit, statute and ordanit, That letters be direct
over all partis of this Realm, and to all Schireffis, Stewartis, Baillies and
their Deputis, and to Provestis, Baillies, Aldermen of Burrowis, and to uthers
Officiaris of the Quenis Schireffis in that part, Chargeing them to pas to the
market croces of all Burrowis within this Realm, and their be oppin
proclamatioun, command and charge all and sindrie our Soverane Ladyis liegis,
that nane of them tak upone hand to cast down or destroy any of the saidis
Kirkis, Religious placis, and uthers Kirkis and Kirkmennis housis foirsaidis,
or to withhald, intromet or tak the samin at their awin hand be way of deid in
any time cumming: Or to spubie the Iowelis, or ornamentis of the Kirk ordanit
for Godis service, and dedicat to the samin, under the pane of tinsall of life,
landis and gudis. And gif any sic Kirkmennis housis or placis be else takin be
quhatsumever persounis, ordanis the takaris and withhalders of the samin, to
restoir and deliver the samin agane to the awnaris thairof, and their
factouris, under the said pane. And ordanis this act to be ratifeit in
Parliament.

Table of the Acts of Parliament contained in the foregoing leaves, being
certain Acts of the Scottish Parliament, inserted in the Copy of the Acts
printed by Robert Lekprevik, the 12th day of October, 1566, but which are
omitted in the Copy of the Acts, printed by the said Lekprevik, the 28th day of
November, 1566, pointing out the places where they ought to be inserted in the
latter copy.
JAMES Vth. Fol. Between. Of the fredome of halie Kirk. Ca. v. cxiii. Ca. iiii.
and vi. For the eschewing of heresy within this Realm, and the panis thairof.
Ca. viii. cxviii. Ca. vii. and ix. For the honor of halie Kirk. Ca. lxiii.
cxxxiii. Ca. lxii. and lxxii. For worschip to be had to the Virgin Mary. Ca.
lxiv. That na man argune the Papis authority. Ca. lxv. The Kingis grace
exhortatioun in plane Parliament, for reforming of the Kirk and Kirkmen. Ca.
lxvi. That na private conventiounis be maid to dispute of the Scripture. Ca.
lxvii. Of persounis abjurit of heresy. Ca. lxviii. Of fugitivis suspect and
summound for heresy. Ca. lxix. That nane dishonor the Imagis of Sanctis. Ca.
lxx. That nane dishonor Imagis. Ca. lxxi. MARIE. Aganis the invadaris and
downecastars of Kirkis and Kirkmennis placis, and rei^aris of the Jowellis. Ca.
iii. cxlv. Ca. ii. and iv.


