of Dumfreisse, upon Friday the twenty two day of the said month of Iunij.
The weaponshawing of our Stewartrie of Kirkudbright, von tuesday the twenty
saxt day of the said month of Junij. The weapon-shawing of our Shirefdome of
VVigtoun upon Fridaye the twenty nine day of the the said month of Iunij. The
Weapon-shawing of the Baillerie of Carricke upon tuesdaye the third day of
Iulij next to come. The weaponshawing of our Shirefdome of Air, called Kings
Kyle, upon Friday the saxt day of the said month of Iulij. The weaponshawing
of the Baillierie of Kyle Stewart, upon tuesday the tent day of the said
month of Iulij. The weaponshawing of the Baillerie of Cunnynghame, upon Friday
the thirteen day of the said month of Iulij. The weaponshawing of our
Shirefdome of Renfrew, upon tuesday the seventeene day of the said month of
Iulij. The weaponshawing of our Shirefdome of Dumbartane, upon Friday the
twenty day of the said month of Julij. The weaponshawing of our Shirefdome
of Striviling, upon tuesdaye the twenty four day of the said month. The
weaponshawing of our Stewartrie of Menteith, upon Fridaye the twenty seventh
day of the said month of Julij. The weaponshawing of our Stewartrie of
Stratherne, upon tuesday the last day of the said month of Julij. The
weaponshawing of our Shirefdome of Perth upon Friday the third day of August
next. The weaponshawing of our Shirefdome of Clackmanan, upon tuesday the
seventh day of the said month of August. The weaponshawing of our Shirefdome
of Linlithgow, upon friday the tent day of the said month of August: And the
weaponshawing of our Shirefdome of Lanerk, upon tuesday the fourteen day of
the said month of August: And touching the weaponshawing of the Regalities,
and other Baillieries within Our Shirefdomes, Stewartries and Baillieries
aboue-written, WE with advyse of Our said Lords, Ordain the same to be made
upon the days particularly above specified, appointed for the weaponshawing of
the Shirefdomes, Stewartries and Baillieries, wherein the said Regalities, and
others Baillieries lie. And that in such parts and places, and before such
ordinary Judges and Officers unto whom they have been formerly accustomed to
make their Musters and Weapon-shawing.

OUR WILL IS Herefore, and We charge you straightly, and commaundes, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, You pass, And in Our Name and Authority
make publication hereof by open proclamation at the Market Crosses of the Head
Burrowes of Our Shirefdomes, Stewartries and Baillieries abouewritten,
wherethrough none pretend ignorance of the same. And that you command and
charge all and sundry Our Lieges, and Subjects between sixty and sixteen
years, and others fensible persons, as well within Regalitie, as Royalty, and
that they and every one of them, prepare and address themselves well and
sufficiently armed, to give their Musters and Weaponshawing every one of them,
within the ordinary places of the Shirefdomes Stewartries, and Baillieries,
where they dwell, upon the days respective abovewritten, under the pains
mentioned and contained in the former Act and Proclamation made there-anent.
And such like to command and charge all and sundry Our Shirefes, Stewartes,
and Baillies as well to Regalitie as Royalty, Provests and Bailies of Burrowes:
That they and every one of them, within their own bounds, office and
jurisdiction, attend and awaite upon the said weaponshawing and to do, and
perform that which to their charge and office appertains, and that they and
every one of them, make a perfect record, and note in writ under their hands
of the whole persons that comes to the said weaponshawing, and (...) form and
manner of their Armor, and deliver the same under their hands the said
Colonel BRUCE, To the intent he may exhibit the same to Our said Counsel of
war, to the effect above written. As they will answer upon the dutiful
discharge of their office at their heighest charge and peril. And sick-like
that you command and charge all and sundry Noblemen, Barrons, and Gentlemen
within the bounds particularly abovewritten, to give up to Our said Shirefes,
Stewarts and Baillies the names of the whole persons that accompanies them to
the said Musters and weaponshawing with the names of all others under them, who
by the Law are subject to give their Musters and weaponshawing thereat without
concealing of any one of their names. Together also with the names of the
Paroshins where they dwell, as they and every one of them will answer upon
the contrary at their highest charge and peril. As also that you command and
charge all Our said Shirefes, Stewarts, Baylies of Royalties and Regalities,
and their Deputs that they and every one of them; have a special care, that
none of their Clerks, nor no others under them entrusted with the inrolling of
the persons conveening to the said Weaponshawings, use any extortion, nor exact
any duty, or fee, from any person or persons whatsomever for receiving and
inrolling of their names. As Our said Shirefes, Stewarts, Baylies, their
Deputes and Clerks will answer upon the contrary at their highest peril: and
under the pain to be called, persewed and punished for extortion of Our
subjects with all rigor. The which to do, We commit to you coniunctly and
severally, Our full Power, by (...) Our Letters, Delivering the same by you
duly execute and indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Holy-Rood-House, the twenty five day of Ianuar. And
of Our Reign the second Year. 1627. Per Actum D. Secreti Consilij EDINBVRGH,
Printed by Thomas Finlason his M. printer


