ACT ANENT THE IN bringing of Money.
At EDINBVRGH (...) fifteenth day of July16(...) years: These of the Committee
(...), poynding, and caption be execute against Collectours* valuers, and
others who does not their duty or make payment of their tenth part in manner
after specified, viz.

2. Against the Collectours for not making count, ^eakoning, and payment of
what they have received, and gives not in the names and roll of these who have
not paid.

3. Against the Valuers for not valuing, conform to the said act of Parliament
which is either upon the Valuers oaths, or upon the Heri^ours oaths, or upon
the Heritours declaration, under their hands, with certification: What they
conceal shall be confiscat; And for not delivery of the said valuations.

4. Against the not payers of the said tenth part, by apprehending their
persons, poynding their own proper goods, or poynding their ground.

5. And because after all ordinary means are used, to make men pay what is
due, yet such is the unwillingnesse and delaying of some, to the evil example
of others, that money comes not in to serve the present time. Therefore it is
thought fit for maintenance of the Army presently on foot, for preservation
of the Religion, and liberties of this kingdom: That all those who have any
moneys, and shall len the same for the public use in manner after specified,
viz. These within the Shyrefdome of Edinburgh, Hadingtoun, and Linlithgow,
within four days after intimation: These of the Shyrefdome of Air, Stirling,
Lanerke, Renfrew, Fyffe, Angus, Perth, Bervicke, Roxburgh, Peibles, and
Selkirke, within six days after intimation made thereof. And siclike, these of
the Shyrefdome of Aberdene, Bamfe, Murray, and Innernesse, within ten days
after intimation: Such money as shall be so lent, shall be free of any common
burden, by detention of any part of their annuelrent, but shall have their
full annuelrent free of any burden or detention.

6. Secondly, They shall have full annuelrent from the lenning thereof, as the
same shall be received within the said spaces respective forsaid to the Term
of VVhitsonday nexto-come as for a whole year, notwithst^^ding a good part of
the Term is past.

7. Thirdly, They shall have such security, as they shall please, design, or
crave themse^ves; So that what persons they shall crave to bind for what sum
they len, shall give their personal bands for the same: And these persons who
shall bind to them, shall have the whole Presbytery or Shyre bound for their
relief: And the Presbytery or Shyre shall have the Estate bound to relieve or
repay them.

8. And siclike, If it be tried that any have moneys, and will not len the
same; It is ordained that the act of Parliament be put to execution against
them, especially in that point: That all these who can be tried to have money,
and will not len the same as said is: The Delatours and finders out, to have
the one half, and the other half to be confiscat for the public.

9. And sicklike, It is appointed, That all the Silver-worke, and Gold-worke in
Scotland, as well to Burgh as Land wart, as well pertaining to Noblemen,
Barrons, and Burgesses, as others of whatsoever degree and quali^^e they be of,
be given in to the Committee at Edinburgh, or these they shall appoint to
receive the same upon such security for rep^yment as the said Committee and
they shall agree at the prices following. And for this effect, The Committee of
war within each S^yrefdome, and the Magistrates within Burgh, with concurrence
of the Ministry (who must exhort and give warning out of the Pu^pits to the
Paroshioners) are appointed to call before them any such persons as has any
silver or gold work, that inventar may ^e made of the weight and spaces
thereof, and security given for the same, with declaration always. Like as it
is hereby declare^, That these who have any Silver or Gold work, which they
crave rather to keep for their own use, than deliver the same ^o be coined,
shall have power to redeem the same at the prices following, viz. Fifty six
shillings for the unce of Scots silve^ work, fifty eight shillings for every
unce of English silver work; And thirty four pounds six shillings eight
pennies for ^very unce of gold: The same being either produced before the
Committee at Edinburgh, or before the Committee of war in each S^yrefdome, or
before the Magistrates of every Burgh, and inventar made thereof, or else
declared by the parties under their hands, and money presently paid at the
rates and prices foresaid; For the which money security shall be given for
repayment thereof, and free of any burden, as said is.

And incase any has double gilt work, or curious wrought work, and can not
get m^ney to redeem them, It is hereby declared, that the said gilt and
curious work being delivered to the said Committee, shall ^ot be melted, or
disponed upon before the Term of VVhitsonday next: Betwixt and which time the
owner thereof shall have po^er to redeem the same at the prices foresaid, he
paying always the annuelrent thereof, so long as the same shall lie
unredeem^^. And the said silver or gold work to be all given in, either to the
Committee of Estate, or to the Committee of war within each ^hyrefdome, or
Presbytery, or to the Magistrates of each Burgh, within eight days after
intimation shall be made thereof, ^^^her at the several Market crosses, or by
towke of Drum, or by advertisement from the Ministers out of the Pulpits: With
certi^^cation, That these who shall not give in or redeemed the said silver
(...) gilt work, within the said space, the same shall be con(...)i(...)nt
for the public use.

Printed at Edinburgh by James Bryson, 1640.


