ANE DECLARATIOVN of the just and necessar cauSIS, MOVING US OF THE Nobillitie
of Scotland and vthers ye Kings MAIESTEIS FAITHFVL SVBIECTIS to repair to his
Hienes presence, and to remane with him for resisting of the present daingeris
appearing to Goddis true religion and professors thairof and to his Hienes
awin person estait and croun and his faithful subiectis that hes constantly
continuit in his obedience, and to seik redres and reformatioun of the abuse
and confusioun of the commoun wealth Removing from his Majesty the chief
authouris their of quhil tho treuth of the famine may be maid manifest to his
Hienes estaits That with common consent redres and remeid may be prouidid.

Derectit from Striuiling with special command and license to be prentit,
ANNO. M.D.LXXXII.

WE the Nobility and vtheris the Kingis Majesty's faithful subiectis mouit
laitly to repair to his presence: and to remane with him for resisting of the
grit dangeris appearing to the true religioun and professouris thairof, to the
Kings awin persoun estate and Croune. And to the commoun wealth of this country,
willing that the groundis and occasiounis of all our procedingis be maid patent
and manifest to all our Souerane Lordis true Liegis and guide subiectis,
quhairthrow the prosequutioun of this our godly and honest cause may tak the
better effect to the glory of God, the chief and only author thairof, and to
the releif and comfort of yis puir afflicted commoun wealth Haif thocht it may
meit and expedient to publishe and diuulgat the just and necessar causis,
moving us to provide for a good and godly redres and reformatioun of the abuses
and enormiteis vnderwrittin, houpping yat all the true professors of Gods
religioun presently preachit within this realm, And all sic that hes
constantly co^tinuit in the Kingis Ma. obedience, and tenderis the commoun
wealth of their native country, will put to their hand and forder this godly
interpryse, that with co^moun consent and sound advise the best and may suir
remedy thairfoir may be prouydit.

IN THE FIRST, it is not unknown how our forebearis faithfully seuit our
Kingis Maiesteis may noble Progenitouris and spendit yair lyfis in defense of
this Realm aganis all forane enemeis As our Fatheris and we have hazardit our
lyfis and lands in preseruatioun of his innocent persoun, first from the
murthera of his Father, and thairefter in defense of his Croun and authority,
being suaioyned with the cause of Godis true Religioun, as the ane culd ressaue
na detrimen without the inconvenient of the vyer, on ^ir hope alwayis of his
grace guide allo^ance, and assurit protectioun thairfoir at (...)s zeiris of
discretioun, like as indeid we (...)uer fand nor findis in his Majesty's au^^
guide nature and propir inclination bot a ^^if and zeal to that true and
christien reli^^oun, quhairin he was godly nurished, a ^^uing affectioun to all
his nobility and ^^heris faithful subiectis and ane earnest ^^syre to have
the commoun wealth of ^^is his realm governed in peax accor^^ng to justice and
equity zit of lait zeirs (...) sum few men borne heritouris to na^^ing in this
land, partly moved be igno^^^ce of this estait, and pairty be ane am^^^ious
desire, not only to be equalles ^^t superiouris to the ancient nobility.
^^ething yame with the pretense of ye K. ^^enes Name and kinrent, and ascryuing
^^to his Majesty the odious title of ane ^bsolute power, They have not ceassit
to attempt in effect quhat they pleasit, in an ^^ange and vnaccustumat manner,
and in a very short space of his Majesty's zoun^ age, hes aspyrit to tytillis
of heich hono^ and obtenit the possessioun and co^moditi^ of grit and fair
leuingis both sprituall and temporal, beside gritt brybes in money Iowellis
and other coistly graith ressau^ be sum of them. Bot how justly and with quhat
good gru^d and ordour almighty God knawis and will declair with time. Quhil^ we
patiently beheld quhil be experience we fand all thingis tending to the
vndermynding and ouerthrawe of true religioun put in lively practice, and
working fordward to the destruction of the Ministeris of Godis word and haill
professouris thairof and their with all the Kings Maiesteis good fame falling
in decay, and his Croun and authority to be put in questioun be the preuie
practice of a reconsiliatioun betuix his Hienes and his Mother, be dimission of
his Croun, or joining her in coniunct authority with his Hienes, drawing in
the mean time ye ordour of Justice and haill gouernament of the commoun wealth
in a dissolute partial and confused ordour, that the other mischeifis in^endit
micht the mair easilye proceid vnespyit

FOR as concerning the dangeris appearing to the true religioun and professors
thairof. Quhat gritter preparation of wraik and ouerthraw of the true religion
culd be intendit, nor to ga about to corrupt the Kings Majesty's tender aige,
may godly and happelly nurished instructit and exercisit befoir their men came
in credit. Occupying his Hienes for the may part not only in vanities bot
also defyling his cares with filthy and vncu^ly spechis, drawing his residence in
the places of Dalkeith and Kinneill, quhair the grittest resort of pepill was
commounly Papistis dissolut personis and sic as had been ever aduersaris to
true religioun his awin persoun and estate, and quhair hurdome and insolence
was mair frequent nor princely and virtuous exercises. That vile and impudent
woman over famous for her monstrous doingis, not without probable suspitioun
o^ the deuilishe Magical art, never ceassing be her wickit inuentionis,
slanderous lying and fylthie words and be her vncu^ly doingis to vex and
importune the K. Majesty to the grit grief of sindrie yat be held and culd not
amend the same.

AND be that cumpanie and from yai places his Majesty was persuadit no^ only
to write to Papistis and to enter in intelligence with them bot to sic
Papiste^ Scottismen borne as were be his hienes (...) estaits justly forfaltit
for tressonable cry^mes committit be them aganis his auct^ritie. Persuasioun
geuin to his Hienes y(...) the suirtie of his estait and Croun depe^di^ chiefly
on sic freindship as their trauelli^ and practisis micht compass and procure
unto him. Quhilk in end notwithstandin^ the concurrance of the Papis nunce and
vtheris may notable persequuteris of y^ Kirk of God in France wrocht not
same* kill as to procure him anis to be styled King^zit to interteine this
trade sum takinn's and presentis was procurit and send unto his Majesty to
hald his Hienes occupyit with contemplattioun and use of ye novelty yairof,
quhil with time he micht be drawin farther in the snair intendit for the wraik
of his Majesty and us all.

IN the mean time the practice of the assosiation working fordward, the K.
Majesty hes been persuadit to allow that the Ministeris should be put at, not
plainlye bot indirectly and coloratly at the first. Beginnand with dispositioun
of beneficis to personis unworthy and vnqualifyit (pleno iure) and be absolute
power without examination or admissioun of the Kirk aganis the laws and
constitutionis of this realm, and without dew prouisioun maid for sustentation
of the M^nisteris serving at the Kirkis of prelacijs in that sort disponit.

NIXT the disciplene of the Kirk mair opinly impugnit, quhe^ as the Kings
Majesty be the persuasio^ of their enemeis to the Kirk was inducit to make him
self and his privy counsall Judges in the cognitioun and judgment of materis
meir ecclesiastical and concerning the doctrine of the preichouris and to tak
upon him quhat sumeuer iurisdictioun the Paip usurped thairinto ofauld, Zea and
mair to dischairg the general assembly and haill pastouris within this Realm
to proceid to the sentence of excommunicatioun, also to suspend the same
sentence of exco^municatio^ may justly and ordourly pronuncit and to decerne
thesamin of nane availl force nor effect.

AT last the mouthis of Preichoris hes been stoppit be commandment. Sum
Ministeris hes been dung, banished, suspendit from the Ministry, cassin in
prison and removed from their flockis, vntryit or lauchfully co^uicted of any
crime or just occasion. Otheris of them hes been laitly indytit and callit to
underly the Law in may suspect judgment for tressonable and foul crimes to
make them and yair doctrine odious, and they having purchest aduocation to the
justice general (quhais judgment they meine never to decline) the ressauing of
their souerteis in the ordinar manner be commandment was differrit and refusit
to be ressauit That thai being put to the horn as rebellis, their escheits
micht have been disponit upon. Commandment also hes been geuin not to proceid
in execution of the ecclesiastical censures aganis manifest and obstinat
offendaris.

IT is mair nor manifest how the K. Majesty hes been intysit and provoked to
tarry fra ye sermonis of godly Priechours and to tak leth to heir the treuth in
reproving of sin spokin be them. And be the contrair to permit a periurit and
excommunicat persoun worthelie cut of from the society and fallowship of
Christ to be interteineit and fosterit in his sicht and company.

WAS their not violence vsit to pull the ordinar Minister out of the pulpet of
the Kirk of Glasgow and be force to place and intruse thairin the same
unworthy (...) was not Papistis and me^ weil knawin infamous purposly placit
as magistrattis in that city and university to truble the Kirk and studeis of
the Scolleris with special directioun to them, and to the gentilmen of the
country to displace the ordinar minister and intruse in that room, that same
self unworthy persoun quha lang befoir w(...) dischargit of all functioun in
the Kirk of God* was he not only their manteined and expres commandment geuin
to suffer na^^ of the Ministeris quha withstude him (...) have rest or
freindship in they bound^^ And was not the officer of the Kirk that past to
charge him takin and put in prissoun.

TO quhat excessive chargis and t^^uellis were the Ministeris within and about
Glasgow and the Masters and Regentis of the university put to, be their often
summonding befoir his Majesty and couns^^ and continuatioun of their cause to
sindrie dayis and places. The Scolleris thairwtall being the sonnis of nobill
men Barronis (...) vtheris of good quality furiously inua(...) and their blud
drawin.

QVHAIR UPON diverse pri(...)t and publict complaints being made (...)d the
Ministry conuening and presen(...)ng the causis of their greifis unto the K.
^aiestie at Perthe, how hardly and vnrea^^nablie they war vsit be sum of the
coun^^l for the time, and how slenderly an^^ered with reformatioun of lytill or
na^^ing co^plenit upon Be the same answer ^^ay zit appeir.

IN place of quhilk redres (...) (...)rmatioun hoped for, was their (...)ecreit
geuin and letteris in ye four (...)st be these Lordis of the preui(...) (...)ll
for the time, To answer and (...)id excommunicat man of the re(...) (...)ctis
of the Archbishoprik of (...) a manner parciall, and altogidder (...)nar, yat
being na competent in (...) any sic matter, bot the Lord (...)unsall and
sessioun to quhais iud(...) sic materis properly appertenit, plainly refusing
the granting of any sic letteris to a persoun sua standing excommunicat.

AND beside all this be act of pr^uie counsall and Proclamatiounis past yai^
upon and publist not only at dyueris ma(...)cat Croces bot in the Kirk of S.
Iohnesto^ in the K. Maiesteis awin heiring quhil^ his grace was intysit to
afferme be his aw(...) mouth. Their was a narration maid rich^ sla^derous and
displesant to the hearts of a(...) it God and lufit ye true religion (...) the
Ministeris ar callit vnnatu(...) subiectis seditous personis trubilsun(...)
(...)uyet spirits, memberis of Satan (...) to the Kingis Majesty and the
(...)n wealth of their native country (...)ding in the same proclamatioun
(...)m commandment to dissist from (...) sic thingis as their ar callit
lie(...) in verity knawin sins and offer (...) God and to the hurt and
flaunde(...) (...)irk and true religioun. And di(...) them the conuentionis
and asse^(...)bleis of the Ministry under the pane to be punist as rebellis
and makeris of conuocatioun.

TO all this concurtit the frequent aduerteismentis and rumoris of forayne
countreyis of the suddane alteratioun of religion and cutting away of the
principal^ of the nobillitie professouris yairof to be shortly attemptit in
Scotland. It was (...) quyrit be sum gif our Kings Majesty pas^ alreddy to the
Mes, famous buikis and lybellis were printit and dispersit in this country
warnand the professouris of Goddis true religioun to remove. Daily
intelligence was betuix their men that gouernit ^he Kingis Maiesteis persoun and
estait, and ^he Papistis both in France and Ingland and sum of the Inglis
fugitives being Papistis ^esett and intertenyit very neir the Kingis Majesty's
persoun for the time. The ^peciall names of sic of the Nobillitie of ^^ceris,
and of the Kingis true seruandis y(...)ar destinat for the Massacre in all
men^^ ^outhis and nathing resting bot the execution sen the Authouris of the
like in France had obtenit place and credit to command also in Scotland. The
lyffis and deith of noblemen and vtheris ye Kingis faithful subiectis not
depe^ding upon ane ordinar and (...)full tryel of yat quhair with yai micht any
wayis be chargit according to the ancient and louable lawis of this realm. Bor
their dirtay and distructioun standing in the privy aduertismentis daily
ressauit fuith of France and ingland fra their aduersaris in religioun and
their knawin professit enemeis yat la^g hes awayted procurand yait wraik,
quhair of their intention was to mak^ our Kingis Majesty the instrument

AND for the better performing of this their ungodly enterprise, tending to the
utter wrak and final subuersioun of the true religioun and haill professouris
thairof, They have trauellit with the K. Majesty to persuade him be all means
possible to take vpoun him self to be the ^^thour of all this wrak and
dissimulatioun (...) he was moved be their importunitye to declair in S.
Iohnestoun all abusis complenit upon to be his awin deid howbeit we dout not
bot his Majesty is altogidder innocent.

NOW the true and christian religioun and haill professouris thairof being
brocht to sic hazard and extremity as is abone rehearsit. Quha can not consider
and behald the evident dangeris quhilk appearit to ye Kings awin persoun estait
and Croun seeing the ane sa dependis upon the other that the ane can not be hurt
or imparit in any wayis without the grit incommoditie and detrement of the
other.

FOR by and attour the traveling to corrupt the Kingis aige geuand him all the
prouocatiounis to dissolute life in maneris that was possible, be licentious
company be intertening of their awin har ^ottis in his presence, and carrying
them about with them, to all places quhair his Hienes did repair.

QVHAT sall we speik of the sham(...)s and filthy behavior of her that is
callit Countess of Arrane, quha not beand satisfiit with the shame and
ignominye done to the Earl of March the Kingis derrest uncle, throuch her
inordinat lust, ceisis not zit to pervert the Kingis Maiesteis awin zouthe be
slanderous speiche and countenance qnhilk we are ashamed to expres.

QVHAT gritter danger can be deuysit agains the Kingis Majesty's estait and
Croune, nor to ding continually in his earis and to persuaid him to think his
reg^ne unsure wantand his Moderis bennisoun and that France and Spane wald not
call him King bot at her desire. And to ya(...) effect to write unto her and
enter in practice anent the dimissioun of his Croun or for associatioun of her
in coniunct authority with him to the extreme perrell of his awin estait: To
cast all thingis done sen he was crouned in dout, and to make all his true
Nobillitie and subiectis tratouris. And in the meime time quhill as this
purpose was still wirking nather the Estaitis no^ counsall being maid preuie to
ye message or answer returnit, sindrie practices hes been maid with Papistis
both in France and England specially with Scottis men standing forfalrit of
quhome sindrie war drawin hame: Sum intrusit to be Magistratis within burrowis,
quhais inahbitants for ye Kings quarrel they have murtherit ^esyde that they
war gyltie of the blude of the Kingis M. Paren^^s, vtheris standing convict of
the Kingis Fatheris murthour evil affectit to his Crou^ and service brocht ^n
credit and their aduysis in materis of grit ^est importance chiefly followit.
The noble men and vtheris that had alwayis con^inuit the Kingis faithful
subiectis and ^eill willaris reprochit and banissit his Hi^es court and
company vnharde or tryit, ^^ares laid to trap them sum faiklesly for
(...)ltit, vtheris impedit to gif their fry voris (...) Parliament, and
counsal and gif they did (...)raggit and quarrellit thairfoir, continual
(...)is and misreportis of them dung in the (...)ingis M. earis to make the^
odious. and ye (...)ird

of Innermarky fugitive and remaning fur(...) of the realm for a foul
murder; fona(...) brybe brocht hame and pardonit. To m(...) him for his awin
remissioun ane accu(...) of noblemen and the Kingis good and faithful
subiectis. Thus the Kingis May(...) authority fame and reputation being
bro(...) in decay and gritly diminissitna cair nor (...)tion is maid for his
provision to a marriage with a party agriable and of ye same religion

THAT their foirnamit practi(...) both aganis the true religioun and (...)
Kings Maiesteis estait and Croun hes be(...) deuysit and intendit experience
teachis (...) to be may true, like as alsua the samy(...) appearis may
manifestly be the dissolutioun of the ametye and freindship bet(...) his
Majesty and his derrest sister ye Qu(...) of England and ye tua realms
maliciou(...) procurit be their men altogidder ignora(...) of the estait of the
country and autho(...) of their calameteis, traveling be all mei(...) possible
to alienat the Kingis M. mind (...) her freindship, notwithstanding her gr(...)
zeal and affectioun shawin fra time to ^^me in the mentenance and protectioun
^f the true religioun in both the realmis (...) of the grit cair love and
providence de^^arit oftentimes in the preseruatioun of ^^e Kingis Mateis
persoun estait and Croun and repressing be her force and substance of ^^neris
rebellions attemptit aganis his ^ersoun during his infancy.

AS concerning the co^moun welrh ^ the realm standing chiefly in the guide ^^d
virtuous governing of the Kings per^^un and estait, and in the equal
administra^^oun of justice to all the subiectis, to the ^^^fort of the guide and
terror of ye wickit (...) all indifferent me^ judge quhat hes be^^ ye condition
thairof their tua or thrie ^^iris past. Is not the haill ordour of ius^^ce and
policy of the realm interuertie ^he law brokin be making of men and ^^eme^
prisoners and using and threatening of ^^rtur for every licht and simulat cause
and ^^nishment of the honest men of Edin^urgh from their awin housis they never
being callit nor convict of any crime b^^ delatit be ye malice of their evil
wille^^ and relaxt or kepit strait at yir me^nis appetyte. Quha hes left
nathing vnsocht or v^assayit yat they micht make profeit or money of, not
sparing that quhilk sold hau^ sustenit the Kingis awin estait, and the nei^
full effairis of the realm, and zit the fami^ not able to sustene the neidles
and prodiga^ consumptioun and the insatiable ambition and gredines of their me^
yair wickit coun^sallouris and followaris to quhom nathing hes semit
vnlauchfull merchandise. wa^ not justice, bluid, freindship and the Kingi^
proper rent bestow it on the Duke for hi^ leuing and all maid commonly sellable.

HOW far hes ye co^moun weil been interessit in rasing and abusing of ye cu^zie
yir last tua zeiris. Quhat lose at last he^ the subiectis ressauit be the
crying dou^ of that money this zeir, quhilk was cunzeit the last zeir, to
quhome in particulai^ hes the commoditye of that commou^ skaith redoundit. hes
it releuit any pai^ of the Kingis M. grit det or suppleyit any ^ne honorable or
profitable warke in the haill commoun wealth.

TOWARD the administration of justice, let first the sessioun considder how
extraordinarly they have been vrgit in this feirfull time by past luking quhan
they should be takin ane and ane out of the judgment seat, and co^mittit to
prisoun or banissit, quha^ any thing procedit co^trairye appetit and intention
of their me^ or quhair they requestit or fauorit.

WAS not command geuin to reposses men forfaltit quhair their pacification and
restitution was not ratifiit and appreuit be Parliament and that na suspension
for laufull causis should be grantit aganis the same. In matters criminal na
justice done, and sumtyme double warrandis geuin to proceid and continue
justice courtis togidder and attanis. Grit f^^ds fosterit to make ye fattar
escheitis to fall and plane opposition maid to the aggrement of parteis
standand at variance.

TAKING of ordour with the burningis slauchteris hershipis and depredationis
co^mittit on ye bordouris and in ye hi^landis altogidder neglectit. Little or na
cair takin for interteinment of ye peax and amity with the christ^ane Princes
and common welthis to get the new exactionis raysit on ye marchandis in France
and Flanders releuit and ye quyetnes on ye bordours kepit ye course of justice
and redres at'ye fronteirs impedit and dreuin over, leuand this country louse
to be inuadit at all occasionis, without fuir freindship of any. Bot gif it ^albe
socht quhair ye Kingis M. is not acknawledg it for a King, and quhair it will
not be obtenit without ye hazard of his religion and perrel of his awin estait
and croun

QVHAT sal we say of the unlawful taking of the tutorie of Atran a conforttes
noblema^. Innocent of all foull crimes, and visited be the hand of God, and
under yat pretext after solemnizat aith maid of lauchful administration of yat
charge and office to his utility, according to richt and law is of ye realm,
bereuing him (after he was declarit idiot) of his style leuing and heritage, be
a fraudfull and stollin resignation, to ye wraik and disherishing of him and
all his lynage, althocht not declarit offendaris, procurand strange and
extraordinar actis of Parliament to be maid to me^tene yat godles and unlawful
conquest, and reproching ye principallis of ye nobillity with lies and vtheris
insufferable iniureis in their faces. The like quhair of was never done in
Scotland, beside ye inhumane handling of that innocent and dejected creature,
and of the miserable nobilwoman the Duches his Mother. Keeping him in a preson
with presoneris, evil furnishit of meit drink or clething, in a most cruel
and barbarus manner, to ye hurt of the Kingis conscience, honor and good fame,
quhome they trauellit to persuade, to take on him to be the author of all their
wrangs and wickedness.

QVHAN all other schyf^is that micht make proffite or money had been scu^mit and
socht zea ye guds of ye leuing me^ before yai war co^uict or put to ye horn
intromettit with or factoreis grantit yair upon in a new and vnaccustomit manner.
At last the justice air of Cliddisdaill haldin and ye chalmerlane aitis deuysit
for scurging of the burrowis restifies with quhat form or gu^^ ordour their men
begouth and et^ilit to haif procedit.

COMpositionis taken for men and zit they never impannellit nor accusit, and often
times the landit man and his tenne^ts sauld ouerhed for a sowme without respect
to the offensis bot to the number of the personis and sindrie other fassionis
of brybrie new and may perrillous to enter in custom under the name of
justice, like as the puirest sort in the burrowis should not hais escapi^ ye
importable scaffrie inte^dit and the welthiest althocht of neuersa guide fame,
were threatened with ye persute of ye hamebringing of falls money, a crime indeid
deserving seueir punisme^t^ Bot quhider ye motion procedit on zeal to justice
and punisme^t of offendaris, let it be iudgit considering to quhais gane and
proffeit yai exactionis should haif cum, And quhe^ sic as were appointed to be
judges and reuleris of yat court, war for the may part markit with sum note of
infamy: And was it not g^it presumption for any subject to preis to impy^e in
sic sort above the haill burrowis being ane of the thrie estaitis, and
derogation and emparing of the Kingis M. awin authority and to his Hienes
justice general. Zea to intrude in ye offices of him and of the Admerall was
estemi^ for ye time na materis of effect or importance.

QVHAT extraordinar and feirfull co^missionis and chargis hes been impetrat of
the Kings Majesty not semplie of iusticiarie, bot with blankis for taking and
apprehe^ding of quhat personis thai plesit and incais of their refuse to be
taken to raise fire assege housis* sla or mutelat. and to quhais discretion was
ye execution thairof committit, Bot of him yat is famous and already in danger
of the law quhen God sal send justice, of fire rasing, common adultery sindrie
odious slauchteris, reuesing of a woman, asseiging of men in yair awin housis
within burgh, halding of a house of weir, within burgh, and shuting forth of ye
sam at ye Kingis M. subiectis and barrounis, leisching of men with beltis and
brydillis, slaughter of ane officer of arms at ye marcat croce in the uerie
executing of his office, ryuing of the Kingis letteris, causing the executor
their of sueir yat he should not reueill the same. Taking of a gentilman out of
the K. Maiesteis awin house of the castle of Striuiling, carrying of him to the
park under silence of nicht, tytring him nakit, bidding him cheis quhidder he
wald be hangit or heidit, and after dinging and misusing of him, causing him
sweir yat he sold reueill the same to nane bot to his master. Forcing of the
Kings M. waird of the ^olbuith of Edinburgh, cruelly wonding a man co^mittit to
waird thairin, and maisterfully taking ane other offe^dar out of waird without
finding of cautioun or commandment had of the magistratis. hanging in a sword
belt and tormenting of a zoung man cu^ming to him for executing of a precept of
warni^g befoir yis last Witsonday, in a foul and unworthy manner to be
rehersit. Participation with Pyratis in their thyft and rubery of the guids of
the freindis and confederattis of this realm, reproching and misusing sum of
ye Kingis Majesty's counsall in his a win house: Gir this man was meit to have
the credyte of the execution of sic a feirfull and bludy commission, or was any
ways worthy to be sufferit to cum to his Hienes with a cumpanie of armed me^
for putting of furthe cruelteis to execution, Let first God and than the Kings
M. and his estatis Judge

IN all this time lytill ordinar preuie counsall being kepit, except it had
been for proppit causis to ye auanceme^t ^o^ their men yair freindis or
followaris, ye ^^ther because the Duke had procurit ane ordinance that nathing
past out of counsall should be valiable that was not subscry^uit be him.

THVS the Kingis M. honor being gritly emparit, ye muist pairt of the
nobillitie and guide subiectis, finding na sure acces to admoneis and certify
his Majesty of his awin honor and weilfair nor to move his Hienes in their
awin erandis or to procuir expedition of their laufull and reasonable causis,
bot be the said Duke his mediation and to him be s^m interpretor oftymes deirly
hyrit, Finding ourselffis in continual dangeris be misreportis, to be put at
and hourly loking for the execution of the cruelteis intendit aganis us we
thocht nathing better nor to repair to his Majesty and to remane beside him
remo^ing the chief and principal authouris of ^hir enormeteis quhil ye treuth
micht be manifested to his Hienes and his estaites and that be common adwyse
sic spedie and sub^^antius remedeis may be prouydit, as ye Ministeris and
professouris of Godis true religion publictly prechit, and be the lawis of the
realm established may leif and use the exercise of the same religioun asweill
in the fry dispensation of Godis word and reproving of sin and impiety, as in
administration of the Sacramentis and using of the ecclesiastical ce^sures and
discipline quhair occasion is offerit according to ye same word and louable
lawis and custom obseruit within this realm heirtofoir vntroublit or burdenit
with extraordinar or straing iniunctionis. They behaua^d them selffis the Kingis
M. dewtifull subiectis and being obedient to his Maiesteis lawis in ordinar and
lauchfull judgment for any offenses cryminall or civil quhairwith they may be
chargit.

NIXT that the treuth may be manifestit of the trauellis that hes been taken and
practice used for moving of ye Kings Majesty to condescend to any dimission of
his Croun and royal authority, or associatio^ of ye Queen his mother in a
co^iunct gouernament with him, and that it be considderit quhat avantage or
perrell that intention taking effect micht have wrocht to the true religion, ye
Kingis M. person and estait, and to his nobillitie and faithful subiectis
professing his obedience, and yat ^uir provision may be had how ye further
proceeding in this dangerus practice salbe snibbed and cut of and the attempting
of ye like in time cu^ing forborne and eschewit.

AND finally that the said corruptionis abusis and deforderis enterit within
their lait zeiris in the co^moun wealth aither in the corruption and misusing of
justice or ye Kingis awin persoun, house, rent officeris, ordour of counsall
and gouername^t of the publict affairs, oppressing and extorsing of the
subjects under color of justice or vtherwayis being particularly
considderit, may be sa amendit and reformit, as God may be thairby pleasit, The
Kingis M. honorit and luissit, and yat the nobility and subiectis may leif in
justice peace and tranquillity, releuit of the cruelteis dangeris and
calamiteis inte^dit aganis them in time cumming. (*)


