HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To our Lovits(...) Messengers, our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and
severally specially constitute greeting.
For So Much as our Lieges and Subjects are heavily oppressed and burdened with
exorbitant annuals and interest taken for the use of money, far exceeding the
rate and proportion taken in our Kingdom of England, France, and other
neighbor Countries, Wherefore We, out of Our gracious goodness, with consent
of Our three Estates conveened in this present Parliament, have reduced the
interest and profit of money from ten of the hundred to eight. Therefore our
said Estates of Parliament presently conveened, being sensible of the great
good ensuing thereby to this whole Kingdom in all time to come, Have made one
voluntary and humble offer to Us, that of the said ten paid by Borrowers for
ilk hundred (during the space of three years next ensuing) Two shall be paid
to us during the said space (by and attowr the twentieth penny presently paid
to Us in this present running Taxation) And that for the terms of Martinmasse
next, one thousand six hundred thirty three years: and Whitsunday, one
thousand six hundred thirty four years. And by and attowr the sixteenth penny
of the extraordinary taxation now presently granted to us in this our present
Parliament, to begin at Martinmasse, one thousand six hundred thirty four
years. And ordains the Lenners to pay the same yearly and termly, during the
said space of three years, Together and in one sum with the twentieth penny of
this present running extraordinary taxation for the said term of Martinmasse
next, one thousand six hundred thirty three years, And Whitsunday, one
thousand six hundred thirty four years. And together and in one sum with the
sixteenth penny of the extraordinary taxation granted in this present
Parliament for the terms of Martinmasse, one thousand six hundred thirty
four years: Whitsunday and Martinmasse, one thousand six hundred thirty five
years; And Whitsunday, one thousand six hundred thirty six years. Beginning
the first terms payment of the said two of ten at the said Feast and term of
Martinmasse next, and so termly thereafter during the said space of three years
and six terms. And whereas We and Our said Estates have authorized all and
sund^y heritable Sheriffs, Stewards, Bailiffs, and Bailiffs of regalities, and
their deputes, And the Provest and Bailiffs of free Burrowes within the bounds
of their, jurisdiction, as likewise the Clerks* within the jurisdictions where
these offices are not heritable (which Clerks have their offices ad vitam) To
collect the said Taxation of Two marks upon every ten of annual, And to
make payment thereof to our Collector general to be appointed by us for
receiving of the same. Therefore, and for inbringing of the (...)terms payment
of the said Taxation, our other letters are direct, charging all and sundry
heritable Sheriffs, Stewards, Bailiffs, and Bailiffs of regalities, their
deputes and clerks, And the Provest and Bailiffs of free Burrowes, and their
Clerks, As likewise the Clerks within the jurisdictions, where these offices
are not heritable, that they and every one of them dwelling by North the River
of Dee, within the space of fifteen days after the said term of in the year
(...) of God, one thousand six hundred thirty (...) And that they and every one
of them dwelling by South the River of Dee, within the space of ten days after
the said term, deliver to (...) Our Collector general appointed by Us for
receiving of the said Taxation, a true and just account and inventar of the
whole sums of money due to be paid by any person within the bounds of their
jurisdictions, for his part of the said Taxation, And that they give up the
same account and inventar upon their oaths solemnly sworn, that the same is
just and true, And make payment to our said Collector general, or to his
Deputes in his name, having his power to receive the same, of the whole moneys
due to be paid to us, conform to the said account and inventar, for the said
(...) terms payment of the said Taxation. Within twenty days after the term
of (...) in the year of God, one thousand six hundred thirty (...) years,
under the pain of rebellion, and putting them to our horn, for whose relief,

OUR WILL is, and we charge you straightly and command, that incontinent these
our Letters seen, ye pass, and in our Name and Authority command and charge
all and sundry the said anwelrenters dwelling within that our (...) To make
payment to you our said (...) and your deputs, of the said two of ten of all
annual rents (...) due and payable to them, As for the said (...) terms
payment of the said Taxation, within twenty days next after they be charged
by you thereto, under the pain of rebellion, and putting of them to our horn.
And if they failye, the said twenty days being bypast, that ye incontinent
thereafter denounce the disobeyers our rebels, and put them to our horn, and
escheat, and inbring all their moveable goods to our use for their contemption.
And if need be, that ye our said (...) poynd and distrenie therefore, as ye
shall think most expedient, according to justice, as ye will answer to us
thereupon. The which to do we commit to you conjunctly and severally Our full
power, by these our Letters, delivering them by you duly execute and indorsed
again to the Bearer.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh the twenty eight day of June, and of our
reign the ninth year. 1633. Per actum Parliamenti.

