Ane Short and general Confession of the ONE CHRISTIAN FAITH AND RELIGION,
ACCORDING ^to Godis word and actis of our Parliamentis, Subscriued be the
Kingis Majesty and his household, with sindrie vtheris, To the glory of God
and good example of all men, At Edinburgh the Twenty eight day of January,
The year of God. Ane Thousand, Five Hundredth, Fourscore years. And the
fourtene year of his Maiesteis Regne.
WE all and every one of us underwritten protest, that after long and dew
examination of our own Consciencis, in matters of true and falls Religion, are
now thoroughly resolved in the truth, by the word and spirit of God. And
therefore we believe with our heartis, confess with our mouths, Subscryue with
our hands, and constantly affirm before God and the whole world. That this
only is the true Christian Faith and Religion, pleasing God, and bringing
Salvation to man, quhilk is now by the mercy of God reveled to the world, by
the preaching of the blessed Euangell. And is received, believed, and defended
by many and sindrie notable Kirkis and Realms, but chiefly by the (...)
Scotland, The Kings Majesty and three Estates of this Realm, As Gods eternal
truth, and only ground of (...) ^^luation, as more particularly is expressed
in the confession of our Faith, stablished and publictly confirmed by (...)
^^tis of Parliamentis, and now of a long time has been opinly professed by the
Kings Majesty, and whole body (...) Realm, both in burgh and land. To the
quhilk confession and form of Religion, we willingly aggree in our (...) ^^cis
in all pointis, as unto Gods undoubted truth and verity, grounded only upon
his written word. And (...) we abhor and detest al contrary Religion and
doctrine, But chiefly all kind of Papistrie in general and (...) ^^lare
headis, even as they are now damned and confuted. by the word of God and kirk
of Scotland, but inspe^^ (...) detest and refuse the usurped authority of that
Roman Antichrist upon the scriptures of God. upon the Kirk, (...) magistrate
and conscience of men. All his tyrrannous Laws made upon indifferent things,
against our Chris^^^^ liberty. His erroneous doctrine against the sufficiency
of the written word, the perfection of the Law, the office (...), and his
blessed Euangell. His corrupted doctrine concerning original sin, our
natural inabilitie and re^^^^^ to Gods law. Our justification by Faith only.
Our inperfect sanctification and obedience to the law, the nature, (...) and
use of the holy Sacraments. His five bastard Sacraments, with all his rytis,
ceremoneis, and falls (...) added to the ministration of the true Sacraments
without the word of God. His cruel Judgment against (...) departing without
the Sacrament, his absolute necessity of Baptism, his blasphemous opinion of
transsub^^^^tion, or real presence of Christis body in the elements, and
receiving of the same by the wicked, or bodeis of men. (...) ^ensationis with
solemnet oaths, Periureis, and degrees of marriage forbidden in the word, his
cruelty against (...) ^^o^ent deuorced, His diuilishe Mess. his blasphemous
Preistheid, his profane sacrifice for the sins of the dead ^^ick. His
Canonization of men, calling upon Angels, or Sanctis departed, worshipping of
Imagrie, relics, and (...) of Kirks, Altars, Dayis, Vows to creatures. His
Purgatory, prayers for the deid. praying or speking (...) language, with his
processiones and blasphemous letanie, and multitude of Aduocats or Mediatouris.
His (...), Articulare confession, his despered and uncertain repentance, his
general and (...) faith, his (...) for their sins, his Justification by
works, Opus Operarum, works of supererogation, meritis (...), peregrinationis
and stationis, his holy watter, Baptissing of Bellis, Coniuring of spiritis,
Crossing, Saving (...), Hallowing of godis good Creatures, with the
superstitious opinion joined therewith, his war^^ (...) ^onarchie, and wicked
hierarchy, his three solemned vows, with all his shawellingis of sindrie sores.
His ^rroneous ^^die decreis maid at Trent, with all the subscryuers and
approuers of that cruel and bloodes band, coniured aga^^ Kirk of God. And
finally we deteste all his vain allegoreis, Ritis, signs, and traditonis
brought in the kirk (...), or against the word of God and doctrine of this true
reformed Kirk. To the quhilk we join our selves wil^^ doctrine, Faith,
Religion, Discipline and use of the holy Sacraments, as lyuelie members of the
same in Christ (...), promising and swearing by the great Name of the Lord our
God, that we shall continie in the obedience of ^^ine and discipline of this
Kirk, and shall defend the fame according to our vocation and power, all the
days ^^ues, under the panes contened in the law, and danger both of body, and
soul, in the day of Gods fearful Judge

And seeing that many are Fyrred up by Satan, and that Roman Antichrist, to
promise, swear, subscryue, and (...) use the holy Sacraments in the Kirk
deceatfully against their own conscience, minding hereby, First under ^^enal
Cloak of Religion, to corrupt and subuers sectetely Gods true Religion with in
the Kirk, and afterward ^^me may serve, to become open enemies and persecuters
of the same, under vain hope of the Popes dispensati^^ against the word of
God, to his greater confusion, and their dowble comdemnation in the day of the
Lord Jesus, ^^efore willing to take away all suspicion of hypocrisy, and of
sic dowble dealing with God and his Kirk, protest (...) all hearts for Witness,
that our myndis and heartis do fully aggree with this our confession, pro^^
(...) So that we are not ^^ued for any worldly respect, but are persuaded only
in our con^^ (...) prented in our hearts by the (...) Spirit, as we sha^ (...)
day when the secrets (...) disclosed. And because we purceaue, that the quher
(...) Religion and kirk does depend upon the sauetie and good beha^iour of the
Kingis Majesty, (...) Instrument of Godis mer^^ granted to this Country, for
the maint^^ning of his Kirk, and (...) of Justice amongs us. We protest and
^^omes with our heartis, under the same oath, hand writ, and (...) we sal
defend his person and authoriti^^ (...) our geir, bodeis, and lives, in the
defense of Christis Euangel, (...) of our Country, ministration of Justice
(...) ^^unishment of Iniquity against al enem^s within this Realm (...) as we
desire our God to be a strong a^^ (...) ^^cifull defender to us, in the day of
our death, and cumming of (...) Jesus Christ. To whom with the Fat^^^ (...)
the holy Spirit, be all honor and gl^rie eternally Amen.

The Kingis Maiesteis charge to all Commissioners and Ministers within this
Realm.
^^^^^ing, that we and our Household have subscriued and given this publict
confession of our faith, to the good exem^^^ of our Subiectis. We command and
charge all Commissioners and Ministers, to ^raue the same confes^^^^ion of
their parochinars, and procead against the refusers, according to our Laws
and order of the Kirk, de^^^^ (...) their names and lawful process to the
Ministers of our house, with all haste and diligence, under the pain of (...)
to be taken from their stipend, that we with the adwise of our Counsel my take
ordour with sic proud con^^^^ of God and our laws. Subscryued with our hand.
At Holyrudhous, (1580.) the 2 day of march, the 14 (...) regne.

Imprented at Edinburgh be Robert Lekprewike.


