C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE depiction of the English royal blazon surmounted by
a crown and with a single, crowned royal initial (C, R) on its left and right,
respectively
Charles R.
CHARLES by the grace of God King of Scotland, England, France and Ireland,
Defender of the faith.
To Our Lovits (...) Heralds, Maissers, Messengers, Pursevants, Our Scheriffes
in that part conjunctly and severally specially constitute, greeting.
Whairas We have by many fair and calm ways, and alanerly by them endeavored
to reclaim Our subjects, but especially such as (being cunningly seduced by
vthers) have blindly run themselffes into undutiful and seditious courses, And
have labored by the same fair means to re-establisch and sattle Our Royal
authority and governament there; but hitherto all in vain, Our clemency and
mildness toward them producing no better effects in many of them, then
increase of their insolences toward Us, and such ane height of violent
rebellion, as taking Our Royal Forts and Castles, with Our Crown, and all Our
ancient Regal Ornaments, munition for war, and whatsoever belongs to Us, and
fortifying of Towns against Us: Yet We heartily declair and faithfully
promittis, that though We be now in airmes, they sall be no ways used, either
to force upon this Our native Kingdom any innovation in Religion, or to
infringe any the civil liberties or laws thairof: for such is Our tender
affection both to it, and to such of Our subjects there as have schawn
themselffes loyal and faithful to Us at this time (who both may expect and
sall receive such testimonies of Our favor as their fidelity justly merits)
as we sall ever have a great and special caire both of it and them, accompting
it Our glory to preserve liberty and freedom amongst them, according to their
laws.

Thairfore We do once again by this, renew Our former promises for the
maintenance of Religion and Laws, and We assure all Our people that We will
make guide whatsoever We have declaired or publisched in any of Our
Proclamations or Declarations, or which Our Commissioner declaired in Our name
at the last pretended general Assembly; And this We do in all sincerity of
heart; and withal to make it appear, both at home and abroad, that the wicked
and detestable malice of these seditious men (which first raised these storms)
had no true ground to work upon, whill they sought to poison the hearts of Our
guide people, and to make them believe We did not only intend to bring in
Popery, but that We were that way inclined Our Selffe. Now though it be not
necessary for Us to make often Declarations of Our integrity to the true
reformed protestant Religion, which We from Our heart profess, yet We hold it
fit thus far to manifest to all Our people and to the world, that this their
allegation is notoriously falls, and that they could have no other end thairin,
then by broching that fond and scandalous report, to steill away the hearts of
Our guide and loyal subjects, that so they might both with more ease and
greater security be able to compass their awn traitorous and damnable
designs, to the overthrow of all Monarchical governament; Whairas We take God
(the searcher of all hearts) to witness, that as We are Defender of the true
Protestant Religion, which We from Our heart profess, so We truist by his
guidnesse and mercy We sall continue in the same all Our days, and never
permit any innovation of Religion to creep into this or any other of Our
Kingdoms, but sall constantly maintain the same, as it is establisched,
according to Gods law, and by the laws and constitutions of Our several
Kingdoms respectively.

Now whairas We say We will constantly maintain the true Religion by law
establisched in these Our Kingdoms, and cannot tell how to express Our
selffes either better or vtherwise, to the full content of Our guide people (as
We are most willing to do it) yet We are informed that some captious, busy,
and traitorously affected men, labouris (even out of this fullness and
clearness of Our expression) to poison Our loyal subjects, and makes them
believe that it is manifest We have no intention to perform what We have
promised; These thairfore are further (if further We can go) to assure all Our
guide people, that Our intentions all of them are Regal, just, and full of
integrity. And so far are We from intending to break any the least piece of
a promise which We have made unto them, as that We sall most punctually and
strictly observe all We have promised, and that as firmly as We sall adhere to
the Religion it self. And heirupon We hope and are persuaded that all Our guide
and loving subjects, notwithstanding the whispers of seditious men, will both
believe and rest satisfied with the integrity of Our intentions in this
behalffe, and be no more abused and led out of the way of their alledgeance by
the treacherous practices of these men, who being exceeding foul themselffes,
labouris to get as many followers as they can, and theirby hopes to escape the
just punischement which their traitorous carriadge has deserved: But We must
let them and Our guide people know, that to seduce many is the worst way they
can take to make themselffes innocent, and the greater inducement to make Us
inflict due punischement on them; yet We think it withal very necessary for
Us to let all Our people and the Christian world know, That though the number
be very great whose carriadge has been treasonable in this commotion, yet such
is and sall be Our clemency toward them, as yet We sall freely pardon and
forgive all such amongst them, as sall lay hold on this Our mercy offered
them, and from hencefuirth carry themselffes dutiful to Us and Our just
commands. And to this end We entend (God willing) to hold Our Parliament so
soon as We sall see the country in such peace and quietness, as may befit Our
honor in Person to come amongst them: And thairfore We command all Our Houses,
Forts and Castles, surprised and taiken by any of Our subjects, and detained by
them, Our Crown, Royal Ornaments of Our Regal power, munition for war, and
all things whatsoever belonging to Us, and taiken by any of Our subjects, to be
restored unto Us within eight days after the publication heirof, And all the
said fortifications of towns to be razed and demolished to the ground, at
least the best they can do to that purpose within the same space; And also all
the lands, houses, or guids of Our loving subjects, who have been faithful
unto Us, and are taiken from them by any whosoever, to be restored unto them
within the same space; which We command to be done, as they tender their
alledgeance. And We do also command all and every one of Our subjects to lay
down airmes, and all their forces and airmies to be dissolved and dissipate,
and ilk man to repair in peaceable manner to the place of his ordinary
dwelling, And all conventions, conventicles, and convocations of Our subjects,
of what quality or degree soever they be, to surceas in time coming within
the said space and days after the publication heirof, as they tender their
alledgeance; All which being done, and Our said subjects randring unto Us
their civil and dewtifull obedience in all things, conform to the laws of
this Our native Kingdom, We give full and free pardon to all Our said subjects
and every one of them, of all facts and deeds done by them or any of them
preceding the day and daite of the publication heirof, And further sall cause
ane Act of oblivion to be maid heirupon in Our next ensuing Parliament. And
since We have been pleased out of Our innate, Royal and tender affection We
bear to this Our native Kingdom, to cure the wounds of the distracted estaite
thairof with so gentle a balm, and to pass by the errors and disorders
thairof with so fair a hand, and to embrace (even the most rebellious) in the
airmes of Our mercy, We are confident that this Our gracious and free offer
sall be heartily and with all submissive dewtie received by Our subjects: But
if the perverse disposition of some be such as they will not be cured, but
still go forward in their crooked and rebellious ways, and (without due
respect to the alledgeance they owe unto Us their native and lawful King) sall
not accept of this Our free grace and pardon, before the expiring of the said
eight days, which We hope none will do, then and in that case (the time being
expired, and Our grace and pardon contemned, by disobeying of these Our just
and lawful commandments) We are forced to have recourse to ane more scharpe
and quick way, to cure their obstinacy and rebellion by the sword of justice:
And thairfore in that case We do proclaim all such as sall reject this Our
free and gracious pardon, and does not return before the expiring of the said
eight days to their civil and dutiful obedience, to be from thencefuirth
open Rebels and Traitors to Us Our Crown and dignity, And declaire all their
lands and possessions, guids and geir, to be forfaulted to Us and Our Crown,
and that We sall dispose of their lands, possessions, guids and geir, to Our
weill-deserving subjects, Noblemen, Gentlemen, and vthers, who sall adhere to
Us and obey Our just commands. And to this purpose We dischairge all vassals
and tenants to any Rebels, from making payment to them of any their rents,
duties, or casualities, and require them to keep the same in their hands, the
one half whaireof sall be kept for Our use, the other half for themselffes:
promising also to the tenants of the said Rebels, who sall leave their
Masters and assist Us to the maintenance of Our authority, guide terms of
years in the estaits they possess, with the diminution of the third at least,
if not more, of the duties they pay, as We sall find them to deserve by their
guide service and ready obedience unto Us, And to the vassalls of such
superiors as are Rebels, that they sall become Our immediate tenants and
vassals, and hold their lands and possessions of Us, and that for the payment
of the third part less dewtie then is conteinit in their present charters and
they presently pay to their superior; providing they adhere to Us, and assist
not their disloyal superiors, but leave them and concur with Us for
maintenance of Our authority. And if the superior be loyal, and the vassals
and tenants refuis this Our grace, and to adhere to Us, or to concur with the
said superior in Our service, We declaire it sall be lesum to the said
superior to expel the vassalls and tenants thus rebellious, fuirth of their
lands and possessions, and what sall accres to Us by the forfalture of their
lands and possessions, We freely dispone and totally resign it to the loyal
superior, promising to concur and assist him for effectuating heirof. And
further We dischairge all debtours who are addebted in sums of money to any
the said Rebels, to make payment to them of the sums of money addebted to
them, or any part thairof, Assuring Our guide subjects that they sall have
retribution out of the same moneys as We sall find them to deserve. And
further we declaire, whatsoever Borough or City sall embrace this Our free
pardon and grace, and adhere to Us, and assist Us in the maintenance of Our
authority, We do heirby take them, their liberties and privileges, into Our
protection and favor, and sall defend the said Cities and Burrowes in their
rights and privileges, as becomes ane just King, Secluding them always from
all hope of such favor at any time thairafter, in case they do not embrace
this Our free grace and pardon before the said eight days expired. And last,
it is Our pleasure, and We heirby do declaire, that the forfalture or escheite
of any of the Rebels, sall not prejudge Our guide subjects who adhere to Us, or
embraces this Our free grace, and behave themselffes as dutiful subjects
heirafter, but that the lands and estaites of the said Rebels, and the gifts
of forfalture and escheite proceeding from their rebellion, sall be burdened
with the payment of the just debts addebted to Our guide subjects, and they
first paid before any thing accres to Us or Our donatour, And execution sall
pass upon their bands and obligations, in the accustomed manner, against the
lands and guids of the said Rebels.

OUR WILL is thairfore, and We charge you strictly, and commands, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, you pass and make publication heirof by
open Proclamation, at the Market Crosses of the head Burrows of this Our
Kingdom of Scotland, and all other places needful, whairethrough none pretend
ignorance of the same.

Given at Our Court at York the twenty fifth day of April 1639.
Imprinted by ROBERT YOUNG, His Majesty's Printer for Scotland, Anno Dom.
M.DC.XXXIX. CUM PRIVILEGIO.


