A SECOND PART OF SPANISH PRACTICES. OR, A RELATION OF MORE Particular wicked
plots, and cruel, in humane, perfidious, and unnatural practices of the
Spaniards.

WITH, More Excellent reasons of greater consequence, delivered to the Kings
Majesty to dissolve the two treaties both of the Match and the Pallatinate, and
enter into War with the Spaniards.

WHEREUNTO IS ADJOINED A WORTHY ORAtion Appropriated, unto the most Mighty and
Illustrious Princes of Christendom, wherein the right and lawfulness of the
Netherlandish war against Phillip King of Spain is approved and demonstrated.

PRO. 20.28. Mercy and truth preserve the King, and his Throne is vpholden by
mercy.

PRINTED. M.DC.XXIV.

MORE EXCELLENT REASONS OF GREATER CONSEQVENCE, DELIVERED TO THE Kings Majesty,
to dissolve the two Treaties, both of the Match, and the Pallatinate, and enter
into War with the Spaniard.
FIRST it is to be observed, that the State of Spain, not content with those
ordinary provisions for the exercise of the Roman Religion, by the Infanta,
and her family, (which other Princes in like case would have demanded, and
which his Majesty with great reason, might at the beginning of the Treaty have
conceived they would have been contented with: Have with great vehemence (upon
advantage of having the Princes Person in their possession) pressed a general
conniuence for all his Majesty's subjects of the Roman Religion; to the great
dishonor of Almighty God, in the sincerity of his service in this Realm, and
to the great derogation of the Laws of this Kingdom. And lastly, to the great
discouragement, and grief of all his Majesty's well affected subjects, from
whose general discontent they expect (as well appears) a consequence of no
small mischief.

Secondly it is observed, that during the continuance of this treaty, and by
reason of the same Popish faction, have exceedingly increased in this Realm,
both in multitude and boldness.

And whereas they have been divided heretofore amongst themselves into the
part of the Jesuits depending upon Spain, and the secular Priests otherwise,
They are generally now strongly united together depending no less upon Spain
for temporal respects, then upon Rome for spiritual.

And considering the house of Austria has been always a capital enemy to
our Religion to increase their own greatness, by extirpiting the protestant
party in all places where they can prevail. It cannot but be of most dangerous
consequence, to the safety of the King, and the Realm unless remedy be
provided with speed, for the abating of that party here at home, which cannot
be during the time that these Treattse are on foot.

Thirdly, it is observed, that by advantage of these Treaties, and thereby
keeping of his Majesty in hope of a general peace, they have contrarily under
the pretense of assisting the Emperor, oppressed the Protestants party in most
parts of Christendom, being the ancient Alies and confederates of this Crown,
to the endangering not only of the whole State of the reformed Religion, but
also of the Common safety of all the professors of the same.

Fourthly, during the time of these Treaties of love with his Majesty, they
have with all kind of hostility, set upon his Majesty's son in Law, the
husband of his only and most Royal Daughter, inuadeing his Towns and
Territories in all places, and infine dis-inherited him with all that Royal
Offspring of all his ancient Patrimoniall Honors and Possessions, to the great
dishonor of his Majesty, and extreme grief of all his well affected Subjects.
And now also at the last, when they should come to make good the hope of
restitution, they have laid new grounds for endless delays, and turned
pretended difficulties into apparent impossibilities, not forbearing also now
to annexe as a Condition to the weak hope of their uncertain and imperfect
resolutions. That the eldest son of the Count Pallatine, should be brought up
in the Emperors Court: so restless are their desires to work the overthrow
of Religion by all possible devices.

Lastly, it is apparent how manifoldly from time to time, they have deluded and
abused his Majesty with their Treaties, how small respect they have showed to
the Prince his Greatness and worth, what endignities they have offered again
and again, to his highness, by importuning him upon all advantages to forsake
his Religion, contrary to the custom of all Princes, and contrary to the
ancient Laws of Honor, and Hospitality, who ought to have been used there
withal Princely freedom, and pressed to nothing unto which he was indisposed,
considering with what confidence (being so great a Prince) he had put himself
within their power, although it pleased God to guide and fortefie so his
Princely heart, that he constantly withstood all their attempts, and
stratagems, to his own immortal honor, and to the unspeakable comfort of the
good people of his Fathers Kingdom; Whereunto may be added their infinite
aduantagiousnesse, and endless delays in their Treaties. And finally what
dishonor they have obtruded upon our Nation and Religion in inviting still to
new Treaties, and turning al to the advantage of their own particular ends,
being true to nothing but their own grounded Maxims, with which neither the
Match nor the restitution of the Pallatinate can possibly consist, but upon
such terms as threaten to our State, an incurable mischief.

AN ORATION OR SPEECH OF THE RIGHT AND LAWFVLNES of the Netherlandish Wars
against Phillip King of Spain: Unto the most Mighty and Illustrious Princes of
Christendom.
Illustrious Princes of Christendom:
GReat and Mighty are the Kingdoms in your possession, which extend far and
wide, throughout all the world: but much more great, and far more excellent
are the virtues and knowledge, by which you hold, preserve and govern the same
righteously, even to the uttermost extent of felicity.

In the mean time let me now entreat you, o most peaceful Princes, that you
will hear me with a friendly and well-affected mind, the sequel hereof, and
fundamentally will understand wherefore the Spaniards do most falsely accuse
us; That this peace was violated and broken by us: which accusation I hold to
be very grievous.

Among other Conditions, Laws, and Contracts of this peace, this was one of
the chiefest and weightiest: That Don John should not admit any Spaniard or
stranger, nor any of them; by whose counsel and advise it was evidently
known, that the Provinces were brought into that extreme spoil, into the
Council: And contrarily, he called, and sent for them to him, kept them in
his Court, and in his most secret chambers; That Baptista Taxis, a most notable
Spy, and enemy of our common affairs, who a little before had been Secretary
unto Duke d' Alva, who was not only adjoined to his privy Counsel, but also
was made and set over them. Besides him one Octauius Gonzago an Italian, as
also he took unto him one Escouedo, a crafty Spanish Fox, unto whom he
adjoined certain Netherlanders. But what Netherlanders I pray you? Those who
partly had been the stirrers up and favorers of so many miseries; who were
both hated of their native Country, and of all good men; viz. Barlemont,
Megan, Hierge, Flojon, Hautepenny, Assonuille, and other plagues of their
Country, who having ordained the Law of Lentulus, Cataline and Cassius,
established the same with their counsels and deeds, viz. That all those that by
preserving the Commonwealth would be preserved, should be declared for enemies.

By this counsel and advice, the Spaniards presently, even at the beginning of
this peace, should have surprised the Town of Gent, if the good and profitable
counsel, and also the valiant deeds of the States, had not hindered the same;
For don John himself could not refrain nor keep in his hatred and enmity any
longer, which he bore to the Netherlanders, but had quickly forgot that sacred
oath, which he had sworn, upon the Evangelists, before the Bishop of
Shertogenboseh, and the Popes Nuncius, or spiritual Ambassador.

He had promised and sworn; that he would deal with all the soldiers in the
Netherlands, who were 15000, about their Arrearages, to the end, that they
thereupon might be discharged, like as in the agreement of the peace had been
concluded. And contrarily thereunto, he promised the Soldiers, in the Kings
behalf, anew, to have greater means, honors, offices and rewards: and held a
most mischievous counsel with Fronsberghen and Focker, Colonels of the German
soldiers; part of whose wicked counsel he effected, and the rest being
hindered by the States he could not effect.

But yet to the end, that you may see and know the ground of this Business, I
will in few words declare unto you how the matter fell out: For under these two
conditions or covenants, viz. in maintaining of the Romish Religion; and in
yielding lawful obedience to the King, did the whole Treaty of the peace
consist.

And when the States which had sworn hereunto with an high Oath, then were
they presently admitted, that those affairs concerning the Land, which
presently in the beginning of the treaty of peace were begun, but could not
be concluded upon, that they should be dispatched and concluded in the next
assembly of the States.

But yet Don John, whose affection burned with a lust and longing desire, by
some secret and concealed practice to break the peace, and to begin the war
again, casting all these conditions and promises at his heels, made a way for
those complaints which Phillip, and all the former Governors had used as a
cloak to cover all their intended wicked imgainations against the
Rei-publicke, viz. That the Hollanders and Sealanders neglected and despised
the Romish Religion; and by that means the commandment of the King was
neglected.

Upon this Anvile did they hammer night and day? they assailed the States, and
were exceeding troublesome unto them, counselling them that they altogether
should begin the wars, against Holland, Sealand, and the Prince of Orange,
who was the most eminent Champion against the unjust government of the
Spaniards, who indeed had been exceeding beneficial to the whole
Commonwealth.

In this counsel Don John had his eye upon these two objects, which should be
exceeding profitable and serviceable to further his intent; that by their
Civil wars, the substance and treasure of the land might be exhausted, and
they being weakened and bruysed by their own War, that then he, with the more
ease and convenience might suppress them together.

Whereas he still persisting with these desires and entreaties, being as it
were dashed against a Rock by a Tempest: The States answered him; that it were
better and more profitable for the Commonwealth, That concerning all those
matters whereof Don John made his complaints, to have them by a friendly
composition decided, and united, in the assembly of the States; and if they
could have imprinted or persuaded him to have believed the same, we had never
fallen into the miseries of a Civil War.

For what is more repugnant to the common good, and to all humane Laws and
Justice; then to try by war, those controversies, which may be decyded by
Right and Reason. Arch^damus (though no Christian King, but of a stately,
honorable any provident Nation) said; That it was unlawful to take Arms
against those, who were willing to have the matter tried by Law. When and
injury had been offered to the Romans themselves; they did not presently
begin with wars: but did first send Clarigatum, that is, they caused those
things that were stolen or taken away, to be more apparently and manifestly
demanded again.

But how profitable, good, and wel-ordred is the cumstome of the Commonwealth
of the Venetians, which I lately saw and observed; where they will not suffer
that the principal Nobles themselves of that flourishing Commonwealth, should
contend, chide, or maintain enmity among themselves, for, or about other men's
small and petty affairs. But they bring the same into their Senate, or
Council, and there they desire, pray, and admonish them, that they will
remember, and be mindful, that they are all of them Saint Marks children
(which name they have given their Rei-publicke) and that they are brethren, and
Burgeses of such a free and happy government, and that it was not beseeming for
them, for any particular business, to cherish and foster any private
dissension or hatred, which might thereafter prove to be more general, to the
peril and danger of that Rei-publicke.

Which custom above all other affairs ought to be used in the affairs
concerning the Land, and ought to be esteemed of in all wel-ordered
Commonwealths. If this were so, we should not see one City so against another
(oftentimes in one Province or Rei-publicke) or one Nobleman so against
another of the contrary party, to threaten war, murder, destruction, burning
and blaking, nor violence to assault each other.

But now to return to our former purpose, in respect that there are two sorts
of Wars: the one with words by way of Justice; the other with violence. The
first being proper to men, the second to unreasonable beasts. And that we must
necessarily avoyde violence, unless the course of Justice be denied us.
Therefore we must believe that the States far rather would have decyded those
controversies, by their good and wholesome counsels, by reason and conference;
then to make them greater by War and spilling the blood of the Citizens.
Contrarily Don John complains of the States very publicly: He reprooues
and vpbraids them all for Rebels, and then deals with the High Dutch Soldiers
no longer by secret dealing in the affairs very prejudicial to the
Commonwealth (with whom very cunningly he had long time dealt with all) but
then began he very publicly to deal with them; so that the whole discovery of
that business, by diverse intercepted letters, was fully come to the knowledge
of the States. And many things they daily saw with their eyes, as first when he
removed his Court and family, with his Councell-companions to Bergen in Henegow
(being a very strong Town, and very fit for his conjurations and complottings)
and commanded that the same should be provided with a strong Garrison.

Moreover, when as he surprised the Castle of Antwerpe by Treachery, and did
surprise those well provided and fortified Towns of Namen and Charlemont, and
put a strong guard into them of his own soldiers, thinking thereafter by
treachery to have taken in the Town of Brussels, So that already the
principal and chief Cities and Towns, by the great number of his Forts and
Citadels, where beleagred and oppressed; and then he wholly began to set up
himself against the Rei-publick; and also many other things were then done by
his advise and motion: whereas he according to his oath, ought to have
advised, that all the soldiers should have laid down their Arms, and
presently to have departed out of the Country.

All which things appearing manifestly to the eyes of the States, who adjudged
that the same tented to the subversion of the Commonwealth; they thought that
they were bound continually to keep a good counsel-watch; neither did they
turn their eyes aside from the Rei-publick, from that time that he sought to
have all the government alone, unto whom they in all officiousness (not being
moved by any distemperature of mind) sent as Ambassadors unto him, Marolaus
and Brusus, charging them that they should present and show, their full
performance, innocence, and integrity, and should free them from all suspicion
and evil conceit, (the which they most certainly knew, that he mischievously
had dissembled,) that the faith that was given at Gent should be renewed: They
should also promise, that the States should make diligent inquiry, and execute
severe punishment upon those Treacherous murderers and conspirators, who (as
he said) laid wait for his life, and had conspired against him; (making a
show and dissembling, as if to prevent the same, he went to Namen:) They
would augment his Guard more then those he had already, to the number of three
hundred complete armed men, who should be all of them Netherlanders, the which
before that time was never offered to any Governor or Ruler. And yet with all
these supplications and entreaties they effected nothing; for there was neither
modesty nor reason to be found in Don John. Nay, he could not bridle nor keep
in his own evil arrogance and audacious passion; but declared the same to
Marollaus at the same time of his Embassage, boasting himself, that he now
did wholly assure himself, and that he doubted not, but that he had brought
under the subjection of his will and command, the City of Antwerpe, that he
had no lack neither of money nor men; that he now had all things in a
readiness, for the furnishing of a War; and that he with his sword, would
purchase unto himself a greater authority, power, command and government; then
the States had promised and granted him in the pacification of Gent; and that
it was his will, that these Ambassadors should report all these things unto
the States, for he would not conceal any thing from them that he knew to
appertain to this his intent and will. This matter is undoubtedly sure and
certain, and sufficiently known before this, so that here it is not
needful to produce witnesses. And although it be a very miserable thing, not
to be able to deny, and very shameful to be confessed; yet I think verily that
the Spaniards themselves (although they be less shameless then a man would
believe they are) cannot deny this at any time. Don John had written unto
Tre-longe, and to his other companions and fellow-workers of his secret tricks
and conspiracies, That he had given as a Cymbrian spoil the wealth of the
Citizens of Antwerpe, for a prey unto his Soldiers. The soldiers ranged
already through the City, as mortal enemies, and forced the Citizens to give
them whatsoever they listed: Many of the principal citizens began to fly out
of the City, and as it were banished: by which means the traffic and trading
of the Merchants by shipping, began to cease. And although there were great
and manifest tokens of their malignant enmity; yet nevertheless the States did
bear all this very moderatly and modestly, and indeed would have born yet much
more, if that mortal and pitiful project which Don John intended, had not
been discovered and made manifest as the day; even as if a man at the first
sight seemed to perceive some livelesse and insensible creature, and afterward
by more certain and sure signs and tokens, begins to think of what quality
that was whereof he doubted: even so the States did also very easily
understand, by all those things which they had seen, that this prince did
cherish in his mind and counsels, an hatred tending to the ruin of the
commonwealth: but of what quality that he was, and how far he would extend
himself over the reipublick, that they most evidently discerned and
distinguished thereafter, both out of his own, and by letters from others. For
there were many letters intercepted in Gasconie, viz. Two of Don John's, written
by himself unto the King, and other from him written to Anthony Perez the
chief of the Kings Council; Moreover five letters from Escouedo to the King,
out of which the States might assuredly understand, that there were fed and
bred monsters, and strange impostures; that private conspiracies were there
practiced; that there was great dissension mingled among the Cities and the
Nobility of the Netherlands; and by what means the same was effected; and how
fit and serviceable it was that tyrany and the Inqvisition, according to that
firm resolution of the Spaniards, should be brought in and established; and
to that end soldiers, arms, and all warlicke preparation very earnestly was
required for the King.

Consider and understand, illustrious Princes, the secret and privy
conspiracies of this man: Hear the words which this man uses in his letters
written to the King, which (as I said before) were intercepted. In regard that
this body (says he) is so vnhealthful, that it cannot be cured any otherwise,
but by cutting off of the unsound members, you must now carefully observe this
occasion which is presented. And Escouedo adds thereunto the rest very amply,
as a good interpreter of his meaning, who might very well write that which Don
John himself would not give to understand. This Escouedo was the right minion
and servant of Audacitie and Treachery, whom I think by reason of his nature
and manners, was named Escouedo, because that he knew by his deceit to bring
the miserable Netherlanders into his net. He wrote that unto the King which Don
John would have him to write, viz. That it possibly could not be, that the
Netherlanders should be brought under the pure and perfect obedience and will
of the King, unless that first they were tamed and constrained thereunto with
fire and sword. That therefore both men and arms were very needful, and that
the same must be effected by war. By the which as a good architecture of the
Spanish tyranny, he gave them to understand, that the cruelty and rigor which
Alua and Requisenius had abused, must not continually be put in practice, but
that the Netherlanders must be ensnared by a greater deceit and hypocrisy.
Like as in Navigations, it is a point of knowledge to see before hand the
storm, that although men cannot attain the haven, yet (if altering the
course) you may attain thereinto, then it is a foolish deed to keep that
course which before was taken with great peril and danger, rather then that
you altering the same, might attain to the wish for haven. For so was his
opinion, that the first raging and madness of the Spaniards must be somewhat
mollified, and now must go to work with dissembled faith and promises. That
Don John who had an incredible moderation, and an indifferent mind betwixt
Ambition and Cruelty, might very fortunately effect the same. He advised by
his own and his masters counsel, that England should be first surprised and
conquered by war, and then it would be easy to svrprize the Netherlandish
provinces.

In those letters which Don John sent unto Anthony Perez his special friend;
He gave him to understand that he was of such a nature and condition, that he
could not live still in idleness, nor could away with the laws of peace; and
that his mind and conscience could not endure that he should wholly submit
himself to the privileges and laws of the Netherlanders, but that he far
rather by force of Arms would obtain and effect for the King, a whole
absolute, and unlimited government over the Netherlands.

And if now you do not sufficiently see and perceive, that Don John first broak
the pacification of Gent, where the same by so many and clear proofs does
appear. Then remember (by the Eternal God) remember, I say, what reasons he
used to the Ambassadors of our States at March and Famines, when he said,
that he would keep the contracts and conditions of peace so long, until that
covenant which was begun, should repent him, that is, until he by his sweet
entisings, and hypocritical lenity, having rockt the States asleep, at the
last might destroy them; and with them suppress the whole Reipublick. For
after the death of John, Philip showed very manifestly that that same in very
deed should have befallen us, like as he at Mechlen by the Lord of Selles
certified and gave them to understand, that he would break the laws of the
peace, and that he no longer would be bound to keep them. But I pray you for
what occasion? was it for neglecting the Romish Religion? Assuredly it had
never been more used nor reverenced with the like devotion, care and
diligence, nor never was the zeal of our people so greatly affected thereunto
as then. The Bishops of the Churches were then received; the Schools and
Colleges were partly instituted, partly renewed and augmented. Finally, there
was not any thing omitted that served for the maintaining of the customs and
ceremonies of the Romish Church. So that our Netherland might well have
compared, matched and strouen with Italy and with Rome the chief seat and
Metropolitan of that Religion. The which the Popes Nuncius, (or spiritual
Ambassador) who in his behalf was sent unto us, shall not deny the same. For
he writing himself unto the Pope concerning this, says, that he did much
admire, and was therefore exceeding joyful, that those prescriptions and
duties (or services) of the Romish Church, were exceeding well maintained by
the Netherlanders in great devotion and piety.

How and after what manner the affections, wills, and devotions of all our
States, and of all the Netherlanders were affected to the king, I need not to
make repetition; neither is it needfvll to prove, that they delighted or loved
any thing so mvch as to fvlfill the kings commands, and to show obedience
thereunto. The Trophaes, Pyramedes and Pageants which were made and prepared so
svmptvous and costly to the honor, and at the entrance of John, can testify
this. How did all the Nobles with svch exceeding joy, wishing him good luck,
receive him? How did all the people with great mirth and reioycings receive
him? What bankets and sumptuous feasts at the lands charge, were then with mvch
delight made for joy thereof, that this peace was made and concluded? And what
great triumphs all the Netherlanders made and demonstrated upon all their
Theaters when this peace was made, is yet testified by all the inhabiting
strangers, who were thereat exceedingly droven to admiration, yea were even
astonished.

It was no otherwise then, but as if the Netherlanders had then found the
beginning and principles of a wel-governed Commonwealth in the person of this
their Chief, or Governor. Yea, thou thy self John, if thou will but enter
into thine own heart and conscience, shall not be able to deny the same, That
the Netherlanders did fully keep and observe all the contracts and conditions
of the peace, which they were bound to keep; and never denied obedience unto
the commandment of the king, if they were not more vile then the commandments
of Manlius, if they did not to too much oppugn the laws and privileges.

But to the end that I may produce one instance which far exceeds all men's
admiration; and which shall perfect this our disputation: you must for a
certainty acknowledge, that the states had undertaken with force of Arms to
have forced the Hollanders and Zealanders to have done those things which you
most desired, which was the induction, and as it were the groundwork of your
accusations and complaints, if in case they by right, reason, and conference,
could not be brought thereunto; which things you altogether scorned and
rejected, and to the end that this one pretext, this only pretense might
remain for matter for your false accusations; And that this might be a just
occasion for your conjurations: yet this occasion was not sufficient thereunto,
neither could it be sufficient enough, in regard the same is manifestly known
unto all men, not only to Netherlanders, but also to all strangers, who either
saw the whole business as it was carried, or else have heard the same
reported: That the Hollanders and Zealanders have always entertained,
received, and accomplished the precepts and commandments of the King, no
otherwise then if they had been the Oracles or commandments of God: That they
never were careless nor negligent in their offices or duties which by the law
of Nature they were owing to their Prince. Yet this I will freely confess,
(which I will attribute and consecrate to their immortal and most high
commendations) that the Hollanders and Zealanders were the first counselors,
and showed the way first to the other Provinces, to free and to maintain the
common liberty. For I will at the last, O you most provident men, you most
mighty States of Holland and Zealand, convert and turn my speech and oration
from those wicked and horrible dealings of that dishonorable man; to your
virtues, valors, and abilities. Should I so slightly pass by the worthiness
and valiant deeds, and manly courage, whereof every man's mouth is full: and for
which every one so highly commends, loves, and honoreth you for.

You have evermore with a valiant, constant and persevering courage, resisted
and rejected that most intolerable and most cruel servitude and thraldom of
the Inquisition, or Faith-presse. And if they now say, that the authority,
respect and commandment of the King consisted therein; and that you in respect
thereof, would not give way, nor be obedient unto the same; wherein indeed
consists your glory, and whereof you may justly boast; Yet you confess, to
your great commendation, that you have given these occasions unto the
accusations of Don John: That you, being free from all faults, yet in this you
are and will be faulty. And herein you may boast, That you with an especial
providence and wisdom, have carefully watched and kept your selves, so that
at no time, neither by any of these, nor any other Spanish trecheries,
periuries, tricks, or traps, you have been cousoned, debaucht, nor ensnared:
that you were the first which were inflamed with a singular constancy and
courage, to deliver the Reipublicke from the grievous yoke of tyranny and
cruel government. That you with the toarch of your liberty, have been a light
to enlighten all the other Provinces. And that you had far rather, by these
long-during wars, be spent, die, and endure all kinds of misery and
adversity: then to forsake your customs, laws and privileges. I beseech the
Lord God, by whose only conduct, grace and assistance, you have atchived such
admirable things, that you may prosperously continue and persevere therein from
henceforth perpetually. Now will I turn me again unto that from which I have
digressed, and recommend unto your judgment and arbittrement, Oh Christian
Princes, all what I have spoken of the deeds of Don John. Take notice, judge,
and speak what you think thereof. Considering that of all the States parts,
there is nothing omitted, which by the law and contract they had promised to
do: and contrarily for Don John's part, of the ten parts of the agreement or
composition, which wholly he ought to have performed, he has not discharged
any one point thereof well nor honestly as he ought. And hereby you may see,
with what justice and equity we undertook this business, and how we (having
undertaken the same) have dealt and proceeded therein.

For when the States perceived, that all their hope and trust for the
cashiering of those great numbers of the Germane soldiers was frustrate, and
that they were laid in the cities, towns, and mouths of the frontier
garrisons, and that they kept Namen and Charlemont, being Cities and Castles
that were very well provided; to the end that Don John that way, might receive
and bring into the Netherlands that great army which he had desired of the
King in his letters; and moreover they perceiving that the hate and envy of all
the soldiers was turned upon them, and that they with an exceeding greedy
desire longed for the pilaging of the greatest Cities, And that they attended
only but for the least sign and token of their Prince, to have fallen
rauenously and furiously, as raging beasts, and to have ceized upon the lives,
goods, and means of the Netherlanders. That Don John himself, and other
naughty people daily threatened the ruin and subversion of our native Country.
That they by the demostrations, hand-writings, mouths and letters of their
confederates, were themselves convinced. That they all had agreed to set the
cities and towns on fire, and to have slain all the Nobles and chief of the
Citizens, to have destroyed the Netherlands, and to have rooted out the
Reipublick. Who is he then that would not be awaked and stirred up for the
defense and preservation of the common good? Who is he that with good counsel
would not prevent the trecheries of John: Who would be so vnprovident, and such
a coward, that would not defend and maintain his own life, with weapons and
war? Assuredly reason has taught the learned; necessity the Barbarians;
custom the heathens; and nature it self the unreasonable beasts, to repel
violence with violence, even to their uttermost ability.

You your selves, Oh great and gracious Princes, which possess kingdoms
freely and in prosperity; may easily know and understand this; and know also
that even so it must be done. But what do I say, that you must know it? All the
Spaniards our enemies do know it, and will freely confess the same. For they
demonstrate it in their deeds, that the same has been just, and is so yet. For
considering that Henricus Castellanus (being a bastard) and the great
Grandfather of King Phillip, did expel Peter his lawful brother and right
heir, out of the kingdom, because he seemed to use tyrannical dealing: and
because he seemed to dominiere contrary to the laws and customs of his
kingdom; And, that King Phillip upon the same conditions that he inherited
Spain, did inherit the Netherlands, (viz. that he should maintain and
religiously observe the laws and customs.) Wherefore then may not we, as the
Spaniards did reject Peter, even as well reject Phillip (who oppresses his
subjects with an unjust and unlawful government) and expel him with our arms
for ever out of our Provinces.

But I fear, O Princes, that I have too much abused your patience, and that my
oration seems to have run such a course, that I need not add any thing more
thereunto. Yet I entreat your leave, that you be pleased to suffer me, though
very briefly to continue in that which Phillip sought to effect after the
government of John, by the deceit of an hypocritical and dissembled peace; to
the end that you may clearly see and perceive, wherefore that we, so long as
the world stands, may never make any peace with Phillip, but now and for ever
without ceasing, are bound to War against him. The very name of peace (I
confess) is exceeding sweet, a peace that is good and sound: But between
peace and that bondage which is cloaked, covered, and falsely folded up in a
concealed peace, is indeed a very great difference. Peace is a still and quiet
liberty: but that bondage, or all manner of fear thereof, is the extreme of
all evils and mischieues. Such was the peace, (if a man may call that peace)
which induced, or rather seduced the Netherlanders even unto Collen.

When at the States by their Ambassadors and letters unto you and your
predecessors, Oh all you Princes of Christendom, had again entreated; that
you by your authorities, respect, and exhortations, should ratify, establish,
confirm, and look unto that peace which Phillip after a new cousening manner
should make, that the same should not be deceitful: Like as he certainly and
most maliciously by his deceit ouer-threw the fame. For the Spaniards then made
no delay, but presently brought in new dissentions into Artois and Henego^e,
causing them to fall away from the other Provinces, over the which they even
unto this present have dominiered. Afterward by force of Arms, violently they
surprised Mastricht, and moreover and above they, partly by violence, and
partly by great promises, have sovght to get into their power many other cities
and provinces.

And finally is that Vlisses-like-wit Alexander Farnesius Duke of Parma,
brought out of Italy, who like unto a most crafty and cunning bird-catcher,
with the song of his lenity, and promises of great rewards, ensnared and
captiuated all the Cities and Towns of Brabant and Flaunders.

Of this Prince I could say very much, which I am constrained to omit: Yet this
one matter I cannot pass by in silence; That, although in the time of his
government he effected many things very great and eminent for Philip, yet
could he not escape of being suspected, as if he would have undermined the
King in the government, because that through his gentleness, linitie and
amity; he had drawn unto him the affections of all the Netherlanders, and
that he also seemed perspicuously to have looked into, and also to bear a
hatred to the wickedness and fraudulent treacheries and deceites of the
Spaniards. Therefore Philip gave him fungos, or Toads-bread to eat, which
Agrippina had so commended to the Emperor, to the end that by the power and
operation thereof, he might be admitted, counted and received into the number
of the gods.

But I pray you, what was that at last for a peace, which as a Comet or bright
shining star, shined unto us out of the firmament of the Spanish trecheries
unto which the Duke of Parma counseled us, at what time the Arch-enemy stood,
as it were, over our heads, and that the incredible great Spanish Fleet filled
and covered the great Ocean or main Sea? A Fleet which was so terrible to
behold, that I can hardly judge, whether the Fleet that Xerxus had, which
covered the Sea called Mare Ponticum had a greater number of Ships, more
Soldiers, or greater warlike preparation. With this Fleet Phillip had thought
totally to have suppressed us: who were at that time ravished, as it were, with
that pleasant and delightful sound of peace. Yet when this Fleet, by the only
power of the Almighty God, was wonderfully destroyed and brought to naught;
then presently by the Emperors Ambassadors he offered these Provinces a new
Treaty of Peace, to the end, that he thereby might transport all his Army and
power of war out of the Netherlands into France. The treacheries which many
years before he had plotted against that kingdom, began then to have a
wonderful good progression: For his natural kinsman Henry being made away by
paracide, (or his murdering of a kinsman,) and the state of all that kingdom,
being utterly confused with Civil war; then the matter, and the present
occasion required, that he with Arms and a mighty Host should prosecute his
design, in that flourishing and famous great Kingdom of France, which
Kingdom he by violence having taken in and conquered, he might thereafter,
without any trouble at all, have subiugated those Netherlandish Provinces, and
all the other Kingdoms of Christendom.

What? Is it yet lawful for me, or may I yet speak any more of Arrereges, or
residue of the dangers of this Reipublicke? Yes, it is lawful for me, and it
shall be lawful for me always to stand for the dignity of my native Country,
and to confess the truth. Like as all good Orators, or eloquent speakers, do
ever keep some of their most forcible and ponderous Arguments to the last. And
like as experienced Generals use to place their best soldiers in the last
ranks; even so Phillip in these latter years presented a peace unto these
Netherlands, which should be adorned and confirmed with notable fidelity; the
whole foundation and chief ground work thereof, lay and consisted in the
virtues, mercy, endeavors, diligence, and in the love of the Archduke Ernestus
his sisters son; who, after the Duke of Parma, was placed in the government
of these Provinces: He promised these Provinces a peace; not such a peace as
should be limited with any grievous or heavy conditions and contracts, like as
the former was; but such a peace as they themselves would wish or desire. In
the mean time Phillip sent his great and huge Armies into France, and his
secret murderers into Holland, to have murdered the Illustrious Prince
Mauritts, Earl of Nassow, a famous and notable imitator of the virtues and
valor of his father, and a singular defender of our Liberty; and by such an
odious and treacherous villainy, to have made him away; like as they, but a
little before, by a most cruel and treacherous hand, had murdered his most
worthy and valiant father, the Prince of Orange.

And finally Phillip concluded many more mischievous, and more wicked purposes
against these Provinces, then ever before he could have bethought himself of.
I do not speak any thing unadvisedly, o Princes, but that which thousands
besides me of good reputation, can testify in faith and verity, and that which
Phillips own letters do make good.

What then? Means the king of Spain, that our States by any propositions of
peace, can be diuerted from their enterprises and designments? Does he not yet
know and understand, that all our affections are so abdurate and hardened, that
we will far rather yield and give place to Arms and War, then to any kind of
new invented peace-treacheries, after what manner soever the same might be
propounded? Or, thinks he peradventure, that the affections of our States
every day, lie open to his desire and appetite? What? Is he yet ignorant, that
the counsels of all our people, with a general consent and uniformity of
voices, are long ago united and knit fast together in this point; and that
they will far rather honorably in war and Arms live and die, for their
Laws, and for their native Country; then from henceforth shamefully to sink
or quail, under his treacheries and deceits? What, do I say sink or quail?
Nay, to come into the extremest evils of Tyranny; to be bound with
intolerable and inhamane bonds of slavery, and to be reckoned and accounted
among those slaves that are bought and sold. We have prepared, made ready and
sharpened, a perpetual and an everlasting war and Arms against him: we
neither have, nor may cast our eyes upon any other peace, then upon such a
peace as is grounded, confirmed, and may be maintained with force and Arms.

But in regard that a little before I began to speak of France, and to prove
that our war partly was joined with that same; therefore I will proceed to
add some other matters hereunto, by the which you may evidently see and
perceive, how many treacheries, traps and deceits that Phillip has laid for
them.

He has a long time since, as you know, O Princes, labored and endeavored to
assail France, with all the violence and force of his war; to the end that
he by the occasion of the Civil dissentions in France, might effect so much by
his wars and charges: that if he could not swallow and devour the whole
Kingdom; yet that at the least he might get a great part thereof. For he had
made his full reckoning and account before hand, by preparing of that cruel
Fleet, that both France and England had been a prey unto their enemies: Whereas
those good Princes, notwithstanding had nothing at all endamaged him, neither
was he by any juiustice provoked to that war; unless peradventure it be,
that he thought this occasion sufficient; that the Pope, at the will and desire
of Phillip had excommunicated those two flourishing Kingdoms, for their
exercising and ministry of the Reformed Religion; who for the extirpation and
eradication of that Religion; Phillip as a Cato Mayor, with the puissance of
the Romish Censores (or correction masters) uses to have regard unto all the
Kings and people of the earth, and therefore to correct and punish them, which
is indeed a matter known unto you all; for which no man can sufficiently
wonder at the shamefulnesse thereof, and might now neither be passed by nor
omitted. And that Phillip in these wars of France dealt most earnestly, and
with the greatest diligence and alacrity, with the Duke of Feres, and other
Spaniards of the League, whom he as companions, had assisted in that war, to
have estranged the Right and Title of the Crown of France, not only from the
succession or descent of the Kings blood and kindred, but even from all
Frenchmen, and to have drawn the same to Spain.

These things are so certain, O Princes, that there is no man which doubts
of the truth hereof. But to what end do I bring these into your Remembrances;
What is this to maintain the purpose I have in hand; For this end it serves;
thereby to prove how exceeding great the ambition is of this most cruel
Tyrant; and to the end you may perceive and see how greatly, not only we, but
even all of you together, must keep good watch and look unto it. For like as
the nature of the Vine, is to extend the branches, as the arms thereof far
and wide, and therewith embraces and lays hold upon every thing that is near
it, if it be not lopt and pruned; Even so shall Phillip, if you do not all at
once make resistance, at the last destroy and devour all Christendom, with
most cruel and bloody war.

Moreover, he by his Btibery, and secret conspiracy had lately effected so much
in Scotland, that some of the chief of that Kingdom, should have received and
taken in twenty thousand Spaniards, if they had not been punished (after the
matter was known and revealed) according as their treason deserved. I need not
to think with my self, that I can sufficiently express with words, what
treasons, what perils, what dangers, he, so oftentimes has attempted against
the Queen and Kingdom of England. Can ambition and violence proceed yet any
further? Yes truly, For the like treacheries practiced he a little before
against the Principallity of Collen, the Dukedomes of Gelders, Gulich, Clean;
the County of Berghe, and that ancient Imperial Town of Aken: All which is
most manifestly and apparently known by good Testimony, and by his own
letters. And who knows in what lurking hole and corner of hypocrisy and
dissimulation, he hides and sheltreth his most mortal hate against the most
mighty Princes of Italy; whom (as soon as the wind of the first opportunity
shall blow (very suddenly, shall be turned into coals and ashes, by his
unquenchable and fearful great flames of War.

Do ye not yet see and perceive enough, o Princes, what treacheries and
deceits that Philip prepares, for your most happy Kingdoms and Provinces,
which are your Patrimonies? Considering there is no man so blind nor
senseless, who sees not, and understands not that the ambition of Phillip
never rests, but daily draws him from land to land, and raises a new war
out of war; So that he by wars, sin, mischief, and mere villainous deceits
and treacheries, under the pretense of a seeming-peace, seeks to deject and
detrude every one of you from the seat of your Government. For this his desire
is insatiable and immoderate, and cannot be included nor shut up, neither in
Heaven nor in Earth. If that all Phillips Kingdoms which he uses commonly in
that long train or tail of his most proud Titles and Terms of Honor were
put or laid into one of the Seals of Critolaes balance, and in his other
seal his Ambition or greedy desire of Honor; All the Kingdoms would
scarcely weigh the quantity of one grain, in comparison of his Ambition.

Alexander the Great looked about for more worlds, when he had conquered the
whole world; but Phillip would, if he could, with the Giants assault the
heavens. And therefore, O Princes, and you most peaceful Princes, I entreat
you, and I would admonish you, that you judge no more of the occasion and
lawfulness of our war; but in your judgments and opinions to hold it for
good: and I exhort you most earnestly again and again, that you by all
means, both in your understandings, and with all your powers, will take heed
of the treacheries, robberies, and mischievous practices of Phillips deceit.

In former times, whenas the Athenians, partly with war, and partly with
deceits and treacheries, sought to get unto themselves certain near adjacent
places, as the Cities of Syracusa, Lacaedemon, Messena and Catina: they by
their immoderate Ambition, and desire of others Rights, drew such an hatred
upon their own heads, that Darius the most mighty King of Persia, with the
whole country of Grecia, voluntarily undertook and prosecuted war against
them, unto which every man ran and hasted, as to quench a public flame. But
you, O most Illustrious Princes, ought long ago to have expelled Phillip, (with
your conjoined forces from you, and from your prosperous States) that seeks
continually your lives and Kingdoms, by most unjust war, and by most wicked
enterprises.

And it concerns, and is fitting, not only for you, who for a long time
since, have been provoked, spurred, and stirred up thereunto, by the many
injuries and ambition of Phillip, but even you altogether, who see and
perceive, that he incroacheth with violence upon the limmits of your
neighbors; and with an easy and slow pace creeps and incroacheth toward
your Countries. It stands you upon in time to look unto it; to the end, that
your neighboring Countries, being conquered and brought under his slavery and
bondage, Tyranny, when you lest think upon it, do not incroach upon you.

When as Phillip of Macedon, the Father of Alexander the Great, after the
Battle with the Tribaldes, had entertained a long dissembling war with the
Athenians, the Thebeans assembled themselves for this occasion; fearing, lest
when the Athenians had been conquered, the fire of their neighbouring-warre
might have flowne unto them. And a little before, there being a confederacy
made betwixt two of the mightiest Cities; who, before had been at extreme
enmity with each other, terrified thereby, and by their Ambassadors, all the
Country of Grecia: esteeming it so, that a common enemy ought and must be
repelled with common force; so that if the first invasion of Phillip of
Macedon, had had good success; he would not have held up, nor rested until he
had conquered and subjugated the whole country of Grecia. The Romans in former
time, perceauing that the power of the Carthaginians increased and grew great,
they had an especial care that the Carthagenians should not grow so great as to
ouer-master them: And for that end they sent their soldiers to relieve the
Mamertines from the beleagring, and to relieve Spain from servitude of the
Africans.

Although that the Venetians are not very lightly incited to war, but when
the matter of necessity constrayneth them: Yet they never tefused to send their
warlike power for the succor of others that were under them, when they
perceived that their neighbors contended with each other, with an unreasonable
and an immoderate violent ambitione.

These, and the like even to an innumirable examples (or foredeedes) do teach
you, how carefully you must take heed of that most pestilent evil, of the
Spanish ambition; and do show; or prove, that it is a righteous and just cause,
that even all you with one consent with us, prosecute a war against that
Tyrant.

For our States do know, that the occasion of their war against Phillip, is
not only exceeding just and righteous, and ever was: but also, that they at no
time, now nor never, may cease their war, that they may make no peace with
Phillip, but always must mainetaine war against that Tyrant. For we are
taught by our friends, how we must take heed of our enemies: For if Phillip do
gape and long so earnestly, and with such diligence for your Kingdoms; like as
you see he daily does; how then shall we speed? For assuredly he will never lay
aside Arms before that he has subjugated all the Netherlands under him,
because it is a Country so fit for his purpose; who, out of them may attempt
many enterprises upon your Kingdoms, and daily may begin to raise new wars
against you, and draw out of them Soldiers, Arms, and all manner of warlike
provision against your adjacent Countries. And therefore he would far rather
cast the greatest part of Christendom for a prey to the Turk; then to cease
these wars.

At the last Parliament in Germany, he would not consent to furnish the Emperor
with any soldiers, nor assistance against the Turk; and the reason was,
because he might the better vex Christendom with war.

Do ye yet doubt of this, O ye Princes, which you your selves have seen,
that Phillip in the beginning of our civil commotions, had far rather loose
two Kingdoms, Tunis and Goulet, which the Turks, under their General Sinam
Bascha then recovered from him, then that he would for a while cease his
wars with us; or would remove his Soldiers out of these Provinces, against
the most deadly and mortal enemy of all Christendom.

And you know how many Soldiers, how much Arms, and what charges Phillip has
been at, and wasted, to maintain this war against us. So that if you would but
reckon up the same, you shall find that he might have bought and purchased two
Netherlands with that money: although notwithstanding they be very great, rich,
and exceeding copious. So that there is no doubt of this, but Phillip would
far rather endure the greatest loss that might betide him then that he would
leave Bellgium with out bellum, or the Low Countries without long encountrings
of war, with out strife, without soldiers, that they might live in peace and
quietness, freely and wholly according to their Laws and privileges. For by
this war, and with the conquest of our Provinces, he will lay and establish the
strongest foundation and surest groundwork of his Monarchy, Sole-dominion,
Tyranny, and cruel Government. For when he saw and perceived that these
Countries were so singularly fitting for his cruel treacheries and desgnments,
and that our Laws and Liberties contraryly did wholly oppose the same: therefore
sought he first of all with war, with force and violence, to pluck up, tear
in sunder, and with violence, to oppress the same, to the end, that his
subjects of other Kingdoms, which at this present he has subiugated, or else
might subiugate hereafter; from this our concording, and general defense of
our Laws and Liberty, might take no example or instance, with the greater
courage and alacrity, to stand for, and maintain their liberty.

What do you then judge, o you most peaceful Princes? or what is your
conclusion that our States ought to do, who chiefly seek for the common good
of their native Country? Verily it cannot be with them, as it is under the
Government of a cruel Tirant, and as it usually is in ill-gouerned Reipublicks:
they are not used to be lead, and to submit themselves at any time, with cap
and knee, as flatterers do? to the wills, desires, and lusts of their
superior Lords, nor to be dealt with all as hired slaves? considering that
they never would admit nor suffer, that their Laws, Liberties, nor their
Reipublick, should bow or submit under the yoke of unjust and unlawful
Government: But have as good fathers of their natiue-Countrey; as good fighters
for their freedom, and Defendors of their Laws, (like as it must be in a
Reipublick which is moderately and ciuilly governed by their Prince) directed
their designs, wills, and government of their superior Lord; according to
their Laws, and the preservation of their Liberty.

Do you think that the Spaniards shall spoil and cruel vex and torment our
Reipublick; and that we with shame will leave and quit the same? Shall we
neglect our dear country and liberty? Must we despise the laws of our
predecessors? And shall they pervert and turn topsie-turvie our civil orders
and policy into tyranny? And shall we with wringing hands look upon the coarse,
and behold the exequies or funeral of our patria and native country? Shall
they rend and tear in pieces the body of our commonwealth, and like most
ravenous beasts devour the same? And shall we like slaves, with praying and
entreating, hardly preserve our own lives, goods, and means? Or do ye not far
rather laud and extol with the highest commendation of honor, this will and
affection of our States, for their manumising and preserving of their dear and
native country? Incite and exhort you them to proceed as they are best able,
and to the uttermost of their powers, for the preservation and manumising of
their own lives and liberty? Come not these things daily into your
remembrances, when you think of the Netherlandish war, or discourse thereof,
which I have now demonstrated, and with sure and infallible and uncontrollable
reasons proved unto you, viz. that our States, and all the Netherlanders, being
drenched and soaked in misery, and oppressed with the cruelty of the Spaniards;
and being expeld out of their native country, of mere necessity were
constrained to take Arms against Philip. And that now all the other
treacheries, infidelities and injuries which the Spaniards during the time of
these wars have done unto the Netherlanders, being so great, so inhumane, and
so incredible, that they themselves (so to speak) do earnestly exhort, do
require and command, that the States with a constant courage, should keep and
maintain their arms, and neither now, nor never, to lay them out of their
hands; but to show unto the other subjects of Phillip (those of Sicilia,
Calabria, Lombardy, Arragon, Castile, India, and Portugal) yea even unto your
selves, O Illustrious Princes, I say to show, and with valiant deeds to prove,
that not only we, but all of you together, yea and all men upon the face of
the earth, far rather ought to dye, then to behold or look upon the face of
that tyrant.

Do ye yet think, or can you imagine with your selves, that Phillip, with the
limits of our country, has limited in his tyranny? Do ye not yet see and
perceive, that the high ascending and mortal flames of the Spanish tyranny,
devoureth and swalloweth up the tresholds, doors, and turrets of your
kingdoms? Arise, and at the last awake out of this your sleep and
carelessness; come hither with speed, and in all haste fly hereinto, for to
quench these universal fireflames. Wherefore do ye seek unto us against our
wills, by your counsels, authorities, and respects, to induce us to make peace
with Phillip; whereas it had been more fitting, that you your selves long ago,
with war and force of arms should have expelled Philip, and with an
especial force and power to have suppressed him?

And to the end I may speak unto you all one after another, you most mighty
Princes of Germany, be sencible, that Philip in your Dutchland does not hunt
after a cruel and unjust government; but (so to speak) does possess the same
already. For he having once conquered these Netherlandish provinces; when you
will not bow and submit to his government: he will have all the havens of the
sea, and the mouths of all the Germane rivers at his own will, and in his
own power: thereby afterward to impose such grievous toles and taxations,
upon your navigations and trading, or else wholly will hinder the same, even as
it shall please himself. And this is that for which, and in behalf whereof,
one or two of the provinces do appear in your assemblies and consultations:
you hear him publicly speak his mind, and you esteem and prefer his
tyrannical advice and counsel, before your own prosperity and tranquillity.
You have him, the Bishop of Frisinghen and Hildeshem preferred before; and you
have seen them made Princes and Prince-Electors of the Empire; The Bishop of
Collen, Liege, and Magdeborgh: and you have seen that the most ambitious Duke
of Bavaria has laid snares for you all.

And to the end that I may turn my speech unto you, O you illustrious and
mighty powerful Princes of Poland, has not Philip brought a great number of
that generation of mankind, (I say Jesuits) into your Country, by whose
religion and policy they have brought almost the whole world into an vp-rore,
to the end that he by their means, with Sun-shine-like deceits, might propound
unto you what his will and counsel is.

To you also, most peaceful Princes of Italy, I have already said, and say
again, that the sword of the Spanish tyranny hangs by a very small thread
over your heads, already naked and drawn out of the scabberd.

And for you, O most illustrious Senators (or Privy Counselors) of Venice, you
your selves have seen and beheld the tyranny of Phillip in your own State and
government, when he sent money to arm the Turk against you; and diuerted the
power and force of the Turk from his own dominions upon Cypris; although that
he by thee quity and right of the covenant, had been exceedingly obliged and
beholding unto you.

Therefore O Princes of Christendom, yet even now, at the longlast, be
careful of your own estates and affairs, of your own lives and prosperity;
mark and consider it well, that Phillip is enemy and tyrant to you all, and
suffer him to live no longer in the world: but resist and impeach his ambition
to reign, and that his pestilent and mortal government proceed no further.
And like as some certain members are cut off when they begin to be without
life and blood, and are hurtful to all the other parts of the body; even so
must you also esteem, that this inhumane cruelty in humane shape, must (so to
speak) be separated and cut from the common body of men. Verily the deed of the
Persians is much to be commended, and ought to be well thought upon of you all;
who when Cometes and Oropastes two of their Magicians (or wise men) by the like
tyranny and murder of Smerdis, King of Persia, possessed the Kingdom: they
were slain by the valor of seven of the ablest Princes of Persia, all of them
running with a singular affection, diligence, and burning zeal to kill and to
destroy those tyrants with their swords, one of the Magitians clasped about the
neck of one of the Princes whose name was Gebrias, which made his companions to
linger the more, because they would not kill him in steed of the Magician (for
this was done in a dark place) who commanded the Magician to thrust his sword
through his body. Yet in the end the Magician was slain, and this valiant
Gebrias (who had rather to have died, then that the tyrant should have escaped
with life) was saved, and had his life preserved, Such an hate did these men
bear to tyrants.

The Grecians informer times attributed divine honor to those men who had
slain a tyrant, And do you think that the Netherlanders shall do evil, or
more unjust, that they oppose and resist Philip that jnhumane tyrant.

The Romans expelled their King Taquinus Superbus, because that he, did but in
some sort weaken the state of their commonwealth; and shall we suffer or
endure Phillip in our commonwealth, who not only with fire and sword would
destroy and turn-vp-side-downe all the Netherlands, but even the whole world?
No, by no means. Our States without doubt, will proceed and prepare the way
for you to break off, and to expel this tyrant. They will persevere to divert,
drive away, and to foil him so far and wide from suppressing and killing of
our prosperity, that once, not only they and theirs, but also even the other
provinces of the Netherlands, may bere-established in their former liberty, and
may lead them out of the straights of the Spanish tyranny, and repossesse them
in the possession of their predecessors. That finally, they being
re-established, and better ordered, and united and bound with the Provinces of
the whole Netherlands; they may stop the incursion and invasion of this cruel
tyrant, and altogether with one accord may expel him from their prosperity,
and from their common liberty. Amen.

FINIS.
AN ADIOYNDER OF SUNDRY OTHER PARTICVLAR WICKED PLOTS AND Cruel, Inhumane,
Perfidious; yea, Unnatural practices of the Spaniards.
To the well-affected indifferent READER.
GEntle Reader, there being so much spoken, as thou may perceive, by the
foregoing first Part of the Spanish practices, touching the cruel, inhumane,
treacherous, perfidious; yea, unnatural practices of the Spaniards, in most
parts of the World, which may sufficiently delineate him in his deserved
colors, that whosoever beholds him may mourn to see this Hazael so to
tyrannize over the innocent, and that the Lord should permit, and the earth
bear such an unheard of monster; yet notwithstanding, much more might be added
in sundry other particulars, as the Dutch Chronicles mention, and other Writers
have well set out: amongst which, although I my self be a stranger by Nation
to them; yet since the time of my abode here, having attained some
understanding in the Language, I have thought fit to add some further
particulars, which in my reading I have observed, and could add many more; but
my purpose being only to annex a few things, I will not enlarge, lest I add
another Treatise. But before I come to what I intend, I have thought fit having
some oversight in the publishing of this Treatise aforegoing, to note by the
way, The Dutch word Ghesante signifies indifferently Ambassador or Messenger.
the ill translating of one word, in the 21 folio, it is touching the Princess
of Parma, the Translator terms her a crafty Queen, whereas the word bears no
such sense in the Dutch, but signifies one that has a sharp wit to deceive, as
is said of the serpent that beguiled Eve. Beside, that that is translated
Ambassador, speaking of such as were sent from the States to the King, I
conceive to be more fittingly rendered Messenger.

First, thou art to understand, gentle Reader, that the King of Spain was
lovingly received here in the 17 Provinces, and a solemn oath was taken on
both parts; the King for his part swore to maintain all their Laws and
Privileges, and they to him all due homage and allgeance: He presently
demanded of them a sum of money, whereupon the States did assemble, and
collected for him 40. millions of Florines, of Brabants money, to be paid in
nine years, and paid it into his Exchequer; and although it was more then they
had paid before to his predecessors, yet upon this he did take great
displeasure against them; and, as they write, he for this did hate them to
death.

But he pretended this to be the cause of his wroth, because he saw that there
were some among them, that did defy the Pope and all his Religion: but that
could not be, for the City of Aelst was as superstitious in that Religion as
Rome it self; for they did persecute the Reformed Religion even unto death:
and yet for all that both they, and 170 fair Villages that belonged unto them,
were by them plundered and spoiled of all their goods, and many of them wounded
and tormented for to confess where their money was, and many were killed. Thus
much by the way.

My scope and chief intent, is to show the first and just cause of the wars
in the Netherlands; whereby the diligent Reader (not partially affected) may
clearly understand, that the Netherlanders did not rebelliously take up Arms
against a lawful Prince, (as some ignorantly think and speak) but justly and
religiously defend themselves against a perfidious Tyrant who sought their
ruin, by all possible means he could, and the subversion of the whole State.
A long while they patiently underwent his cruel oppressions, and intolerable
vexations, as the Histories clearly manifest; till there was no hope, but
either they must become slaves in soul and body, worse then that of Israel in
Egypt, they and theirs for ever, or else be butchered by merciless
executioners of a cruel Tyrant. The Inquisi^^^ was there 4. years before.
This Tyrant having a purpose to innouate all things, to root out the ancient
inhabitants, and to frustrate all the Laws, Customs and Privileges which
himself had sworn to maintain, knew not how better to effect his evil ends,
then by raising a bloody Inquisition to set over them for their government;
which said Inquisition (raised in Spain) concluded and pronounced certain
Articles, the tenth of February 1568, which were confirmed by the King, the 26.
following. Now because it may appear I do them no wrong in this charge, I
will lay down the Articles themselves verbatim.

The most sacred Office of Inquisition so often attempted in the Netherlands by
his Majesty, and hindered until this time, shall be instituted and advanced
in this manner, which is most expedient.

1 They must persuade the Emperor, being gone astray, and wickedly
confederated with heretics, that he resign his Kingdoms unto his Son,
with the whole administration of the Neitherlands.

2 That the Emperor with his two sisters, having given over all affairs,
leaving the Netherlands, shall retire into Spain unto Us, being assured that
they shall never return more to do any harm.

3 These being dispatched, we must also draw the king to us, and keep him for
ever that he part not, and not suffer any Flemmings to have access or
conference with him.

4 That the King write unto, and command the Clergy of the Netherlands that
with the Inquisition they should accept of 15 new Bishops, the which should be
free from all secular jurisdiction, yea in cases of treason.

5 The subjects of the Netherlands through their malice and waywardness, will
revolt and move seditions and tumults, pleasing to all but to our company.

6 The Princes and Noblemen, heads and authors of those factions, with the
subjects, must be taken away, and the others reduced unto reason.

7 They shall hire at our charge thieves and spoilers of Churches and Images,
whose offenses shall be by all the world imputed to Rebels, by some subtle
means, and so we shall vanquish them.

8 That all Comerce, Negotiation, Liberties and Privileges, shall be rooted
out, and that all be reduced to extreme poverty, whereby the realm shall be
permanent for Us.

9 No man of all those Countries (except he be of our faction) shall be held
worthy to live; and finally all to be rooted out: and all Goods, Possessions,
Arts, and Trades, and all Orders to be taken away, until there may be a new
Realm, and a new people.

10 In this action the wise and valiant Duke Alva shall be employed in person;
whereas any other, were he of the blood Royal, or a Prince, shall be of no
esteem: so as being suspect, yea in the smallest matters, they must be
dispatched.

11 No Contracts, Rights, Promises, Donations, Oaths, Privileges, and solemn
Assertions of the Netherlands, shall be of any force for the Inhabitants, as
being guilty of high treason.

12 But above al we must have an especial care that in these matters of so
great weight and moment, we proceed not violently, but by means, by degrees,
and that discreetly, to the end the Princes, Nobility, and inferior subjects
may mutiny amongst themselves, so that one may persecute, yea execute the
other until at last the hangman be executed himself. For in all Christendom
is there not a Nation more foolish and indiscreet, and whose levitie and
inconstancy may sooner be deceived then these Netherlanders and God punishes
them accordingly.

There were other Articles found in President Vergaes chamber at Antwerpe, and
there Printed; and those are more cruel then these.

By these articles and unlimited power of these lawless Inquisitors, no man
had any assurance of life or goods for a day, but were in danger continually to
be called into question, either for the law of their God, or for some work of
mercy, which either religion, moral equity, or the bond of nature called
for: or else if they had color for none of these, they would impose such
unreasonable taxations, which if the Cormorants had not their gorges crambed
full, they would make prey of all, whether by right or wrong it mattered not.
But my purpose being to avoid prolixitie, and to pass by impertinencies and
needless repetitions, I will come to that I intended. In the year 1565, a
match was concluded for the Prince of Parma, and the nuptials were solemnized
at Bruxels, whither all the Nobility and Gentry of the Country were invited,
and accordinglyt, here met of them about four hundred, who like faithful
Moses being grieved to see the daily oppression of their brethren by the hard
taskmasters of the Inquisition, who not only robbed them of their goods, but
also by inhumane cruelty, and unnatural butchery, deprived them of their
lives, who daily led them as sheep unto the slaughter: The consideration
hereof they jointly laid to heart, and hereupon (being met upon this occasion)
they resolved to present a petition to the Princess of Parma, which they did
the fifth of April next following. The Earl of Breedrod delivering the
petition, humbly requested a favorable answer. Three days after they received
this answer, viz. they should send two of their Noblemen to the king, by whom
she would write in their behalf. The Lord of Barlaymont being present, after
their departure said ( like a flattering Courtier) they were a company of
Rascals and Beggars.

It was concluded that the Marquess of Bargen, and the Lord of Mountigny
should go into Spain, who humbly presented their suit to the King, but could
get no answer in 16 Months after.

The 26 of August anno 1566, the Princess of Parma sent for the Gentry,
telling them she had received letters from the King, containing promise that
all should be well, and that the Inquisition should cease. And for the
Proclamations they should not be of force, but his Majesty would take such
order as they and the State should well like of. The Princess also gave them
toleration for their Religion, on condition, they should not deface, nor break
down the ornaments of the Churches: for, there had been before this time
vilde and lewd persons that frequented the meetings of the Reformed; these
went into the Papists Churches, stole their silver and what was worth carrying
away, and brake down their Images: but the Reformed suspected that this was
done by the appointment of the Princess; neither was their suspicion without
good ground, for it is to be seen in the Kings letters, Art. 7. that she had
order to hire this rascal company to do this villainy, Emanuel de Miter says,
that in Flanders they took 50. of them at one time, and hanged 2^, and whipped
the rest.
which fact was imputed to the Protestants, to the end that they might not only
be odious there, but also seem guilty, even in the judgment of other Nations;
howbeit the offenders were punished with imprisonment, yea, with death, even by
the Reformed themselves, who jointly confessed the action unlawful, and were
so far from having occasion of offense in this nature, that Papist Burgers
themselves offered good security that no such thing should be attempted by
them. Who then can make any doubt that they were free from giving any hand in
those outrages laid to them, the very opposites in Religion being Judges, who
as appears were willing to undertake for them; now as their faithfulness
brought so good effect for their persons, so did the Lord work that the truth
of Religion found many friends likewise, the Lord wondrously prospering the
course of Reformation, in so much that in short space they had in Flanders 60
Assemblies, some Churches themselves builded, but were by Duke d' Alva soon
cast down, who erected gallowses of them, and hanged them upon them.

The Princess of Parma also began to entertain soldiers with pretense to
apprehend the Church-robbers, but intended indeed to take away the ancient
Liberties and Privileges of the Netherlanders, wherefore sending certain
companies to Valencyn, the inhabitants denied them entertainment, who for that
were proclaimed Rebels the 14 of December, soon after they were besieged,
sacked, and many of them put to death.

But before they of Valencyn denied entertainment to the soldiers, Let
pretended it for religion, but his aim was to get their lands and goods.
the Nobility had received letters out of Spain, from the Marquess of Bargen,
showing, that the King was exceedingly incensed against the Netherlanders, that
he had in the presence of many vowed to be fully revenged of them, though it
were with the hazard of all his Countries; that he would make them an example
to all the world, and would inuit the Pope and Emperor to assist him in this
quarrel. Upon the receipt of the letters the Nobility assembled at Dortmond to
consult what were best to be done, but concluded not any thing, some judging it
safest to join, and make head to resist his tyrannical fury, other seeking
rather to escape by flight.

Now was the Inquisition again brought in contrary to the Laws and Liberties
of the Country, which the King was sworn to maintain, for execution whereof
there were appointed 12. Inquisitors, commanding them to receive the Council
of Trent, these were called, The bloody Council, and so they were indeed,
which Rome well knew, refusing it, anno 1559. when as they fell upon the
Inquisitors house, set it on fire, wounded the chief of them, brake open the
prison, and set at liberty the captives, and would have burned a Cloister that
belonged unto them, had they not been by fair means dissuaded by two Lords
in the City, viz. Marc* Antonio Colunus, Iuli^ Caesar.

Likewise Venice, Naples and Millaine, though they be Papists, would not suffer
it; the Merchants of Lisbon who are as superstitious in the Romish Religion as
any in the world, yet they did offer the King two millions and a half, that
they might not have it in their parts.

Yet the cruelty of this Inquisition did here increase, and many soldiers came
into the Country, that some of the Country forsook their houses, and
resorted toward Freezland, and some did stay at home, and went to meet Duke
Alva, and welcomed him into the Country, and showed him all the kindness they
could, As the Grais of Egmond, and the Grais of Horn, and many of the Gentry at
Brussels, 1568.
but he very shortly took off most of their heads, so that he did so
terrify the inhabitants, that there fled out of the Countries more then an
hundred thousand householders, besides many that were taken in flying, were
taken and hanged, and all these had their goods confiscated to the King.

The Prince of Orange, and the Earl of Bredrod, and fine Earls, eight Lords,
and fifty Gentlemen, and they had some fine thousand of Soldiers being in
Freesland, but were most overthrown by the Duke of Alua his forces; so that
they were driven to Embden land, and there prepared themselves to the sea.

Now the Duke of Alua did command all the inhabitants to pay the hundredth penny
of all their goods, and of all that was bought and sold* the which some of the
States did yield unto: And then he commanded them to pay the twentieth penny:
and then he commanded the tenth penny of all things that were bought and sold,
so often as they should be sold. Some of the States did make their humble
petition to the Duke, and to the Princes, showing them that it would drive all
trading out of the land. The Duke of Alua told them that he would have it,
though it did ruinate all the land; but if he saw them to do their best to
pay it, he would deal favorably with them. All the prisons were filled, in
so much as they were forced to prepare more, and filled them also.
But he said that it was against the Kings honor if they should not pay it,
seeing it was his pleasure to require it. And now did the Inquisition imprison
and execute many of the richer sort, as well Papists as of the reformed Church:
and if they were rich, there was no escaping for them. And whosoever was found
to have any hand in way of suit and petition to have the tenth penny to be
remitted, they were adjudged to have committed high treason against God and the
King; and all these must forfeit life and goods to the king, and not any of
their children to enjoy one penny worth of the same: but (poor Orphans) they
must beg their bread. And some that had been buried certain months, they
caused them to be dug up, and hanged on the gallows, and some to be burned,
because they had not the sacrament, and confessed before their death; but it
was because he would confiscate their goods to the king: yea when these
insatiable gold-thirsty and bloodthirsty wretches wanted color to cover their
injustice and cruelty, they had their officious imps (false-witnesses) suborned
by Jesabel, to get Naboths vineyard; witness Marti^ Hutton, who was one of the
Inquisitors Clerks, and (being committed to Prison) did acknowledge that he
had made many false testimonies against sundry rich persons, some whereof were
of the reformed Church. Here might fitly be brought in the hundred Merchants of
Granado, who were of the Roman Religion, and were never other; what pretense
had he to cause them to be murdered all in one night, and then presently to
command all their goods to be brought to his treasury of Exchequer, whose
estate was worth more then 28 hundred thousand pounds sterling? Now as this
tyrant was a deuourer and destroyer of the lives of men, so did he presume to
usurp further, not only upon civil ordinances, but upon the things of God; so
that those that were married in the reformed Church, he forced to be married
again: and if they were rich, he took them from their husbands, and gave
them to his soldiers to make prize of them. Those that were baptized in the
reformed Church, he compelled to be baptized again, contrary to Gods word, and
to the decree of the ancient counsels, so that intolerable were the burdens
this cruel Pharoh laid, so excessive was his cruelty, that he filled all
places with blood, blood touching blood, as the Prophet speaks. For in small
towns he executed 50, and in great towns 200, and 300 or 400. And in places
as men traveled from one town to another, they might see many that his
soldiers had hung up in trees to death, and some were worth 80 thousand
guldens, and some less: yea, this tyrant did confiscate so much lands and
goods, as by his account sent into Spain, did amount yearly to 8 tun of money
sterling, besides the many thousands that he and his soldiers had. All the
money that he did exact out of this land in 6. years, did amount to more then
50. millions of gold. And if any were known to have any thing that did belong
to any that were put to death, and had not brought it to the knowledge of the
Inquisition, they did loose both life and goods: yea the 16. of February 1566.
he gave sentence in his Court at Madrill, that they were all traitors against
God and himself. At Vtrecht he beheaded a widow that was 84. years old,
because she had before lodged a Preacher one night, whose living was worth
four thousand guldens yearly. And at Mastricht a father for lodging his son
that he had not seen in a long time, that was fled for religion, was put to
death. And at that place there was one put to death for giving a widow a peck
of corn for an alms, whose husband this bloody Court had put to death. And
many women were put to death, because they received their husbands in the night
that were fled for religion; yea, they have killed women great with child, and
ripped up their bellies, and taken out the child and killed it: and some they
have fleyed alive, and covered drums heads with their skies, and some they
have tied to a post, and made a small fire round about them, and so roasted them
to death.

At Naerden they received the Spaniards friendly into the town, The like
cruelty they did at Ondwater.
who promised them both their lives and goods; and as soon as they came in,
they commanded them to come to the State-house without their Arms, the which
they did, and the Spaniards gave fire upon them, and murdered them all: and
then they ran about in the town, and ravished the women, and after killed them
and fired the town. The young children that lay in the cradle, they quartered
them, and took them upon their pikes, and so went up and down the town,
rejoicing in their cruelty.

Such savage cruelty is scarcely to be found in any History, what Christian
heart can hear it, and not be affected with deep sorrow, yet behold some
monsters herein have been found, that have been so far from humanity herein,
(for he that has humanity in him will commiserate others calamities) that
they have applauded it, as if he had in all these outrages done God good
service. Amongst the rest, I shall content my self at present, but to name the
holy Father the Pope, and one of his chief sons in this business. The Pope
sends his Legate to commend these so rare exployts, and calls this cruel Duke
Alua his beloved son, sends him a costly sword, the hilts whereof were of
Gold, and a hat wrought with gold, and be-set with rich and costly stones,
thanking him for his good service in maintaining the Romish Religion, and
subuerting of heretics. Howbeit that his chief son I mentioned (exceeding
this man of sin, in the sin of cruelty, as if he would verify himself to be
ten-fold more the child of Satan, then his father the Pope) thinks not so well
of it, his name is Vergas, the President of this bloody Inquisition; for going
shortly after into Spain, he told the King, that he and Duke d' Alua, did
mar all in the Netherlands, by showing so much mercy to those people.

Concerning this Duke d' Alua, of whose outrage and cruelty so many have felt,
and perfidious dealing which many have found by lamentable experience, whereby
may easily appear of what stamp his excessive mercies are, even such as the
Wiseman speaks of Pro. 12.10, the tender-mercies of the wicked are cruel. In
which he prids himself, These words he spoke at a banquet, as he sat at the
Table, rejoicing he had done the King so good service.
boasting he had slaughtered eighteen thousand and six hundred, in form of
justice, in six years times, and ten times so many he and his Soldiers
murdered otherways. And many more would he doubtless have murdered, had not
the Lord restrained and limited him, for his desire herein was as hell, that
cannot be satisfied: Witness the purpose of his proceeding against the
Magistrates of Bruxels, because they did not collect the tenth penny so as he
desired. He swear that he would have it, and before he would let it fall or
remit it, the Sun and Moon should leave their shining: so he went to
Brussels, and commanded the executioner to prepare ladders and ropes to hang up
that night in their doors 70 of the citizens, Anno 573 1 April. 1. I have
instanced but 4 or 5 towns, but there were scarce any town escaped their cruel
pillaging, except they had bribed their Commanders with exceeding large (...).
and gave them his warrant in writing what they should be: But God in his
providence prevented this his cruel purpose, in that there came news that the
Grave of Mark had taken in the Brill, so the tyrant did not go forward with
his bloody enterprises.

Thus having given you a taste of some of those many things I have observed
concerning the intolerable oppression, and worse then savage cruelty of the
Spaniards, exercised upon the people, which they endured and labored under the
space of sixteen years; I will now leave these cruel tyrants to the Lord for
judgment, and address my self to speak somewhat further concerning this Earl
of Mark, who had those Gentlemen with him that fled. Before this he had lain
with his shipping in England, but the King of Spain sending his Ambassador to
our Queen (who was then in peace with him) to desire her that she would not
suffer his subjects to have their harbor in her land, and that she would not
give them or suffer them to have any relief whereby they should make head
against him: and hereupon the Queen sent and commanded them out of her
harbor; and she commanded that they should not be suffered to have any
provision in her coasts, so that now they had no other means but only God,
who did in his mercy provide for them better then they expected. For they were
purposed to have gone for the Tassel, and to have taken some town about that
part; but when they came near that part, they had the wind contrary that they
could not come there, so they went for the Malse, and came with their ships
before the Brill, and there they went presently and took it; yet the Duke of
Alua had his forces in the town, near so many as they were, whom they
presently killed and chased out of the town, and out of the Island. The Prince
of Orange being in France, and hearing what had happened, he sent them
soldiers with as much speed as could be out of France. And within one month
after Duke Alua sent certain companies to Vlishing to keep that place strong
for himself, and many of the Commanders were come into the town: So the
Magistrates commanded the citizens to come presently upon the Statehouse, so
they told them they must lodge the Spaniards in their houses, and they knowing
how they had used the Citizens in all places where they came, they told the
magistrates they would not have the Spaniards in their town. The Magistrates
asked them which of them it was that did refuse to receive them. They said, All
of them. So the Magistrates seeing them so earnest against the Spaniards, they
jointly took their Arms, and killed and took prisoners all them that were ^n
the town, He had appointed those to be executed because they were they were
the chief that stood against the payment of the tenth penny.
and with their Ordnance they shot at his ships where the Spaniards were, and
they made away. And of those that were taken, there were the names of about 80
that they had in writing from Duke Alua that dwelt in the Island, that they
should put to death. So those of the Bril sent their soldiers with speed to
help the^. And shortly the Prince of Orange came with forces and defended them;
and some other towns, seeing the cruelty of the Spaniards, forsook the
Spaniard, and joined with them, and took the Prince of Orange to be their
Protector, yet the States notwithstanding did remain in obedience to the King
some seven years after.

Again, it is further worthy to be noted, that these Provinces did three times
send to the King their Noblemen, but could obtain no mercy, and many more
times they went to the Princess of Parma, and made their humble petition for
redress of their oppression, but could not obtain any favor, then they made
friends to the renowned Queen of England, and to the Princes of Germany, and
to the Emperor, who did earnestly entreat by their Ambassadors for them. The
King of Spain answered their Ambassadors with these words; he bad them tell
their Masters, That they should meddle with their own subjects, and not with
his, for he knew well enough how to rule his subjects without their counsel.
Now when our Queens Majesty found his unreasonableness and cruelty, then and
not before, she assisted them with Arms. Ann. 1575.


His own son Prince Charles did entreat for them, that it would please him
to let them have their Laws and Privileges, and that they might not be so
oppressed; Marplam in his Chronicle an. 1567.
and withal he told his father that those Countries did belong to him, and
that they were given him at his Baptism, for the which his father sent him to
prison, and he never came out again. If the Lord would not have forgot what
Amalek did long after, for smiting the weakest and hindmost of his people, how
may we in equity forget the infinite murders, and spoils, this cruel Tyrant
has executed where-euer he has prevailed? And who can forget in special
that bloody attempt against our selves, in the year 1588.

If I should trace this Tyrant from place to place, I should run in
infinitum, having made the name of Christianity hateful, by his cruelty,
amongst the Heathens that know not God further then the light of nature: for it
is confessed by the Spaniards themselves, that some of the chief of the
Jndians, They were exhorted by a Popish Priest to mind, that after this life,
there was one place for joy, and an other of torment.
who were to be burn to death, being told of heaven and hell, they asked
whether the Spaniards went when they died? It was answered to heaven, Oh then
said they, we will never come there, for we will never come where the Spaniards
are. But not to run so far, I will rest content to keep me within the bounds I
chiefly intended concerning these Countries. When the Citizens of Leyden were
in great extremity, by reason of a long siege, the Spaniards proffering
conditions of peace, if so be they would yield up the City and themselves to
them, they returned answer; Not while they had a right hand to hold the sword,
or a left to eat; but if they should be driven to fall into their hands, they
would rather burn the City and drown themselves, then to submit to them, of
whose perfidiousnesse they had had so lamentable experience: and when some of
the Citizens pressed a yielding, in respect of the extremity of famine, a
Burgermaster, called Peter Adrianson said; Loving friends, I confess the
famine is great, and that some do die for want of food: yet rather let us
agree to eat up one another, as it shall fall by lot, begin with me first, and
divide me amongst you.

At Antwerpe, the Spaniards by the appointment of their Governor did come into
the City in battle order, and marched up and down their streets, and shot
into their houses, and made a tumultuous noise, as if they had been so many
devils, for one day and two nights, and took the keys from the Magistrates,
They did this as well to the Spiritualty* as to the ^^poralty no sort e^cepted.
and set watch at the Ports; whereby they put the Citizens in so great fear,
that many women with child fell in travel, and some dyed with fear: and they
went by 12 or 20, into the best houses, and commanded them to prepare them the
best cheer, as boiled and roast, and other dainty dishes, as they list to call
for; and besides beer, They did offer them two parts in money and the third
^^cloth, but they cried all for money.
they would have at least two sorts of wine. And all the chiefest Citizens
houses had at least ten of these guests. And they all cried out for money,
and said that they would have 15 months pay, before they went out of the
City, of them; and the Magistrates told them that they would procure them in
cloth, and apparel, and money the sum; but they all cried out for money, and
that money they would have before they went away; so at the last, the
Magistrates got the money, which did amount to 400 thousand Guldens. And the
charge they were at, I do make but a short relation of some of the cruelties
they did against this City yet there stands in the Chron^cle, one quier of
paper of their further cruelty*
which these companions did cost the Citizens, was 600 pound sterling the day,
and thus they were oppressed with them 28 days, in which time they had made
them all rich suites, some of satin and velvet, and some of cloth of gold: and
one of them had a cushion of velvet, with these words in letters of gold. I am
the Dutchmans Bride-well Master. And thus they got r^d of them for the present.
And about two years after they came again, and then they used the Citizens
much more cruelly, for these devils did bring straw, and set on fire, and put
it into the houses, whereby they set nine rich streets on fire, and burnt them
with many rich and costly goods, and rifled the Citizens of all their rich and
costly jewels, and siluer-workes, with their money, and three days did they
torment the inhabitants for money: That they are now and have been this 30.
years more (...)* I easily yield it. But why? not that they have changed their
former nature, for they still hold the former principles of the Council of
Trent, but being more subtle, and finding their Kingdom is more weakened,
they dare not so presume as formerly.

In the year 1580. the States proclaimed King Phill^p to have l^st his right,
by reason he violated his oath. A Spaniards kindness to his friends.


and in this time there was murdered of the Citizens above four thousand. The
money they took at that time, is reckoned for more then 40 tun of gold, beside
the Jewels and the loss they had by fire, was as much as the rest. And thus
was the best City of Merchants in Europe ruinated.

At Risell there was a Spaniard would force a rich woman to have the use of her
body, and the woman cried out for help, and her husband came, and two of his
neighbors to help his wife, and they thrust the Spaniard away, and he ran
into the street and cried Spaynea, Spaynea, and there came many Spanish
Soldiers about him, and they rushed into the house, and took the man and his
neighbors, and carried them before the Magistrates on the Towne-house where
they were assembled, and there before them he complained of them to be rebels,
and stirrers up of vp-ro^es, and told the Magistrates that if they did not
presently put them to death, they would burn their Town, and execute them
themselves, whereupon they durst do no otherwise, but hanged two, and whipped
the other.

Diverse things being manifested of the Spaniards cruelty, I will add one
instance of their treachery, and that of a famous person to his nearest
familiars; yea, when he pretended sweetest familiarity and friendship. Pope
Alexander the 6. a Spaniard by birth, invited diverse Nobles and Cardinals to a
banquet, with a purpose to poison them all. The meetest instrument he made
choice of to effect this, was a Spaniard, one Caesar Burgia, his sworn servant.
The Pope showed himself wonderful pleasant to avoid suspicion, and drank a
carouse to them all; willing that his trusty servant to fill from such a bottel
he knew well: which he did very effectually to the Pope himself as well as to
the rest. After the company was departed, the Pope perceiving by an alteration
in himself, what was done, and that he must die now also, said to Burgio, This
is a right Spanish trick. It is written of them that they are so expert in
these exploits, that if Judas himself were alive, he might go to them to
School.

J do b^seech the Lord to show mercy to my native Country, that they may never
come under the government of the Spaniards, and give them hearts to repent of
their transgressions, and that they may sincerely embrace the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, to their endless comfort. Amen.

Yours to command in all services, for the advancement of the truth of Jesus
Christ. S. O.

O Thou most high God, which guidest and gouernest the heaven, the sea, the
earth, war and peace: Thou which give laws and commandments to Kings,
Princes, and to all people upon the earth: Thou that appointest and give
conquests, triumphs, and trophies, the signs of victory: Thou which do
hinder and divert overthrows, dangers, and all unjust dealing: Anse, O thou
great God, and oppose thy self against the enemy of all justice and peace;
against the enemy of thy praise and honor. We beseech thee, that with thy
providence and wisdom thou will order our endeavors, and relieve thy people,
that thy most holy name may be adored and honored with all perfect piety and
true religion. Amen.

FINIS.

