THE SPANIARDS PERPETVALL DESIGNS TO AN UNIVERSAL MONARCHY.

Translated according to the French.

Printed 1624.

A PROGRESS OF THE Conquests of the King of SPAIN, and House of Austria in
Germany, Switzerland, the Grisons Country, Italy, and the Frontiers of France,
since the death of Henry the Great.
THE Spaniards continually pursuing the advancement of their universal
Monarchy, (the first foundation whereof were laid by Charles the fifth, since
which time that design has been still eagerly prosecuted,) have bin so happy
in their endeavors in these last 10 or 12 years in diverse parts of Europe:
and particularly near to the borders of France, that there remains very
little for them to conquer; to encompasse it on all sides, and so by little and
little to make themselves Majestrates and Arbiters of Christendom.

And to begin with the last and freshest of their Conquests; Besides the
Palatine Electoriall dignity, which they have put into the hands of one of
their confidents: they have conquered by Arms all the Palatinate, both on this
side and beyond the Rhine; and within, or near it, many Cities and strong
places, whereof diverse are Imperial free Towns, as namely Wormbs, Spire,
Landaw, Haguenau, Wissembourg, Fridberg, Gailhassen, Wetzlar, and others:
together with a good part of the Country of Hannau, and of the Country of
Wetteraw, wherein are many Counts and Lords neighbors, and Allies to the
Prince Elector Palatine: whose Brother and Cosens have been no more spared
then the rest, though not comprehended in the Imperial Ban, their Lords and
Lordships being seized on, together with the Iointures of the innocent widow
Princesses. This notable conquest, to take it from Mentz and Haggenaw on the
one side, and the countries of Trier and Lorraine one the other, and from
Francfort almost close to Strasbourg, contains in length more then 50 French
leagues, and in breadth Forty. And they still continue to make some progress
about the Palatinate, under color of passages or other pretents: and proceed
in their secret practices upon diverse other Imperial Towns, especially that
of Strasbourg, (a great and strong place, and of the ancient patrimony of our
first Kings:) and likewise upon the Town of Besanson, to establish a
Parliament there, or transfer thither that of Dole. As in the time of Phillip
the second, the Admiral of Arragon presumed to ask the Vicariat of that Town
for the King his Master, but it was denied him by the Emperor Rodolph the
second. And of late the Ministers of Spain have offered money for certain
places in the Bishopric of Liege, for no other end but that we even now speak
of. But that which is most monstrous, is the quarrel they make with the
Elector of Brandenbourg, seeking an occasion to make him likewise loose his
Electorat, although that Prince has all this time remained neutriall, and kept
intelligence with the Elector of Saxony, who at one time or other will escape no
better then the rest, though he has assisted the Emperors with his Arms and
Counsels, to the prejudice of his near kindred, whom he daily sees to be
turned naked to the world.

All men know that not long before this, the Spaniards had made themselves
Masters of all that Country which lies between the Rivers of the Mosell and
the Rhine, from the Towns of Liege and Cullen, to Numeguen in Guelderland: and
especially of the free and Imperial Towns of Aix-la-Chappell and Wezell:
notwithstanding the intercession of the King and Queen Mother then Regent,
both by frequent Letters and Ambassadors sent expressly for that business. And
they have since taken by composition the Towns and Fortresses of Iuliers, and
hold entirely the Duchess of Iuliers and Berg, together with all the Towns and
places of the Grand Conte de la Mark, and the County of Rauensberg, with two
thirds of the Duchy of Cleues, on this side and beyond the Rhine, and the most
part of it under the Duke of Newbourgs name. But the Spaniards having their
garrisons there, the good Prince can neither enjoy the places nor the reuinue,
but in very small proportion. And notwithstanding all his endeauours and
diligence used at Bruxells, for freeing himself from those garrisons, yet
cannot he hitherto obtain or prevail with them in any thing, though he be a
Catholic, their friend, and Allie. This conquest is not much less worth to
the Spaniards, then that of the lower Palatinate, as well for the approach which
foot by foot they make toward Holland: as for the extent of these Countries,
which one with another, from the town of Aix-la-Chapell to Lipstat, the last
place of the County De la Mark, and from thence to the Town of Cleues, amounts
unto above fourscore French leagues in length, and about 50 in breadth. And
this without accounting the Fort of Pappe-mutz, sittuate in an Isle of the
Rhine on this side Cullen, lately conquered by the Spaniards, and by them
Christened with the name of Isabella. And in a word, either by association, or
by the conuenience of the Electors of Mentz and Cologue: or by their proper
conquests, they may call themselves Masters of the great River of Rhine, from
the Town of Stratsbourg, yea even from Brisacke and Basle, to Rees and
Emericke, Towns in the Land of Cleue, not far distant from the mouth of that
River.

Furthermore, who knows not the designs of the Spaniards upon the Country of
the Grisons, and how the Archduke Leopold on the one side, and the Governor of
Millaine on the other, have possessed themselves of the greatest part of those
Countries, having put garrisons into Coyre, Mayenfeld, Pretigau, and all other
places of the one and other Engadine, even close to the Canton of Zurich: where
the Archduke intends to erect a Fort in a certain place called Steig, thereby
to bridle the Switzers, and keep an entrance into the Country. And toward
Millaine they have seized upon the Counties of Chiavenna and Pregaglia, and the
long and fertile valley of the Val-telina, (the two ends whereof join Millaine
and Tirol) which is the subject of the present difference between the King of
Spain on the on side, and the Crown of France, the States of Venice, Sauoy,
and generally all Italy, the Switzers and Grisons on the other side.

They have also seized on the Counties of Bromio and Valmesolcina, a fair and
large valley near Bellinzons, toward the Frontiers of Italy: and now of late
upon the County of Muscco, under the title of of the Count of Triuulce his
pretense: the foresaid Conquests making altogether, to reckon from Mayenfield
to Bormio, and from thence to the Fort Fuentes at the least, 40 French leagues
in length, and more the 30 in breadth, as it may evidently appear by Cluverius
his Map of Rhaetia. And although the present Pope, being now depositary of the
most parts of these Forts and places, labors with the King of Spain for
restoring all things unto there former estate, according to the French Kings
desire, yet cannot he attain unto it.

And for Italy, it is true that the late King of Spain in the year 1611, had
made himself Master of the Town of Sasello, and placed a garrison there: but
upon the complaint and request of the Republique of Genoa, restored it to the
former State. Nevertheless in Monaco, and the Town and Castle of Correggio,
the Spaniards keep a strong Garrison. They have also newly erected the Fort of
Sandonal, upon the Frontier of Piedmont, toward Vercel. And concerning the
Sates of Milan, Final, Plumbin, and other Fiefs which the King of Spain holds
of the Empire, he has upon the instance of his Ambassador resident at Vienna,
received solemn investiture thereof by the Emperor 1621; And besides, the
States of Venice and Savoy are threatened by him, as well for the
misunderstanding and differences past, as for this new dispute and quarrel
touching the Valteline, wherein the greatest part of the Potentares of Italy,
and the Pope himself are also interessed.

And to make his way by little and little amongst the leagues of the Switzers
and Grizons, (peoples formerly so obliged and affectionate to the Crown of
France, as they did in a manner reject all other Alliances) the Spaniard has by
money, promises and practices, divided them into Factions, thereby to weaken
that body which subsists not but by their union, and to be able to bring them
against France it self, and other neighboring States. The Spaniards have done
as much under diverse pretents in the Country of Valey, and Bishoprirke of Sion,
having likewise possessed themselves of the passages of Switzerland, thereby to
have the ways free and clear for their Armies to pass from Italy to
Flanders: which before they were constrained to beg from the Duke of Savoy, or
the leagues of Switzerland.

To return to Germany, it is very considerable that the conquests made by the
Duke of Bauaria, as well in the upper Palatinate which he has gotten entirely
into his possession, as in the lower Palatinate, tend all of them to the
advantage of the House of Austria, this Prince being near Allie, and obliged
to that House, by the translation of the Electorate upon his person, and other
benefits lately received from the Emperor. So that to favor that Duke, in
hope either to bring him into suspicion with the Emperor, or to draw profit
from him against the hair, considering how strictly they are all linked
together in interest, and affection the one to the other: and in giving such a
Council, there must be want of integrity, or pure ignorance of the present
State of the affairs of Germany. The like must be said of the Children of the
Marquis Edward Fortunate, to whom the Marquisat of Baden has been lately
adjudged by the Emperor, against and in prejudice of their Cosen the Marquis
of Douelach, who is now turned out of it, which is an extent of land somewhat
considerably between the Towns of Strasbourg and Basle, on the one side, and
the Palatinate and Duchy of Wirtemberg on the other.

They have likewise since a few Months possessed themselves of a good part of
the Langrauiat of Hessen, under color of a sentence given by the Emperor, in
favor of the Langraue Louis of Darmstat, against his Cosen the Langraue
Maurice of Kassell, (an ancient Allie and confident of the Crown of France)
upon their difference touching the Town of Marspourg, and the country about
it. And so by little and little they proceed, getting footing in the Provinces
of Germany, and oppressing the liberty of the Princes and Cities of the
Empire: thereby to make it hereditary in their House; as they do the Kingdoms
of Hungary and Bohemia, (which those peoples have evermore maintained to be
merely Elective.) together with the Provinces of Moravia, Silesia, and
Lusatia, incorporated to the Kingdom of Bohemia, and newly reconquered by
Arms and other means, to the great increasing of the House of Austria, and
exceeding great advantage of their designs.

We will not speak here of the Towns and Fortresses of Arache, Mamora, and
others in the Kingdom of Fez, surprised or conquered by the Spaniard since a
few years, because they are far distant, and of less consideration to France.
But touching the Fort of Grauelines, which they still advance, and will by
snatches bring it to perfection: we must blame our selves if we suffer it. But
it would be a far worse matter, if the Spaniard should conclude the Treaty of
Marriage with England, for the reasons which every man may understand; for if
the only Negotiation touching that Alliance, has given the Spaniards time and
means to subdue the best and greatest part of all Germany: and to push their
designs so forward; what other thing can be expected from the accomplishment
of the marriage, but that in the end we must receive Law from the Conqueror,
and so loose the prerogative of this glorious title, anciently won by our
Kings, of Protectors of the liberty of Germany, and which is more, of Arbiters
of Christendom: besides the fruit which we see lost before our eyes: of so
many Millions employed since 100, or 120 years, to entertain our Allies the
Switzers and Grizons, and other our friends and confederates; And of the
expense made at the siege of Iuliers, to put it into the possession of the
lawful heirs of the House of Cleue, whom the Spaniards labored to
dispossess, and to take it themselves: as they have now done 10 years
afterward. For which notwithstanding, our ill-affected-Frenchmen have
professed public joy, although this place was formerly delivered to the late
Mareschall de la Chastre, general of the Kings Army, being for the most part
Catholic.

It must be also taken into consideration, that the Spaniards who for 70 years
has by diverse writings continual blamed our Treaties: which the Turk does
now himself seek that Alliance with much instance. The last from
Constantinople bear, that one Antonio Barili, a Dominican Friar, who had bin
there secretly twice before, was again returned thither, with two others in
his company: and that he has been zealously seconded and assisted in pursuit
of this peace, by the Emperors Ministers that were then at the Port: and now
lately by one Curtz, who for this end has carried thither a good sum of
money; of all which the Grand Vizier himself, gave advertisement to some
Ambassadors resident at the Port, and opposite to the Spanish Party, judging
his design of the Emperor and King of Spain to be for no other end, then by
this Peace By a Peace with the Grand Signiour of the King of Spain, would
yearly save the charge of 20 m. men kept in Garrison, upon the Coasts of
Naples, Sicilie, Sardinia, and those Islands, and of 60 Galleys, in which are
of Soldiers and Slaves well nigh 20 m. more: All which great forces, the King
of Spain is forced with a vast expense, continually to maintain for his own
safety and defense against the Turk. And it is considerable that this
proposition of Peace, is made in a time when the necessities of the Turkish
affairs, in regard of the present Rebellions and disordres in their Empire,
threatening ruin, or at least some notable alteration, might make the offer
acceptable. And that for the said respects, it could not for the present be
either dangerous, or unsafe for the King of Spain; but would be of infinite
advantage to the progress of his affairs in these parts, if so great forces
as are now only maintained for a mere defense, without attempting any thing,
should be drawn forth into an active employment.
to have the better means and leisure to go through with their business and
conquests in Europe: and by degrees make themselves strong enough to undertake
the Turk, and then carry their Arms into the Leuant. And to this end it is
their writers publish, that it is necessary there should be but one universal
and absolute Monarch in Christendom, and that it should be the King of Spain,
who is the might, and who by their report has the best mirited of the
Apostolic Sea, and of all Christendom.

For their pretenses, either upon France in general, drawing a descent of the
Princes of the house of Austria, in a direct line from Male to Male, from
Meroue, Childeric, and other Kings of France of the first race called
Merouingiens: thereby inferring that the Kingdom belongs to them. Or upon the
Provinces of Burgundy and Brittany in particular; These falsehoods have been
lately solidly refuted by one of our most excellent and learned Antiquaries.
And touching their pretenses unto other Kingdoms, and particularly to England,
the care and refutation thereof is to be left to those who have most interest
therein. The evidence of these pretenses which have been seconded by real
under takings and attemps, appears sufficiently in Hereras History of Phillip
the second of Spain, in Cabrera, and in Camille Borrell, his Book touching
the prerogative and dignity of the Catholic King.

Our France being therefore environed on all sides with the Teritories and
Dominions of the Spaniard, and House of Austria, either of their ancient
domaine, or new conquests, (which has bin made in so short a time, as it
seems a thing prodious) this State having thereby lost all its outworkes and
bulwarks: that is, the best and most powerful friends and Allies: it seems
to be more then high time to awake out of this deep and fatal Lethargy,
whereinto our France is fallen by the disastrous death of our great Henry, and
seriously to look to our conversation, by taking it into due consideration,
that if the Spaniard should now pick a quarrel with us, and assail us
again: as in the time of the league, when Phillip the second would have had
this Crown put upon his Daughters head, in prejudice of our Salique Law: the
passages by Land would on all sides be shut up against us, so as we could not
be relieved either with men or money from Germany, Switzerland, or Italy: as
was our late King in his great necessities. And on the contrary, all the
Princes and people subject to the Spaniard, and those whom he has lately
subdued unto him, who were formerly our friends, and favored us: will be
constrained and bound to assist and and serve against us, and many of them to
their great grief.

Yet is it not meant that recourse should presently be had unto Arms, and the
public peace broken. as if so great a King in so powerful a kingdom as this
is, had no other means to protect the afflicted. The late King in the like
case, without applying those violent remedies, has by his wisdom
sufficiently showed the way; as when by a serious interposition of his credit
and authority, he accommodated the difference between the Pope and the
Venetians: or when by his liberallity he succored those who besought his
help: or when by menaces, he gave cause of apprehension to those that would
oppress his friends and Allies. And these are the means that ought to be used
in the first place, before the way of open force be taken; all wars how just
so ever, being both ruinous and hazardous.

True it is that the peace of this State, the union and concord of the people
in a due obedience to our King, and the conduct of a wise Council, that knows
how to resume the wise Counsels and Maxims of Henry the great: and the former
state of a good intelligence, with the most sincere friends and ancient
confederats of this Crown, are the first and principal remedies of this
evil: yea, the supreme way for restoring this puissant and once flourishing
Kingdom, to its ancient splendour, strength, and authority.

FINIS.

