Assembly at Glasgow, December 6, 1688. Sess. 14.
I. Act concerning the Service Book, Book of Canons, Book of Ordination, and
the High Commission.
I. The Assembly having diligently considered the Book of Common Prayer, lately
obtruded upon the reformed Kirk within this Realm, both in respect of the
Manner of the introducing thereof, and in respect of the Matter which it
contains, finds, that it has been devised, and brought in by the pretended
Prelates, without Direction from the Kirk, and pressed upon Ministers without
Warrant from the Kirk, to be universally received, as the only Form of Divine
Service, under all highest Pains, both Civil and Ecclesiastical; and the Book
itself, beside the Popish Frame and Forms in Divine Worship, to contain many
Popish Errors and Ceremonies, and the Seeds of manifold and gross Superstition
and Idolatry. The Assembly, therefore, all in one Voice, has rejected and
condemned, and by these Presents does reject and condemn the said Book, not
only as illegally introduced, but also as repugnant to the Doctrine,
Discipline, and Order of this reformed Kirk, to the Confession of Faith,
Constitutions of General Assemblies, and Acts of Parliament establishing the
true Religion; and does prohibit the Use and Practice thereof: And ordain
Presbyteries to proceed with the Censure of the Kirk against all such as shall
transgress.

II. The Assembly also, taking to their Consideration the Book of Canons, and
the Manner how it has been introduced, finds, that it has been devised by
the pretended Prelates, without Warrant or Direction from the General Assembly;
and to establish a tyrannical Power in the ^^^sons of the pretended Bishops,
over the Worship of God, Men's Consciences, Liberties and Goods; and to
overthrow the whole Discipline and Government of the General and Synodical
Assemblies, Presbyteries, and Sessions, formerly established in our Kirk.

Therefore the Assembly, all in one Voice, has rejected and condemned, and by
these Presents, does reject and condemn the said Book, as contrair to the
Confession of our Faith, and repugnant to the established Government, the Book
of Discipline, and the Acts and Constitutions of our Kirk; prohibites the Use
and Practice of the same; and ordains Presbyteries to proceed with the Censure
of the Kirk, against all such as shall transgress.


