REASONS FOR A GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

HEBR. X. 25. Forsake not the assembling of your selves together, as the manner
of some is, etc.

A VIRTVTE ORTA. OCCIDVNT RARIVS.

June 29, 1638.



Printed in the year of God, 1638.

REASONS FOR A general Assembly.


The Sone of God, the King and Head of his Kirk, has graciously promised,
where two or three are gathered together in His Name, there He will be
amongst the mids of them; which does als well prove the Divine original of
national Assemblies to be kept in the case of the urgent necessity of the
Kirk, as of other inferior meetings of the Kirk: And therefore the Councels of
old used this for their warrant, and the Fathers being conveened in Counsels,
used to pray for the presence and assistance of Christ upon this ground of his
gracious promise.

The holy Ghost filling the hearts of the Apostles, moved them to conveene in a
council at Jerusalem Act: 15. Whether also did resort the Apostle Paul, by
revelation at the same time, Gal: 2.1. For keeping that Assembly, as both
ancient and modern Divines observe upon that place; for which cause, and for
the assistance of the Spirit which brought them together, they were confident
to give out their determination in this manner: It seemed good to the holy
Ghost, and to us.

The Christian kirk directed by the light of nature, confident of the promise
of Christ, and warranted by the divine practice of the Apostles, has in all
ages, even when she was persecute by the powers of the world, used this as the
ordinary and necessary mean for uniforme establishing of Religion and Piety,
for censuring of Heresy, and for removing of scandals, and such other evils as
by Divine providence and prediction must be, and would certainly bring
division, and desolation upon the kirk, if by this powerful remeady they were
not cured and prevented. Both Popish and reformed Divines agree in this truth:
That although God by his omnipotency, or by way of miracle may preserve his
kirk on earth without Assemblies, yet in the ordinary providence of God,
Assemblies are necessary for the right governing and well being of the kirk.

Scotland kept her general assemblies with great evidence of the presence
and blessing of God from heaven; For while they continued in their strength
(far contrary to that which we have seen of late) the doctrine was by them
preserved against error and heresy, the worship was kept pure against
superstition and idolatry; the Discipline was holden in integrity against
confusion and tyranny; unity and peace was entertained against schism and
division; piety and learning were advanced against profanitie and idleness,
every man had his gift stirred up and increased, every gift was made use of as
it might serve for the good of the kirk; and all went from these assemblies
with fresh resolutions, and fervent zeal for the work of God in their
particular places.

Morton than Regent, in March 1573. And by the act of Parliament in the year
1592. For such necessary causes as are expressed in these acts, which being
neglected, religion could not be preserved. King James as at diverse other
times, so by his Commissioners at Lithgow, in the year 1606. did acknowledge
that the keeping of general assemblies was the most necessary mean for
preservation of piety and union, and for extermination of heresy and schism,
and therefore willed that the act of Parliament for conveening the general
Assembly once in the year should stand in force. The prelates themselves in
their assembly at Glasgow 1610. expressly acknowledged, that the necessity of
the Kirk did require yearly generally assemblies, and the act of that assembly
did suppose and import the same: for by the Act they were made liable to the
censure of the general Assembly in their life, office, and benefice in
general, and in some particulars specified therein, as that of the process of
excommunication.

Arminianisme and Popish errors. 2. Abuses and enormities through the
government of prelates are multiplied: 3. The Discipline of this Kirk
established, by the acts of assemblies and by solemn oath, is not only
perverted, but overturned: 4. Peace and unity in the Kirk is turned into
schism and division, by the adversaries, who have minded nothing but their
worldly peace, and increase of their dignities: 5. Brethren of the Ministry
are become strangers one to another, their minds filled with suspicions, and
none of them bettered by another, more then if they were Ministers in sundry
kingdoms: 6. Many of the people have for a long time doubted of their
religion, not knowing what hand to turn to, when they found such diversity of
opinions amongst Pastors. 7. Faithful Pastors have been thurst out of their
Ministry through usurpation of the prelates and their adherents, who take the
greater liberty, and boldness to smite their Fellow Servants, that there be
no general Assemblies to control or censure them. 8. Arminian and popish
teachers both in Kirks and schools are rather rewarded and preferred, then
censured and controlled: And therefore except We will suffer religion to
expire, and the Kirk of Christ to perish by consumption or by combustion, We
must resolve upon the necessity of general Assemblies.

Objections answered.
THE name of the Kirk belonges to the prelates, and the meeting of Our prelates
for matters of religion is the representative Kirk of this kingdom.

Acts 15. and in many other councels afterward, Presbyters had their voices,
and the spirits of the Prophets must be subject to all such as by gifts and
calling are prophets. 3. Because they have no more warrant by the laws of the
country and Acts of the Kirk to represent the Kirk, then some few citizens,
turning robbers, have to represent the corporation of the city, or some small
faction rising in a kingdom against the fundamental laws, to represent the
whole kingdom, or an impostume growing on the body, and making it diseased
and monstrous to represent the body: 4. It is manifest by the acts of
Parliament and Assemblies, that this kirk and kingdom never acknowledged any
other kirk representative since the reformation, but the general Assembly
orderly constitute of Commissionars, chosen and delegate for that effect. 2.
The Service book, and new Canons represent to all men, what conclusions we may
look for from the prelates, if they were acknowledged to be the kirk
representative: And We may safely say of them, if they were the kirk
representative, what is by all our Divines affirmed of the Roman
representative kirk, made up of the members of the Roman hierarchy, that it
cannot be the true kirk.

Where the Christian kirk lives under an unchristian Magistrate, Assemblies of
the kirk must be kept, (according to the custom of the kirk for many
years) without the consent of the Magistrate: But where the Kirk lives under
a Christian Magistrate, so that the kirk and Commonwealth make but one
corporation; the Assemblies of the kirk must depend upon the indiction of the
Prince or Magistrate, who is the head of the republic, and the principal
member of the kirk.

kirk, and when in his wisdom he thinks it convenient, he may by his
authority conveene assemblies of all sorts, whether general, provincial,
presbytries, or kirk Sessions: But the question is, whether he may prohibit or
impede them, when the necessities of the Kirk evidently call for them. 2. No
man will think that a republic, becoming a Christian Kirk, should loss any
of her civil liberties, why then shall a kirk being in her self a perfect
republicke, although of another kind, because she now lives under a Christian
Magistrate, loss her privileges, or suffer diminution in her Christian
liberty, whereof the holding of assemblies is a necessary part: 3. When the
Christian Magistrate either forbids, or in the urgent necessity of the Kirk
forbeareth to conveene Assemblies, in this point the Kirk is left to her own
liberty, and must provide for her own safety. 4. The great wisdom of Jesus
Christ, the King of the Kirk, has provided sufficient supplies for all her
necessities, and fitting remedies for all her evils, of which there be many
that cannot be helped without general Assemblies; and therefore, not only the
Christian Prince, but the pastors of the Kirk, especially when the indiction
cannot be obtained of the Prince, are bound as they will answer to Christ to
provide that the Ecclesiasticke republic receave no detriment, and to esteem
the safety of the Kirk to be the supreme law.

Although the liberty of the Kirk for holding assemblies once in the year at
least, and oftener pro re nata, be ratified in the Parliament 1592. yet the act
of Parliament 1612. acknowledges the indiction of the general assemblies to
pertain to his Majesty by the prerogative of his royal crown, and therefore
abrogates the former act.

Via citationis ac publicae authorizationis, by way of citation or compulsion
by authority; and between a voluntary meeting, Per viam admonitionis ac
requisitionis, by way of Christian admoniton or advertisement; the former is so
proper to the King by his prerogative, that it can neither be given to the
Pope, nor to any foreign power, nor without usurpation can be claimed by any
of his Majesty's Subjects. Moses only may blow the trumpet; The other is proper
to the Kirk and her office-bearers, which neither is, nor can be taken from her
by any Act of Parliament. Secondly we are to distinguish between a cumulative
or rather a positive power of calling Assemblies, and between a privative or
destructive power* The former is acknowledged by the Act of Parliament to
belong to the King, who being Custos utriusque tabulae, may, and ought, pro re
nata, call the assemblies of the Kirk, but the other cannot be meant in the act
of Parliament 1612. 1. Because it does not confer any new power, but only
declares quo jure his former power of indicting (which is only set down in the
act 1592.) does appertain to him: 2. Because in the act 1592. it was found
that the Kings power of indicting general assemblies, and that by virtue of
his prerogative royal, might consist with this native liberty of the Church,
to appoint the time and place of her necessare assemblies, in case of the Kings
not using his prerogative by appointing them: And the act of the Kings
prerogative was declared to contain no derogation to the liberties and
privileges granted by God to his Church, whereof the liberty of general
assemblies is there acknowledged to be one. 3. Because although Cujus est
nolle, ejus est and velle, it is not always reciprocal, Cujus est velle, ejus
est and nolle, and 4. because the act of Glasgow assembly, whereof the act of
Parliament is ratificatorie, acknowledges the necessity of yearlie general
assemblies.

Thirdly, We must observe the difference betwixt the indiction, or calling of
assemblies considered absolutely, and in respect of the circumstances of time
and place, Indictio simpliciter, and secundum quid, the act of Parliament
intends no further but touching the circumstancess of the place, as in what
town the assembly shall conveene, and of the time in what Month of the year,
and what day of the month, as is evident by the act of 1592. which gives this
liberty of time and place to the assembly, when the Kings Majesty or his
Commissioner does not appoint them.

FINIS.

