CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To (...) Messengers, our Sheriffs, in that part
conjunctly and severally specially constitute greeting. For So Much as in our
Parliament holden at Edinburgh upon the Twenty eighth day of June, 1633. the
three Estates of our Kingdom of Scotland being assembled, having taken to
their consideration the many blessings which this nation does enjoy under our
most wise, happy, and peaceable government, whereof each Estate is most
sensible, our Royal zeal for propagating the Gospel of Jesus Christ, our care
for providing sufficient maintenance for the Clergy, our extraordinary pains
taken for uniting the dis-jointed members of this commonwealth, and extirping
of all roots of discords, relieving the oppressed, and with so even and
fatherly a hand curing the wounds of this commonwealth, as the wisest eye can
find no blemish in the temper of all our royal actions; and lastly, the great
comfort they have by enjoying of our presence, pains taken, and expenses
disburst by Us in this our journey, Have made a free and willing offer of one
yearly extraordinary taxation of the sixteenth penny of all annual rents
which any person or persons within this our said Kingdom have freely due and
payable to them yearly or termly (their own annual rents wherein they are
adebted to others being first deduced) The first terms payment whereof is to
be and begin at the feast and term of Martinmasse in the year of God, 1634.
and so forth yearly and termly at Martinmasse and Whitsunday for the space of
six years, until the said six years and twelve terms payment thereof be full
and completely outrun. And whereas We and Our Estates have by act of the said
Parliament authorized all and sundry heretable sheriffs, stewards, bailiffs,
and bailiffs of regalities, and their deputes, and the Provests and bailiffs of
free burrows within the bounds of their jurisdictions, as likewise the clerks
within the jurisdictions where these offices are not heretable (which Clerks
have their offices ad vitam) To collect the said extraordinary taxation, and
to make payment thereof to the Collector general to be appointed by Us for
receiving of the same. Therefore, and for inbringing of the (...) terms
payment of the said extraordinary taxation, Our other letters are direct,
charging all and sundry heretable sheriffs, stewards, bailiffs, and bailiffs
of regalities, their deputes and clerks, and the Provests and bailiffs of free
burrows and their clerks, As likewise the clerks within the jurisdictions
where these offices are not heretable, That they and every one of them
dwelling by North the river of Dee within the space of fifteen days after the
said term of (...) in the year of God 163^ years, And that they and every one
of them dwelling be south the river of Dee within the space of ten days after
the said term, deliver to (...) Our collector general appointed by Us for
receiving the said extraordinary taxation, A true and justaccompt and inventar
of the whole sowmes of money due to be paid by any person within the bound of
their jurisdictions for his part of the said extraordinary taxation, and that
they give up the same count and inventar upon their oaths solemnly sworn
that the same are just and true, And that they make payment to our said
collector general, or to his deputes in his name, having his power to receive
the same of the whole moneys due to be paid to Us, conform to the said
account and inventar for the said (...) terms payment of the said
extraordinary taxation, within twenty days after the term of (...) in the
year of God, One thousand six hundred thirty (...) years, under the pain of
rebellion and putting of them to our horn. For whose relief (...)

OUR WILL IS, and we charge you straightly and command, That incontinent these
our letters seen, ye pass, and in Our name and authority command and charge
all and sundry the said annuall-rentars dwelling within that our (...) To make
payment to you our said (...) and your deputes of the said sixteenth penny of
all annual rents freely due and payable to them as for the said (...) terms
payment of the said extraordinary taxation, within twenty days next after
they be charged by you thereto, under the pain of rebellion and putting of
them to our horn. And if they failyie the said twenty days being bypast,
that ye incontinent thereafter denounce the disobeyers our rebels, and put them
to our horn, and escheat and inbring all their moveable goods to our use for
their contemption. And if need be, That ye our said (...) poynd and distrenyie
therefore, as ye shall think most expedient. According to justice, as ye will
answer to us thereupon. The which to do we commit to you conjunctly and
severally our full power, By these our letters delivering them by you duly
execute and indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under our signet at Edinburgh the twenty eight day of June, and of our
Reign the ninth year, 1633. Per actum Parliamenti*

