REASONS For which the Service Book, urged upon SCOTLAND ought to be refused.
1. IT contains diverse points and directions, which would breed a change in
some Articles of that doctrine and discipline of the Church of the said
Kingdom, which is both warranted in Scripture and approved by Parliament: and
it seems to be as well against Statewisedome as against Religion, to change
any thing either in the matter or form of the said doctrine and discipline,
without first showing both some evil or defect in the things to be changed,
and what good and benefit it is that the said Service book will afforde more
to the Edification of the Church, or true worship of Almighty God, then the
points of doctrine and discipline, which the said Service book would breed a
change of?

2. In the pretended Communion, it has all the substance and essential parts
of the Mass, and so brings in the most abominable Idolatry that ever was in
the world, in worshipping of a breaden God and makes way to the Antichrist of
Rome, to bring this Land under his bondage again, as may be seen at large by
the particulars of that Communion, where in some things, that were put out of
the Service of book of England, for smelling so strong of the Mass, are
restored, and many other things, that were never in it, are brought in, out of
the Mass book, though they labor to cover the matter. It has the
commemoration of the dead: The Table set Altar ways: The oblation of the Bread
and Wine to God before the consecration: It has the Popish consecration, that
the Lord would sanctify by his Word and by his holy Spirit, those gifts and
creatures of Bread and wine, that tbey may be unto us the body and blood of his
Son, and then repeat the words of institution to God for that purpose. It has
an oblation of it again, after it is Consecrat, the consummation by the
Priest, kneeling before the consecrat Bread and Wine. It takes away the eating
and drinking by faith, mentioned in the English Liturgy. It has the pat in
challice, two paternosters in English before the Mass, and several other
particulars, that would take a long time to rehearse and confute.

3. Though they would take away the Idolatrous mass out of it, yet it has a
number of Popish superstitions and Idolatrous ceremonies, as 29 holy days,
whereof 22 are dedicated to Saints, two of them to the Virgin Mary, the one
whereof is called, The Anuntiation of our Lady, so she is made a Lady to
Christians, not being on Earth, she must be a Lady in Heaven: Js not this to
make her a Goddess? It has 14 Fasting days, and some weeks. It has also
the humane Sacraments of Cross in Baptism, laying on of the Bishops hand in
confirmation: a Ring for the outward seall in Marriage: a sanctified Font,
holy water, holiness of Churches and Chancels: private Baptism, private
Communions, Ceremonies for Burial of the dead, and purification of women after
Childbirth, the Priest standing, kneeling, turning to the people, and
consequently from them, speaking with a loud voice, and consequently sometimes
with a low voice. People standing at Gospels, at Gloria patri, and Creeds:
their answering to the Minister, and many such like, in number above 50.
besides any religious Ornament, that the King, or his Successors shall
prescribe, and Cerem^nies that Bishops shall deteremine, or that shall be
contained in Books of Homilies to be set forth hereafter.

4. And though they would take out of the Book, both the Mass and all those
superstitious Cerem^nies yet it has a number of other material errors: as
leaving unread about a 120 Cbapters of Gods Word, and putting this reproach
upon them, that they are least edifying, and might best be spared, and reading
sundry Chapters out of Apocrypha, under the style of holy Scripture of the old
Testament It has a Letanie more like conjuring then like prayers: It has some
places out of which papists may prove, that Sacraments are absolutely necessary
to salvation, in appointing Baptism in private, with such haste, that if
necessity require, he that baptizes needs not so much as to say the Lords
Prayer, and out of which they may prove, that Sacraments give grace by their
work wrought, in saying, Children baptized, have all things necessary to
salvation, and be undoubtedly saved. It has other places out of which they may
prove mo Sacraments then two which they say every Parishoner, who is already
baptized, shall communicate and shall also receave the Sacraments, and that
Sacraments two, are generally necessary to salvation, as if there were others,
either not so general, or not so necessary. It has other places out of which
they may prove universal grace: saying, God the Father made me, and all the
world, and God the Son redeemed me, and all mankind: One Collect pretends
to beg from God, that which they dare not presume to name, and a number
others of this sort.

5. Though likewise they amend all those errors, and that there were no
material error in it at all: so they read nothing at all but Scriptures, yea,
and that all their Prayers, and Exhortations were nothing but words of
Scripture, yet such a Liturgy were not lawful to be made the only form of
Gods worship in public: for, though a formed Liturgy may be to serve for Rule
to other Churches and monuments to Posterity what forms are used or that it
may lead the way or be a direction to th^se that are beginning in the
Ministry, yet it is not by reading of Prayers and Exhortations that the Lord
appoints his servants of the Ministry to worship Him, or edify his people,
but he has giv^n gifts to them to Exhort, Pray, and Preach, which they ought
to stir up and use, and though they may in their private studies take ^e^pe of
other men's gifts yet it is not lawful for a man to the himself or be tied by
others, to a prescript form of words in prayer and exhortation, for these
reasons:

First, Such a prescript form is against the Glory of God. in stinting to him
such a daily measure of service, and so hindering the many spiritual Petitions
and praises that otherwise would be, if Gods gifts were used. Secondly, It is
against the dignity of Christ, in making his gifts needless: for, though he
send down no gifts at all, they can serve themselves with the Book, without
them. Thirdly, It quenches the holy Spirit, because he gets no employment.
Fourthly, It hinders the Edification of Gods people, they may as well stay at
home and be edified by reading the Book themselves. Fifthly, It is against the
Conversion of those that know not God: will ever a Rab-ryme of words said over
without feeling or blessing, work upon an unrenewed heart? (...) serve to
convince an Heretic, to check a profane Person, or to waken a secure Soul:
they may long go on or such a service byte upon them: yea, it fosters people in
a presumptious conceit, that they are well enough if they be present, and say
their part of service. Seventhly, It fosters. a lasie ministry, and makes way
for putting down Preaching: they need take no pains, and therefore need no
stipend: yea, they may come from the Ailhouse, or a worse place, and step to
and read their Service, without either check or preparation. Eyghtly, It may
all be done by a Boy of 7 years old, and so every private man that can read:
yea, a Turcke if he can read, may be such a Minister. Ninthly, It cannot
express the several needs of all people to God, or deal with them, according
to their several estates, that will alter otherwise then any prescript form
can be applied to. Tenthly, Jf any one stinted Liturgy had been good, or
needful, no doubt but CHRIST would have set one down to us.
6. Though a perscript form of Liturgy were lawful, yet there is no warrant
for imposing of one: for, might not able Ministers (at least) make a prescript
form to themselves, which would fit them and their people best? But if it were
lawful to impose one, then there is one in this Country already. Ought not
that rather be imposed, then any other, seeing it is already established by
Parliament, now of a long time? But now, if a new one ought to be imposed, then
it ought to come in by a lawful manner: by a general Assembly, and men
chosen to make it that are known to have the gift of prayer themselves, and
not the Mass book, translated into English, urged by Antichristian Prelates,
upon Gods people, without consent of any General Assembly or Parliament,
against the will of all men, and with no small offense and scandal to the
minds and consciences of such, as think all Liturgy unlawful, that is
either in the M^ss^ way, or inconsistent with the practice and peace of the
reformed Churches of Scotland hitherto, and against the hearts of such as know
many things in the English Liturgy and Canons, which the practice of, neither
has warrant in Gods Word, nor can bring any such addition, to the profit,
honor, or power of the King, that is able to compense the loss he may make of
his good Subjects affections, by commanding such a change, as the urged
Liturgy would bring to the peace of our Church, and respect due to the Acts of
Parliament and long custom, whereby our Church discipline, order, and
Government has been established.

PRINTED in the year of GOD, 1638.


