A SHORT RELATION Of the State of the Kirk of SCOTLAND since the Reformation of
Religion, to the present time for information, and advertisement to our
Brethren in the Kirk of England, By an hearty Well-wisher to both KINGDOMS.

Printed in the year of God, 1638.

THE Kirk of Scotland after the reformation of Religion did by degrees attain
to as great perfection both in doctrine and discipline as any other reformed
kirk in Europe. The soundness of Doctrine appears in her several
Confessions of Faith approven by all the best reformed Kirkes in foreign
parts. But because purity of Religion cannot be long preserved without that
platform of Government, which the Word of God has laid forth unto us, her
national assemblies labored diligently many years to find out the same, and
after many conferences, and public reasoning resolved upon these conclusions,
which are contained in the book of Policy, or second book of Discipline. But
shortly thus much for the present.

Each Parish being provided of a Minister (who underwent trials before his
admission to the place, and behoved to be qualified both for life, learning and
skillful government) was ruled by him and the Elders thereof, being the men of
best life and understanding in the said Parish. Twelve sixteen or twenty of
these Kirks were conjoined in a Pres-byterie or classical meeting, that did
meet weekly and exercise their gifts by course, and had the power of ordinary
jurisdiction, ordination, suspension, deprivation, excommunication, or
direction to the parish Minister to excommunicat, after the sight of the
process deduced by the particulare Eldership, collation of benefices,
visitation of kirks within their bounds. The enormitie of Ministers either in
life or doctrine were dela^ed, either by some parochinar, or neighbor
Minister. Persons of whatsoever quality in the Co^gregations who would not
obey their own Ministers and Elders were censured: If very great difficulties
come before them, or if the Pres-byterie had ado with great parties, who did
withdraw any of their number, in these and the like cases there was recourse
had to the provincial Synods.

The whole Pres-byterie of a shire or two met twice a-yeare in their Synod,
tried presbyteries, and ordered what was disficle for the presbyteries, or
might concern them al in common. If any difficulty come before them, for
which there was no kirk constitution, they referred the same to the national
Assembly, which conveened once a year, or oftener pro re nata. Where they gave
their judgment in the case preponed, and made some act and constitution for the
like cases in time coming, and other acts and constitutions needful, received
appellations, petititions, grievances, and appointed some to propone their own
grievances to the Parliament, King, Counselor Convention. This was the supreme
and highest Kirk judicatorie, to which was made the last appeal, and which was
composed of these members, his Majesty's self or a Commissionar representing
him, two or, three Ministers chosen by each Presbitery, one Gentleman an Elder
within the bounds of a presbytery, A commissioner for each regal burgh, and
two for Edinburgh: some one of these Ministers was chosen to moderat, or
preside by the voices of the whole assembly. This supreme judicatorie so
censured the omissions of the subordinat, that no vice of any person whtasoever
escaped censure, no error could sooner set out its head, but it was presently
crushed by one of these, as King JAMES confessed in diverse discourses, and
gave that reason why so few errors had appeared in the kirk of Scotland,
because they could not escape the censure of one of these Ecclesiastical
judicatories.

This form of government so comfortable to the religious, and profitable to
the kirk was insufferable to many of higher rank, who did not think this yoke
of Christ so easy as to enjoy their wished liberty without controulment, which
made a number of these, with Courtiers, and some of the Ministers who were more
loose and worldly minded suggest unto King James of ever blessed memory, that
He had not so much power in the kirk as in the commonwelth. because, when any
of these libertines committed any offense, he could not save them from kirk
censure, although his Majesty had always power to remit the civil censure
and punishment. His Majesty being then hopeful of the kingdom of England,
they added that reason, that if he obtained the Kirk of Scotland to be
governed by Bishops, as that of England was, he would thereby endeare to
himself the kirk men there, who might otherwise suspect his affection to their
state, being acquainted with another form of kirk government, if he should not
evidence it, by laboring that change. And if he should eshablish the government
of Bishops in Scotland, he might be as absolute in the kirk as in the
Commonwealth.

Thus they kindled in his Majesty's heart the des^e of an absolute power over
the kirk, being specially moved by their own particular ends. Great men for
obtaining erection of kirklands, which then appertained to the Crown, in
recompense from his Majesty, for assisting the erection of Bishops in the kirk
of Scotland. His Majesty being assured of the Bishops consent, and of
inferior kirkmen, in hope of suceeeding to the said Bishoprics, and of both
for vindicating themselves into a licentious liberty from under the awful
censure of the Kirk, was so earnest on that design, that he made it his most
special endeavor, but suppressing, the same withal, that he might obtine it
the more easily.

Where-unto he attained by degrees, which are here set down shortly in some
general heads We refer the par^iculars to a more large information, which
shall contain the degrees, course of defection, and advancement of Hierar by in
our kirk. First, his Majesty Propounded the necesatie to have Ministers voters
in Parliament, in the name of the kirk, who sitting in Parliament might be
careful, that nothing were done in prejudice of the kirk, and might carry the
desires of the whole Kirk to the Parliament for such things as were convenient
for them.

The meddling of Ministers in these civil employments was extremely disliked,
and opposed by the most judicious in this Kirk. To make the Ministers voting in
Parliament the more plausible, and to move the more easy condiscendence
thereto, they were tied to such caveats, viz. that they should propone nothing
in Parliament, Convention or Counsel, without express warrant from the kirk,
nor keep silence when any thing is proponed there to the prejudice of the
Kirk: That they should give an account of their Commission after each
Parliament to the next national Assembly, and be subject either to their
censure of deposition, incase they did transgress: To attend faithfully their
particular flocks as Ministers, in the administration of discipline, collation
of benefices, or other points of ecclesiastical government, to usurp or
acclaime no jurisdiction over their brethren. A number of such caveats being
agried upon in the assembly should have been ratified in the next parliament.
But these being suppressed, there was insert in place there of a number of
articles in favors of Bishops never mentioned nor agried upon in Assembly.
These Ministers who would have entered the Parliament House to discover that
falsehood, and protest against it, were holden out from protesting publicly,
but they delivered their protestati win write to the Estates severally.

All this time these pretended prelates labored, that there should be no
general Assembly at all to censure them for transgressing their cautions that
they might the more boldly contraveene. And whereas in these general
assemblies before their dissolving the kings Majesty or his Commissioner
being present did appoint the time and place of the next assembly. His
Majestiie being moved by these Kirkmen, who could not endure the censure of
general Assemblyes, by his own warrant first shifted the time solemnly
appointed by the last assembly to another time, and then to no certain time:
which made some of the special and ablest Ministers to keep the time last
prescribed for preserving the Kirks right. These were conveened before the
civil Judge by commandment, and sentenced with baniment although only the
Assembly should have judged, whether their meeting had been a lawful assembly
or not: some others of these were for that same cause imprisoned. The Kirkmen
presented to Bishoprics were restored to their civil estate and dignity in
Parliament, voices being obtained by consenting to erections of sundry
Abbacies, and other corrupt means in the year. 1606. Thereafter they began to
encroach upon the kirk government. First they affected to be constant
moderators; and to the end they might effectuat this point the more easily,
they procured a meetting of Ministers at Linlithgow not long after, while as
their chiefest opposites in the Ministry were either banished, imprisoned,
confyned or drawn up to Court, being sent for by his Majesty to give their
advice or best overtures for the peace of the Kirk as was pretended. That
meetting consisted of such as were sent for by his Majesty's missives without
mention of any general assemblies. At this meeting these who were styled
Bishops in respect of their benefice were made constant Moderators of the
Presbyteries, where they were resident, but were unwillingly admitted by the
presbyteries. Yet this did not content them, and therefore they accepted the
power of the high Commission, allowed them only by his Majesty's command, and
Lords of Counsel, against the act of Parliament inhibiting any judicatories,
but such as should be established by parliament.

Thereafter they procured an Assembly to be holden at Glasgow, consisting of
such as were given in note to the presbiteries, and corrupted by sowmes of
money, or hopes of preferment, or awed with the terror of the high Commission.
At this pretended assembly some power in Presbyteries, and moderation in
provincial Synods upon an assurance by word, and an implicit condition in the
Act it self for set or yearly assemblyes, was granted to those who were
styled vulgarly Bishops in respect of their benefice. But the office of a
Bishop was not re-established, which before had been damned by former
Assemblies. Yet went some of them to England, and received consecration to the
office of a Diocesian Bishop, returned and consecrat their Fellows deserted
their flocks, and governed as diocesian Bishops without respect to the
limitations of the act of the pretended assembly. And this their usurpation
they maintain by the power and authority of the high Commission.

Finding that yet they wanted means to make the people stumble, and so to be
brought under their censure, a national assembly was called 1618. Whereunto
his Majesty invited by his letters above thirty Noblemen and Gentlemen wanting
Commissions, who voted to the conclusions of that pretended assembly. Ministers
were brought in from the streets, and some were written for to assist (though
never chosen for Commissioners). These who had Commissions were neither
suffered to reason, nor vote freely. (There they concluded the five articles,
which had been formerly condemned by our Kirk as superstitious) promising then
to leave the practice of them arbitrarie. These they procured by the like
indirect means to be ratified in Parliament Anno 1621. Against the which
articles and ratification thereof in Parliament (without the desire and consent
of the assemblyes had thereunto) the most religious and judicious of the
Ministry did solemnly protest in name of the reformed Kirk of SCOTLAND,
whereunto the most part of the particular Congregations have adhered, and never
practiced these Articles. Notwithstanding hereof, the Bishops did press them
violently, and when any refused practice, there was matter for their high
Commission to work on. This their usurpation even without any pretended
warrant of corrupt assemblyes; and their cruelty increased. For they usurp
the moderation of general Assemblyes which are holden only at their pleasure,
at diocesian Synods they sit as Judges rather than simple moderators. They
ordain Ministers not in the presence, or with consent of the Congregation, but
in some remote place, and sometimes without the presence of any Minister of the
Presbytery, or bounds where the Minister is to serve. They give orders to
sundry without the charge of any flock, they suspend and deprive Ministers
usually for none conformity, not in Pres-byteries and in Synods, where-unto
they are tied, but in the Court of high Commission, wherein they fine, confyne,
or imprison Preachers or professors at their pleasure. They stay pres-byteries
from proceeding to the sentence of Excommunication. They exact subscripiton
from intrants to the Ministry unto articles framed by themselves alanerly,
and debar the best qualified for refusing to subscribe. It does not content
them to admit according to the oath contained in the Act of Parliament. They
convocate Ministers to promiscuous meetinges, and direct their mandates from
these, as from the representative Kirk of Scotland. They consecrate Bishops and
ordain Ministers according to a form not allowed by this Kirk. They debar
persons presented by lawful Patrons, because they refuse to enter by the
degree of a baptizing Deacon. They sit in Counsel, Session, and Exchequer,
contrare to the word of God and acts of the Kirk. They stay process against
Papists. They teach Popish and Arminian points of doctrine, or prefer such
as teach the like. They bring in practice of novations in the royal chapel,
not warranted so much as by any pretended acts of corrupt Assemblies. But to
relate their particular insolences and usurpations were fitter for a Volume
than for this short information.

And although at Conventions and Parliaments their oppressions were complained
upon, yet neither parliament, Convention or Counsel, would hear any plaint
against them. By direction of his Majesty's private letters the Counsel all
ways interposed their authority to all their sentences in the high
Commission, when it was craved, and assisted them so far as lay in them, which
did increase their pride, and encourage their undertaking all novelties, which
seemed good in their own eyes. Thus thinking themselves by thirty one years
experience sufficiently persuaded of the passive disposition of the people to
underly what they would impose, and of the secret Counsels assistance, they
obtained his Majesty's letters patents for an high Commission consisting of
above an hundredth persons civil and ecclesiastical promiscuously, whereof the
Bishop of any Diocie, might assume any six to himself, and there judge any
person of whatso-ever quality within, or without his diocie, whereas only
before Archbishops might held Courts of high Commission. Some of the Bishops
began to put this new Commission in practice, and and give it life and
execution.

In the year 1636 the Bishops framed a book of Canons and constitutions for
governing the kirk of Scotland. Which did quite subvert the order and form of
discipline established, contained many errors, and opened a door for many more
both in doctrinall and disciplinarie points of Religion, whenever the Kings
Majesty upon the Bishops recommendation would ordain the same. In this book
it was ordained that there should be no obloquie against these Canons, or
book of Common prayer, which was to be set forth, notwithstanding such
proceedings were illegal.

In the next year in Iunij 1637 the said Bishops caused print the book of
Common prayer, compiled by them for the use of this Kirk, which was appointed
by his Majesty's letter to be received, as the only form of Gods public
worship, where-unto all Subjects either civil or ecclesiastical behoved to
conform themselves, and the contraveeners to be condignly punished. By
proclamation each Minister was enjoined, and some charged with letters of
horning to buy two of them for the use of the Parish. Approbation from the
Lords of Counsel was given to it, when few but Bishops were present at
Counsel.

The Bishop of Edinburgh accompanied with two Arch bishops, and sundry other
Bishops (notwithstanding the mislik Ministers and Professors had for the
manner of introduction and corruptions of the same) began the use of it in the
chief Kirk of Edinburgh, upon the 23 Iulij. 1637. The people much discontented
with the former novations, could not endure so great and sudden alteration, as
imported a change both of the external form, and nature of the former public
worship, did the most part of them all at one instant rise and hinder the new
service, calling it superstitious or idolatrous. The same was also stopped in
another Kirk of Edinburgh, where it was to be read by the Bishop of Argyle.
Notwithstanding hereof they procured by act of Counsel, the pain of death
without all favor and mercy to be denounced against all those who should any
ways rail or speak against the Bishops, or any of the inferior clergy, or
against the Service book. They discharged the Ministers and Readers in
Edinburgh, (who refused the Book,) there wonted service, and interdited the
public Evening and Morning prayer, reding of Scriptures, singing of Psalms,
for a long time, and still pressing the buying and practicing of the said Book
by all Ministers. Which moved the Ministers first to petition, and next many
of the Nobility, Gentry, Burgesses, and Ministers to meet, and to supplicate
the Lords of privy Counsel against the said books of Canons and Common
prayers against the illegal and unorderlie way of introducing the same.

The general Supplication sent to His Majesty by the Duke of Lennox, (who was
then returning to England from the burial of his Mother in September, 1937.)
was answered in October only by a Proclamation, discharging the Counsel to
meddle in Kirk matters, and charging all the Supplicants to depart out of the
Town within twenty four hours, under the pain of rebellion, as also the
Iudicatories of Counsel, and Session to remove, but no ways answering the
petitions, which the Supplicants did patiently expect, notwithstanding the
matter concerned the service of God. The Supplicants gave in then a Complaint
against the Bishops, offering to prove these books contained the seeds of
Superstition and Idolatry etc. and craved justice upon the Bishops, as authors
thereof, and guilty of lies, betwixt the King and his Subjects, and many other
crimes censurable by Law.

The affection of people drawing so many together to wait for the answer to
their Supplications gave offense to the Lords of Counsel, whereupon the
Supplicants for giving them satisfaction, did with their consent choose but a
few of their number to attend the same, who after long expectation, were
answered only by a Proclamation upon the seventh of December, declaring his
Majesty not to be inclined to Popery, which the Supplicants did not allege.
They being then earnestly required, by such as had power from his Majesty, to
divide the supplications severally by shires, to restrain them only to the
books of Canons and Common prayer, and to pass from the high Commission and
the pursuit of the Bishops, the supplicants gave sundry reasons, why they
could not do so, showing also, that if the Bishops kept their boundless
usurped power, they could soon frame and bring in the like books within a
short space, and offered to prove they had all deserved exemplare punishment by
their usurpation against Law, and by their heavy tyranny unlawfully exerced on
the Subjects for many years.

All this time the Supplicants could obtain no answer to the supplications
sent to His Majesty, nor move the Counsel to receive them, and recommend them
to His Majesty not for the space of a whole Month, although they continually
attended, till they were ready to make protestation against the Counsel for
not hearing them in so important a business.

Upon the twenty one day of December, 1637. the Counsell' received the
general Supplication, and sent it to his Majesty, at which time the
Supplicants declined the Bishops from being their Judges, as being now their
parties. The answer to the particulare and general Supplications was returned
by a Proclamation made in February, 1638. Whereby his Majesty had declared
he had ordained the book of Common prayer to be compyled, that he had
approved the same as a ready mean to maintain the true Religion, and beat
out all Superstition and Idolatry, and doubted not to satisfy the minds of
all the Subjects. Heere-with charged them all to depart from these Towns where
the Counsel or Session should sit, and to abstain from all meetings any where
under the pain of Treason. A very great number of the Nobility and Gentry,
made a proestation on the market Cross of Edinburgh immediately after the
Proclamation was red, against the books of Canons, and Common prayer, high
Commission, and all other Novations introduced in the Kirk against or without
the Word of GOD and laws of the Country, and against the Bishops as their
parties, and that in no judicatorie they should sit as their Judges, till they
were tried by Law. That their whole meetings were lawful and necessare, and
that they might have their recourse to his Majesty. The Supplicants were then
forced to forbear any futher dealing with the Counsel, because against the
Law of Nature and Nations they would not admit their declinatour against the
Bishops their parties from sitting as their Judges, whereas they offered under
the pain of their lives, to prove many heinous crimes against them, and such
as were palpable to the World. as their introduction of Popery, and
Arminianisme, and their many public transgressions against Law.

The whole Nobility, Gentry, Burrowes, Ministers, and Commons, who had now so
often supplicat, and so long attended, were cast into great difficulties
considering their Religion so well warranted by Gods Word, and established by
the laws of the Kirk and Kingdom, was now begun to be changed, both in
doctrine and discipline, at the pleasure of the fourteen Bishops, and the
liberties of the Country like to be infringed by their usurpation, and that
having complained often upon them to his Majesty by his Counsel, were
answered by the former declaration approving these Popish books, their wicked
and unlawful proceedings, and condemning the Supplicants lawful and peaceable
meetings, and humble way of supplicating, as prejudicial to regal
authority, prohibiting also their necessar meetings in time coming, All these
did move the Supplicants, to bethink the renewing of the national Covenant of
this Kirk and Kingdom, (the breach whereof has been a special cause to
bring these evils upon them) to be a good mean for obtaining the Lords
wonted favor, having many examples in holy Scripture that the people of GOD
have happily renewed their Covenant with GOD.

This their Covenant contains nothing in substance but that which is
contained in the Confession of Faith, and general band formerly made for
maintenance of Religion, and acts of Parliament made at sundie times. The
Confession of Faith was approved by diverse Acts of secreet Counsel, and
general Assemblbes. It was first subscribed by King JAMES himself, and his
whole Household, after by all his Subjects, commanded by public Proclamation
to subscribe. Subscription to this Confession has been in continual
practice, when any persons suspect of Papistrie were to be tried, and likewise
masters of Schools and Colleges were ordained by act of Assemblye to cause
their Scholars subscribe when they were to pass their degrees, which has
been observed to this day.

The practice of subscribing being in continual use to this time was a
sufficient warrant for the Supplicants to subscribe the same for manifesting
their affection to GODS truth, and holding out all Popish superstition. To the
said Confession are subjoyned such acts of Parliament, as ratified the heads
thereof, and were made in favors of Religion professed in the same, Together
with a part of the general band formerly made and subscribed by authority of
King James, and his Counsel, binding all the Subjects to the defense of
Religion, and his Majesty's person, and each to other in these two causes. The
Supplicants bind themselves to forbear all approbation or practice of
corruptions and innovations brought in this Kirk, till the form of their entry
their lawfulnes, or expediencie be tried in a free general Assemblye, and to
labor by all means lawful to recover the purity and liberty of the
Gospel, as it was professed and established before the entry of the said
Novations. But withal they declare that the novations and evils contained in
their Supplications, complaints and protestations, have no warrant in the word
of God, and are contrare to the articles of the forsaid confession, and acts of
Parliament. They promise to forbear the practice and approbation of novations
already entered, till a free assembly and Parliament, because they were never
condiscended upon, but in pretended Assemblies, and upon conditions which have
not been observed, besides that protestations have been made contrare to the
same.

This Covenant was subscribed by many thousands in February last, yea, in a
very short time, by almost the whole Kingdom. It was publicly read and sworn
in most Kirks with great motion, prayers, and tears, all professing repentance
for their sins, specially for their breach of Covenant to God in suffering
the purity of his worship to be thus tainted. The desire of true knowledge
wrought by it in the hearts of the people may approve it to be a special
mean appointed by God for reclaiming this Nation to himself.

The supplicants having now both by oath and subscription manifested their
desires to be religious, and their hearts loyal and faithful to their Prince,
being now barred from dealing with the privy Counsel, who admitted the
Bishops to sit as Judges in the cause, after the Supplicants had declined them
as parties, and being desirous his Majesty should be rightly informed, that
he might give a gracious answer, they thought it expedient to write to the
Duke of Lennox, Marquess of Hamiltoun, Earl of Mortoun, as special members
of this state, because they had near access to his Majesty, not doubting
that they could not but be very sensible of these evils complained upon,
desired them to learn from his Majesty, if he would be pleased to receive a
new petition from the Supplicants immediately or if they should make their
desires known to his Majesty by their Lordships. This supplication was sent to
have been delivered if his Majesty would have received it, and also some
articles containing their just desires for their Lordships information. His
Majesty was not willing to receive the supplication, but perusing the articles
did remit his gracious answer to be delivered by the Marquess of Hamiltoun,
who was to be sent as his Majesty's Commissioner, with instructions and power
for settling the peace of this kingdom.

Upon the thirty day of May a ship arrived at the road of Leith, carrying a
great deal of munition, as Cannon, powder, with Cannon ball, muskets, Pikes,
and match for the Castle of Edinburgh, foretold and threatened by the Bishop of
S. Andrews, and his followers, who affirmed the providing that Castle, and
fortifieng the town of Leith, to be the only mean to beat down Edinburgh,
and force them to undergo any thing should be enjoined, as also to hold the
supplicants out of it etc. Upon suspicion that the putting of this munition in
the Castle would be stayed, the Lord Thesaurer did convey it quyetly to
Mussilburgh harberie and from thence to Dalkeith. The people remembering the
threatenings preceding, and considering that such provision had not been made
for these places these thirty years by past, began to suspect danger The
Supplicants suspecting that the same would be employed against the body of
the Kingdom, who were aiming at no thing but the preservation of Religion, and
the Subjects liberty, resolved without giving offense, to keep a watch lest
any of that provision should be conveyed into these places against the wonted
custom: For these are the greatest forts in the Country appointed for her
sastetie, and not for her hurt.

The Marquess of Hamilton being appointed his Majesty's Commissioner did send
a number of missives to his friends, followers and acquaintance in Scotland
from Court, to meet him at Haddingtoun, and Dalkeith, the fifth day of Iunij.
Where-upon the Papists applauding to the Service book, bragged that they with
some neutralls, and such as were indifferent in matters of Religion, would
assist the Bishops, and used all their means to conveene the greatest numbers
they could.

The Supplicants moved with the provision intended for the Castle, and these
frequent meetings of Papists and neutrals, resolved not to join with them at
their meeting with the Commissioner, because they would impudently ascribe the
most part of these whom he had required, to themselves and these neutralls,
for these and some other important reasons, the Supplicants resolved to send
out some few of their number to make their excuse to my Lord Commissioner. The
Supplicants together and the Town of Edinburgh apart by their request procured
his coming to Haly-rood-house as the most convenient place for their
attendance.

Upon the seventh of Iunij at his entry he was attended by a great number of
the Supplicants on horse, meeting him three miles from Haly-rood-house, and all
the way betwixt by many thousands on foot, amongst the which were six or seven
hundredth of the Ministry. In hope that the Commissioner would not offer to
furnish the Castle with munition during the treaty, the numbers appointed for
watching were diminished even before his entry.

The Supplicants renewed their former desires of a general Assembly and
Parliament to the Commissioner, as the only mean to redress the evils
complained upon. He acknowledged himself unable to grant either, till first
the Country were in a peaceable condition, and till they should first rescind
and render their subscribed Covenants to his Majesty. To the first it was
answered, the Cuntrie was not unpeaceable, there was many humble supplications
desiring remedy of these pressing grievances, the Supplicants could not be
moved to stay from meeting, and supplicating till they should receive a
gracious answer, and the only mean to content them was the granting of a
free general Assembly, and a Parliament, for the second, they could not draw
on themselves the guilt of perjurie before God, and gave the Commissioner
sufficient reasons of their refusal, which are extant in print.

The Commissioner excepted against that clause in the Covenant, bearing mutual
defense, as if the Supplicants had combyned themselves to maintain each other
in their own private quarrels, howbeeit the clause be clear eneugh of
itself, yet for his Majesty's satisfaction they gave in a Supplication to the
Commissioner, wherein they declared their mutual defense of each other, was
only in the defense of true Religion, of the laws and liberties of this Kirk
and Kingdom, and of his Majesty's person, and authority in preservation
thereof, wherewith his Grace acquiesed.

The Commissioner professing, that all his instructions did run on the hope
of having the Covenant surrendered, and this failing, he could do no more but
return, and deal with his Majesty for obtaining a free general Assembly and
Parliament. Withal did show that before his parting he behoved to publish his
Majesty's gracious declaration, and so first made that proclamation of
returning the Counsel, and Session to Edinburgh to make a fair way for the
other, professing also, that the other should be full of goodness, promising
only a general Assembly and parliament, and discharging all novations
introduced. Where upon a protestation was provided only to give thanks to his
Majesty, and to protest that some short and convenient time might be
appointed for holding the Assemblye and Parliament.

But the Supplicants attending the publishing of this fair and smooth
declaration, when it was proclaimed upon the fourth of Iulij they found it so
grievous, as it necessitat the Supplicants to make that protestation, which is
extant in print.

As the Supplicants were grieved at the Proclamation, so their grief was
augmented when they heard that the Lords of Counsel had approved the
Proclamation by a particular Act. For the Counsel had approved that
proclamation as satisfactorie, and so full of grace and goodness, so that it
might satisfy all men. Whereas it gave saisfaction to none of the Supplicants
desires, and did condemn their lawful meetings. Therefore they prepared a
supplication for the Commissioner, which did bear their just exceptions at the
Proclamation, and far more against the Counsels act of approbation. But the
Counsel considering better of their Act, did tear it after it was subscribed,
and before it was put upon record. The next day the Commissioner was
supplicated and earnestly desired to make some act to clear, that the
Counsels subscribing of the Kings Majesty's declaration was no approbation
thereof from them, but only a warrant for the Clerk to cause proclaim it. The
Commissioner and most of the Counselors declared the same solemnly by their
oaths, wherein the Supplicants acquiesced. My Lord Commissioner promised to
recomend their desires earnestly to his Majesty, and return at the fifth of
August next, or before the twelft at the furthest.

The Commissioner reported that it was written from England, that these of this
Nation were coming with arms toward them. The Supplicants protested before
God, it never entered in their minds to do them the least harm, but that they
carried toward them all due respect of Brethren, if they should not be first
invaded by them, which was as far from their expectation, as it was without
their deservings.

But on the contrare, whereas such of the Bishops as were chief authors of
these evils, apprehending danger from the Panick terrors of their guilty
consciences, and not from any just occasion offered by the Supplicants, when
they and their adherents, had acted the part of Incendiaries at the Court of
England betwixt the Kings Majesty and his Subjects, did thereafter retire
themselves out of Scotland, as hopeless to find a party for them there, these
who have not subscribed the Confession, excepting Counselors, not being a
considerable part, and the most part of them no favorers of Bishops. And they
bragged that his Majesty will make the people of England come in arms against
Scotland, which is neither to be expected from so just a King against his own
native subjects only supplicating for the preservation of true Religion, and
liberties of the Country established by laws, nor from so good and wise a
people with whom the Kingdom of Scotland is not more nearly conjoined by
marches, than all true Scottish hearts have been these many years past. It
should be an high and fearful dissimulation, if any such spytefull intention
were kept up against brethren, whose natural freedom and ingenuitie cannot
admit the least suspicion of any such thoughts: seeing they live in one Iie,
under one King and have entertained commerce with as little contoversie, or
debate, and with as much affection and peace, as ever was betwixt two Nations,
yea, they are so far from intention to offer wrong to the English, that they
are resolved never to suffer England to be wronged by any other Nation, so long
as their lives and means shall last, and do expect the like br^therly duty
from them, least they be found even to f^ght against God himself. How can they
have any purpose to wrong that Country, wherein so many worthy Preachers and
professors have given both by writing and suffering abundant testimony to the
cause they plead for in all the particulars thereof, which now they maintain.
My Lords of the Clergy in Scotland as they have borrowed somethings from
England, to wit, high Commission, Canons, and such other stuff not warranted
by law, as in England, thought to have repared that loan by establishing the
new Service book first here, that thereafter their confederats might thrust
out that service so long continued in England, for if it had not been for that
end, it should not have gotten so much help and approbation from thence, and
perhaps from Rome. But that current is stopped here, praised be God, and we
wish it might be also there, If some English Bishops, seeming to compassionate
their Brethren here, have a desire to further the plot, though it were upon
National Perils, and so may move the English Catholics, as persons furthest
disappointed, to undertake the recoverie of their cause, by giving their whole
assistance against Scotland, which being once suppressed, all may be settled
there, and then undoubtedly in England: The kingdom of Scotland (with
reservation of all due respect to the true English) craveth they may not only
have help from good Christians there, in case of such invasion: but also leave
to root out these Cananits, who are pricks in their sides. And this much
shortly, to give satis-faction to the better sort, that there be no mistaking
amongst brethren. Cursed be these that do not wish and pray for peace, if it
can be had without that great loss of the Gospel of peace, in the purity and
power thereof according to the word of God.

FINIS.

