A Recit^l of STOW's Collection concerning the Rise, Profi^^bleness, and
Continuance of the Court of Requests, or Court of Conscience in the City of
LONDON: Together wi^h the ACT of Parliament of 3 JACOBI Regis, for Establishing
and Confirmation of the same.
A brief Collection how the Court of Request, commonly called the Court of
Conscience in London, has been established and continued for many years past,
for the relief of poor Debtors in London, and the liberties thereof, viz.
FIrst, I find that primo Februarii, Anno 9 H. 8. an Act of Common Council was
made, that the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the same City for the time being,
should monthly assign and appoint two Aldermen, and four discreet Commoners to
be Commissioners to sit in the same Court twice a week, viz. Wednesday and
Saturday, there to hear and determine all matters brought before them between
party and party (being Citizens and Freemen of London) in all cases where the
due debt or damage did not exceed forty shillings.

This Act was to continue but for two years then next ensuing: But being found
charitable and profitable for the relief of such poor Debtors as were not able
to make present payment of their Debts, and to restrain malicious persons from
proceeding in their wilful Suits: and also to be a great ease and help to such
poor persons as had small debts owing to them, and were not able to prosecute
Suits in Law for the same elsewhere: The same Act has sithence been continued
by diverse other Acts of Common Council: and hereby (besides the said two
Aldermen monthly assigned) the number of Commissioners were increased from four
to twelve. And so by that Authority the same Court continued till the end of
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, etc.

And then diverse people, being Citizens and Freemen of London (contrary to
their Oaths formerly taken) repining at the authority of the same Court, and
not regarding the expense of any charges how great soever, so they might have
their desires upon their poor Debtors, and being often animated thereunto by
diverse Attorneys and Sollicitors (for their own particular gain) did daily
commence Suits, for such petty debts and causes against poor men (Citizens and
Freemen of London) in the high Courts at Westminster, or elsewhere out of the
said Court of Requests, to avoid the Jurisdiction of the same Court, and to bar
the said Commissioners from staying such Suits, and examining the said Causes,
and thereby caused the said poor men many times to pay six times as much
charges as their principal debts or damage did amount unto, to the undoing of
such poor men, their wives and children, and also to the filling of the Prisons
with the poor so sued: where otherwise they might have got their Debts in the
said Court of Requests, for very small charge and little trouble.

For remedy whereof, and for the strengthening and establishing the said Court,
an Act of Parliament was then made in Anno primo Jacobi Regis, that every
Citizen and Freeman of London, that had, or should have any Debts owing to him,
not amounting to forty shillings, by any Debtors (Citizens and Freemen of
London, inhabiting in London or the Liberties thereof, should or might cause
such Debtors to be warned to appear before the Commissioners of the said Court;
and that the said Commissioners, or the greater number of them, should from
time to time set down such Orders between such parties, Plaintiff and
Defendant, Creditor and Debtor touching such Debts not exceeding forty
shillings, as they should find to stand with equity and good conscience.

But sithence the making of that Act, diverse persons (intending to subvert the
good and charitable intent of the same) have taken hold of some doubtful and
ambiguous words therein, and have wrested the same for their own lucre and
gain, to the avoiding the jurisdiction of the same Court, contrary to the godly
meaning of the said Act.

For remedy whereof, and to the intent that some more full and ample provision
might be made for the further establishing and strengthening of the said Court,
and for the better relief of such poor Debtors; another Act of Parliament was
made, Anno 3 Jac. whereby the authority of the said Commissioners was much
enlarged, viz. that every Citizen and Freeman of London [ and every other
person and persons inhabiting, or that shall inhabit within the City of London,
or the Liberties thereof, being a Tradesman, Victualler, or Laboring man,]
which have or shall have any Debts owing to him or them, not amounting to forty
shillings, by any Citizen or Freeman [ or by any other person or persons (being
a Victualler, Tradesman, or Laboring man) inhabiting within the said City, or
the Liberties thereof] should or might cause such Debtors to be warned to
appear before the said Commissioners of the Court of Requests. And the said
Commissioners, or any three or more of them, shall have power to set down such
Orders between Plaintiff and Defendant, Creditor and Debtor, touching such
Debts not amounting to forty shillings, as they shall find to stand with equity
and good conscience. Also the said Commissioners, or any three, or more of
them, have power (by the said Act) to minister an Oath to the Creditor or
Debtor, and to such Witnesses a^ shall be produced on each part: And also to
commit to prison in one of the Counters, such Creditor or Debtor, as shall not
appear upon lawful Summons, or not perform such Order as the said
Commissioners, or any three or more of them shall set down. And by this last
Act, the said Court of Request is established and continued to this day; and
God grant it may so long continue to the relief of the poor, etc.

A Remedy for Recovery of small Debts, and for the Relieving of the poorer sort
in LONDON.
WHereas by virtue of diverse acts of Common Council made within the City of
London, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the same City, for the relief of poor
debtors dwelling within the said City, have accustomed monthly to assign two
Aldermen, and twelve discreet Commoners to be Commissioners and sit in the
Court of Requests, commonly called the Court of Conscience in the Guild Hall of
the same City, there to hear and determine all matters of debt not amounting to
the sum of xl. s. to be brought before them: And whereas at the Sessions of
Parliament holden at Westminster the nineteenth day of March, in the first year
of the reign of our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty that now is, for the
further relief of such poor debtors, and more perfect establishing of the said
Court, there was made and provided an Act, entitled, An act for recovery of
small debts, and relieving of poor debtors in London: And whereas since the
making of the said act, diverse persons, intending to subvert the good and
charitable intent of the same, and taking hold of some doubtful and ambiguous
words therein, do wrest the same for their own lucre and gain, to the avoiding
the Jurisdiction of the said Court, contrary to the godly meaning of the said
act.

For the remedy whereof, and to the intent that some more full and ample
provision may be made for the relief of such poor debtors, Be it enacted by
authority of this present Parliament, That every Citizen and Freemen of the
City of London, and every other person and persons inhabiting, or that shall
inhabit within the said City or the Liberties thereof, being a Tradesman,
Victualler, or a laboring man, which now have or hereafter shall have any debt
or debts owing unto him or them, not amounting to forty shillings, by any
Citizen, or by any other person or persons being a Victualler, Tradesman or
laboring man, inhabiting, or that shall inhabit within the said City or the
Liberties thereof, shall or may cause such debtor, or debtors to be warned or
summoned by the Beadle or officer of the said Court of Requests for the time
being, by writing to be left at the dwelling house of such debtor or debtors,
or by other reasonable warning or notice to be given to the said debtor or
debtors, to appear before the Commissioners of the said Court of Requests,
holden in the Guild Hall of the said City. And that the said Commissioners, or
any three of them or more, shall have power and authority by the virtue of this
act, from time to time, to set down such order or orders between such party or
parties plaintiff, and his or their such debtor or debtors defendants, touching
such debts, not amounting to the value of forty shillings, in question before
them, as they shall find to stand with equity and good conscience, All such
their order or orders to be registered in a book, as they have been accustomed,
and as well the party plaintiff, as the debtor defendant, to observe, perform
and keep the same in all points.

And that for the more due proceeding herein it shall be lawful for the same
Commissioners, or any three or more of them, to minister an oath to the
plaintiff or defendant, and also to such witnesses as shall be produced on each
party, if the same Commissioners, or any three of them or more shall so think
it meet.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any action of
debt, or action upon the case upon an Assumpsit for the recovery of any debt,
to be sued or prosecuted against any the person or persons aforesaid, in any of
the Kings Courts at Westminster or elsewhere out of the said Court of Requests,
it shall appear to the Judge or Judges of the Court, where such action shall be
sued or prosecuted, that the debt to be recovered by the plaintiff in such
action does not amount to the sum of xl s. and the defendant in such action
shall duly prove either by sufficient testimony, or by his own oath, to be
allowed by any the Judge or Judges of the said Court where such action shall
depend, that at the time of the commencing of such action, such defendant was
inhabiting and resiant in the City of London or the Liberties thereof, as
above: That in such case the said Judge or Judges shall not allow to the said
plaintiff any costs of suit, but shall award that the same plaintiff shall pay
so much ordinary costs to the party defendant, as such defendant shall justly
prove before the said Judge or Judges, it has truly cost him in defense of the
said suit.

And be it further enacted, That if any such plaintiff or creditor, defendant
or debtor after warning given him or them, in manner and form before in this
act mentioned, by the said Officer of the said Court of Requests, shall without
some just or reasonable cause of excuse, refuse to appear in the said Court
before the said Commissioners, or shall not perform such order as the said
Commissioners or any three or more of them shall set down, for or concerning
such debts as aforesaid: That then it shall be lawful for the said Officer of
the said Court, or any other of the Sergeants at Mace of the said City, by
order of the said Commissioners, or any three or more of them, to commit such
party or parties to prison, into one of the Counters of the said City, there to
remain until he or they shall perform the order of the said Commissioners in
that behalf.

Provided always that this act or any thing therein contained, shall not extend
to any debt for any rent upon any Lease of lands or tenements, or any other
real contracts, nor to any other debt that shall arise by reason of any cause
concerning Testament or Matrimony, or any thing concerning or properly
belonging to the Ecclesiastical Court, albeit the same shall be under xl s. Any
thing before contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the said act made in the
first year of the Kings Majesty's reign, be from the end of this Session of
Parliament, for and concerning any order to be made in the said Court of
Requests, after the end of this Session of Parliament utterly repealed.

There being now humbly proposed to this High Court of Parliament, A Bill (for
a Law) for the like Relief of the Poorer sort of People in the Suburb. Parishes
within the Bills of Mortality, who are very numerous, and need all the ease
from Oppression as may be afforded them: for that such Establishment will also
advance the Credit of such Poor, by encouraging Traders to trust them with
necessaries; when by this they may in a moderate and certain way obtain their
Debts as the Commissioners in their discretion do find and adjudge the Debtors
shall pay, when by the Charge of Six pence they may recover the same by the
above said means, and if the Debtor should prove obstinate (which seldom is)
the whole Charge of the said Suit to Execution amounts not to above Five
shillings, nor ever can, Provision being made in the Bill to the contrary.

And therefore the Opposers of so good and charitable a Law (as now lies at His
Majesty's Feet and the High Court of Parliament, whom God preserve) are
referred to and answered by the Act above-recited, which was made and commended
by that eminently wise Prince and his Parliaments.

So that whatever Alterations have been made in the Bill for erecting a Court
of Conscience in the City of Westminster, yet that other Bill depending in the
Honorable house of Commons for erecting a Court of Conscience in Southwark,
another in the Tower Hamblets, and a third in the remaining Parishes of
Middlesex, within the Weekly Bills of Mortality, have no more, nor other in
their Constitution, than is drawn from the long practice of the City of London,
and is exactly Conform to the Acts of Parliament, and does not meddle with
Trespasses.


