ARTICLES OF ENQVIRIE TO BE MINISTERED CONcerning the Admiraltie in the County
of SUSSEX.

Anno Dom. 1638.

LONDON, Printed by B. A. for for RICHARD MEIGNEN. 1638.

Articles of Inquiry to be ministered concerning the Admiraltie in the County
of Sussex. ANNO DOM. 1638.
1. INprimis, you shall truly present without repect of persons, all such as
have any time within these Twelve years last, profaned the Sundays in going
out to take Fish by themselves or their servants.

2 Item, you shall present all Pirates, Robbers, Murderers, Felons and thieves,
that have committed any Piracy, Robbery, Murder or Felony upon the high Seas,
or within any Fresh Water, Haven, River or treeke from all Bridges next unto
the Sea within full Sea mark, or on the Sea sands within the Jurisdiction of
the Admiralty in the C^unty of Sussex, against any of the Kings Majesty's
Subjects or any other his friends or Allies, and of their Receivers,
Counselors, Ayders or Abetters, procurers, comforters or maintainers, either
by words, victuals, Ships, Boats, Artillery, Weapon, Gunne, powder, or any
other thing, and the Receivers of their spoils and buyers of Pirates goods.

3 Item, ye shall inquire and true presentment make, of all petty Pickers,
petty Felons, and private Thieves, that breaks any cofers, fardels, packes,
Dry-fats, chests or other like, upon board any Ship or other vessel, or that
steals Oars, Anchors, apparel, tackle of any Ship or Boat, or any
Fishermens nets, hooks, pots, Fish or other things.

4 Item, ye shall inquire and true presentment make, of all those that have
taken any Ships, vessels, goods, or Prisoners upon the Sea, or elsewhere, for
any matter done upon the Sea, or any other River, fresh water, or creek within
the Kings Majesty's jurisdiction of his Highness said Admiralty in the County
of Sussex, and have not presented the same in this Court accordingly.

5 Item, ye shall truly inquire and true presentment make of the slaughter of
men, done and made by any Ship, vessel, or boat, or any apparel of them. And
of all dead bodies found that have come to their deaths upon the Sea, or in any
other Haven, River, Freshwater, or Creek, within the Jurisdiction of the
Admiralty aforesaid, which have not been presented in this Court (as it
apperteyneth) or that have had any Gold, Silver, Jewels, or other things found
upon them, and the like presentment has not been made thereof.

6 Item, ye shall inquire, and true presentment make of all Riots, unlawful
assemblyes, contempts, Concealments, routs, trespasses, frayes, outcries,
blood-sheds, maymes, quarrels, menacings, or threatenings, Weapons-drawing, or
any other act, crime, or trespass, done and committed against the Kings peace,
and Laws of this Realm, upon the Sea, or upon any other Haven, Port, place,
River, Fresh Water or Creek, within full Sea mark, or on the Seasands, or
else where from the first Bridge next unto the Sea within the Jurisdiction of
the Admiraltie in the county of Sussex in any Ship, vessel, or Boat, or upon
the Sea sands within the foresaid Jurisdiction, and true presentment make of
the offenders, their names and dwelling places.

7 Item, ye shall inquire and true presentment make of all them that have laden
or do use to lade any goods or merchandise, either upon the high Sea, or in
any Haven, Fresh Water, River or Creek, within the Jurisdiction of the
Admiraltie in the county of Sussex in or upon any strange Bottom, either
within this Realm or without, where they might have had English Ships to serve
them, according to the Laws of the Realm.

8 Item, ye shall inquire and true presentment make of all them that have
shipped, or laden any Ship, Vessel, or Boat, lying upon the high Sea, or in
any other Haven, Fresh Water, River, or Creek, from the first Bridge next unto
the Sea, within the Jurisdiction of the Admiraltie in the county of Sussex,
with Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats, Malt or any other Grain, and have transported
the same beyond the Seas contrary to the Laws of this Realm. And ye shall
truly declare the names of the Merchants, owners and masters of such Corn and
Ships with the names of the same Ships.

9 Item, ye shall truly present, all them that have laden, shipped, delivered,
carried, sold, or conveyed any Wheat, Rye, Barley, Beans, Malt, or any other
Corn, Tallow, Leather, Brass, Lead, Candles, Cheese, Butter, or other
Victuals, in any Ship, Vessel, or Boat, out of the Realm into any other
Realms, from any Fresh Water, River, Creek, or place, within the Jurisdiction
of the Admiraltie in the foresaid county of Sussex, contrary to the Laws and
customs of this Realm, whereby his Majesty has been deceived, and not paid
his just customs and Subsidy, and the common wealth hurted.

10 Item, ye shall truly inquire, and true presentment make of all them that
either by day or night, lade any Ships or Vessels in secret Creeks or places
(being no common or open Port) or that do help to convey and lead strangers
Ships into any such private Creek or place, whereby the secret Landing places
on the Seacoasts may be known to strangers.

11 Item, ye shall present all Fishmongers and all other persons, that be
fore-stallers or regraters or keepers of Markets upon the water or the shores
within the Jurisdiction of the Admiraltie in the county of Sussex, whereby the
common wealth and the Markets be abused, (That is to say) all them that
forestall, regrate and buy any manner of goods, merchandise, or Victuals upon
the water or shore as aforesaid, before it come to the place, or Port where it
is to be discharged and sold.

12 Item, ye shall inquire and truly present all that cut or let slip any Boy,
or Boyes-rope whereby any Anchor is lost, or cut any Cable, or any Tackling of
Ship, Vessel, or Boat, in any Haven, River, or Port, from all Bridges next
unto the Sea within the Jurisdiction of the Admiraltie in the county of Sussex,
whereby the Ship or Vessel drives, or otherwise is in peril of hurt taking,
or any man thereby in peril of life.

13 Item, ye shall inquire of all that send unlawful Anchors, Cable or
Tacklings, in any Ship or other Vessel to the Sea, whereby the same might
stand in danger to be cast away, and the Mariners in peril of their lives,

14 Item, ye shall inquire and truly present all manner of unlawful Nets, or
other Engines used by Fishermen, where with any manner or kind of Fish or fry
of Fish is destroyed, to the hurt of the common wealth.

15 Item, ye shall inquire and truly present all those that have dragged any
Oysters or Muscles or put them to sail at unseasonable times (that is to say)
At times prohibited by the Laws and customs of the Admiraltie, all those that
do any hurt or annoyance to the Beds and Brood of Oysters and Muscles; And
also those that have taken in severed and ^ngrossed any Oyster plots or Beds
for their private profit.

16 Item ye shall inquire and present all them that have carried any Gold or
Silver Bullion, or Plate in any Ship into any other Realm.

17 Item, ye shall inquire and present all them that have found any Ship,
Vessel, or Boat waffing on the high Seas or in any Fresh water River or
Creek, within the Jurisdiction of the Admiraltie in the county of Sussex,
without Owner, and have not presented the same to this Court.

18 Item, ye shall inquire and truly present all those that have found upon
the Sea, or any other River, Haven, Freshwater or Creek, or else where by the
Seaside, within the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty in the county of Sussex, any
Flotzon: as Tonne, Pipe, Oil, Wine, Bale, Trusts, Masts, Sails, Yards,
Timber, or any other manner of thing whatsoever it were, and have not presented
the same and them that such things possess.

19 Item, ye shall inquire and truly present all men that have found in the
bottom of the Sea, or in any other Haven, Fresh water, River, or Creek,
within the foresaid Jurisdiction any Lagon, as Anchors, Gunnes, Iron, Steel,
Tynne, Lead, or other metal or things, Gold or Silver, and have not justly
presented the same to this Court.

20 Item, ye shall inquire and duly present, all them that have maintained upon
the high Stream of any Ports, Havens, or Creeks, within the foresaid
Iurisdicton, any Mills, Wears, Kidles, and stakes or other things, to the
annoyance of the navy of this Realm, or hurt of any channel or Stream, or
that casts any Ballast or other things into the same.

21 Item, ye shall inquire of them that have taken any Fish Royal, or other
Fish accustomed to the Kings Majesty and the Office of his high Admiraltie of
England (That is to say) Whales, Ballens, Sturgeons, Grapes, Dolphin, Porpose
or any Fish that is of great growth, or taken or r^puted for a Fish Royal, and
have not presented (as it apperteyneth accordingly.)

22 Item, ye shall diligently inquire and true presentment make of all such
Mariners, Sailors, Fishermen, and all other Watermen which have at any time
before this absented and withdrawn themselue^ from any of his Majesty's Prests
or at any other time from the service for the Realm to serve in his highness
Navy, and have become retained servants with any man for that time, or have
receiue^ Pressed money, and so have gone their ways: name all such persons.

23 Item, ye shall present all idle Mariners, Sailors, Wherrimen,
Tiltboat-men, Fishermen, and Bargemen, that use any loytering, playing at Dice
and cards, and haunt Alehouses, and Tavernes with idle company, and do not
continually follow and give themselves to their Occupations, nor are content to
serve in Covenant for any reasonable wages: All such you shall by name specify
and declare.

24 Item, ye shall present all those persons that have made any Frayes, or
drawn any Blood in or upon any ship, Vessel, Barge, Boat, or elsewhere
within full Sea mark, (within the foresaid Jurisdiction of the Admiraltie) or
in any wise breaks the Kings peace, and be common pickers of Quarrels: Name
all such with their dwelling places?

25 Item ye shall present all those persons, which have thrown any Dung,
chaulke, rubbish, or noisome thing into the Sea or any sea passage, to the hurt
of the same, within the foresaid Jurisdiction* Name the offenders therein?

26 Item ye shall present all those, that have cast any Anchor into the Sea,
or River without a Boy or mark upon the same, whereby danger has or might
ensue to any Ship, Vessel, Barge, Boat, or man's body?

27 Item ye shall present all Handicrafts men, and other persons, that have
used and exercised this year past, or at any time before, any Nets, or other
Engines to take Oysters, or other Fish, and have not been Apprentice to the
craft of Fishing?

28 Item ye shall present all those that take any to service in the craft or
science of Fishing, but for term of years whereby they may have their present
knowledge and learning in the Water-craft and trade of Fishing.

29 Item ye shall present all those that have v^xed, troubled, arrested or
imprisoned a^y Mariner, Seaman, Fishermen, or other persons, for any contract,
bargain, trespass, hurt or other thing done upon the Sea in any Haven, Fresh
water, River or Creek, within the Jurisdiction of the Kings Majesty's said
Court of the Admiraltie in the county of Sussex, in any other court or place,
in contempt of the Kings Jurisdiction of his Admiraltie aforesaid. Enquire
diligently for this and specify their names, sirnames, and dwelling places?

30 Item, ye shall inquire diligently, and make true presentment of all such
customs, orders, and vsages, as have formerly been observed in the Township,
Villages, and places, in which you now severally dwell, touching the taking of
Cockles, and all those that have broken any of the said customs or Orders
within these Twelve years last past.

31 Item, ye shall present all those that have privately sold at the waters
side, or elsewhere, or carried to Market in Bags, or that sells abroad in the
countries, any small brood or fry of Fish not marketable, or that have taken
any Fish before the acustomed time of taking thereof, to the great destruction
of the increase of the Fish. Name the offenders in this point.

32 Item, ye shall diligently inquire and truly present, whether any Kidles,
Stanks, Stakes, or Wears, have bin or be newly erected, builded used, and
occupied in any Creek, Port, Haven, or other place unto the same adjoining
within the Kings Jurisdiction of the Admiraltie in the county of ^u^^ex
aforesaid, whereof let true presentment be made, declaring in what places, and
by whom the same were or are so builded, made or used, how many there be in
number: who be their owners, and what kind of young fry of Fish they do
commonly use to destroy, and when the time is to begin to fish, and to leave of
by ancient custom.

33 Item, ye shall present the maish of the unlawful Nets and other
unlawful Engines, used and occupied in the said Kidles and Wears.

34 Item, ye shall present all other ancient customs, Orders, and vsages used
and frequented in fishing trade amongst the old Fishermen of the Townships,
Villages, and places, in which you do now severally dwell, as well of the
times and seasons accustomed to Fish, the names and Assizes of your Nets, as
what kind and sort of Fish are commonly taken by your labor from time to time.

35 Item, you shall inquire diligently and make true presentment of all such
Fishermen, as have taken, sold, or brought to Markets in the high Sea, or in
any Haven, Fresh water, River, or Creek within the Kings Jurisdiction of his
Admiraltie, within the county of Sussex, below the lowest Bridges next to the
Sea, any Bace, Mullets, Soales, Plaice, Flounders, Turbuts, or other Fish of a
less assize, or scantling, then by your ancient customs, vsages, or the law
is allowed.

36 Item, you shall present all Podders that come to secret places on the
Seacoast, and there regrate the Fish whereby the common Markets are defrauded.

37 Item, you shall present all Fishermen that do sell their Fish at such
secret places of the Sea coasts, where no private Markets ought to be.

38 Item, you shall present all Cable-hangers, That is to say, Taylers,
Shoemakers, or Handicrafts-men, being not brought up in Mariners Science, that
do go, or send any of their Servants to the Sea, whereby Mariners and
Fishermen or their science should in any wise decay, or be hindered.

39 Item, you shall present all sea men, that do send any young men, or Lads
either to fishing or sailing in any vessel or boat, except there be a
sufficient number of able men therein, to guide the same without peril of
drowning, or casting away for lack of government.

40 Item, you shall present all nusances committed or done upon the Sea shore,
or upon the shore of any Haven or Creek below high water marks, whereby the
shore is any way impaired, or annoyed, or the liberty of the passage hindered.

41 Item, you shall present all other annoyances, Crimes, evil facts,
disorders or hurts, which are in any wise prejudicial or hurtful, as well to
poor Fishermens and Sea-fayring men's lives, or to the common wealth or Navy of
this Realm.

42 Of these and all other offenses, hurts and annoyances used committed or
done in any respect upon the Sea, or in any River or Creek belonging to the
same within the Jurisdiction of his Majesty's Admiraltie in the county of
Sussex, for the space of Twelve years last past, you are diligently to inquire
and true presentment make, upon the Oaths of every of you, and the same to
give up in writing under your hands.

FINIS.

