A TRVMPET TO CALL SOVLDIERS ON TO NOBLE ACTIONS.

BY The rare and new Examples of two Christian Kings and a Prince, personally
meeting in the open field of war.

Viz. Gustanus the now-present King of Sweden, against Sigismond King of
Poland, and the Prince his son, in removing of the Siege of Meve, a Town in
Poland, which was formerly gotten by the Sweden King, from the Poland.

With many memorable Stratagems and Military Occurrences attending on so
honorable a Design.

Sent out of Sweden, from a great man in the State, and written with his own
hand.

Translated out of the Latin Copy.

Printed at London for N. Bourne, and Tho: Archer. 1627.

TO THE READER.
TO see Kings and Princes sweat in Battles in these days, is so rare and
unusual, that this warlike Encounter of Gustanus the King of Sweden, with the
King of Poland and his son, is for the remarkability of it, worthy to be
engraven in Tables of brass.

The Prize for which they contended was the Town of Meve in Poland. The honor
of the Aduenturer (the King of Sweden) the more to be exalted, in that he went
out of his own Court and Country (where he lived in fullness of all content)
to trample on the fields and faces of his enemies, to beat at the Gates of the
Polacke Cities, hunting after glory in a foraigne Kingdom, in despite of all
the horrors which war ^seth to bring along with it: not regarding the petty
Towns which he fought for, and did rescue, but for the victory which shall
crown his fame to all eternity.

Here you shall see a brave young Gentleman, lay by all kingly regards of his
own life, and with eight thousand Swedens constant and fight with thirty
thousand Poles, and their adherents. The Polander having the advantage of a
hill, upon which he lay encamped and entrenched, and the Sweve spreading his
handful of an army beneath another hill.

Here you may see this young King of Sweden, to fetch off a common Soldier, in
his own person, and to kill with his own hands, that Polacke, who had set
upon the other.

By which example of the Kings valor, the subjects under him, ran out like
Lions to the Battle, and came off with a most glorious conquest: Glorious to
their King, to their Country, to themselves, and their posterity, and a
dishonor to the Enemy, being so many, to be driven out of their own fields by
so few: some reporting that of the Poles and Cossackes were slain in this
Battle 5000 at least.

And albeit the truth of this great Action challenges all Rites, Praises, and
Acclamations to be given as due rewards to the Sweden (a stranger to us) yet
let not this story (when it is read in aftertimes) be so spiteful as to bury
the Name and Memory of the English Nation, honored in the Darings and high
deeds of Colonel Muschampe (our Countryman) who behaved himself nobly,
manfully, and as a true-worthy Soldier in all this service.

Neither must we smother the high courage of that brave Bohemian Torn, whose
warlike acts in this Enterprise, are his speaking Chronicles: he being after
the King of Swedens departure home, left General in his stead.

So Noble Soldiers, wishing you all no worse fortune in your Battles, nor no
less fame, than here the Sweves have achieved, I leave you to read that
which may serve as a pattern and president for all heroical spirits to follow.

So Farewell.
A BRIEF RELATION OF the manner of the encamping and besieging of the town of
Meve by Sigismund King of Poland, and of the raising of the siege by Gustanus
King of Sweden.
AFter that the King of Sweden had possessed himself of the Palatinate of
Marienburge, and by crossing the river of Wyzel in Pommerellia, had encamped at
Dersove, where he might with most safety and advantage proceed in his Treaty of
Neutrality with those of Dantzicke: And (by some Forts cast up at Hovet and
Dersove) to be more able to keep the river favorable and secure for stopping
the attempts of the enemies.

At length the King of Poland in person, with the Prince his son,
(accompanied with a great part of the Polonian Nobility) marches with an army
consisting of Polonians, those of the Duchy of Spruce, Lituanians. Germans,
and Livonians, which he does fortify at Grudent, he passes the river, and
comes to Niewburghe, and from thence goes on. And upon the 7 of September
1626. he besieges the town of Meve, lying upon the river of Wyzel: The town
has a Castle compassed about with an old wall after the ancient manner of the
towns in Germany. The town was distant four miles from our Kings Camp, and
was defended by a garrison of 150 Swethen footmen, having 60 inhabitants joined
with them. The Polonian (being encamped on the west side) makes himself master
of a hill, where there was a village, and there he does strongly entrench
himself, especially in that place where the passage toward Meve did lie most
open, and thereafter he begins to batter the town with his ordnance.

Hereupon the King of Sweden (knowing how unable the place was to resist the
invasion of an advised and resolute enemy) did resolve of nothing else, but
that (he being shortened of time to enforce the raising of the siege) the town
would shortly be rendered: the best encouragements our King had depending
either upon an expectation of a scarcity of victuals, or other conueniences
wherewith the enemies army might be pinchod, or otherwise upon the constancy
and resolution of the soldiers besieged, who by defending themselves
valiantly, might give some hope that the siege might be prolonged: And to the
end that neither the valor of the besieged should prove their overthrow, nor
that the enemy should attribute our Kings delay to fear, it was resoluted that
the army should dislodge and encampe nearer the enemy and the town.

Upon the 11 of September our King did remove his Camp three miles nearer the
enemy, and encampeth at Falkenow, where he did prepare himself with his army
for some encounter, expecting that the enemy would offer some occasion of
service that day: Notwithstanding the enemy did not stir out of his quarter,
but only sends forth eight troops of Cossackes, who did ouerrunne the fields
about Falkenow: That day was spent in light skirmishes with Colonel Banneer,
who was appointed for the guard of the point of an Island where the two rivers
of Wyzel and Noga^t do divide themselves.

The place where our King did encampe, was betwixt the river of Wyzel and a
great bank of earth or dyke lying over against the river: for the river has a
high and large dyke artificially raised for holding out the great landfloods,
whereby about the Spring time the country people do sustain great losses: The
King did make this high bank to serve for a trench, where at the further and
of the quarter he did draw a ditch from the great dyke to the river, and
thereby did fortify his Camp.

The next day being the 12 of September, our King (upon some consultation had
of the most expedient courses for the relief of the town) thought it
necessary to make choice of some aduantageous place where he might have the
full view of all: And then he draws forth 1000 horse, with 2000 foot, and
presents himself in full sight of the enemy, having the river of Wyzel on his
left, and the great dyke on his right hand: At length (advancing forward for
the space of one half mile) he sees the enemy drawing themselves forth upon
the hill near to their trenches where (there lying a plain field betwixt both
Camps) some few horsemen did enter in skirmish. There was not far from
thence a wood of oaks having groves of hazell wood on every side, which did
stretch it self to the hill possessed by the enemy, and to the river side.

Our King being desirous to see this wood, and to try whether the place would
offer any good advantage to force a passage to the hill or to the castle, did
give order that 500 musquettiers, with 100 dragonnes should be sent forward:
The King did follow himself with 300 horse, imagining that the enemy would
march toward the wood with great forces: The King sent for Colonel
Mus^champe, whom he commanded with 200 musquettiers to put himself in the way,
if the enemy should fall down from the dyke. In the mean time the enemy had
sent the musquettiers from the hill, and there after sent five troops of
Lanciers and Cossackes: so that our footmen skirmishing with the enemy, did
force them to a retrait. It being uncertain whethar this did proceed from the
cowardice or policy of the enemy, intending to draw on our men to some
ambuscadoe.

Our foot advancing too far, were disordered by the Polonian horse, and some
were killed. Not many of these had escaped, unless our King himself (seeing
one of his soldiers put hardly to it by one of the enemy) had not advanced
himself for the rescue of his soldier, and laid the Polonian dead upon the
ground. By which rare example his cauallery was much encouraged to give on
furiously upon the enemy who were all beaten back to the hill quiting the wood
to our men, whilst both the enemy and* ours were thus in fight, Colonel
Muschampe marched on to the foot of the hill near the great dyke, where he
stayed the whole time of the service, not suffering the enemy to fall out any
more in that quarter. The King did call for the rest of the army, and that the
Cannon should be brought in the wood within the great dyke, which when the
Polonian did perceive that the King did bend directly toward the wood, he
sends down the greatest part of his Infantery from the hill another way, that
beating our men from thence he might be master thereof: And withal he sends 20
troops of Lanciers and Cossackes to lie betwixt the great dyke and the hill in
a plain field, which was done as well to hold our King environed, as
thereafter to fall upon our troops, which they thought could not be very
strong, and so by that means (as they did imagine) the war might shortly be
brought to an end.

The enemies foot did carry themselves well, striving for the Dyke with our men:
Their Cauallerie did show themselves upon the plain field, whereof some
finding the passage nothing difficult, did leap over. In the mean time our
King puts his army in order, planting his Artillery in a place where the wood
was thinnest: he commands 3 troops of horse to attend in the front near the
trench who should be ready to attend the enemy, if they should issue forth out
of that quarter. After that four troops of Lanciers had put themselves in a
gross squadron, to give a charge, they seeing our Cavallery placed in the
front, ready to abide their choke, they give backs toward the plain field,
forsaking the great Dike: It was much debated whether this place were necessary
to be maintained, and whether the whole Army should be brought there: But when
our forces being (howsoever) the weaker in numbers, were separated, and that
the soldiers were not provided of victual, nor the horsemen of forage and
other conveniences. It was concluded that the maine dessigne should not be
altered, but that the forces there employed should march back again to their
old quarter, and thereafter to go on resolutely for the relief of the
b^siedged: The enemy was to be removed at what rate soever, who was lying
strong upon the pass^ge toward ^he Town. The King gives order to his Marshall
of the field Herman Vrangle to draw forth of the Army four Companies of foot,
with two field pieces; the Marshall was to give on upon the trenches: After
that the Artillery had played once or twice, and that some of our musquettiers
(by leaping over the dike) had begun the charge, both horse and foot did retire
themselves to the hill, quiting the great Duke: As the bri^t did go, there was
killed of the enemies 150 amongst whom was the Captain Deuhoffe with some
others: So that they did retire to their Camp in that same order and way they
came: The enemy looking on, without adventuring further: There was some of ours
wounded, and about 20. killed.

The day following, our King (causing himself to be transported in a little
Boat) did take a full view of the Islands of the river of Wizel, and of their
approaches toward the Town, to the end that (before he should attempt any
further) he might know the best advantages, how to enforce the raising of the
siedge, or the most toylesome difficulties to impeach the same.

The King himself approaches to the foot of the hill, having placed (...)
musquettiers upon ^he (...) Duke. He gives 600. musquettiers to the Count of
Torn, and 500. Sweden foot to Colonel Mustchamp: The one being commanded to
stay upon the right hand, at the foot of the hill: The other at the left hand:
both were ordered that they should press (by the steepness^ and precipice of
the hill) to keep their men in greater safety, from the violence of the
enemies sh^t. The King commanded that neither of them should st^rre without
direction or sign given: There was at the side of the VV^od, a great precipice
or steepness planted with little Trees which covered those that we^e lying in
ambuscade, and h^lped also those that were to give the charge. There was a
road or pathway leading toward the hill, scarce passable for horsemen,
which pathway did lie betwixt Colonel Mustchampe, and the Count of Torn.
Colonel Mustchamp was commanded to enter this path on horseback, with some
of his musquettiers, that he might learn what countenance the enemy kept on
the hill, and to es^ye the best means he could of beating them from thence.
As the Colonel does advance himself, he is charged with a Troop of German
horse, and beaten back to the road way: Some musquettiers strayning to
desengage their Colonel being killed, and some taken prisoners, the remainder
did withdraw themselves the same way they went. But the nature of the place
and passage being discovered, the Count of Torn and Colonel Mustchampe do
charge resolutely, and partly breaking through the road way, and partly by the
precipice of the hill at length they gain the top thereof: In the mean time,
the enemy draws all his forces together, the foot^-men from the qua^ter and
forts, the horsemen from the field, and charge our men forcibly to beat them
from the top of the hill: The King and Prince of Poland being spectators: it
was long foughten with much courage, eagerness and noise: The Germain
hor^e-men being seconded by their foot and the Hayduckes, charge Mustchampe
but were repulsed with great loss.

In the mean time out men lying discovered are beatten with their Canon from
their forts, neither was there any thing left unattempted, to make all our
enterprise in-effectuall. At length, after two hours fighting, our men
defending themselves valiantly, and gayning ground of the enemy, some Troops
of the Polonian horse, Lanciers, Cassackes and Germans mixed together (partly
being stricken with shame) partly being animated with the presence of the King
and Prince, promising rewards to the best deservers, did furiously and in great
disorder charge the Count of Torn, who (perceiving what they intended) did
make his Musquettiers fall low on their knees, that nothing could be seen but
only their heads, whereby (the violence of the horsemen being deluded) he
stood firm: They being disabled to follow their point in regard of the
precipice of the hill, scarce favorable to a charge on horseback, and there
he stays, their first heat with his muskets lying so low; and when the
Cavallery did begin to wheel about, they were shrewdly galled with our
musquettiers.

When the enemy had thus charged our men with great numbers, the last rushed
forward so violently upon the first, that neither o^ them was able to rejoyne
their troops together, where by many in that disorder were kil^ed, and the
hill filled with dead men and horses.

Colonel Mustchampe who did lie upon the one side of this pathway, did much
mischief to the enemy, by beating them in flanque with his musquettiers: So
that there was such a faintnes and dejection of spirits amongst them, that the
Lanciers did throw down to the ground, three of their Cornets at the feet of
our soldiers, and basely did forsake them.

Afterward, all was in disorder in the enemies Camp, neither (as it was there
after known) could they resolve what course to take. The Infantecy did
altogether quite their trenches and fo^ts, lying against the Town without any
resolution to adventure further.

Hereupon the King of Poland dispairing to be able any longer to defend the
Hill, Forts, or his Camp; and being zealous that his Cannon might be in some
hazard to be lost, if he should give any further time to approach nearer him;
and seeing our men fortifying themse^ues upon the great Dike, whereby he
might perceive they were resolved to go on.

Upon the 14. of September, the Ea^le of Torn comes to the King with three
Regiments of German foot, which had served in Live-land.

The Army being reinforced with this new supply, togeth^r with a Regiment of
Swedens, under the Conduct of Colonel Kodwin, a bridge being laid over the
^^z^l, not far from our Camp; and a strong Fort b^^^ded at the end of the
bridge, where there was a competent garrison placed, to secure the passage unto
the Island for the soldiers, and the victuals of the Camp, which were left
behind: The King upon the 19. of September dislodgeth, and encampeth near the
enemy, about 300 paces from the place which the enemy ha^ kept strongly
fortified betwixt the Camps. Our King did resolve that he had gained enough
that day, to have put his new camp in defense, by making the great Dike less
passable, framing it after the manner of a rolling Trench, whereby the great
bank and new trench being enclosed, the King might as well be less subject to
any sudden surprise or assault of the enemy, as more able to put his
determined resolutions in execution by assailing the enemy, with the more
security of his own men.

The King sends the Earl of Torn with 400 German Musquettiers, to the end
he ^ld possess and make good that part of the Dike, which did streach it self
from the Camp to the hill.

He sends Colonel Mustchampe with 300. Sweden foot for the defense of the
Town of Groenhoffe, which did lie above the Camp, over against the plain
field. The enemy (seeing us in camp so near them) draws his whole forces
upon the hill, he plants his artillery, and played upon our men, but all in
vain, the bullets either over-flying the Camp, as being shot from an high
hill or did fall short and beat upon the great Dike, without any hurt done.

In end, the enemy sends forth a great number of Cossackes, Lanc^ers, and
German troops of horse, with his whole Infanttry from the hill, intending
thereby not only to beat the Count of Torn from the great bark, but also
Colonel Mustchampe from the defense of Groenho^^e, and there after to give a
general assault upon our quarter: But every where their labor was lost by
the courage of our soldiers, defending themselves valiantly and pressing upon
the enemy with much animos^ty and resolution.

Our Artillery in lik^ manner, which was planted ^eere the trench, did so beat
upon the enemy, that the plain field lying over against the Dike, was spread
over with dead men and horses: At length toward night, the Poloni^^ did
withdraw himself to his trenches on the hill: The day following was quiet and
nothing attempted on eythe^ side.

^ur King (having buil^ed five forts) made himself master of the great Dike
and plain field, and did prepare his passage to the h^ll, where the enemies
was entrenched, to the end he might stop the enemies sallies from the hill,
whereby they might give any annoyance to his Camp^. The enemies in like manner
(that he might more freely domineer with his Canon along the plain field, and
be more firmly fortified against all our enterprises; and also that be might
be longer able to hold out the hill) did erect two forts, one upon the right
hand of the way, the other on the left hand: In the one he planted 3 pieces of
great Ordnance: in the other, some lesser pieces, whereby he might stop our
coming up the Hill.

The 21. September, our King consulteth with his Council of War, how the
enemy might be beaten from the hill* and how a passage might be opened toward
the Town: And seeing his Camp (as well by situation as industry) defensible,
and safe against all hostill invasion; and (the sallies of the enemies being
cut off)(...) to the foot of the h^ll was not very dangerous: He leaves his
Marshall of the field, with the greatest part of the Army in the Camp; and
goes in person, entering the Wood with one Regiment and a half of foot, some
troops of horse, and 1500 choice musquettiers.

He lays the foot and horse troop, in ambuscade amongst the trees, that
they might be as safe from the voll^es of the enemies shot, holding the top
and length of the hill, where diverse fortes were erected with field pieces in
them, as that they might be ready to receive and repel the enemy, if our men
employed in service should be beaten back from thence.

He thought it not safe to stay any longer, but did cause to draw out his
Ordnance, with a great deal of difficulty and confused have. He did give order
to burn the Village where he had been entrenched and fortified upon the
hill. Our soldiers did enter the trenches and forts. The King and Prince of
Poland looking upon them. Our King was upon the hill, and would have
willingly (in the confused d^straction of the enemy) have attempted upon the
Artillery; but finding that the passage were too straight, that he could not
(to the terror of the enemy) charge them with his front enlarged; and finding
the enemy vnpe^^^ed with bagage, betwixt the trenches and the camp: the hill
being forsaken, the forts in his own power: three of the enemies Comets left
as pledges of their confusion; and above all the Town and Castle of Mewe
relieved, which was the cause of this expedition. The King did resolve he had
gained honor enough for that day; and that the way was prepared to enforce the
enemy to abandon his Camp, if he should stay longer: Therefore he thought it
not fit (the passages not being fully known, betwixt the trenches and the
Camp) to expose a certain Victory in the valor of his soldiers to an
uncertain event.

The enemy being perplexed what to do, keeps himself close within his Camp.
To forsake it, it was to fly away, which was shameful. To remain longer, he
could expect nothing but further mischief: Because our Army (commanded the
hill) could beat them out of their Camp only with our Ordnance. The enemy
passed over that night with great astonishment, standing in order of battle*
expecting that our Army should have fallen upon their Camp, as it was
after-wards known by some Prisoners: At length about the first VVatch of the
night, they sent away their bagage.

The King himself by the dawning of the day, marches away with great silence,
without sign of Trumpet, Drum, or phipher.

The Troops were seen by our Sentinells at the Monastery of Weul^^, lying a
mile and a half from our Camp.

The King of Poland had left some Cossackes to observe if our men should
attempt any thing upon their confused retreat: And afterward (when they
should understand that the King was any thing advanced in his journey) they had
order to burn their quarter.

This was the issue of the besiedged and relieved town of Mewe.

Our King knowing that the enemy was gone, entered the Town and Castle,
extolling the constancy, fidelity, and merit of the Soldiers, and the
inhabitants with much praise, thankes-giving and revvard, and presently did
give order, that a day of public thankes-giving to God, should be solemnly
kept for this Victory.

Thereafter he changed the Garrison with fresh soldiers, and furnished the
Castle and Town with munition and Victuals, and stayed in his Camp some few
days, until he might discover whether the enemy would bend his course, or
what he would attempt further.

In these three days ^^rvice, there was killed of ours about 30. The loss of
the enemy cannot be certainly related, by common fame and discourse, with
some prisoners, there is above 500. killed and many wounded, who are sent to
the further parts of Spruce.

It is credible that the loss has been g^eater, since it is not very
probable that the King would have abandoned the si^dge of a little Town sca^se
well fortified, with so much dim^nution of his own h^nour, and that of the
Polonian Nobility, unless the loss had bin greater.

Here it must also be remembered, that the enemy had cast a bridge over the
River of Wizel a half mile above Mewe, whereby the inroades upon the
Territories of Stum and M^rnenbourg might be less difficult. And that the
P^lonian Soldiers, who ranged up and down through the Bishopric of
Vlormditt might have free passage to the Camp.

The enemy had committed the charge of this bridg^ (which was made o^ Ships
that carried Corn up and down the River) to 300. Cossackes. But after the
^arting of the Army (whether by neglect or fear) the b^i^ge was abandoned: The
King did send a Cap^ayne with some Musquettiers, who ^aue brought away the
Ships with all their furniture and provision, whereof the Army has made very
good use.

FINIS.

