AN ESSAY ON Ecclesiastical Authority:

In which the Pretense of an Independent Power in the CHURCH, to a Divine Right
in the Election of Bishops;

To the Invalidity of Lay Deprivations;

To the Inseparable Relation of a BISHOP to his See;

To an Obligation of continuing Communion with the Deprived Bishops;

And several other Things relating to the Nonjurors Separation from our CHURCH,
are particularly and impartially Examined.

By JOHN TURNER, D. D. Vicar of Greenwich, and Chaplain to His Royal Highness
the PRINCE.

LONDON: Printed for JOHN WYAT, at the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1617.

AN ESSAY ON Ecclesiastical Authority.
THE many irregular and dangerous Practices of the Romish Clergy under the
Pretense of an exempt Jurisdiction, and an Authority Independent on the Civil
Power; caused the Governors of our CHURCH to take that Doctrine into their
serious Consideration, at the Beginning of our REFORMATION; and in our XXXVIIth
Article they have determined and settled it thus: That the Queen's Majesty, for
this was done in Queen Elizabeth's Time, has the chief Power in this Realm of
England, and all other her Dominions; unto whom the chief Government of all
Estates of this Realm whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all Causes
does appertain. And then to avoid Offense, and prevent Misconstructions, as the
Queen had declared in her Injunctions, so the said Article, thus explains the
forementioned Doctrine. We give not hereby to our Princes the ministering either
of God's Word, or of the Sacraments; but only that Prerogative which we see to
have been given always to all godly Princes in Holy Scripture by God Himself;
that they should rule all Estates and Degrees of Men committed to their Charge
by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal. And this was so confirmed
by the Canons in the Beginning of King James I's Reign, that if the Authority
of our CHURCH might be admitted to be decisive in this Matter, we see plainly
what that was, and is. But the giving so much Jurisdiction to Princes over
Ecclesiastical Persons in Ecclesiastical Causes and Affairs, is complained of
by some among us as an Encroachment, and a dangerous Compliance; an enslaving
Principle, which controuls the Powers of the CHURCH, that, as they say, ought
to be exempt and Independent.

THIS Point then, not being successfully enough determined by the declared
Judgment of our CHURCH in Her Articles and Canons; must, it seems, be brought
under a farther Examination. And it must be considered not only as a Subject of
Debate and Speculation, but, at this Time, it is become a Matter of the
greatest Moment and Importance to our Peace both in CHURCH and STATE. All the
Enemies of the late happy REVOLUTION, are gone into the Defense of that
Independent Authority; to say no more. And all those other Notions and Opinions
whereby the Non-jurors would vindicate their Separation from the Communion of
our CHURCH, are built upon this Foundation. And it will not be easy to make
them sensible, that this their Separation is Unjustifiable and Wrong, if this
Claim be allowed good. On the other Hand, if it can be proved, That the CHURCH
has no such exempt, and independent Authority, as is pretended; we shall strike
at the very Root of their untoward Principles and Proceedings. In our Inquiry
into this Matter,

1. THE first Thing that occurs to our Observation, is, That the STATE is found
in the actual and full Possession of Authority over all their Subjects, and in
all Affairs whatsoever, antecedently to the CHURCH'S Claim. We are not born
Priests, as we are born Subjects; but are made such upon a sufficient Maturity
of Age; and are therefore to consider what Share of Authority the Prince loses
over any of his Subjects upon their Admission into Holy Orders; and what is the
Foundation of the pretended Change. And as to this, we shall soon be sensible,

2. THAT there is Nothing in natural Religion to be pleaded as the Ground of
such an Exemption or Independency. For according to that, Kings had a Right to
the Priesthood also, and were the undoubted supreme Judges and Determiners of
all Affairs. Melchisedech and Jethro, we all know, were such. Nor does it
appear, that there ever was any Separation of the Ecclesiastical Authority from
the Temporal, before the Mosaic Dispensation, which was a Type of the
Evangelical; and consequently no Room for any Debates or Disputes of this
Nature in the first Natural State of Mankind. It must therefore all be laid in
Divine Revelation and Institution. From whence I think it plainly follows,

3. Thirdly. THAT if the CHURCH has any Right to such an exempt and independent
Authority as is now pleaded for, it must be founded on that Divine Commission
which CHRIST gave to his Apostles and their Successors, and by them to his
CHURCH to the End of the World. The Way then to know what there is to be said
for such a Claim, is, to consider well the Contents of that Commission which
must be looked on as the great Charter of the Gospel, upon which all Her
appropriated Rights and Privileges, Her Authority and Powers, Her Immunities
and Franchises are built. The Substance then of CHRIST'S Commission to his
Apostles was, That they should make Proselytes of all Nations Matthew. xxviii.
19, 20. Joh. xx. 21, etc.
by Preaching God's Word; that they should Baptize them, and by that Sacrament
admit them into Christ's Church; that they should afterward instruct and train
them up in the Pure Christian Worship and Holiness, and in that Worship
commemorate CHRIST'S Death in the Eucharist, according to his Institution; bind
Offenders, loose Penitents, and by Ordaining Ministers make an effectual
Provision for the perpetual Continuance of this Ministry which CHRIST has thus
committed to 'em, to the End of the World, according to his Appointment. So
that Preaching and Performing Divine Service in the Worship of GOD;
Administering the Sacraments; inflicting Censures, and passing Sentence upon
enormous Sinners; Absolving the Penitent from such Sentences and Ordaining
Ministers. These and whatever other Particulars of Ministration in the Divine
Offices of Religion, are by the special Commission of CHRIST in any Part of it
appropriated to the Spiritual Governors of the CHURCH, become thereby, the
Peculiar sacred Powers of the Christian Priesthood. Concerning all which it is
allowed and granted, 1. That the CHURCH does not derive Her Authority to the
Execution of them from any Temporal Powers or Potentates; but from JESUS CHRIST
alone by the forementioned Divine Commission. 2. That as they were not
originally derived from, so neither can they be taken away, or made to cease by
any secular Authorities whatsoever. 3. That neither can any secular Powers of
themselves execute these Divine and Holy Offices. The very End and Reason of
taking these Holy Offices out of the Hands of the secular Powers, who before
had executed them, and of vesting them in a distinct Set or Order of Men, still
requires that they should continue so separated. And consequently, all the
Powers specified in CHRIST'S Commission, are the limited and appropriated
Powers, which belong to the Spiritual Governors of the CHURCH alone; and which
no Temporal Potentates can take upon them to execute, without breaking in upon
CHRIST'S Institution, and subverting the very Ends and Reasons of their
original Separation. And therefore, if no more had been intended by the
Independent Authority of CHRIST'S Church in the Execution of their Priestly
Office than this, That they who derived not this Authority from the State,
could not have it taken away by them; and that the secular Powers are by
CHRIST'S Commission excluded from the Performance of all the Divine Offices
specified in it: The Church of England has declared Her Judgment in Favor of
such a Claim; and we should have entered into no Disputes against it.

BUT then, he who himself has no Authority to baptize, may yet be a competent
Judge of the Care and Fidelity of those who do. And he who has no Power to
administer the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, or to ordain Ministers, may yet
be capable of taking Cognizance of the Neglects, and of the Miscarriages
committed in those Performances. So that it is one Thing to minister in the
Holy Offices and Service of the Church; and another to have Rule and
Government, and a judicial Cognizance of the Care, Fidelity, and good or evil
Conduct of those who do. This leads me to consider,

2. THAT besides the Ministration in Holy Offices, the Power of the Keys and
Ordination, there are other Powers and Authorities claimed by the Church: Such
are all the General Powers of Government, of Assembling in Synods, of
Consulting one another on important Occasions, of making Laws or Canons; of
appointing to particular Churches or Districts their proper Pastors; of
determining religious Debates and Disputes; of prescribing Rules of Order and
Discipline, etc. All which, as not being expressly mentioned in, or
appropriated by CHRIST'S Commission as the other divine Offices of Religion
are, can belong to the Church only of Common-Right, as it is a Society; and as
such Acts of Government are the constant and common Rights of every Established
Community.

A SOCIETY cannot subsist without Government; as therefore the Christian Church
is by CHRIST'S Commission constituted a spiritual Society there is no Doubt,
but that it thereby obtains a certain Right to the Exercise of all such
Authority in Government as other Established Communities are usually possessed
of.

THE Question then is, not whether the Church has a Right to the Exercise of
such Authority, for it is undeniably evident that she has: But what is the
Foundation of that Authority, and how far it will hold good to the Exclusion of
the secular Powers. Now unless it could be made appear that these Powers of
Government are by CHRIST'S Commission specified and appropriated to the
Priesthood as the divine Offices of its Holy Ministration are: There can be no
other Reason or Ground of this Claim than that of common Right and Necessity to
the Support of this spiritual Community and to the Attainment of the great End
for which it was ordained.

WE see therefore that in this Controversy a great regard is to be had to the
Distinction here made between the divine Offices of the Christian Priesthood
and the more General Powers of Government. The former are allowed to be
appropriated to the Orders of the Bishops and Clergy only. The latter are those
Powers and Authorities which our present Controversies and Dissentions are
about. And if I am right in Stating the CHURCH'S Claim and Title thereto, I
shall certainly be Right in the Determination of this dispute. So far as they
are Necessary to the due Execution of CHRIST'S Commission, the CHURCH has
undoubted Right thereto. And if Dr. Hickes and his Friends had gone no farther
in claiming a Right to the Exercise of Ecclesiastical Authority Independently
on the secular than as that shall be found necessary to the Propagation and
Establishment of Christianity; I am apt to think that all Christians would have
come into it. I for my Part, can make no Scruple to affirm, that by Virtue of
Christ's Commission to his Apostles and their Successors to Preach and Propagate
the Gospel, and to gather Him a Church thereby: They have an undoubted Right
and Authority to do every Thing in the Exercise of their Spiritual Offices,
which shall be found necessary to the Support of the Christian Faith and
CHURCH. But if Men will not content themselves with this, without going
farther; if they will claim an Universal Inherent Authority of doing every
Thing in Matters of Religion, if they please, by themselves; and to be the sole
Proper and Rightful Judges of all Ecclesiastical Causes, and Matters; with a
divine Right to exclude the Secular Authority at their Pleasure, and to make
Null and Invalid every Thing that is done by the Temporal Powers in these
Affairs without the Clergy's Approbation and Consent: This I think a most
Unreasonable and Unrighteous Demand; and I have these six Things to plead
against it.

I. SUCH a Claim seems contrary to the very Nature of the Powers that we are
now reasoning about. They are not the peculiar appropriated Offices of the
Priesthood, such as Ministering in the Divine Service, administering Sacraments,
etc. which we have already owned Kings and Princes to be excluded from; But
they are the CHURCH'S common Powers of Government which belong to Her only of
common Right, and to the General Exercise of which other Societies are entitled
as well as the CHURCH. Now these general Powers of Government are no otherwise
to be exercised exclusive of and Independently on the Secular Authority, than
the Necessity of Affairs requires them so to be. And that Authority which has
no other Reason or Foundation then its Usefulness or Necessity as a Means to
the attaining to such an End, certainly loses a great deal of its Force and
Obligation in all those Instances in which it ceases to be useful or necessary,
and where the End may be as effectually obtained without it. And this is the
true Reason of all that Difference which is observable in History in the
Practice of the Bishops and Governors of the Christian Church in the Exercise
of these very Powers under Heathen and under Christian Emperors and Governors.
When their Heathen Governors cast them off and left them to themselves, they
then managed all Things by themselves, the Necessity of their Affairs requiring
that they should so do. But when the Christian Emperors took the Affairs of
Christians into their Cognizance, and made Laws, and passed Sentences, and
executed Judgment therein: The Christian Bishops and Clergy unanimously gave
Way, and very readily submitted thereto.

IT may possibly have some weight with some of my Readers to observe, that even
Dr. Hickes in the Collection of Papers lately Published by his Friends, and
which were Written and Published on purpose to carry up the Powers of the
Priesthood, and an Independent Authority as high as possibly he could: Yet
comes in to this Distinction of the CHURCH'S Communicable and Uncommunicable
Authority. Whatever indirect Ends he might have to serve in his Endeavors to
Support the Spiritual Authority of the Nonjuring Deprived Bishops: Yet he was
too well acquainted with Primitive Church History to think, that all the
Christian Churches Authorities are alike exclusive of the Secular Powers. And
accordingly as I find him quoted p. 27. he allows; that the Church on valuable
Considerations may in some Cases modify the Exercise of Her Just Power, and
make Grants and Concessions to the State. Pray mind that, for if Princes and
States may on any Considerations be admitted to a share of the Churches Just
Power: Then it is plain and evident that in such Cases it is not JESUS CHRIST,
that by his Divine Laws excludes them, but these Churchmen themselves. But let
us see what Instances of this kind he mentions, and they are such as these;
That the CHURCH shall consent not to call Synods without acquainting the King,
and obtaining his Leave if Possible; not to make Foreigners, or Clerks of a
Foreign Allegiance Bishops; to make no Bishops but what shall be supposed
worthy of the Kings Nomination; to give the Builders and Endowers of Churches
the Honor and Privelege of presenting worthy Clerks to supply the Cure of
them; and Noblemen to Erect Chapels, and to choose Chaplains for their
Families. There are then it seems Cases and Considerations, in and upon which,
notwithstanding all the sacred Powers of the CHURCH, Kings may have Authority,
in calling Synods, in Nominating Bishops, and in the Presentation of Clerks to
the Cure of Souls. Here I would ask in what Cases, and upon what Considerations
any of these Kings or Nobles may be allowed to administer Sacraments and Ordain
Ministers? I know that this will not be allowed at all by any Means, or on any
Considerations whatever. It seems then, that in Dr. Hickes's own Opinion,
although some of the Powers of the CHURCH are Exclusive and Uncommunicable to Lay
Hands: Yet others they may be admitted to a share of, if the Consideration be
but good, and the Authority not abused. Now I would willingly know, what is the
true Foundation of this Difference, which Dr. Hickes himself admits of? I would
have it openly declared, whether CHRIST'S Commission has Appropriated these
Powers to the CHURCH which may be so modified, and has Excluded Secular
Potentates from them, or on what foot that Modifications stands. And at the
same time let them add, why the Influence of the Civil Magistrates Authority to
preserve the Peace and Safety, and good Order of a Kingdom, may not be allowed
as just a Consideration and as good a Reason of his Exercising Authority in
such affairs, as any munificent act of Beneficence or Protection?

BUT to bring this Debate with Dr. Hickes and his Friends to a Short Issue;
Either JESUS CHRIST by his Gospel, and his Divine Commission to his Apostles
has Appropriated all Ecclesiastical Authoritty to the Clergy only, and Excluded
the Secular Power from it, or he has not. If he has, and the Certainty of that
be made appear, then they ought on no Consideration whatsoever to be allowed
any Share therein, because that is acting contrary to CHRIST'S Commission and
Laws. But if he has not, then the CHURCH has no Divine Right at all of
Excluding their Authority and acting Independently. The Consequence of this is
plain and undeniable. For to Exclude the Jurisdiction of the Secular Powers
where CHRIST by his Divine Commission has not Excluded them, is to do it
without Reason and contrary to Justice.

But that which Dr. Hickes and his Friends lay the greatest Stress upon is; 1.
The Nature of the Society; and, 2. The Powers by which it Subsisted in the
Beginning.

1. As to the Nature of the Society they tell us that it is CHRIST'S Spiritual
Kingdom or Vindication Non-Juring Church. prop. I. II.
Incorporation, which had a Being Independent on the Secular Power for above
three hundred years before the Government of it was interwoven with the secular
Government and Laws. I grant all this to be true; but because there seems to be
great Stress laid on this Independency so much talked of; I desire that it may
be considered what it means. For in a Christian Country, the CHURCH and STATE
are not two Distinct Societies like the Kingdoms of France and Spain, made up
of different People and Subjects inhabiting different Territories: but are One
and the same Body of Men considered in two different Relations and Capacities.
The same Persons are at once Members of the Church and Subjects of the State,
and so constitute but One Society of Men under two capacities of Government.

AND Even in this twofold Capacity their Affairs, their Duties and Obligations
are so mixed and interwoven, that in a Christian State it is scarce Practicable
for the Church to Govern and Manage her spiritual Affairs without influencing
and affecting the State. Nay in the Extent of spiritual Power now claimed, it
is absolutely impossible so to do. So that this Contest for an Independent
Authority in the Government of the Church, is nothing else but a Struggle to
take the Management of Religion and all religious Affairs out of the Hands of
Kings and Princes. And if they once do this, the STATE must be brought to
depend upon the CHURCH, because the CHURCH will be independent on the STATE;
and so it would be in a very fine Condition. In short, while such a Power is
contended for, the CHURCH and STATE must inevitably clash and disagree, and
there is no Way to consult and secure the public Peace, without a
Subordination of the one to the other in their Administration of Government.

AND as to the CHURCH'S having a Being independent on the secular Power for the
first three hundred Years: it proceeded only from the Necessity of her
Circumstances and Affairs at that Time, that She acted independently on the
secular Potentates. It was when Christianity was in a State of Persecution, and
the secular Powers refused to intermeddle in Her Government. Then, it is very
true, that She subsisted of Herself; and this proves undeniably, that the
CHURCH has a Capacity so to do when Need requires. But it does not prove, that
it is a desirable Thing for Her to be in such a Case; or that She has a Divine
Right and Power to exclude the secular Potentates, if they think fit to
interpose their Authority. But I shall speak more particularly to this
hereafter. I am now only showing what weak and insufficient Reasons Men allege
for an Independent Authority in the Church; of which, I think, this is a very
great Instance; that because She did once so subsist out of Necessity,
therefore She must always do so, out of Choice, or has a Divine Right so to do,
when ever She pleases.

2. BUT they tell us, That this Spiritual Kingdom of CHRIST, is also a Royal
Priesthood, a Kingdom of Priests, the chief Priests of which are Regal Priests,
or Kings, as well as 1 Pet. ii. 9. Prop. 18. 21.
Priests unto God. That their Government in their several Dioceses or
Districts, is Monarchical; and the Bishops are therein the supreme
Representatives of CHRIST, his Legates, or Vicegerents, in regard to whom,
Christian Emperors and Kings are their spiritual Subjects and Inferiors, and
ought to be obedient to them. All these high Titles, and big Words, are
evidently intended to possess the People with a Notion, that Kings and Princes
must have Nothing to do with Bishops, unless it be when the CHURCH, in
Consideration of some valuable Advantages and temporal Endowments, will modify
Her Power, and indulge them in a Share in Government on their good Behavior.
In any other Case, it is sacred; favete linguis, ite Profani, say not a Word of
Jurisdiction or Authority; be gone, it is the Ark of GOD, touch it not, lest
you die. Now in answer to all these high Strains, for the Satisfaction of
modest, sober, christian Minds, let us enquire,

1. WHAT St. Peter means, when he tells us of all Christians; for he does not
speak of the Governors of the Church alone, but of the whole Community of
Christian Believers; when he says, Ye are a Royal Priesthood. 1 Pet. ii. 9.
In the fourth Verse of that Chapter, he vindicates CHRIST himself from the
Contempt that Unbelievers had poured out upon Him; and he calls Him, a living
Stone, disallowed indeed of Men, but chosen of GOD, and precious. And then, for
their farther Consolation under the Reproaches that were thrown upon themselves
for Believing in Him, he adds. Verse 6. Ye also, as living Stones are built up
a spiritual House, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices,
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. And again, ver. 9. Ye are a chosen
Generation, a ROYAL PRIESTHOOD, an holy Nation, a PECULIAR PEOPLE, that ye
should show forth the Praises of Him, who has called you out of Darkness into
his mavelous Light. Whatever, therefore, might be intended by that Expression
under the Jewish Dispensation when it was first used, it is plain, that St.
Peter intended no more by it, than to set forth how honorable and favorable a
State all Christian People are in with GOD, whom He loves and esteems, and
counts dear to Him, even as the Priests of His Congregation. And what is all
this to the making Bishops Kings and Princes, and Lords of the Flock of CHRIST,
with a Supremacy of Power? Not but that I readily allow, that the Authority
which CHRIST first committed to his Apostles, was by them put into the Hands of
Bishops; and by them is conveyed down to us; and that they are under CHRIST the
supreme Governors of this spiritual Community, whenever the secular Potentates
refuse to concern themselves therein. And very great Deference, Regard, Honor
and Submission ought to be paid to them all on that Account.

AND yet, methinks, this high Style, and lofty Language, does not mighty well
suit the meek, modest Temper of the Gospel, in that there is not much of this
grand Strain in the New Testament. The Royal Priesthood, we have seen, will do
them but little Service, in that it respects every private Christian, as well
as the spiritual Governors of the CHURCH. And although we are called Ambassadors
of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God; yet this 2 Cor. i. 24.
our Christian Embassy must be managed with all imaginable Meekness and
Humility. St. Paul after a very small degree of Authority in threatening the
Corinthians corrects himself thus; Not that we have Dominion over your Faith.
And St. Peter very affectionately exhorts 1 Pet. v. 3.
the Clergy, not to carry themselves as being Lords over Gods Heritage, but
Examples to the Flock. But Dr. Hickes, and his Non-juring Friends, are for
lording it over Emperors and Kings, their spiritual Inferiors and Subjects, who
ought to be obedient to the Bishops and Clergy in what concerns Religion. Not
so the Meek, the Blessed, and Humble JESUS, who teaches his Apostles thus: The
Kings of Luke xxii. 26.
the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them; but it shall not be so with you. But
he that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger; and he that is chief,
as he that does serve. We may see in the Style we use, what Manner of Spirit we
are of; and how far we are degenerated from the Original Meekness of our Holy
Religion. And yet at last, after all this great Talk, if it does not infect the
Minds of the ignorant, common People, it is nothing to the Purpose. For when
all is said, that can be said this Way, the main Question still remains to be
argued; which is,

2. WHETHER all the Fullness of the Power which the Clergy can be supposed to
have in the spiritual Affairs of the CHURCH, does amount to an Exclusion of the
supreme Jurisdiction and Authority of the STATE? Whether CHRIST ever intended
that the Government of the Church should be so managed by spiritual Men alone,
the Bishops and Pastors of it, as that the supreme secular Powers should have
no Right or Title to any Judicial Authority therein; but be excluded from that,
as well as from the Divine Offices of the Priesthood? And the Determination of
this Matter, must not be made by any high Strains of Rhetoric, or lofty,
metaphorical Titles that may be used; but from the Jurisdiction and Authority
that are really given and appropriated to them in Holy Scriptures. So that
unless it could be proved from thence, that the general Powers of governing the
Church, are by CHRIST'S Commission appropriated to the Priesthood as the
Ministration in Holy Offices is; all the rest that can be said, will be to no
Purpose. For it must be unreasonable and unjust to exclude the Authority of
secular Powers, where GOD and CHRIST have not excluded them. To this Argument,
let me add,

II. THAT such an exempt, independent, exclusive Authority in the CHURCH, where
it is not highly necessary to the Support of Religion, is indeed very absurd.
It has Something worse in it than erecting Imperium in Imperio; it is actually
setting up the Kingdom of God the SON, in Opposition to that of the FATHER, and
in Derogation of His supreme Authority and Power.

DR. Hickes and his Friends tell us, That the Christian CHURCH is the spiritual
Kingdom and Body of Christ. I grant this to be very true; and so is the
Government of the whole World, by the temporal Powers of it, the Temporal
Kingdom of God the FATHER, Who is Lord of all the Earth, the only Potentate,
Josh. iii. 11, 13.
the King Eternal; whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and rules over
all. In this Kingdom the Civil Powers are the Ordinance of God, for the Good of
Mankind; they are the Ministers of God for Good, to whom all 1 Timothy vi. 15, and
i. 17. Psalm. cxlv. 13. -- ciii. 19. Romans xiii. 2, etc.
must needs be subject for Conscience Sake. And therefore for the Ministers of
CHRIST to oppose and lord it over the Ministers of GOD the FATHER, is to invert
the sacred Order of Things, and to forget the Subordination of the SON to the
FATHER.

GOD, for the Honor of the ever blessed Redeemer, was pleased to grant Him a
Kingdom within his own Dominions, with Rule and Power over all Mankind in order
to our Salvation; and to the effectual Establishment of it, to appoint Him
Powers and Ministers of his own; and to take away from temporal Governors the
Ministration of those divine, and sacred Offices which they before performed.
But as it does not appear by CHRIST'S Commission, that He has appropriated all
the Powers of Government in his CHURCH, to the Bishops and Clergy only,
together with the Authority of those sacred Ministrations; it is certainly very
wrong in them to assume a Power of excluding universally the Authority of the
FATHER'S Ministry. The Dispensation of the SON, however Excellent and Glorious,
as blessed be GOD, it is, ought yet certainly to be administered in
Subordination to that of the FATHER. And to pretend the contrary, must needs be
very absutd and displeasing to Them both.

AND yet this Absurdity, as great as it is, is carried still farther; and the
Abettors of it not content with the Claim of an independent Power only, plead
for a superior Authority in the Church; because that is spiritual and extends
to the Souls of Men. This is not only in Effect to deny the Civil Magistrates
Concern in Matters of Religion, and where the Souls of Men are affected: But
moreover, it is to set up the SON above the FATHER, by making the Ministry of
the SON superior to that of the FATHER. This is what I cannot but think
unreasonable, and contrary to the Design and Intention of Them both. It is
under the Favor and Protection of the SON, to reject the Authority and
Supremacy of the FATHER; than which scarce any thing can be more offensive to
him. To this let me add,

III. THAT the true Kingdom of GOD, and the Religion of JESUS CHRIST
established therein do not appear to be at all more strong and safe, and secure
from Corruptions by such an Independent Authority than they would be otherwise.

REMEMBER we are here disputing only about an independent Power in the
Government of the Church, and the Management of its Affairs for the Success of
Religion. It would therefore, methinks, be much in Favor of such a Pretension,
if it could be made appear by long Experience throughout all Ages, that the
Purity of this Holy Religion had always been better secured that Way than the
other. And that it had as constantly suffered when ever it was brought under
the Direction and Jurisdiction of the STATE. But alas! this was true only in
the first Ages of Christianity, when the Governors of the Church had more
extraordinary and miraculous Assistances from the Holy Ghost. Then indeed, the
Purity of Religion was effectually preserved, and the Word of GOD mightily grew
and prevailed. But when the essential Principles and Laws of Christianity were
committed to Writing, and the Clergy were to gain spiritual Knowledge by
Reading them; when the extraordinary Powers of the Holy Ghost began to be
removed, and Men were asisted, as they are now, only by the ordinary Influences
thereof; and in Consequence of this, the spiritual Governors of the Church were
subject to the same Passions, and Infirmities, and Temptations as other Men now
adays are: Religion soon felt the Fruits of this, and its genuine Purity, soon
began to decay, and declined apace. Till by Degrees it grew so corrupt that to
use St. Paul's Words, on a like Occasion, The whole Creation groaned and
travailed Romans viii. 21, 22.
in Pain together, waiting to be delivered from this Bondage of Corruption,
into the glorious Liberty of the Children of God.

So that whatever Advantages Christianity received by the pure Faith, and
constant Patience, by the great Integrity and Piety of the Primitive Christians
in the three first Centuries; it suffered at least as much in after-Ages, by
the evil Conduct of those who were in Possession of those Spiritual Powers. To
give one notorious Instance of this; I would desire these learned Gentlemen to
read the History and Acts of the second Council of Nice, and there to consider
by whose Over-bearing Authority the Idolatry of Image Worship was first brought
into the Church of CHRIST. Such Instances show too plainly that the true
Advancement of CHRIST'S Spiritual Kingdom, depends more upon the Fidelity and
Piety of its Ministers, than upon the regal, independent, Authority.

IF therefore the Non-jurors, in Vindication of their Schism, had not
contracted an Habit of Writing Paradoxes, One would wonder mightily to hear
them impute the Atheism Deism, Heresy, Schisms, Infidelity, Profaneness, Dr.
Hick. Collect. page 29.
and Immorality, that are found in this Land, to the taking away of this
supreme, independent Power of the Church. Let any Man look Abroad into Italy,
Spain or Portugal, there he will find the Government of the Church in the Hands
of those very Men, whose Right to it Dr. Hickes contends for; and that too,
with greater Immunities and Exemptions than he has pleaded for. And yet in all
these Kingdoms, he will find as much Infidelity and Irreligion, as scandalous
Vice, and Immorality, and Profaneness, as in any Part of Christendom. Only
perhaps with a little more Reserve for Fear of an Inquisition.

IN short, That our Discipline is too much lost, we all complain, as well as
the Non-jurors. But that the Matter would certainly be mended, by putting it
wholly into the Hands of the Clergy with an independent and unrestrained
Authority, is what cannot be allowed: Because where the Church has that Power,
Religion is more infamously corrupted than in any other Places of the Christian
World.

LET us but reflect what Opposition the Reformation of it met with here at
Home, from those very Men whose independent Power is now pleaded for. And with
how much Difficulty it was rescued out of their Hands, that it might be
restored to its original Purity. The Church of England with all its great
Excellencies, and valuable Constitutions, was thus Reformed; the Spiritual
Powers being ruled and governed by the Secular in the Exercise of their
Ecclesiastical Authority. And has the CHURCH yet a Divine Right to take the
Judicial Cognizance of Religion wholly out of the Hands of those Men, by whom
it has been preserved from Destruction? What Reason or Necessity can there be
for that? If by these Means the Government of the CHURCH should once again fall
into ill Hands, as it has done in former Times; it may in the unhappy Event be
found setting up for Authority to corrupt Religion, instead of preserving it.
And that too without leaving the Secular Potentates a sufficient Authority to
retrieve and reform it a second time. And this also is a just Exception to the
Reasonableness, and Righteousness of such a Claim.

IV. SUCH an Exempt Independent Authority in the Church, seems wholly
Inconsistent with that Interest and Care and Concern for Religion which
Christian Kings and Princes are always supposed to have; and the Regulation and
Defense of which is one great End and Purpose of all their Authority. Till I
see farther Reason against it than what has yet been shown, I cannot but
believe that the Civil Government in their Way, and by a due Exercise of their
Power, is concerned for the Good of Men's Souls, to promote Virtue and true
Religion as well as the Bishops and Pastors of Christ's Flock. And if they are,
then, to exclude their Jurisdiction in all Ecclesiastical Causes and Matters,
is to rob them of one great Part of their Sovereignty. It is in effect to
confine all the Authority of Princes only to the Preservation of Peace, and
Order, and Justice in Human Societies without any Regard to GOD and Religion.
And I know of no good Reason that can be given for this. For although GOD the
FATHER, for the Honor of our Blessed Redeemer, and the more effectual
Accomplishing our Redemption, has given him a Church and a Kingdom within his
own Dominions, and allowed Him his Proper Ministers and Governors of this
CHURCH under his own Divine Authority: Yet I hope these Gentlemen will not say
that this carries along with it a Devolution of all Power and Authority in
religious Affairs from Princes to Bishops, from the Governors of the State to
those of the Church. And if it does not, then the Secular Powers ought not in
any such Affairs to have their Authority and Jurisdiction excluded. That would
be to subvert one of the main Ends of their Institution, which was, That under
them we might live peaceable and quiet Lives in Godliness as 1 Timothy ii. 2.
well as in common Honesty. These Gentlemen I know will allow Kings and Princes
to exercise all their Authority in the Defense of the Church, and for the
Protection of its Powers, and the Support of it in the Execution of its Laws,
although nothing to its Disadvantage. And is it so then at last, that by virtue
of Christ's Commission, Kings and Princes have no more to do with Religious
Matters, than only under the Directions of the Church to minister to the
Support of the Spiritual Jurisdiction, when ever they think sit so to Modify
their Power? I hope that all Christian Emperors and Kings will be sensible what
Honors and Favors such Churchmen intend them, in admitting them to so great a
Privilege? And must they in all other Cases be discharged of all Regard and
Concern for GOD and RELIGION in the Government of their People? Sure I am, that
it was not so under the Jewish Dispensation, when this Separation of the
Priesthood from the Secular Powers first began. Kings did then intermeddle in
Ecclesiastical Causes, and regulate the Affairs of Religion, and had
Jurisdiction in the Government of the Church.

The Ark of the Covenant which none might look into, or so much as touch it,
but the Priests alone: Was yet so far under the 2 Samuel vi.
Government and Authority of King David, 2 Samuel xv.
that he commanded it to be removed first to this Place and then to that. He
also distributed the several Courses both of the Priests 2 Chronicles. xxiii, xxiv.
-- xxiv.
and Levites, and gave the Levites a new Law for their Offices, that they who
before began not their Attendance till the Thirtieth Year of their Age should
now begin it at the Twentieth. He took the Ark from the Tabernacle 2 Chronicles. i.
3, 5.
of the Congregation, and leaving that behind at Gibeon, he built a new Tent
for it at Jerusalem. How came he to meddle so much with that which was in the
Peculiar Custody of the Priests? The like was afterward 2 Chronicles. xxiv. --
xxiii. 4.
done by Hezekiah, who also by his Royal Decree appointed the Passover to be
kept, and called all the Ten Tribes of Israel to Jerusalem to the Celebration
of it, who had been hindered from it for a long time before. Solomon thrust out
Abiathar from being 1 Kings ii. 27, 35.
Priest unto the Lord. Which, let the Adversaries say what they will to evade
it, was as much a Deprivation as any one of those they now complain of; and
when he had done this, he put Zadock the Priest in the Room of Abiathar. The
Altar of Bethel was destroyed by King Josiah; Idolatry was frequently punished
and suppressed by their Kings, and the suffering Religion to be corrupted by
introducing Evil and Idolatrous Novelties into the Worship of GOD, is often
charged as a Crime and a Blemish in the Administration of their Government. Now
as the Instances mentioned in which they did exert their Power, were undeniable
Acts of Church Government and Ecclesiastical Authority: So the Charge and
Imputation of Guilt upon them in their Neglects of this kind, plainly show that
they had a just Authority and a rightful Jurisdiction therein. And if the
Jewish Kings were allowed to have Power and Authority in Ecclesiastical
Matters, and the Priesthood claimed no Independent Power in Church Government,
under that Dispensation in which the Administration of Divine Offices was as
much separated from the Secular Magistrates as it is now under the Gospel: Some
very good Reason, some strong Proof, some very bright and clear Evidence should
be produced to convince one, that the Jurisdiction which Kings exercised under
one Dispensation is quite taken away by the other.

ESPECIALLY too, when this claimed Authority is not to be limited to Articles
of Faith, and Matters of Divine Revelation only; but is extended to a Judicial
Cognizance in all our moral Actions, as well as in those that are purely
religious. And for the Kings and Potentates of the World not to submit to the
Sanctions and Determinations of such Men in all Cases of Morality; is
arrogantly called Disobedience to their spiritual Superiors, Vindic. Prop. 21.
and Rehellion against the Legates and Vicegerents of Christ. And to restrain
ecclesiastical Persons in any extravagant Proceedings of this Kind, is
represented by some Men as downright Persecution.

WHAT an Original Piece of spiritual Pride is this? I would desire any Reader
seriously to consider, that if such Doctrines as these had been preached by the
Apostles and Primitive Christians, Whether it would not have been the greatest
Disadvantage imaginable to the Propagation of the Gospel. And whether it would
not have given all the Secular Potentates of the World a great and invincible
Prejudice against it? What Heathen Emperor or King would have embraced this
Religion, or given any Countenance at all to the Profession of it, who should
have been told, That in the very Minute that this Religion was professed by
him, and became established in his Dominions, he was to lose one half of his
Authority over his People? That he was no longer to have that Fullness of
Jurisdiction and Power which he had before, and which other Kings and Emperors
enjoyed round about him; but was now to give up his Sovereignty and Supremacy
in all Spiritual, Ecclesiastical Causes, and in all Moral Actions, into the
Hands of his spiritual Governors of that Church, of which he was now becoming a
Member? He is now no longer to claim an universal Supremacy in his Dominions,
but himself becomes a Subject to his Subjects, and their spiritual Inferior;
the Bishops in his Kingdom, being as so many Kings, and spiritual Monarchs, who
have a Divine Right to tie up his Hands from having any thing to do in the
Government of the Church, or in Matters of Religion? Would not all the Secular
Potentates in the World have spurned at, and despised the Preachers of so
senseless a Religion, as an Imposture and a Cheat, that under a Pretense of
Godliness, was contrived to wrest one great Part of their Authority out of
their Hands? And would not such an Attempt as this too deservedly have caused
the Word of Truth to be evil spoken of? Most assuredly it would. And yet this
is the very Thing that an Independent Authority in Church Government naturally,
and universally tends to.

DR. Hickes is pleased to say, Constit. p. 76. That the Governors of the Church
lose Nothing of their Power, Authority, or Jurisdiction by admitting Sovereign
Princes into the Church. I beg leave to ask then, Whether it is not altogether
as reasonable, both for the Honor and Interest of Christianity, that Christian
Princes should lose Nothing of their Temporal Authority by embracing this our
Holy Religion? And if it be, I am sure that the Schemes which are now laid out
for Kings and Princes to rule by, under the Church's independent Power, cannot
be of GOD; because they make Spoil and Havoc of the secular Powers, and rob
them of one entire Branch of their Sovereignty and Dominion. And yet this is
not the worst Evil that attends this Claim. For,

V. IT not only robs Kings of all Sovereignty in religious and spiritual
Affairs; but is extended also to their Administration of the Temporal. I have
already observed, That these Gentlemen bring all the moral Actions of humane
Life, under the peculiar Cognizance of the spiritual Government of the CHURCH.
Every Thing in which the Consciences of Men are concerned, they claim, as
falling wholly within this spiritual Jurisdiction. so much as a Judge between
two private Luke xii. 14.
Men in the Division of a small Estate. But our Modern Independents in Church
Government, make themselves Judges of Kings, and of their Titles to their
Thrones. They, in effect, divide the Kingdoms of the Earth according to their
Decisions and Determinations. By a pretended Supremacy from CHRIST, they put a
Check upon the Legislature in the Laws that they provide for the Security of
the Nation, and labor to control the States of the Realm in the
Administration of their secular Affairs. They sanctify even Sedition and
Rebellion by their spiritual Authority, and take upon them to absolve the
Subjects from all the strictest Oaths whereby they have sworn Allegiance to
their King, They endeavor to bind it upon the Consciences of Men, to set up
one King, and to dethrone another, according to their personal Sentiments and
Opinions. Now I would willingly be informed by them what Part of CHRIST'S
Commission it is that gives them this Authority; or that in any disputable
Titles to the Throne makes them the Judges of it? And yet the Modern
Independents in Church Government, do not only assume all this to themselves;
but they also lay as much Stress on their own Notions and Assertions of this
Kind, as though they had a Spirit of Infallibility, or an immediate Revelation
from Heaven. What less than this, could induce them to charge all the Great Men
of our Church, however learned, and equally pious with themselves, as Teaching,
and Acting, and Praying, contrary to the essential Righteousness of GOD, only
because they teach, and act, and pray, contrary to their particular Sentiments
and Schemes in Civil Government? What is this, but to arrogate to themselves a
Spirit of Infallibility in the Interpretation of those Scriptures on which they
build their Notions and Opinions? Will not the Reader stand still here and
Pause a little, and Question the Truth of what I say? Will he not think it
incredible that spiritual Men should approach so near to Blasphemy, as to set
up their own political Principles, as the infallible Tests of Truth and
Righteousness? Certain it is, that CHRIST'S Commission is of another Nature,
and never was intended to authorize the Governors of the Church to frame the
Government of Nations too according to their disputable Models and controverted
Schemes; and to damn all Mankind as Heretics, and Schismatics, and Rebels,
who will not come in to them, and desert the legal Constitutions of their
Country. This is foreign to the Business of the Gospel; the Propagation of the
Christian Faith, by Preaching, and Baptizing, and Administering Sacraments, and
Training up Christians in Holiness and Devotion, is a Sphere at so great a
Distance from all this of Secular Government and Political Controversies, that
GOD certainly never gave the Governors of the Church any Divine Authority
therein. And therefore an Independent Authority in Church Governors, which is
industriously set up to this End; must be an Imposture and a Cheat, and
contrary to the Will of CHRIST and of GOD. And Bishops and Clergymen by Virtue
of CHRIST'S Commission may as well claim a Right to go into Westminster Hall
and turn out the Judges, as giving Judgment contrary to the essential
Righteousness of God; as to teach the People, that it is a Sin to be subject to
the Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom where they live. This brings me to my

VI. LAST Argument, which is, That this Independent Authority in the Government
of the CHURCH., is utterly inconsistent with the Supremacy and Sovereignty of
all Secular Potentates. Two such Independent Authorities in the Government of
the same Body of Men, appear utterly incompatible. They so frequently
interfere, and thereby bring such Mischiefs and Distractions into the World,
that they cannot possibly be both of them from GOD. He, who is a God of Peace
and Order, and not of Confusion, must not be supposed to have intended any two
such Powers without a Subordination of the one to the other.

THE Supporters of that Claim, being aware of this Argument, would evade it by
saying, That the Mischiefs complained of, proceed not from the Inconsistency of
two such Powers, but from the Encroachments of the two contending Parties. And
that all this would be prevented effectually, if each would keep within their
proper Limits, and neither of 'em put their Sickle into the other's Harvest.
This is Regale and Pontiff. p. 15.
smoothly and finely said indeed, but Nothing to the Purpose; because it is
Arguing against plain Matter of Fact. For they both of them claim a Right to
the same Harvest; and who then shall judge between them to preserve the Peace
and Quiet of the Christian World? Are not all our present Contentions and Feuds
about the uncontrollable Supremacy of the Governors of the Church in all
Religious and Spiritual Causes? And is it not apparent undeniably, that the
very End of Claiming such a Power, is, to protect some Men from the Authority
of the STATE? How then is it possible that two such Contending supreme
Sovereigns should exercise their several Powers, one to remove, and the other
to support those Men; and yet the Subjects be bound to obey them both? How can
two such Supremacies subsist in the same Body of Men, when almost every Act of
the one influences the other? When in some Cases almost every Exercise of
Spiritual Authority, one Way or other influences, and either weakens or
controuls the Temporal? A certain Defender of this Spiritual, Ecclesiastical
Independency, saw the Necessity of granting, That CHRIST gave the Church no
Authority Regal. and Pontif. p. 17.
that could possibly interfere with the Civil Powers. This Assertion I own to
be very true; and therefore if the Non-jurors will but grant me that, which I
think no reasonable Man can deny, viz. That GOD has given to Secular Powers as
full an Authority for the Support and Security of the STATE, as He has to the
Spiritual for the Defense of the CHURCH; and consequently, that every Act of
Independent Power of the Church, that interferes with the Civil Powers, is
contrary to the Will of GOD, and to the Intention of CHRIST'S Commission: I
readily join Issue with them upon this Cause, and am very willing to try the
Force of this Principle in those particular Cases that are made the Occasion of
our present Disputes. And they are, 1. The Election. 2. The Deprivation of
Bishops and Clergymen.

1. As to the Election of Bishops and Clergymen, it is granted, That as the
CHURCH has the sole Authority of Ordaining them, so with that they have of
Necessity a common natural Right to take Care of the Qualifications of the
Persons to be ordained, and employed in Divine Service. But then, it is indeed
reasonable, that the CHURCH in the Exercise of this Power, should not claim a
Divine Authority to thrust and force upon a Christian State such Bishops and
Clergymen as are avowed Enemies to the Government and National Constitution
where they live. For this is actually to interfere with the Civil Powers. It Is
highly reasonable that Kings and Princes should be well-assured of the Fidelity
and Allegiance of their Clergy; seeing that They and their Government, have an
Interest therein; and both the Peace and Safety of their Secular Affairs may be
very much influenced by their good or evil Conduct. If therefore on this
Account the Laws of the Land give to our Kings the Nomination of the Persons
that are to be made Bishops; it is indisputably interfering with the Civil
Powers, to say that they have no Right there to; and that every such Nomination
is an Invasion of the CHURCH'S Power. If the Measure of that Power be at all to
be judged of by its Consistency with the Peace and Safety of the STATE, it is
then as clear as any Demonstration in the Mathematics, that CHRIST'S
Commission has given no such Independent Power in the Choice of Bishops;
because that actually breaks in upon the temporal Power of Kings and Princes,
even in the Administration of their National Government: For let us reflect, Is
it not by Virtue of this pretended Divine Right, and Independent Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, that we see such vile and scandalous Practices in our Days, as
the Primitive Christians were wholly Strangers to; and would have Protested
against with the utmost Abhorrence and Detestation? By Virtue of this pretended
Independent Authority, the Non-jurors take upon them to consecrate Bishops, and
ordain Priests, not only in Opposition to the STATE, but with a direct
Intention, if it be possible, to overturn it. For the first Thing that such
Bishops and Clergymen have to do, is to renounce all Allegiance to the KING
upon the Throne, and all Regard to the Present Constitution of the Kingdom. To
treat the KING as an Usurper, to teach a Nullity in all the Oaths that are
taken to Him, though by most solemn Sanctions of the Law. To set up an
Ecclesiastical Community, and gather Congregations against Him, and therein to
pray for another pretended King, whom the Nation has solemnly abjured, and
proclaimed a Traitor. Will not all this be called Interfering with the Civil
Powers? If it be; I think then, it must be granted, that all this is directly
contrary to CHRIST'S Commission, and to the whole Design of it? If there be a
Dispute about the Title to the Crown, most certainly the States of the Realm
are the proper Judges and Determiners of the Matter: And CHRIST by his
Commission, has given the Bishops and Pastors of his CHURCH no Divine Authority
or Jurisdiction in such Determinations. If therefore the Governors of the
Church, instead of taking Care, according to their Trust, that the Bishops and
Clergy of the CHURCH, be Men of sober Lives, and sound Religion, will go so
much farther as to claim a Divine Right in the Choice of all the Bishops
exclusive of the Nomination of the Prince, only to embarrass his Government,
and embroil his Affairs: It is as certain that such a Spiritual Power cannot be
of GOD, as it is that all Secular Powers are of GOD. Because two such
Independent Authorities in or over the same Body of Men, cannot possibly
consist together. The one will inevitably interfere with, and be destructive of
the other; and such inevitable Opposition, Confusion and Distraction in humane
Society, could never be designed or intended by Almighty GOD. The like may be
said

2. AS to the Deprivation of Bishops and Clergymen.

I COULD heartily wish, there had been no Occasion for the unhappy Debate that
I am now upon. And what I shall say upon it, I intend with all Deference to the
unhappy Persons who were deprived. But seeing a pretended Invalidity in their
Deprivation is made the Occasion of a Schism from our CHURCH, and of great
Confusions in the Nation; Doubtless, common Justice ought to be done to the
lawful Secular Powers we live under.

NOW, if it be indeed true, that CHRIST has given no Power to his Church that
interferes with the Civil Powers; and most true it is, and necessary for the
due Government of the World that it should be so; the Consequence of it is,
That CHRIST by His Commission has given no such Authority to His CHURCH, as to
keep Bishops and Clergymen in their respective Sees, when the STATE finds it
necessary for the Safety of a Nation to turn them out. For this also is to set
up Powers that are incompatible; both whose Commands cannot be obeyed, because
they command contrary and inconsistent Things.

THIS was the Case of those unhappy Bishops and Clergy, who were deprived for
not giving the usual Oaths of Fidelity to the Civil Government of King William.
Their Principles and Practices, as to that Government, were such, that it was
become impossible for them to execute their Spiritual Offices in the CHURCH,
with any Security to the Peace and Safety of the STATE. They could not perform
Divine-Service in Public, because they would not own the Authority of the
King, who was to be prayed for therein; The Bishops could not ordain other
Clergymen, for the same Reason; They could not do it without obliging them, by
the Laws of the Land, to own those Secular Powers, whom they themselves did not
own. They could not govern the Clergy, as Bishops by the Laws of the Land are
bound to govern them, without Teaching them, and Instructing them to teach
their People the Duty of Obedience to that King, whom they themselves looked on
as an unlawful King. Neither could they answer the Ends, or do the Business of
the Government by sitting in Parliament, as the Law expects and requires, that
all the Bishops of the Kingdom should do. Nay, in all their Exercise of Divine
Offices, they must undeniably lie under a strong Bias and Temptation of
instilling dangerous Doctrines, and Principles inconsistent with the Peace and
Security of the Kingdom. Can it be supposed then, that any National Government
wants a sufficient and competent Authority of removing such Bishops from their
Sees, and of putting other Orthodox Bishops in their Room? And must They ask
the Clergy's Leave to do this? Or must they borrow a competent Authority from
the CHURCH to do this effectually? Miserable are the Princes who are in such a
Case! Wretched is the Kingdom that wants a competent Authority to do any Thing
which appears necessary to be done with any of its Subjects, of what Order
soever, to support it self, and preserve its own Authority. Who then can
believe that Almighty GOD ever intended this? Those who object against the
Validity of such a Deprivation, should consider two Things:

1. THAT there is no Persecution of Christianity in it. Had those Bishops been
deprived for any Doctrines or Articles of the Christian Faith, it would have
looked more plausibly on their Side, and might with more Reason have been
called Persecution. Or, if upon their Deprivation, their Districts and Sees had
been left destitute of Orthodox Bishops regularly consecrated to perform the
Divine Offices, as others had done before them: This would have made a great
Alteration in the Case. But when it is for an avowed Disaffection to the
established Civil Government, and judged necessary for the Security of it; that
Necessity proves it lawful, and answers all Objections that can possibly be
brought against it. And therefore, to pretend that such a Deprivation is not
valid, as to the People living within their Districts of such deprived Bishops,
because it is not Canonical; is in effect saying nothing at all. For
Deprivation signifies nothing to the Purpose, if it does not in the Effects of
it, bind all the Consciences of the Subjects to disown the Authority of the
Persons so deprived; and discharge them from all Obligations of future
Submission to, and Communion with them. This is a Power without which Civil
Government cannot stand: and therefore Secular Powers must be granted to have a
competent Authority to all such Purposes; or else they are not only Subjects
and Inferiors, but even Slaves to their spiritual Sovereigns, and must depend
precariously on the Good Will and Favor of their Clergy, whether they shall
sit easy and safe on their Thrones, or no. And all the Laws, and Canons, and
Constitutions of the CHURCH, if they be wise, and good, and christian, must be
made with a due Regard and Subserviency to this End, or else they lose all
their Validity, and are to be looked upon as Nothing. For this is a sure
Principle never to be disputed, That all National Governments have as
sufficient and competent an Authority to do every Thing which is necessary to
preserve the STATE, as the Bishops and Clergy can have for the Support of
RELIGION and the CHURCH.

AND if this Authority will extend to the valid Deprivation of the disaffected,
and disloyal Governors of the Church, the plain Consequence of it is, That all
the Subjects of the Kingdom are in Duty and Conscience discharged from any
farther spiritual Relation to, or Communion with the Persons so deprived. What
is it then that our Non-jurors mean by Exclaiming against this, even as though it
were a Sin against the Holy Ghost? To tell the World, That all other Bishops,
who will not adhere to the deprived ones, can perform no valid Acts of
Priesthood; their Prayers Dr. Hickes. Collect. p 32.
are Sin, and their Sacraments, no Sacraments, and their Absolution, Null, and
of no Force. That all other Christians, who are not in the Communion of the
deprived Bishops, are cut off from the Church of Christ, can have no Benefit by
His Promises, no Assistance of His Grace, no Mercy through His Blood. Nay, that
although they die Martyrs for Christ, yet Martyrdom it self cannot make amends
for this Sin. If a Stranger to our Gospel were to hear this, he would certainly
conclude, that Christianity aimed at Nothing more than the Exaltation of the
CHURCH'S Power; and that Nothing greater was required to Salvation, than to own
these deprived Bishops to be the Heads of it. Whereas, in Truth, the Commission
given, is only to preach the Gospel, to administer the Sacraments, and to
exercise such Offices, and such Powers, as shall be necessary to the
Propagation of the Christian Religion: Without any Check upon Secular
Potentates in their Administration of Civil Government, or any Exemption from
their Jurisdiction. They have no Authority that interferes with Civil Powers.
To confirm all which, it must not be forgotten,

2. THAT in this Deprivation the STATE took away no Power which the CHURCH
truly and properly speaking gives. Dr. Hickes indeed, insinuates, p. 24. That
as only Bishops have from Christ a Right to ordain; so they only have a Right
to deprive one another. But this Argument is formed with more Cunning than
Ingenuity, and the Opposition is not fairly put. It should not have been
between Ordaining and Depriving; but Ordaining and Deposing from the Sacred
Order of the Priesthood. In the one the CHURCH gives, in the other She takes
away Her spiritual Authority. But Depriving is of another Nature; it leaves the
Persons all the Catholic Authority which the CHURCH gave, if they can find
Places where they may lawfully Exercise it; and only restrains them from doing
so in such and such Dominions. It is chiefly Removing them from the Districts
and Sees which they held of the Secular Powers, and thereby from all Right to
the Exercise of their Spiritual Offices among any of the King's Subjects. And
if Kings and Princes have not a competent Authority to do this, they are too
weak to stand, and consequently, much weaker than GOD and CHRIST ever intended
that Civil Government should be.

THE chief Objections to what is here delivered, are these three.

I. IT is pleaded, That there is such a Divine Relation between a Bishop and
the People of his District, as no Secular Powers can take away.

II. THAT the Authority in spiritual Affairs, here allowed to Kings and
Princes, is contrary to the Practice and Principles of the first three Hundred
Years.

III. THAT this is bringing the Church and its Clergy into Slavery.

I. As to the Divine Relation pretended to be between a Bishop and the People
of his See or District: Pray, how comes that about? It is compared, I know, by
some Reg. and Pont. p. 3.
Men to Marriage. But who made that Match, or gave the divine Sanction to the
Contract? Or if that were true, how comes there to be so many common Causes of
Divorce? In short, this is the Notion of those only, who make every Thing that
has been occasionally done by the Governors of the Church, to have been done by
a divine and unchangeable Authority. But the only Way to judge rightly of this
Matter, is, to consider what is the original Ground of that Relation, and by
whose Designation and Authority it has been made. Now as to this,

1. I BELIEVE, that every Body will grant, That in promoting Bishops to such
and such Sees, and Clergymen to their Districts or Parishes, a Regard ought,
and will be had, to the Sentiments and the Judgment of the Spiritual Governors
of the Church; who, as I said above, in Consequence of their Commission from
CHRIST to plant and govern it, must be supposed Invested with a Trust as to the
spiritual Qualifications of the Persons to be employed in Holy Offices. And
this Care, and Trust, and just Authority, they are supposed to discharge in
their Admission of Persons into Holy Orders. In which they have Authority to
provide, that no Persons unqualified, should be admitted into the Service of
GOD. But then, when the Church has effectually taken this Care, it must
certainly be granted also in the

2. Second Place, THAT Christian Princes and States have both an Interest in
this Affair, and a Trust also committed to Them in providing proper Spiritual
Guides and Pastors for their People. And where they have both an Interest and a
Trust, it will be very hard to say, that they have no Authority. Suppose that
the Governors of the CHURCH should incline to appoint such Persons as the STATE
can have no Confidence in, or no Security from, must they be allowed no
Authority, even where their Peace and Safety appear to be very deeply
concerned? Sure this is too unreasonable and absurd to be believed. Or, again,
Suppose that the Governors of the CHURCH should be careless, and neglect
providing for their Sees, would not the Temporal Powers be bound to supply that
Defect, and to take Gare that the People should not want proper Guides and
Pastors? It is absurd then to think, that they have no Authority in a Matter
which they are bound in Conscience to take Care of. Now as all this seems very
agreeable to common Reason; let us go on, and consider

3. WHAT has been the Practice of the CHURCH in this Particular. And here we
shall find, that generally speaking, every One who appeared to have an Interest
in the Management of Ecclesiastical Affairs were allowed to have an Influence,
and some Power in the Designation of the Person to be employed in such a Place
or District.

THE CHURCH commits a Catholic Power or Authority in Consecration or
Ordination, which Authority is to be exercised so far as lawfully it may, through
the whole CHURCH of CHRIST, without any Assignment of this or that particular
Jurisdiction. So the Form of Consecration runs with us: Receive ye the Holy
Ghost for the Office and Work of a Bishop in the Church of GOD. And that such
was the Manner of Primitive Ordinations, the Reverend and very Learned Dr.
Potter, Chapter Gov. p. 452.
now Lord Bishop of Oxford, proves from hence, That Ministers were then
sometimes ordained without any Designation at all to particular Districts. And
indeed, without this general Commission in Ordination, I do not see how they
could be said to be invested with a Spiritual Power or Authority through the
Whole Christian Church. This Power then being thus conveyed by the Church; the
Designation of the Persons to this or that particular District, was made
several Ways. In the Apostles Time, such and such Persons were sent by them to
such and such Cities, and great Towns, to minister therein, and govern the
CHURCH according to the Directions given. But afterward the Clergy of the
vacant Diocese sometimes chose their own Bishop, and sometimes the eldest
Presbyter succeeded in Course. But then, to show that every Thing which the
Bishops and Clergy at that Time did, was not done by a Divine Authority: What
was sometimes done in this Affair by the Clergy, was sometimes done by the
People also, when the Bishops of another Province advanced any new Bishop to a
vacant See, it was always done with the Consent and Approbation of the People.
Usually this Approbation and Consent of the People was had, as to the Person,
before his Consecration. The forementioned Right Reverend Bishop has cited a
Passage out of the VIIIth Book of the Apostolical Constitutions, c. 4. in which
it is decreed, That such a Bishop must be ordained as was elected by the People
for his eminent Merit, and their Consent was to be a third Time asked. And to
the same Purpose there are several Passages in St. Cyprian, whereby it plainly
appears, that the People had so much Authority, that they were usually
consulted, and their Vote and Consent asked in the Designation of the Bishop
that was to preside over them. Which shows most plainly, that such a
Designation was not made by the divine appropriated Powers of the Bishops and
Clergy only. And it is very well known, that what the People had at the
Beginning, came by Degrees into the Hands of Kings and Princes. They had the
Nomination of Bishops to their several Sees; and I would therefore have a very
good Reason given, why those Rulers who had Authority in Promoting them, should
not be allowed the same in Removing them. Or how such a Removal can be called
an Invasion of the sacred Rights of the Priesthood; when they were promoted by
the Election or Nomination of the Laity, as well as of the Bishops?

I KNOW it will be said, That all this was only a prudent Condescension and
Compliance with the People of their Flock, without any Authority. But to this I
answer, Does not Voting, and Electing, and an almost constant and established
Usage of Consigning Persons to such and such Districts by Voting and Electing,
look like a good Degree of Authority in the Matter? And would the Fathers of
the Church have suffered all this, if they had had the same Notions with some
in our Days? Would they have condescended so far, if they had known it to be an
Invasion of the CHURCH'S Independent Powers? No certainly; their Practice in
this Case, is a sufficient Demonstration that they had no such Sentiments.

AND indeed, how shall we judge, or how shall we know what are the CHURCH'S
peculiar Rights, and what not; but by the Words of CHRIST'S Commission, and the
Practice of the most Primitive Churches thereupon? The Performance of those
Sacred Offices which CHRIST by His Commission has taken away from the Civil
Powers, and vested in a distinct Order of Men, we own to be the peculiar
Authorities of the CHURCH. And accordingly, the Primitive Fathers did not allow
the Laity to have Authority therein. They never condescended so far as to
suffer them either to consecrate the Eucharist, or to lay on Hands in
Ordination. When therefore as to the Designation of Bishops to such and such
particular Districts, CHRIST'S Commission gives no Restraining or Appropriating
Rules at all, and the constant Practice of the CHURCH has been to admit the
Laity to have an Interest and a Vote therein, and to promote by their Election:
I do not know what can confute the Claim of a Divine Relation, and an
Independent Authority herein, if this will not.

IF then the Designation of Bishops and Clergymen to their several Districts be
no Part of the CHURCH'S sacred and unalienable Rights; certainly the Removal or
Deprivation of such Persons, can be no Invasion of them; because doubtless they
who have a competent Authority to promote, must be allowed to have the same
also to Remove.

THE Conclusion of the Whole then, is, There is no such Thing in our Days as a
Clergyman's having a Divine Right to his District. His Claim and Right is
wholly Human and Legal; founded on the Laws of the Land, and the established
Constitutions of the CHURCH and Country in which we live. Consequently then,
what the STATE does in a legal Way in such Deprivations, is done by a competent
Authority; it is Valid in all Respects; and binds the Consciences of all Men.
It transfers the Obligations, as to Religious Communion, from the former
Possessor to the latter. It makes it our Duty to adhere to such Bishops, as in
such Cases, the Laws of the Land regularly advance: And it makes our adhering
to the Communion of the Bishops so deprived, to be both sinful and schismatical.

II. THE second Objection is, That what I have here advanced, seems not to
agree with the Practice and Principles of the CHURCH for the first three
hundred Years.

As to the Practice of the CHURCH in those Times, I have in some Measure thus
accounted for it already. That it proceeded from the Exigencies and Necessity
of Affairs at the Time when the Christians were either under Persecution, and
so were constrained to act in Opposition to their Secular Governors, because
Christianity could not otherwise be propagated: Or else, it was done under the
Connivance and Permission of such Temporal Powers. In either of which Cases,
what was necessary to be done by the Bishops and Governors of the CHURCH for
the Promotion of the Christian Religion, they undoubtedly had a Divine Right
and Authority from GOD to do. But then, in such Cases, the CHURCH did not claim
a Divine Authority of Excluding the Jurisdiction of the Emperors and Secular
Governors; but they excluded themselves, by refusing to intermeddle in this
Government. Even the mildest of the Heathen Emperors, who, as Tertullian tells
us, Apol. cap. v. forbid the Christians to be enquired after, or persecuted,
seem to have dealt with them, only as Gallio the Deputy of Achaia did, I will
be no Judge of such Acts xviii 15.
Matters. When therefore the Christian Bishops and Clergy were so far either
neglected, or favored by their Heathen Governors as to be left to themselves;
they had Nothing more to do than to make wise Laws, and proper Canons, and see
them duly executed. And if against those, who among themselves were mutinous,
and turbulent, and schismatical, they pleaded the just Obligation of their
Sanctions, and set forth very emphatically the Disorder and Guilt of those who
in such Cases revolted from their proper Bishop, and despised his Authority,
and separated from his Communion; they certainly Argued very justly, and Acted
very rightly. All Christians were bound in Conscience to conform themselves to
such good and wise Rules, and to submit to such just and lawful Authority. But
what is all this, to the Rights of the Temporal Powers, whose Authority does
not appear so much as once to have fallen under their Debates for the first
three hundred Years.

WHEN the Romans had conquered Judea, they yet left the Jews in a great Measure
to the Management of their own Civil Government. And what Herod, or the high
Priest and the Sanhedrim, in such Cases, enacted or ordained, was doubtless in
Conscience to be obeyed; and it was a Sin to be mutinous and seditious against
them. But sure this Privilege could never be extended to the exclusion of the
Power and Authority of the Roman Emperors. So here, the Roman Emperors put the
Christians under a Necessity of Acting independently on the Temporal Power,
because they would not concern themselves therein. But this does not at all
prove, that therefore all Secular Powers must for ever be excluded. I am amazed
therefore, to find such a Fondness, as I do, for the Rules and Sentiments of
the Cyprianick Age in this Controversy; I cannot but smile at Men's Attempts to
determine it by the Practice and Principles of St. Cyprian, or any other Father
of those Times. All that they say, is out of the Question, and foreign to the
Purpose. They only plead the Power and Authority of the Church's Sanctions
among themselves; and the Guilt of separating from the Communion of their
Bishops, while there was no other who would meddle in the Government of it. In
such Cases, theirs was the only proper Authority to be regarded; because the
Secular Powers had declined all Jurisdiction therein. But this is no more a
Proof that the Authority of Kings and Princes must for ever be excluded from
all Ecclesiastical Affairs, than the Decrees of Herod, and the Jewish
Sanhedrim, are a Proof that Julius, and Augustus Caesar had no Authority in
Judaea.

WHAT shall we say then to Dr. Hickes, who would send all Christian Emperors
and Kings to these very Times to learn new Lessons, and to know from these
Examples what Power they ought to exercise in Ecclesiastical Prop. 26.
Affairs? Certainly this is a very odd Way of Arguing, That because Heathen
Emperors would not meddle with the Government of the Christian Church,
therefore Christian Kings and Princes must not. As though the Neglects and
Disregards of the one, were to be a Bar and an Interdict to the just Rights and
Claims of the other. That this is the Truth of the Case, and that there is no
more than this in it, will be undeniably plain and clear,

3. FROM the great Concessions and large Compliances that the Christian Bishops
and Clergy soon made when the Roman Emperors favored their Interest, and
interposed their Authority in the Management and Settlement of the Affairs of
the CHURCH. If the Primitive Fathers had had the same Sentiments with Dr.
Hickes and his Friends, as to the CHURCH'S Divine Right to an Independent
Authority; it is impossible that they should have given in to the Authority and
Jurisdiction of the Emperors, as they are found to have done. And whether they
will impute it to the Ignorance of the Primitive Christians, or whether they
will make them the first Betrayers of the CHURCH'S sacred Rights, I leave to
themselves; let them account for it as they please. I am contented to observe,
from a very learned Treatise of our present Author. Christian Prin. c. 2. Sect.
4. c. 17, 21, 27, 34, 35.
great and good Archbishop, who has supported his Assertions with Authorities
which are indisputable, That no sooner did the Eusebius. Vit Constable. Lib. III. c.
6, 7, 10, 12, 13, 17. Contanstine called the first general Council by his
Imperial Authority, appointed the City Nice in Bithynia for the Place of their
Meeting, and on the Day set for opening the Synod he came and sat among them,
and Reasoned with them and composed their Differences.

Ibid. Lib. IV. c. 42, 43. He summoned another Council to meet at Tire. A. D.
335; and Threatened those who disobeyed his Summons with Banishment, or
Ejectment out of his See; afterward he adjourned it to Jerusalem. To this
Council Athanasius came in pure Obedience to the Emperor, and appealed from it
to his Authority.

Ib. Lib. I. c. 44. Eusebius commends Constantine for his Piety and Religious
Care in all this.

Dr. Cave. Hist. Lit. Vol. 2. p. 152. In the Assembly at Carthage. A. D. 411.
Marcellinus the Emperors Commissioner directed the Manner of their Proceeding,
appointing Seven Bishops only of a Side to enter into Debate; and in the end
gave Sentence in favor of the Orthodox. And when upon Marcellinus his Death
the Donatists would have had all that had been done rescinded; Honorius
confirmed their Decrees and made them Valid.

Ib. p. 158, etc. Upon the Feuds, and contrary Decrees in the Council of
Ephesus, A. D. 431. between John Patriarch of Antioch, and Cyril of Alexandria
against Nestorius, Theodosius the Emperor commands all that had been done on
both Sides to be rescinded; and upon a full and true Information of what had
past, he confirmed the Decrees made against Nestorius.

As to Imperial Laws in Ecclesiastical Affairs I will mention a Few only out of
the Code and Novells of Justinian. God. Lib. I. Tit. iii. cap. 8. If a
Clergyman gave false Witness in a Pecuniary Case, he was to be suspended from
his Office for Three Years; if in a Criminal Cause, to be Degraded from the
Priestly Office, clericatus honor nudatus, etc. ib.

Novel. Coll. ix. Tit. vi. 123. cap. x. A Clergyman playing at Tables, or
standing by to lay Wagers, or look on, was to be suspended for three Years;
jubemus tribus annis, a venerabili Ministerio prohiberi. ib. c. 17.

He that shall give or take Money to procure the Election or Ordination of a
Minister, was to be degraded; a gradu Sacerdotij retrahatur. ib. c. 31.

A Bishop not Consecrated according to some particular Imperial Constitutions
was to be deposed. Jubemus hunc omnibus modis Epicsopatu depelli, Novel. ix.
Tit. vi. 123, 1.

A Presbyter ordained before examination, if he had been accused as unfit, was
to be deposed, a Sacerdotio repellatur c. 2.

A Bishop deserting his See and not returning in a set Time was to be Deprived.
Ab Episcopatu expelli. ib. c. 9.

If a Bishop or Presbyter excommunicates any without hearing his Cause, the
Person unjustly excommunicated shall be Absolved by another Presbyter, and he
that unjustly excommunicated him, shall himself be excommunicated. ib. c. 11.

If a Bishop that was deprived, or deposed, Sacerdotio pulsus, presumed to
return to the City he had belonged to, he was to be confined in a Monastry. ib.

A Bishop permitting a Deacon to Marry after he was ordained was to be
deprived; expellatur ab Episcopatu, and a Presbyter so Marrying was to be
degraded; expellatur a clero. ib. c. 14.

Many more Laws of this kind equivalent to our Acts of Parliament, might be
mentioned; and they all demonstrate that the Christians of those Ages knew no
such Principle, as the Independent Power of the Church in Ecclesiastical
Affairs.


Christian Emperors concern themselves in the Affairs of the Church and the
Government of it, but the Bishops admitted them to summon Councils by their
Imperial Authority; to appoint the Time and Place of their Meeting; to direct
the Matter to be treated on, and the Manner of their Proceeding. To Preside in,
and Regulate their Debates; to exercise Authority over their Declarations and
Canons, sometimes to Revoke, and sometimes to Suspend their Decrees. Sometimes
they not only made Laws about Church Government, without the Clergy; but even
regulated their Qualifications, and punished their Miscarriages; sometimes with
Commands to the Church to Degrade them, and sometimes to Excommunicate 'em.
They took upon them to judge of the Controversies between the Bishops;
suspended one, and set up another; and threatened the Refractory with
Deprivation, if they but disputed the Authority of their Summons. These Things
they did sometimes at the Request of the CHURCH, and often with hearty Thanks
for what they had done. And those Ages knew no such Thing as disputing the
competent Authority by which they acted, or the Validity of their Sentences; so
long as Nothing was done by them to the Detriment of the Christian Faith or
Religion. This shows most plainly, that what was practiced by the Independent
Authority of the Bishops and Clergy for the first three hundred Years, was only
out of Necessity, and not in a Claim of any Divine Right to exclude the Secular
Powers.

AND now I come to the

III. AND last Objection. Some are apt to think the Principles I advance too
prejudicial to the CHURCH'S Interest and Advantage, that they tend too much to
oppress and enslave Her. But I hope, I have not laid my self open deservedly to
any such Charge. I have granted it a divine unalienable Right to the Holy
Offices of all Religious Ministrations, to the Power of the Keys and to
Ordination. I have allowed it a natural and common Right to all the general
Powers of Government, and owned that by Virtue of CHRIST'S Commission, it has a
Trust useful to it in all its Exigencies; and an Authority to do every Thing in
the Exercise of its Spiritual Powers, that is necessary to be done for the
Propagation and Support of the Christian Religion. Where then is the Slavery or
Oppression in these Principles? Or what is it that we can by the Authority of
GOD and CHRIST claim more? Other Privileges and Authorities, may be granted to
it by the STATE: But of its own Right, I am not convinced that it can pretend
to more than these.

I AM, in Truth, very sensible, that the Clergy are in some Men's Esteem and
Opinion very low and mean; and I hope, I shall always carry a ready Inclination
to do my Endeavor to support both the Honor and the true Interest of the
Order. But, as all the Contempt that we seem to lie under, is either with Men
of profligate Principles, and wicked Lives, whose Reproaches can do us but
little or no Harm; or else with those, who take Offense at our Carriage and
Conduct: So Nothing certainly will go farther to raise our Character, and
promote our Interest, and engage Kings and States to entrust us with additional
Honors and Powers, than our Prudence and Piety, and Modesty, and great
Humility, which are none of them inconsistent with a due Regard to our just
Authority. And while these Virtues and Graces are sound to shine through all our
Conduct, we may vindicate our real Rights without any Scandal or great Offense.
But if we be vain and imprudent in our Behavior; troublesome and turbulent in
our Conduct, and grasp at Power and Authority in the Church, only to support
Factious Parties, and to raise Tumults and Seditions against the STATE: All
this will really do us harm. The Adversary will not fail to make all the
Advantages that they can of it, and we thus give them too just a handle
thereto. And this which is disagreable to the true Temper and Spirit of the
Gospel, will have yet a worse influence to our mighty Disadvantage. It will
make us cheap and mean in the Eyes of those Wise and Good Men, by whose
deserved Favor and Interest the Dignity and Character of our Holy Order should
be supported.

LET any Man of common Understanding judge what the World will think or say of
those Claims and Pretensions to Divine Power and Authority, which apparently
minister only to Ambition, and Pride, and Faction; but are not at all
serviceable to the Interest of true Religion. Such are the Pretenses that I
have so often mentioned already of the Governors of the Church being Spiritual
Kings, Princes, Lords, Legates, and supreme Monarchs in the Church Regent,
instead of the Church Militant; and having a Share of CHRIST'S Kingly Power in
his spiritual Kingdom, as well as of his Priesthood. In consequence of this, to
make all Christian Kings, and Princes, and States, their spiritual Inferiors
and Subjects, from whom, Submission and Obedience is to be expected in all
Religious Matters, under the Penalty of Excommunication, and consigning them
over to the Devil.

IN the Name of GOD, what Advantage will all this be to Religion? How naturally
do such Pretensions put Mankind upon enquiring, What Use the Clergy have made
of this Authority in Times past, when they had it in their Hands? And when upon
several Passages and Instances in History, they can tell us, that through this
very Power, Religion has been depraved and corrupted by the Clergy themselves,
who claim it: What Advantage will this be to the Honor, and Credit, and
Reputation of our Holy Order? Will not every notorious Miscarriage committed
under the Covert of a Divine Power from Christ in all Spiritual Causes;
occasion his whole Commission to be evil spoken of, and turn the very Name of
divine Right into Banter and Ridicule, and a Name of Contempt and Derision; and
give too plausible a Ground for the scandalous Imputation of Priestcraft? Who
must bear the Blame of all this? To whom is all this Contempt of the Clergy to
be imputed? In too great a Measure, to the blameable Arrogance, and boundless
Ambition, and spiritual Pride of some Clergymen. Mankind often fall the lower,
by aspiring too high. The Name of the Virgin Mary was always venerable, and
treated with great Respect among Christians, until some began to adore her as a
Goddess. And Nothing has brought Her to be so disrespectfully treated, as the
Idolatry of Men in Worshipping her. And so I in my Conscience believe, That
where there has been no scandalous Immorality of Life, Nothing has made our
Sacred Order meaner, or lower in their Interest and Esteem, than the claiming
under GOD and CHRIST more Power than They ever intended to bestow upon us.

AND especially then are these Pretenses scandalous and disadvantageous to our
Character, when the spiritual Authority of the Priesthood, is set up in
Opposition to the STATE; and made use of as a Check upon the Secular Powers,
and a Means to weaken them in their Authority, and to cramp them in the
Administration of Civil Government. I verily believe, that the Christian CHURCH
has lost more of Her true Interest by this, than by any other Means whatsoever.
In that when the Lay Powers recover themselves out of such injurious
Oppressions, they never fail to make very large and ample Reprisals. And here,
I must beg leave to remark, That this Claim of an Independent Power in
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Affairs, has not, that I know of been set up by
any of the Clergy of our Reformed CHURCH from Her first Reformation until the
late Happy Revolution. And as it was then first set on foot by the Non-jurors
in Defense of the Deprived Bishops and in Opposition to King WILLIAM and his
Government: So has it ever since been chiefly held up by those who have had
little or no Affection for our National Establishment and Constitution from
that Time. And the Scandalous Part of all this Scuffle in Controversy, and a
Schismatical Separation from our CHURCH, is not made on the Account of our Holy
Religion, and in Defense of the Powers by which that is to be Preserved; but
only in Behalf of a few particular Men, and by those who are confessedly in the
Interest of the Pretender, and who have Nothing more at Heart then this
groundless and unreasonable Schism in the CHURCH to dispose the Hearts of the
English People to another Rebellion against the STATE. Had it not been for the
serviceableness of this Doctrine to breed such Confusions among us, and to
throw us into Factions and seditions, it had never been set on Foot at first.
And if all other Methods of serving and supporting the Pretender's Cause had
not been baffled and made ineffectual, it had never been revived now. For while
they had Hope from other Means, These were laid asleep. And if Men were not
blinded and infatuated above all Measure: This is Demonstration clear enough,
that no such Ecclesiastical Power can be given by GOD and CHRIST. The
forementioned Concession of our Adversaries being a most certain and
indisputable Truth: That Christ has given no Authority to his Church, that can
interfere with the Civil Powers.

To make an end; I think I have plainly and clearly proved, that although by
CHRIST'S Commission the Divine Offices of all Christian Religious Ministrations
are Appropriated to the Bishops and Clergy only: Yet the General Governing
Powers of this Divine Society are not. That as these belong to it only of that
Common Right which naturally belongs to all Societies, and as they are
necessary to the Attainment of that End for which it was Instituted of GOD; so
consequently they have nothing in 'em to exclude the Jurisdiction of temporal
Governors. Because those temporal Governors have the very same natural and
common Right over all their Subjects, and in all Cases and Causes, to do every
Thing that shall be found necessary to the Support and Preservation of the
STATE; which the others can pretend to Claim for the Support and Preservation
of the CHURCH. Nay farther, That it would be no certain Advantage to Religion
for the CHURCH to be possessed of such Authority. That it would rob Kings and
Princes of one great Branch of their Sovereignty; and may be, and often has
been, used to defeat even their Civil Administrations and to shake their
Thrones, and to Ruin their Dominions. And in a Word that such an Independent
Authority is Incompatible with the Supremacy of Secular Princes, whose Affairs
must inevitably be influenced and controlled thereby. Therefore too such
inconsistent Supremacies cannot be believed to be derived both from GOD.

IN Consequence of all this, I have showed, That Princes have an Authority both
in the Election, and also in the Deprivation of Bishops, if they be disloyal
and disaffected to them. That without such a Power, Government may be made too
weak to subsist, and may be in Danger of being Overturned by the Power of the
Clergy. That as this is what Christ's Commission never was intended for, so
consequently all such Deprivations made by the legal Authority of the STATE are
good and Valid to all Intents and Purposes, and oblige the Consciences of all
the Subjects.

THE Conclusion of all this is, That the Deprivation of the late Non-juring
Bishops was in all respects Valid; that the People of their several Sees are
thereby discharged from all Submission, and Duty, and spiritual Communion, and
Relation to them. That they have no longer any lawful Authority in our CHURCH;
but we as Christians are bound to adhere to the Religious Communion of those
whom the King by the Laws of the Land shall Promote into their Places. And in a
Word, that the contrary Practice in leaving the Communion of this established
CHURCH, and setting up Religious Assemblies under the pretended Authority of
such Deprived Bishops or their Adherents: Is very Wicked and sinful in the
Sight of GOD, and an undoubted Schism from the Communion of the Church of
England.

I WILL only add, that as these have been the constant Doctrines and Principles
of the Church of England from the Beginning of the Reformation down to our
Times: So they had not now been disputed had it not been in favor of the
Pretender and of Popery.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
THE Occasion and Importance of this Debate, page 1. The State has a supremacy
in all Cases antecedently to the Church's Claim, 3 Natural Religion gives no
Independent Authority to the Priesthood, 4 Christ's Commission appropriates only
the Ministration in Holy Offices, 5 The General Governing Powers of the Church,
founded only on Common Right, and not Appropriated to the Clergy by Christ's
Commission, 8 Therefore not to be Executed by an Authority Independent on the
State. This proved by Six Arguments, 10 I. From the nature of the Powers in
Dispute, 11 Where Christ has not appropriated the Power, the State is not
excluded, ibid. Dr. Hickes admits this in Part, 12 How the Church's pretended
Independency, is to be understood, 16 The Practices of the three first
Centuries were of mere Necessity, page 17 The Royal Preisthood Nothing to this
Controversy, 18 The Non-jurors lofty Style and Pretensions unsuitable to the
Temper of the Gospel, 20 The Church's real Authority must not be judged of by
high Strains and Metaphors; but by the Powers actually conveyed and
appropriated, 22 II. Such an Independency in the Church not consistent with the
Subordination of Christ's Kingdom to that of the Father, 23 III. Not at all
Serviceable to Religion, 25 IV. It robs Secular Powers of one Branch of their
Sovereignty, 29 That secular Princes and States have Authority in Matters of
Religion, proved from the Jewish Kings, 31, 32 V. Such a Claim dangerous to all
Kingdoms, as Weakening and Ruining their Authority in their Temporal Affairs,
36 This Evidenced by the Practices of the Non-juring Schismatics, 37 VI. Two
Independent Powers in the Government of the same Body of Men breeds inevitable
Confusions; and therefore cannot be of GOD, page 41 The Necessity of granting,
that Christ has given the Church no Authority that interferes with Civil
Powers, 43 The State must have as ample a Power for its own Preservation, as
the Church has for Hers, ib. This necessarily gives them an Authority. 1. In
the Election of Bishops and Clergymen, 44. 2. In their Deprivation, 47 No
Persecution in depriving the Nonjuring Bishops, 50 No real Invasion of
Ecclesiastical Authority. 53 Three Objections answered; showing, I. That the
Relation of a Bishop to his Flock is not Divine, or Unalienable, 54 II. The
Principles and Practices of the Cyprianick Age, altogether foreign to this
Controversy, 62 III. No real Detriment to the Christian Church or Priesthood
from the Principles of this Essay. 69 The properest Method of Advancing the
Character and Interest of the Clergy. 70 The Conclusion. 75

ERRATA.
Page 14. line 21. read Modification. p. 15. l. 6. r. Powers. p. 50. l. 25. for
their r. the.


