NEVVES FROM AMERICA; OR, A NEW AND EXPERIMENTAL DISCOVERY OF NEW ENGLAND;
CONTAINING, A TRVE RELATION OF THEIR Warlike proceedings these two years last
past, with a Figure of the Indian Fort, or Palizado.

Also a discovery of these places, that as yet have very few or no Inhabitants
which would yield special accommodation to such as will Plant there, Viz.
Queenapoick. Agu-wom. Hudsons River. Long Island. Nahanticut. Martins Vinyard.
Pequet. Naransett Bay. Elizabeth Islands. Puscat away. Casko with about a
hundred Islands near to Casko.


By Captain JOHN UNDERHILL, a Commander in the Wars there.

LONDON, Printed by I.D. for Peter Cole, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Glove in Corne-hill near the Royal Exchange. 1638.

(...) of the Indians fort or Palizado in NEW ENGLAND (...) of the destroying
(...) C^^tayne Underhill (...) Ca^tayne Mason.


News from America, or a late and experimental discovery of New England.
I Shall not spend time (for my other occasions will not permit) to write
largely of every particular, but shall as briefly as I may perform these two
things, first give a true narration, of the warre-like proceedings that has
been in New England these two years last past. Secondly, I shall discover to
the Reader diverse places in New England, that would afford special
accommodations to such persons as will Plant upon them, I had not time to do
either of these as they deserved, but wanting time to do it as the nature of
the thing required; I shall according to my ability begin with a Relation of
our warre-like proceedings, and will inter-weave the special places fit for
New Plantations, with their description, as I shall find occasion in the
following discourse, but I shall according to my promise begin with a true
relation of the new England wars against the Block*Ilanders, and that
insolent and barbarous Nation, called the Pequeats, whom by the sword of the
Lord, and a few feeble instruments, soldiers not accustomed to war, were
drove out of their Country, and slain by the sword, to the number of fifteen
hundred souls in the space of two months and less: so as their Country is
fully subdued and fallen into the hands of the English: And to the end that
Gods name might have the glory, and his people see his power, and magnify his
honor for his great goodness I have indevoured according to my weak ability,
to set forth the full relation of the War from the first rise to the end of
the victory.

The cause of our war against the Block Islanders, was for taking away the life
of one Master John Oldham, who made it his common course trade amongst the
Indians* he coming to Block-Island to drive trade with them, the Islanders
came into his boat and having got a full view of commodities which gave them
good content, consulted how they might destroy him and his company, to the end
they might cloth their bloody flesh with his lawful garments. The Indians
having laid the plo^ into the boat they came to trade as they pretended
watching their opportunities, knocked him in the head, and martyred him most
Barbarously, to the great grief of his poor distressed servants, which by the
providence of God were saved. This Island lying in the rode way to the Lord
Sey, and the Lord Brooks plantation, a certain Sea man called to John Gallop
Master of the Small navigation standing along to the Mathethusis Bay, and
seeing a boat under sail close aboard the Island, and perceiving the sails
to be unskilfully managed, bred in him a jealously, whether that the Island
Indians had not bloodily taken the life of our Countrie-men, and made
themselves Master of their goods: suspecting this, he bore up to them and
approaching near them was confirmed that his jealousy was just, seeing
Indians in the boat, and knowing her to be the vessel of Master Oldham, and
not seeing him there gave fire upon them and slew some, others leaped over
board; besides two of the number which he preserved alive and brought to the
bay. The blood of the innocent called for vengeance, God stirred up the heart
of the honored Governor Master Henry Vane and the rest of the worthy
Magistrates to send forth a 100. well appointed Soldiers under the conduct of
Captain John Hendicot, and in company with him that had command, Captain John
Underhill, Captain Nathan Turner, Captain William Ienningson, besides other
inferior Officers. I would not have the world wonder at the great number of
Commanders ^o so few men, but know that the Indians fight ^arre differs from
the Christian practice, for they most commonly divide themselves into small
bodies, so that we are forced to neglect our usual way and to subdivide our
divisions to answer theirs, and not thinking it any disparagement, to any
Captain to go forth against an Enemy with a squaldron of men taking the ground
from the old and ancient practice when they chose Captains of hundreds and
Captain of thousands, Captains of fifties and Captains of tens: We conceive
a Captain signifies the chief in way of Command of any body committed to his
charge for the time being whether of more or less, it makes no matter in power
though in honor it does. Coming to an anckor before the Island we espied an
Indian walking by the shore in a desolate manner as though he had received
intelligence of our coming. Which Indian gave just ground to some to conclude
that the body of the people had diserted the Island.

But some knowing them for the generality to be a warlike nation, a people that
spend most of their time in the study of warlike policy were not persuaded
that they would upon so slender terms forsake the Island, but rather suspected
they might lie behind ^^anke, much like the form of a Baracado^ my self with
others rode with a Shallop made toward the shore, having in the Boat a dozen
^^med soldiers drawing near to the place of landing, the number that rose
from behind the Barracado, were between 50. or 60. able fighting men, men as
strait as arrows, very tall, and of active bodies, having their arrows
nockt, they drew near to the water side, and let fly at the soldiers, as
though they had meant to have made an end of us all in a moment; they shot a
young Gentleman in the neck through a collar for stiffenesse, as if it had
been an oaken board, and entered his flesh a good depth; my self received an
arrow through my coat sleeve, a second against my Helmet on the forehead, so
as if God in his providence had not moved the heart of my wife to persuade me
to carry it along with me which I was unwilling to do, I had been slain.
Give me leave to observe two things from hence first when the hour of Death is
not yet come, you see God uses weak means to keep his purpose unviolated.
Secondly, let no man despise advise and Counsel of his wife though she be a
woman; it were strange to nature to think a man should be bound to fulfill the
humor of a woman, what arms he should carry, but you see God will have it
so, that a woman should overcome a man: what with Dalilahs flattery, and with
her mourn^ull tears they must and will have their desire, when the hand of God
goes a long in the matter; and this is to accomplish his own will, therefore
let the clamor be quenched I daily hear in my ears, that New England men
usurp over their Wives, and keep them in servile subjection: the Country is
wronged in this matter, as in many things else: let this president satisfy the
doubtful, for that comes from the example of a rude soldier: if they be so
courteous to their wives, as to take their advice in warlike matters, how much
more kind is the tender affectionate husband to honor his wife as the weaker
vessel? Yet mistake not, I say not that they are bound to call their wives in
Council, though they are bound to take their private advice (so far as they
see it make for their advantage and their good*) instance Abraham. But to the
matter, the Arrows flying thick about us, we made have to the shore, but the
suffe of the Sea being great, hindered us, so as we could scarce discharge a
Musket, but were forced to make have to land* drawing near the shore through
the strength of wind, and the hollownesse of the Sea, we durst not adventure
to run ashore, but were forced to wade up to the middle, but once having got
up of our legs, we gave ^i^e upon them, they finding our bullets to out
reach their arrows, they fled before us; in the mean while Colonel Hindecot
made to the shore, and some of this number also r^pulsed him at his landing,
but hurt none* we thought they would stand it out with us, but they perceiving
we were in earnest, fled; and left their Wigwams or houses, and provision to
the use of our soldiers: having set forth our Sentinels, and laid out our
Pardues, we betook our selves to the guard, expecting hourly they would fall
upon us; but they observed the old rule, it is good sleeping in a whole skin,
and left us free from an alarm.

The next day we set upon our march, the Indians being retired into Swamps, so
as we could not find them, we burnt and spoiled both houses and corn in
great abundance: but they kept themselves in obscurity: Captain Turner
stepping aside to a Swampe, met with some few Indians, and charged upon them,
changing some few bullets for Arrows, himself received a shot upon the breast
of his Corslet, as if it had been pushed with a pike, and if he had not had
it on, he had lost his life.

A pretty passage worthy observation, we had an Indian with us that was an
interpreter, being in English clothes, and a Gunne in his hand, was spied by
the Ilanders, which called out to him, what are you an Indian or an
Englishman: come hither, says he, and I will tell you; he pulls up his cock
and let fly at one of them, and without question was the death of him: Having
spent that day in burning and spoiling the Island, we took up the quarter for
that night, about midnight my self went out with ten men about two miles from
our quarter, and discovered the most eminent Plantation, they had in the Island
where was much corn, many Wigwams, and great heaps of mats; but fearing lest
we should make an alarm by setting fire on them; we left them as we found
them, and peaceably departed to our quarter: and the next morning with ^0. men
marched up to the same Plantation, burnt their houses, cut down their corn,
destroyed some of their dogs in stead of men, which they left in their
Wigwams.

Passing on toward the water side to imbarque our soldiers, we met with
several famous Wigwams with great heaps of pleasant corn ready shaled, but
not able to bring it away, we did throw their mattes upon it, and set fire and
burnt it: many well-wrought mattes our soldiers brought from thence, and
several delightful baskets: we being divided into two parts, the rest of the
body met with no less, I suppose, then our selves did. The Indians playing
least in sight, we spent our time, and could no more advantage our selves then
we had already done, and having slain some fourteen, and maimed others, we
imbarqued our selves, and set sail for Seasbrooke fort, where we lay through
distress of weather four days, then we departed.

The Pequeats having slain one Captain Norton, and Captain Stone, with seven
more of their company, order was given us to visit them, sailing along the
Nahanticot shore with five vessels, the Indians spying of us came running in
multitudes along the water side, crying, what cheer Englishmen, what cheer,
what do you come for? They not thinking we intended war went on cheerfully
until they come to Pequeat river. We thinking it the best way did forbear to
answer them; first, that we might the better be able to run through the
work. Secondly, that by delaying of them, we might drive them in security, to
the end we might have the more advantage of them: but they seeing we would
make no answer, kept on their course, and cried, what English man, what cheer,
what cheer, are you hoggerie, will you cram us? That is, are you angry, will
you kill us, and do you come to fight. That night the Nahanticot Indians, and
the Pequeats, made fire on both sides of the River, fearing we would land in
the night. They made most doleful, and woeful cries all the night, (so that
we could scarce rest) hollowing one to another, and giving the word from place
to place, to gather their forces together, fearing the English were come to
war against them.

The next morning they sent early aboard an Ambassador, The Indians send to
the English an Ambassador.
a grave Senior, a man of good understanding, portly, carriage grave, and
majesticall in his expressions; he demanded of us what the end of our coming
was, to which we answered, that the Governors of the Bay sent us to demand the
heads of those persons that had slain Captain Norton, and Captain Stone, and
the rest of their company, and that it was not the custom of the English to
suffer murderers to live, and therefore if they desired their own peace and
welfare, they will peaceably answer our expectation, and give us the heads of
the murderers.

They being a witty and ingenious Nation, their Ambassador labored to excuse
the matter, and answered, we know not that any of ours have slain any English:
true it is, says he, we have slain such a number of men, but consider the
ground of it; not long before the coming of these English into the River,
there was a certain vessel that came to us in way of trade, we used them
well, and traded with them, and took them to be such as would not wrong us in
the least matter; but our Sachem or Prince coming aboard, they laid a plot how
they might destroy him, which plot discovers it ^^lfe by the event, as
follows* they keeping their boat aboard, and not desi^ous of our company,
gave us leave to stand ^ollowing a^hore, that they might work their
mischievous plot* but as we stood they called to us, and demanded of us a
bushel of Wampam Peke, which is their money, this they demanded for his
ransom, this peale did ring terribly in our ears, to demand so much for the
life of our Prince, whom we thought was in the hands of honest men, and we had
never wronged them; but we saw there was no remedy, their expectation must be
granted, or else they would not send him ashore, which they promised they would
do, if we would answer their desires* we sent them so much aboard according
to demand, and they according to their promise sent him ashore, This wa^ no
ways true of the Eng^ish, but a devised excuse.
but first slew him, this, much exasperated our spirits, and made us vow a
revenge; suddenly after came these Captains with a vessel into the River, and
pretended to trade with us as the former did: we did not discountenance them
for the present, but took our opportunity and came aboard. The Sachems son
succeeding his Father, was the man that came into the Cabin of Captain Stone,
and Captain Stone having drunk more then did him good, fell backwards on the
bed asleep, the Sagamore took his opportunity, and having a little hatchet
under his garment, therewith knocked him in the head: some being upon the deck
and others under, suspected some such thing, for the rest of the Indians that
were aboard, had order to proceed against the rest at one time, but the English
spying treachery, run immediately into the Cook room, and with a firebrand
had thought to have blown up the Indians by setting fire to the powder: these
devils instruments spying this plot of the English, leaped over-boord as the
powder was a firing, and saved themselves, but all the English were blown up,
this was the manner of their bloody action: Says the Ambassador to us, could
ye blame us for revenging so cruel a murder? for we distinguish not between
the Dutch and English, but took them to be one Nation, and therefore we do
not conceive that we wronged you, for they slew our king; and thinking these
Captains to be of the same Nation and people, as those that slew him, made us
set upon this course of revenge.

(...) the (...)* their (...).
Our answer was, they were able to distinguish between Dutch and English,
having had sufficient experience of both Nations, and therefore seeing you have
sl^ine the king of Englands subjects, we come to demand an account of their
blood, for we our selves are liable to account for them: the answer of the
Ambassador was, we know no difference between (...) Dutch and the English,
they are both strangers to us, we took them to be all one, therefore we crave
pardon, we have not wilfully wronged the English. This excuse will not serve
our turns, for we have suffici^nt ^^stim^nie that you know the English from
^^e Dutch we must have the heads of those persons that have slain ou^s, or
else we will fight with you: He answered; understanding the ground of your
coming, I will entreat you to give me liberty to go ashore, and I shall
inform the body of the people what your intent and resolution is* and if you
will stay aboard, I will bring you a sudden answer.

We did grant him liberty to get ashore, and our selves followed suddenly after
before the War was proclaimed: he seeing us land our forces, came with a
message to entreat us to come no nearer, but stand in a valley, which had
between us and them an ascent, that took our sight from them; but they might
see us to hurt us, to our prejudice: thus from the first beginning to the end
of the action, they carried themselves very subtly; but we not willing to
be at their direction marched up to the ascent, having set our men in
battally; he came and told us he had inquired for the Sachem, that we might
come to a parlie: but neither of both of the Princes were at home, they were
gone to Long Island.

Our reply was, we must not be put off thus, we know the Sachem is in the
Plantation, and therefore bring him to us, that we may speak with him, or else
we will beat up the Drum, and march through the Country, and spoil your
corn: His answer, if you will but stay a little while* I will ^^eppe to the
Plantation and (...) for them* we gave them leave to (...) their own course;
and used as much patience as ever men might, considering the gross abuse they
offered us, holding us above an hour in vain hopes: they sent an Indian to
tell us that Mommenoteck was found, and would appear before us suddenly, this
brought us to a new stand the space of an hour more. There came a third Indian
persuading us to have a little further patience, and he would not tarry, for he
had assembled the body of the Pequeats together, to know who the parties were
that had slain these English men* but seeing that they did in this interim
convey away their wives and children, and bury their chiefest goods, and
perceived at length they would fly from us, but we were patient, and bore with
them, in expectation to have the greater blow upon them The last messenger
brought us this intelligence from the Sa^h^^^, that if we would but lay down
our arms, and approach about thirty paces from them, and meet the heathen
(...), he would cause his men to do the like* and then we shall come to a
parlie.

But we seeing their drift was to get ou^ Arms, we rather chose to beat up
the Drum and bid them battle, marching into a champion field we displayed our
colors, but none would come near us, but standing remotely off did laugh a^
us for our patience, we suddenly let (...) o^r ma^ch, and gave fi^e t^ (...)
many as we could come near, firing their Wigwams, spoiling their corn, and
many other necessaries that they had buried in the ground we raked up, which
the soldiers had for booty. Thus we spent the day burning and spoiling the
Country, toward night imbarqued our selves the next morning, landing on the
Nahanticot shore, where we were served in like nature, no Indians would come
near us, but run from us, as the Dear from the dogs; but having burnt and
spoiled what we could light on, we imbarqued our men, and set sail for the
Bay, having ended this exploit came off, having one man wounded in the leg;
but certain numbers of theirs slain, and many wounded; this was the substance
of the first years service: now follows the service performed in the second
year.

This insolent Nation, seeing we had used much Lenity toward them, and
themselves not able to make good use of our patience, set upon a course of
greater insolency then before, and slew all they found in their way: they came
near Seabrooke fort, and made many proud challenges, and dared them out to
fight.

The Lieutenant went out with ten armed men, and starting three Indians they
changed some few shot for arrows; pursuing them an hundred more started out
of the ambushments, and almost surrounded him and his company, and some they
slew, others they maimed, and forced them to retreat to their Fort, so that it
was a special providence of God that they were not all slain: some of their
arms they got from them, others put on the English clothes, and came to the
Fort jeering of them, and calling, come and fetch your English men's clothes
again; come out and fight if you dare* you dare not fight, you are all one
like women, we have one amongst us that if he could kill but one of you more,
he would be equal with God, and as the English man's God is, so would he be;
this blasphemous speech troubled the hearts of the soldiers, but they knew not
how to remedy it in respect of their weakness.

The Conetticot Plantation understanding the insolency of the enemy to be so
great, sent down a certain number of soldiers under the conduct of Captain
John Mason for to strengthen the Fort. The enemy lying hovering about the Fort,
continually took notice of the supplies that were come, and forbore drawing
near it as before: and Letters were immediately sent to the Bay, to that Right
worshipful Gentleman, Master Henry Vane, for a speedy supply to strengthen the
Fort. For assuredly without supply suddenly came ^n reason all would be lost,
and fall into the hands of the enemy; This was the trouble and perplexity that
lay upon the spirits of the poor garrisons. Upon serious consideration the
Governor and Council sent forth my self with 20. armed soldiers to supply
the necessity of those distressed persons, and to take the government of that
place for the space of three months: relief being come, Captain John Mason
with the rest of his company returned to the Plantation again: we sometimes
fell out with a matter of twenty soldiers to see whether we could discover
the enemy or no; they seeing us (lying in ambush) gave us leave to pass by
them, considering we were too hot for them to meddle with us; our men being
completely armed, with Corslets, Muskets, bandileeres, rests, and swords (as
they themselves related afterward) did much daunt them; thus we spent a matter
of six weeks before we could have any thing to do with them, persuading our
selves that all things had been well. But they seeing there was no advantage
more to be had against the Fort, they enterprized a new action, and fell upon
Water town, now called Wethersfield with two hundred Indians; before they came
to attempt the place, they put into a certain River, an obscure small river
running into the maine, where they encamped, and refreshed themselves, and
fitted themselves for their service, and by break of day attempted their
enterprise, and slew nine men, women and children, having finished their
action, they suddenly returned again, bringing with them two maids captives,
having put poles in their Conoos, as we put Masts in our boats, and upon them
hung our English men's and women's shirts and smocks, in stead of sails, and in
way of bravado came along in sight of us as we stood upon Seybrooke Fort, and
seeing them pass along in such a triumphant manner, we much fearing they had
enterprised some desperate action upon the English, we gave fire with a piece
of Ordnance, and shot among their Conooes. And though they were a mile from
us, yet the bullet grazed not above twenty yards over the Conooe, where the
poor maids were; it was a special providence of God it did not hit them, for
then should we have been deprived of the sweet observation of Gods providence
in their deliverance: we were not able to make out after them, being destitute
of means, Boats, and the like: before we proceed any further to a full
relation of the insolent proceeding of this barbarous Nation, give me leave to
touch upon the several accommodations that belong to this Seybrooke Fort.

^
This Fort lies upon a River called Conetticot at the mouth of it, a place of a
very good soil, good meadow, diverse sorts of good wood, timber, variety of
fish of several kinds, foul in abundance, Geese, Duckes, Brankes, Teales,
Dear, Roe buck, Squirrels, which are as good as our English Rabets; pity it
is so famous a place should be so little regarded, it lies to the Northwest of
that famous place, called Queenapiok, which rather exceed the former in
goodness, it has a fair River fit for harboring of ships, and abounds with
rich and goodly meadows, this lies thirty miles from the upper Plantations,
which are planted on the River Connetticot: twelve miles above this Plantation
is situated a place called Aguawam, no way inferior to the forenamed places;
this Country, and those parts do generally yield a fertile soil, and good
meadow all the Rivers along: the river Conetticot is Navigable for Pinaces 60.
miles* it has a strong fresh stream that descends out of the hills, the tide
flows not above half way up the River: the strength of the freshite that
comes down the River is so strong, that it stops the force of the tide.

The truth is, I want time to set forth the excellency of the whole Country;
but if you would know the garden of New England, then must you glance your eye
upon Hodsons river, a place exceeding all yet named, the River affords fish in
abundance, as Sturgeon, Salmon, and many delicate varieties of fish that
naturally lies in the River, the only place for Beaver that we have in those
parts. Long Island is place worth the naming, and generally affords most of the
aforesaid accommodations. Nahanticot, Martins Vineyard, Pequeat, Narraganset
Bay, Elizabeth Islands, all these places are yet unhabited, and generally afford
good accommodation, as a good soil according as we have expressed, they are
little inferior to the former places. The Narraganset Bay is a place for
shipping so spacious, as it will contain ten thousand sail of ships. Capcod,
New Plymouth, Dukes bury, and all those parts, well accommodated for the
receiving of people, and yet few are there planted, considering the
spaciousness of the place; The Bay it self although report goes it is full,
and can hardly entertain any more, yet there are but few towns, but are able
to receive more then they have already, and to accommodate them in a
comfortable measure.

The Northern Plantations, and Eastern, as Puscataway would not be
neglected, they are desirable places, and lie in the heart of fishing.
Puscataway is a River navigable for a ship of a hundred tun some six leagues
up: with Boats and Pinaces you may go a great way further; it is the only key
of the Country for safety; with twelve pieces of Ordnance will keep out all
the enemies in the world: the mouth of the River is narrow, lies full upon the
Southeast Sea; so as there is no ankoring without, except (...) hazard ship and
men* it is accommodated with a good soil, abundance of good timber, meadows
are not wanting to the place; pity it is it has been so long neglected.

Augumeaticus is a place of good accommodation, it lies five miles from
Puscataway river, where Sir Ferdinand^ Go^ge has a house: it is a place worthy
to be inhabited, a soil that bears good corn, all sorts of g^aine, ^lax,
hemp, the Country generally will afford: there was grown in Puscataway the
last year, and in the Bay as good English grain as can grow in any part of
the world. Casko has a famous Bay accommodated with a hundred Islands, and is
fit for Plantation, and has a River belonging to it, which does afford fish in
abundance, foul also in great measure: so full of Foul it is, that strangers
may be supplied with variety of foul in an hour or two after their arrival*
which knew not how to be relieved before; because the place in general is so
famous, and well known to all the world, and chiefly to on. English Nation
(the most noblest of this Commonwealth) I therefore forbear many particulars
which yet might be expressed: (...) in regard of many aspersions has been
cast upon all the Country, that it is a hard and difficult place for to
subsist in; and that ^^e soil is barren, and bears little that is good, and
that it can hardly receive more people then those that are there, I will
presume to make a second digression from the former matter, to the end I might
encourage such as desire to Plant there.

There are certain Plantations Dedum Concord in the Mathethusis Bay, that are
newly erected that do afford large accommodation, and will contain abundance
of people; but I cease to spend time in matters of this nature, since my
discourse tends to warlike story, but I crave pardon for my digression.

I told you before, that when the Pequeats heard and saw Seabrooke Fort was
supplied, they forbore to visit us: But the old Serpent according to his first
malice stirred them up against the Church of Christ, and in such a furious
manner, as our people were so far disturbed, and affrighted with their
boldness that they scarce durst rest in their beds: threatening persons and
cattle to take them, as indeed they did: so insolent were these wicked imps
grown, that like the devil their commander, they run up and down as
roaring Lions, compassing all corners of the Country for a prey, seeking whom
they might devour: It being death to them for to rest without some wicked
employment or other, they still plotted how they might wickedly attempt some
bloody enterprise upon our poor native Contrymen.

One Master Tillie master of a Vessel, being brought to an ankor in Conetticot
River, went ashore, not suspecting the bloody-mindednesse of those persons, who
fell upon him, and a man with him, whom they wickedly and barbarously slew; and
by relation brought him home, tied him to a stake, flead his skin off, put hot
imbers between the flesh and the skin, cut off his fingers and toes, and
made hatbands of them, thus barbarous was their cruelty: would not this have
moved the hearts of men to hazard blood, and life, and all they had, to
overcome such a wicked insolent Nation? but Letters coming into the Bay, that
this attempt was made upon Wethersfield in Conetticot river, and that they had
slain nine men, women and children, and taken two maids captives, the Council
gave order to send supply. In the mean while the Conetticot Plantations sent
down 100. armed soldiers, under the conduct of Captain John Mason, and
Leiutenant Seily, with other inferior officers, who by Commission were bound
for to come to randivou at Seabrooke Fort, and there to consult with those that
had command there to enterprise some stratagem upon these bloody Indians. The
Conetticot company having with them threescore Mohiggeners, whom the Pequeats
had drove out of their lawful possessions; These Indians were earnest to join
with the English, or at least to be under their conduct, that they might
revenge themselves of those bloody enemies of theirs, the English perceiving
their earnest desire that way, gave them liberty to follow the company, but not
to join in confederation with them, the Indians promising to be faithful, and
to do them what service lay in their power: But having imbarqued their men,
and coming down the River, there arose great jealousy in the hearts of those
that had chief oversight of the company, fearing that the Indians in time of
greatest trial might revolt, and turn their backs against those they
professed to be their friends, and join with the Pequeats: this perplexed the
hearts of many very much, because they had had no experience of their fidelity:
but Captain Mason having sent down a Shallop to Seybrooke Fort, and sent the
Indians over land to meet, and randivou at Seabrooke Fort, themselves came
down in a great massy Vessel, which was slow in coming, and very long
detained by cross winds, the Indians coming to Seabrooke, were desirous to
fall out on the Lords day, to see whether they could find any Pequeats near
the Fort; persuading themselves that the place was not destitute of some of
their enemies: but it being the Lords day, order was given to the contrary, and
wished them to forbear until the next day, giving them liberty, they fell out
early in the morning, and brought home five Pequeats heads, one prisoner, and
mortally wounded the seventh: This mightily encouraged the hearts of all, and
we took this as a pledge of their further fidelity: my self taking boat rode
up to meet the rest of the forces, lying a board the vessel with my boat, the
Minister, one Master Stone, that was sent to instruct the Company, was then in
prayer solemnly before God, in the midst of the soldiers, and this passage
worthy observation I set down, because the providence of God might be taken
notice of, and his name glorified, that is so ready for to honor his own
ordinance: the hearts of all in general being much perplexed, fearing the
infidelity of these Indians having not heard what an exploit they had wrought:
it pleased God to put into the heart of master Stone this passage in prayer,
while my self lay under the vessel and heard it, himself not knowing that
God had sent him a messenger to tell him his prayer was granted: O Lord God, if
it be thy blessed will vouchsafe so much favor to thy poor distressed
servants, as to manifest one pledge of thy love that may confirm us of the
fidelity of these Indians toward us, that now pretend friendship and service
to us, that our hearts may be encouraged the more in this work of thine:
immediately my self stepping up, told him that God had answered his desire,
and that I had brought him this news, that those Indians had brought in ^^ve
Pequeats heads, one pri^on^r, and wounded one mo^^ally, which did much
encourage the h^arts of all, and replenished them exceedingly, and gave them
all occasion to rejoice and be thankful to God: a little before we set
forth, came a certain ship from the Dutch Plantation; casting an ankor under
the command of our Ordnance, we desired the Master to come ashore, the Master
and Merchant willing to answer our expectation, came forth, and sitting with us
awhile unexpectedly revealed their intent, that they were bound for Pequeat
river to trade; our selves knowing the accustom of war, that it was not the
practice in a case of this nature, to suffer others to go and trade with them
our enemies, with such commo^^^ies as might be prejudicial unto us, and
ad^antag^^us to them, as kettles, or the like, which make them Arrow-heads; we
gave command to them not to stir, alleging that (...) were intended daily to
fall upon them* This being unkindly taken, it bred (...) between their
several Commande^^^ but God was pleased out of his (...) things in such a
sweet moderate may (...) turned to his glory and his peoples good

T^ese men seeing they could not have (...) to (...) upon their desi^ne: gave
us a (...) their hands that if we would give them liberty to depart, they would
endeavor to the utmost of their ability to release those two captive Maids,
and this should be the chief scope and drift of their design: having these
promises, depending upon their faithfulness, we gave them liberty: they set
sail and went to Pequeat river, and sent to shore the Master of the vessel to
Sasacoose their Prince, for to crave liberty to trade, and what would they
trade for, but the English Maids, which he much disliked; suddenly withdrawing
himself he returned back to the vessel, and by way of policy allured seven
Indians into the Bark, some of them being their prime men: having them aboard,
acquainted them with their intent, and told them without they might have the
two Captives delivered safely aboard, they must keep them as prisoners, and
pledges, and therefore must resolve not to go ashore, until such time they
had treated with the Sagamore: One of the Dutch called to them on the shore,
and told them they must bring the two captive Maids, if they would have the
seven Indians, and therefore briefly if you will bring them, tell us* if not
we set sail, and will turn all your Indians over-boord in the maine Ocean, so
soon as ever we come out; they taking this to be a jest, slighted what was
said unto them: they weying ankor set sail, and drew near the mouth of the
River; the Pequeats then discerned they were in earnest, and earnestly desired
them to return and come to an anko^, and they would answer their expectation:
so they brought the two Maids, and deliver^d them safely aboard, and they
returned to them the seven Indians, then they set sail and came to Seabrooke
Fort; bringing them to Seabrooke Fort, request was made to have them ashore;
but in regard of the Dutch Governors desire, who had heard that there was two
English Maids taken captives of the Pequeats, and thinking his own Vessel to
be there a trading with them, he had managed out a Pinace purposely to give
strict order and command to the former Vessel to get these Captives what
charge soever they were at; nay, though they did hazard their peace with them,
and to gratify him with the first sight of them after their deliverance: so
they earnestly entreated us that they might not be brought ashore so as to
stay there, or to be sent home until they had followed the Governors order,
which willingly was granted to them, though it were 30. leagues from us, yet
were they safely returned again, and brought home to their friends: now for
the examination of the two Maids after they arrived at Seabrooke Fort, the
eldest of them was about sixteen years of age, demanding of her how they had
used her, she told us that they did solicit her to uncleanness, but her heart
being much broken and afflicted under that bondage she was cast in, The
examination of the captive Maids after their return, though the younger was
very young and said little.
had brought to her consideration these thoughts, how shall I commit this great
evil and sin against my God? Their hearts were much taken up with the
consideration of Gods just displeasure to them, that had lived under so prudent
means of grace as they did, and had been so ungrateful toward God, and
slighted that means, so that Gods hand was justly upon them for their
remissness in all their ways; Thus was their hearts taken up with these
thoughts, the Indians carried them from place to place, and showed them their
Forts, and curious Wigwams, and houses, and encouraged them to be merry, but
the poor souls, as Israel, could not frame themselves to any delight or mirth
under so strange a King, they hanging their Harpes upon the Willow trees, gave
their minds to sorrow, hope was their chiefest food, and tears their constant
drink: behind the rocks, and under the trees, the eldest spent her breath in
supplication to her God, and though the eldest was but young, yet must I
confess the sweet affection to God for his great kindness, and fatherly love
she daily received from the Lord, which sweetened all her sorrows, and gave her
constant hope, that God would not, nor could not forget her poor distressed
soul and body, because, says she, his loving kindness appears to me in an
unspeakable manner; and though sometimes, says she, I cried out David-like; I
shall one day perish by the hands of Saul, I shall one day dye by the hands of
these barbarous Indians, and specially if our people should come forth to war
against them, then is there no hope of deliverance, then must I perish, then
will they cut me off in malice; but suddenly the poor soul was ready to
quarrel with it self; why should I distrust God? do not I daily see the love
of God unspeakably to my poor distressed soul? and he has said he will never
leave me, nor forsake me, therefore I will not fear what man can do unto
me, knowing God to be above man, and man can do nothing without Gods
permission. These were the words that fell from her mouth when she was examined
in Seabrook fort^ I having command of Seabrooke Fort she spoke these things
upon examination in my hearing.

Christian reader, give me leave to appeal to the hearts of all true
affectioned Christians* whether this be not the usual course of Gods dealing
to his poor captivated children, the prisoners of hope, to distill a great
measure of sweet comfort and consolation into their souls in the time of
trouble, so that the soul is more affected with the sense of Gods fatherly
love, then with the grief of its captivity* sure I am, that sanctified
afflictions, crosses, or any outward troubles appear so profitable, that Gods
dear Saints are forced to cry out, Thy loving kindness is better then life,
then all the lively pleasures and profits of the world: better a prison
sometimes and a Christ, then liberty without him: better in a fiery furnace
with the presence of Christ, then in a Kingly palace without him: better in the
Lions den, in the midst of all the roaring lions and with Christ, then in a
down bed with wife and children without Christ. The speech of David is
memorable, that sweet affectionate Prince and soldier, how sweet is thy word
to my taste; yea, sweeter then the honey, and the honey comb; he spoke it by
experience, he had the sweet relish of Gods comforting presence, and the daily
communion he had with the Lord, in the midst of all his distresses, trials, and
temptations that fell upon him. And so the Lord deals to this day; the greater
the captivities be of his servants, the contentions amongst his Churches, the
cleerer Gods presence is amongst his to pick and cull them out of the fire, and
to manifest himself to their souls; and bear them up as Peter above the
water that they sink not.

But now my dear and respected friends and fellow soldiers in the Lord, are
not you apt to say, if this be the fruit of afflictions* I would I had some of
those, that I might enjoy these sweet breathings of Christ in my soul, as
those that are in afflictions; but beware of those thoughts, or else experience
will teach all to recall, or to unwith those thoughts, for it is against the
course of Scripture to wish for evil, that good might come of it, we cannot
expect the presence of Christ in that which is contrary to him, (a man laying
himself open to trouble) but we are rather to follow Christ's example, Father
not my will, but thy will be done, in earth as it is in heaven; and when thou
art brought thus, prostrate before the Lord like an obedient child, ready to
suffer what he will impose on thee; then if he think good to try us, we
may exclude no trial, no captivity though burdensome or tedious to nature,
for they will appear sweet and sanctified in the issue, if they be of the
Lords laying on: specially when the Lord is pleased to impose trouble on his in
way of trial (as he said to Israel of old; I did it to prove you, and to see
what was in your hearts) whether a soul would not do as the foolish young man
in the Gospel, cling more closer to his honor, or profit, or ease, or peace,
or liberty, then to the Lord Jesus Christ: and therefore the Lord is pleased to
exercise his people with trouble and afflictions, that he might appear to
them in mercy, and reveal more clearly his free grace unto their souls.
Therefore consider dear brethren, and err not, neither to the right hand, nor
to the left and be not as Ephraim, like an untamed heifer that would not
stoop unto the yoke: but stoop to Gods afflictions if he please to impose
them, and fear them not when they are from God. And know that Christ cannot be
had without a cross; they are inseparable* you cannot have Christ in his
Ordinances, but you must have his cross. Did ever any Christian read, that in
the purest Churches that ever were, that Christians were freed from the Cross?
was not the Cross carried after Christ? and Andrew must follow Christ, but not
without a Cross; he must take it and bear it, and that upon his shoulders,
implying, it was not a light cross, but weighty: Oh let not Christians show
themselves to be so forgetful, as I fear many are, of the old way of Christ:
case is come into the world, and men would have Christ and ease, but it will
not be in this world; is the servant better then the master? no, he is not,
neither shall he be. But you may demand what is meant by this cross, we meet
with many crosses in the world, losses at home and abroad, in Church and Common
wealth: what cross does Christ mean? was it a cross to be destitute of a
house to put his head in? or was it his cross, that he was not so deliciously
sed as other men? or to be so mean, wan^ing honor as others had? o^ was it
that his habit was not answerable to the course of the world, or to be
destitute of silver and gold, as it is the lot of many of Gods saints to this
day: this was not the cross of Christ, you shall not hear him complain of
his estate, that it is too mean, or his lodging too bad, or his garments too
plain; these were not the troubles of Christ, these are companions to the
cross. But the chief cross that Christ had, was that the word of his Father
could not take place in the hearts of those to whom it was sent, and suffering
for the truth of his Father, that was Christ's cross; and that is the cross
too, that Christians must expect, and that in the purest Churches: And
therefore why do you stand and admire at New England, that there should be
contentions there, and differences there, and that for the truth of Christ? Do
you not remember that the cross followed the Church? has it not been already
said that Christ's cross followed him, and Andrew must carry it: and that Paul
and Barnabas will contend together for the truths sake? And does not the
Apostle say, contend for the truth (though not in a violent way?) does not
Christ say, I came not to bring peace but a sword? and why should men wonder at
us, seeing that troubles and contentions have followed the purest Churches
since the beginning of the world to this day? wherefore should we not look
back to the Scriptures, and deny our own reason, and let that be our guide
and Platform, and then shall we not so much admire, when we know it is the
portion of Gods Church to have troubles and contentions? and when we know also
it is God that brings them, and that for good to his Church; has not God ever
brought light out of darkness, good out of evil? did not the breath of Gods
Spirit sweetly breathe in the souls of these poor Captives which we now
related? and do we not ever find the greater the afflictions and troubles of
Gods people be, the more eminent is his grace in the souls of his servants?
You that intend to go to New England, fear not a little trouble.

More men would go to Sea, if they were sure to meet with no storms: but he
is the most courageous soldier, that sees the battle pitched, the Drums
beat an alarm, and Trumpets sound a charge, and yet is not afraid to join in
the battle: show not your selves cowards, but proceed on in your intentions,
and abuse not the lenity of our noble Prince, and the sweet liberty he has
from time to time given to pass and repasse according to our desired wills:
wherefore do ye stop, are you afraid? May not the Lord do this to prove
your hearts, to see whether you durst follow him in afflictions or not? what is
become of Faith? I will not fear that man can do unto me, says David, no nor
what troubles can do, but will trust in the Lord, who is my God.

Let the ends and aims of a man be good, and he may proceed with courage:
the bush may be in the fire, but so long as God appears to Moses out of the
bush there is no great danger, more good then hurt will come out of it* Christ
knows how to honor himself, and to do his people good, though it be by
contrary means, which reason will not fathom. Look but to faith, and that
will make us see plainly, that though afflictions for the present are grievous,
as doubtless it was with these two captive Maids, yet sweet and comfortable
is the issue with all Gods saints, as it was with them. But to go on.

Having imbarqued ^our soldiers, we weighed ankor at Seabrooke Fort, and set
sail for the Narraganset Bay, deluding the Pequeats thereby, for they expected
us to fall into Pequeat River; but crossing their expectation, bred in them a
security: we landed our men in the Narraganset Bay, and marched over land
above two days journey before we came to Pequeat; quartering the last nights
march within two miles of the place, we set forth about one of the clock in
the morning, having sufficient intelligence that they knew nothing of our
coming. Drawing near to the Fort yielded up our selves to God, and entreated
his assistance in so weighty an enterprise. We set on our march to surround
the ^
Fort, Captain John Mason, approaching to the West end, where it had an
entrance to pass into it, my self marching to the South side, surrounding the
Fort, placing the Indians, for we had about three hundred of them without,
side of our soldiers in a ring battalia, giving a volley of shot upon the
Fort, so remarkable it appeared to us, as we could not but admire at the
providence of God in it, that soldiers so unexpert in the use of their arms,
should give so complete a volley, as though the finger of God had touched both
match and flint: which volley being given at break of day, and themselves fast
asleep for the most part, bred in them such a terror, that they brake forth
into a most doleful cry, so as if God had not fitted the hearts of men for the
service, it would have bred in them a commiseration toward them: but every man
being bereaved of pity fell upon the work without compassion, considering the
blood they had shed of our native Contrymen, and how barbarously they had
dealt with them, and slain first and last about thirty persons. Having given
fire, we approached near to the entrance which they had stopped full, with
arms of trees, or brakes: my self approaching to the entrance found the work
too heavy for me, to draw out all those which were strongly forced in. We
gave order to one Master Hedge, and some other soldiers to pull out those
brakes, having this done, and laid them between me and the entrance, and
without order themselves, proceeded first on the South end of the Fort: but
remarkable it was to many or us; men that run before they are sent, most
commonly have an ill reward. Worthy Reader, let me entreat you to have a more
charitable opinion of me (though unworthy to be better thought of) then is
reported in the other Book: you may remember there is a passage unjustly laid
upon me, that when we should come to the entrance, I should put forth this
question: shall we enter? others should answer again; What came we hither for
else? It is well known to many, it was never my practice in time of my
command, when we are in garrison, much to consult with a private soldier, or
to ask his advise in point of War, much less in a matter of so great ^
moment as that was, which experience had often caught me, was not a time to
put forth such a question, and therefore pardon him that has given the wrong
information, having our swords in our right hand, our Carbins or Muskets in our
left hand, we approached the Fort* Master Hedge being shot through both arms,
and more wounded; though it be not commendable for a man to make mention at
any thing that might tend to his own honor; yet because I would have the
providence of God observed, and his Name magnified, as well for my self as
others, I dare not omit, but let the world know, that deliverance was given to
us that command, as well as to private soldiers. Captain Mason and my (...)
entering into the Wigwams, he was shot, and received many Arrows against his
head-peece, God preserved him from any wounds; my self received a shot in
the lef^ hippe, through a sufficient Buffe (...) that if I had not been
supplied with such a (...) the Arrow would have pierced through me; another I
received between neck and shoulders, hanging in the linen of my Head-peece,
others of our soldiers were shot some through the shoulders, some in the face,
some in the head, some in the legs: Captain Mason and my self losing each of
us a man, and had near twenty wounded: most courageously these Pequeats
behaved themselves: but seeing the Fort was to hot for us, we devised a way
how we might save our selves and prejudice them, Captain Mason entering into a
Wigwam, brought out a firebrand, after he had wounded many in the house, then
he set fire on the West Side where he entered, my self set fire on the South
end with a train of Powder, the fires of both meeting in the center of the
Fort blazed most terribly, and burnt all in the space of half an hour; many
courageous fellows were unwilling to come out, and fought most desperately
through the Palisadoes, so as they were scorched and burnt with the very flame,
and were deprived of their arms, in regard the fire burnt their very
bowstrings, and so perished valiantly: mercy they did deserve for their valor,
could we have had opportunity to have bestowed it; many were burnt in the
Fort, both men, women, and children, others forced out, and came in troops to
the Indians, twenty, and thirty at a time, which our soldiers received and
entertained with the point of the sword; down fell men, women, and children,
those that escaped us, fell into the hands of the Indians, that were in the
reere of us; it is reported by themselves, that there were about four hundred
souls in this Fort, and not above five of them escaped out of our hands. Great
and doleful was the bloody sight to the view of young soldiers that never had
been in War, to see so many souls lie gasping on the ground so thick in
some places, that you could hardly pass along. It may be demanded, Why should
you be so furious (as some have said) should not Christians have more mercy and
compassion? But I would refer you to David's war, when a people is grown to
such a height of blood, and sin against God and man, and all confederates in
the action, there he has no respect to persons, but harrowes them, and sawes
them, and puts them to the sword, and the most terriblest death that may be:
sometimes the Scripture declares women and children must perish with their
parents; some-time the case alters: but we will not dispute it now. We had
sufficient light from the word of God for our proceedings.

Having ended this service, we drew our forces together to battallia, being
ordered, the Pequeats came upon us with their prime men, and let fly at us, my
self fell on scarce with twelve or fourteen men to encounter with them; but
they finding our bullets to outreach their arrows, forced themselves often to
retreat: when we saw we could have no advantage against them in the open
field, we requested our Indians for to entertain fight with them, our end was
that we might see the nature of the Indian war: which they granted us and
fell out; the Pequeats, Narragansets, and Mohigeners changing a few arrows
together after such a manner, as I dare boldly affirm, they might fight seven
years and not ^ill seven men: they came not near one another* but shot
remote, and not point blanke, as we often do with our bullets, but at rovers,
and then they gaze up in the sky to see where the Arrow falls, and not until
it is fallen do they shoot again, this fight is more for pastime, then to
conquer and subdue enemies. But spending a little time this way, we were
forced to cast our eyes upon our poor maimed soldiers, many of them lying
upon the ground, wanting food and such nourishable things as might refresh them
in this faint estate: but we were not supplied with any such things whereby we
might relieve them, but only were constrained to look up to God, and to
entreat him for mercy toward them: most were thirsty but could find no water;
the provision we had for food was very little; many distractions seized upon
us at the present, a Surgeon we wanted, our Surgeon not accustomed to
war, durst not hazard himself where we ventured our lives, but like a
fresh water soldier kept aboard, and by this means our poor maimed soldiers
were brought to a great strait and faintness, some of them swounding away for
want of speedy help, but yet God was pleased to preserve the lives of them,
though not without great misery, and pain to themselves for the present.
Distractions multiplying, strength and courage began to f^ile with many. Our
Indians that had stood close to us hitherto, were fallen into consultation, and
were resolved for to leave us in a land we knew not which way to get out:
suddenly after their resolution, fifty of the Narraganset Indians fell off
from the rest returning home. The Pequeats spying them pursued after them: then
came the Narrag^^^ets to Captain Mason, and my self, crying, oh help us now,
or out men will be all slain we answered, how dare you crave a^de of us, when
you are leaving of us in this distressed condition, not knowing which way to
march out of the Country: but yet you shall see it is not the nature of
English men to deal like Heathens, to requite evil for evil, but we will
succor you my self falling on with thirty men, in the space of an hour
rescued their men, and in our recreate to the body, slew and wounded above a
hundred Peq^eats, all fighting men that charged us both in reere and flanks.
Having overtaken the body, we were resolved to match to a certain ne^^e or
land that lay by the Seaside, where we intended to quar^e^ that night,
because we knew not how to get our maimed men to Pequeat River. As yet we saw
not our Pinaces sail along, but ^eared the Lord had crossed them, which also the
master of the Barque much feared. We gave them order to set sail on the
Narraganset Bay, about midnight, as we were to fall upon the Fort in the
morning, so that they might meet us in Pequeat River in the afternoon; but
the wind being cross bred in them a great perplexity what would become of us,
knowing that we were (...) orderly provided, both with munition and pro^^^^^^
but they being in a distracted condition lifted (...) hearts to God for help:
about twelve of (...) ^ocket he wind turned about and became fair, it brought
them along in sight of us, and about ten a clock in the morning carried them
into Pequeat ri^es, coming to an ankor at the place appointed, the wind turned
as full against them as ever it could blow* (...) remarkable this providence of
God was I leave (...) Christian eye to judge; Our ^ndians came to us, (...)
much rejoiced at our victories, and greatly admired the manner of English men's
fight: but cried ^ach it, match it; that is, it is naught, it is naught, because
it is too furious, and slaies too many men. Having received their desires, they
freely promised, and gave up themselves to march along with us, where ever we
would go. God having eased us from that oppression that lay upon us, thinking
we should have been left in great misery for want of our vessels, we diverted
our thoughts from going to that neck of land; and faced about, marching to the
river where our vessels lay at ankor. One remarkable passage. The Pequeats
playing upon our flanks; One Sergeant Davis, a pretty courageous soldier,
spying something black upon the top of a rock, stepped forth from the body
with a Carbine of three foot long, and at a venture gave fire, supposing it to
be an Indians head, turning him over with his heels upward; the Indians
observed this, and greatly admired that a man should shoot so directly. The
Pequeats were much daunted at the shot, and forbore approaching so near upon
us. Being come to the Pequeat river we met with Captain Patrick, who under his
command had 40. able soldiers, who was ready to begin a second attempt: but
many of our men being maimed and much wearied, we forbore that night and
imbarqued our selves, my self setting sail for Seabrooke Fort. Captain
Mason, and Captain Patrick marching over land, burned and spoiled the Country
between the Pequeat and Conetticot river, where we received them. The Pequeats
having received so terrible a blow, and being much affrighted with the
destruction of so many, the next day fell into consultation, assembling their
most ablest men together propounded these three things, first whether they
would set upon a sudden revenge upon the Narragansets, or attempt an enterprise
upon the English, or fly; they were in great dispute one amongst another,
Sasachu: their chief Commander was all for blood, the rest for flight,
alleging these arguments, we are a people bereaved of courage, our hearts are
sadded with the death of so many of our dear friends; we see upon what
advantage the English lie, what sudden and deadly blows they strike? what
advantage they have of their pieces to us which are not able to reach them with
our arrows at distance? they are supplied with every thing necessary, they are
flote and heartened in their victory; to what end shall we stand it out with
them? we are not able, therefore let us rather save some then lose all; this
prevailed. Suddenly after they spoiled all those goods they could not carry
with them, broke up their tents and Wigwams, and betook themselves to flight.
Sasachus flying toward Conetticot plantation, quartered by the river side,
there he met with a Shallop sent down to Seabrooke Fort, which had in it 3.
men, they let ^ly upon them, shot many arrows into them. Courageous were the
English, and died in their ^^nds, but with a great deal of valor. The forces
which were prepared in the Bay were ready for to set forth my self being taken
on but for 3. months, and the soldiers willing to return to the Bay, we
imbaroued our selves, and set to sail; in our journey we met (...) certain
Pinaces, in them a 100. able and well appointed soldiers under the conduct of
one Captain ^^ou^hton, and other inferior officers; and in company with them
one M. John Wilson, who was sent to in^^^uct the Company; these falling into
Pequeat river, met with many of the distressed Indians, some they (...), others
they took prisoners.

FINIS.

