The state of the Suite in Chancerie, between Francis Verslyn pl': against
Peter Manning, Michael Pulmer and their wives etc. defendants is, viz.
Jacob Verslyn was seized in Fee of the lands in question, under whose estate
all the parties claim. And the said Jacob Verslyn having in his perfect health
traveled in person to Master Serieant Foster, and used his counsel and advise
in making of a Will, dat. 23. Iulij 1601. wherein he settled his lands in the
name of the Verslyns, and published the same in Merchantailors Hall and there
left the Duplicate thereof with a purpose never to revoke the same.

That the defendants (who now seek the reuersal of the decree in Chancery by
Act of Parliament, taking advantage of the old man's weakness both of body and
memory, being no way able to go abroad and also of the Plaintifes
imprisonment) by false Rumors, viz. That Francis the pl' had said he was
ashamed of his Parents and would change his name; That his Mother was a Whore;
to one Doctor Nowell her son in law and to Petula a Broker, and that Francis
the Plaintiff had sold his Patrimony for 700. pounds and had received in hand
300. pounds and had taken part with Sir Ieram Bows against the said Jacob his
Father. Upon these untrue reports (making the said Jacobs wife the Instrument)
they caused the said Jacob, being aged 84. years and upwards to alter his said
will, and to disinherite his said eldest son Francis and to settle the lands
upon the defendants and their wives his daughters, they having great portions
with their wives in marriage; The just and legal proceedings of the said suite
appears as follows.

The suite for this land after the death of Jacob, between the said Francis
his son and the defendants his daughters, and their husbands was in the
Chauncerie before the Lord Ellesmere, whose care was so great to do Justice in
this cause; That after solemn hearing thereof three whole days together in
one Term in open Court in Chauncery; It was upon the fourth day of February 9.
Iacobi ordered, that the said Plaintiff should exhibit an Information in the
Starrechamber for the said practices etc. That so his Lordship might have the
Assistance of that honorable court, for his better Judgment in the cause.

That in the said suit in Starrechamber the defendants as to the undue
practices in procuring the said last will pleaded the general pardon, and
prayed the benefit thereof, So as the Court could not proceed to Sentence: And
as to the forging and publishing of the Deed of Feoffment of part of the lands
pretended to be made by old Jacob to Peter Manning and his wife, the said
Manning and Say (being the defendants charged therewith) pleaded not guilty;
And as to the misdemeanor in obtaining the said deed they pleaded the general
Pardon, as appears by the order made in that Court. 27. Maij 12. Iacobi.

That upon hearing of the cause in Starrechamber, the Court did find very
strong, and maine presumptions, that the said deed was forged, and counterfete
yet forbear to give Sentence not having full, and apparent proof thereof in
regard of the heaviness of a Sentence for such an offense as appears by the
said order, being the words of the Sentence there.

That after the hearing and order in Starrechamber, the cause was again
solempnly heard three whole days together in open Court in Chauncerie, as well
upon the depositions in Chauncerie as in the Starrechamber, and decreed for the
plaintiff 12. Iulij 12. Iacobi.

That after the death of the Lord Chauncellor Ellesmere, the defendants
exhibited a new bill in Chauncery of reuiew and reuersal of the former decree:
And that upon solemn hearing in open Court, the said former decret was
confirmed, and the plaintifes Bill dismissed as appears by the said second
decree dated: 12 Februarij 16. Iacobi.

That the end and scope of the said original decree is to settle the state and
possession of the lands of old Jacob Verslyn in Francis his eldest son as heir
at Common law against the said pretended last will, and deed of feoffement.

That it is now about 7. years since the first decree in Chauncerie since
which time the plaintiff Francis and Jacob his younger brother one of the
defendants are dead, and that the lands are now in the hands of several
purchasors, and that the children and creditors of the said Francis are to be
relieved out of the moneys received, and to be received for the said lands as
appears by the will of the said Francis.

That it is not pretended by the Bill in Parliament that any of the decrees or
orders were obtained by bribes or rewards, or any Indirect course whatsoever,
But it is suggested that the said former decree in Chauncerie was grounded upon
many mistaken and misconceiued suggestions not sufficiently proved, which is a
very untrue surmise, and altogether improbable considering the great wisdom,
experience and understanding of the then Lord Chancellor, together with his
great care and deliberation in hearing of the said cause in both Courts, and
there being no briberie or corruption objected against him, the said Decree
being likewise grounded upon many effectual proofs and reasons not mentioned
in the said Bill, and yet they now lay an imputation upon him being dead.

That if way be given to such improbable and scandalous pretenses as thereby to
question this decree made upon so many solemn and deliberate hearings, both in
the Starrechamber and Chauncerie, and confirmed by a succeeding Lord
Chauncellor by a second decree in Chauncerie upon a Bill of review exhibited by
the said defendants, many most just Decrees will be questioned, and the Rights
and possessions of many clayming by and under them disturbed; which also will
tend to the general disgrace of the Decrees of that High Court, and likewise
to the great trouble of this honorable House, in the examination of such
improbable, scandalous pretenses;

THat therefore this Honorable HOUSE will be pleased, to consider the
dangerous Consequent of such a President, and to Dismiss the said Bill.


