The besieging of Berghen upon zoom by the Prince of Parman the Months of
September and October last 1588.


THe Town of Bergen upon Zoom, with her Palisades / provided with all kind of
ammunition, Also with about four thousand English Soldiers / besides three or
four lusty companies of Horssemen, the (...)y Lord Willebuy(...) company:
the other, Captain Parkars: the third, Captain Baxes, besides other dutch
soldiers and Borgers. 2 The gate called Steenberg-gate. 3 The Ham gate. 4 The
Water gate. 5 The Bos-gate. 6 The (...)sche gate. 7 The Bagine poorte: About
four years ago, the en(...)ie came from underneath this gate into the town,
but were expulsed by Monsieur de la guard, being slain on the e(...)ies side
above 300. (...). 8 The Marquis Court. 9 A little Shansse close to the town.
10 A secret sallie, called Hell gate. 11 The Fort called The Priests cappe. 12
The N^rd skansse: This s^anse the enime thought to have gotten, by m(...) of
promising a su(...) noney unto an Enseigne bearer of the said Fort Master
Grimstone, who went unto the Prince of Parnia, and promised him to deliver,
unto him the Fort: And least the Prince should doubt any thing, the said M.
Grimstone suffered himto be brought unto the Fort his arms tied with matches,
and men with daggers ready to kill him: So he entered into the Fort with a
munber of the eniemie, and cried arm, arm, thinking to have bin (...) the
Fort: But our mening intelligence of it, prevented their purpose, and many of
them were slain, others drowned, besides certain Noble men taken prisoner. 13
The great Skansse on the South side: between these Skansses, (...) Haven. 14
This it is called Wilfords Fort, or Parmaes Spectacles, which was made in the
time the town was besieged. 15 The head of Berghen, with his battery. 16 The
Fort called, Stand fast, with his battery, (...)h also was made in the
(...)ging. Casterly from this Fort Stand fast, upon the Dythe, came the enemy
with his battery: but our men charged them with their battery from Stand
fast, so soar, that they were forced to retire. 17 (...)on gate. 18 The
Ca(...)f Borguliet. 19 The Prince of Parma his Tente. 20 The Spaniardes
quarter. 21 The Alemans quarter. 22 A mountain called Ryserbergh. 23 The
Marquis of Renti his quarter. 24 Our horssemen issuhe Town, came on a sudden
on the en(...)ie, and charged them so fiercely, that they flewe many of them,
putting the rest to flight. 25 The Raber-mount. 26 Our shipp of war. 27 The
(...) the Town. 28 Ca(...)ne Bare with his company of horssemen. 29 Shy Lord
Willebuis company of horssemen. 30 Captain Parkars company. These three
companies, of most valiant courage issued almost (...)p, running fiercely
eminie, and killing many of them.

By the water gate Eastward was Captain Morgans Rauelyne. By the Houwer was
Captain Druries Bullewark. By the Myll Eastwarde, was Lagarde Reueline. This
is (gentle Reader) shortly the state of Bergen upon Zoom, as it was besiged by
the enemy in the mouethes of September. and October. last 1588. And how
wonderfully the Lord has delivered it, to (...) by means of senvinge heaven
abundance of rain, and other infinite mumber of means more which the Lord
has to preserve his people, and to bring his enemies to confusion, as of late
also we seen the wonderful (...) the Lord, by sending ^^htre Southerly wind,
whereby to conform that mighty and proud Name of Spain. etc. It rests
(...)re on our behalf, considering on the Lords side there are means left
left whereby a (...)that we render to (...) and thanks, all the days of our
life,

AMEN.
Printed at Middleborough, by Richard Schilders.


