The old Bride, OR The gilded Beauty.
To a dainty new tune.


NOr morning red
nor blushing fair,
Be through your glass
or curtain spide;
But cloudy gray,
like the short hair
Of year old everlasting
Bride.
So old,
So wondrous old,
In the nonage of time,
Ere Adam wore a beard
she was in her prime.
Whose swarthy dry
Westphalia lips,
Are sunk to mumy
in her skin,
Whose gums are empty,
and her lips
Like eyelids hairy;
and as thin:
So old,
So wondrous old,
In the nonage of time,
Ere Adam wore a beard
she was in her prime.
For amourous sighs
which Virgins use,
She coughs aloud
through lungs decaid,
And with her palsy
cannot choose
But quake like tre^bling
of a maid:
So old,
So wondrous old,
in the nonage of time
Ere Adam wore a beard
she was in her prime.
If that her Bridegroom
be ill sped,
He Is not the first
that has been sad:
For he is the last
heir to her bed,
Of seven before
that she has had.
So old,
So wondrous old,
In the nonage of time
Ere Adam wore a beard
she was in her prime.
Why should her husband
then vex heaven,
Or for a plenteous
offspring beg?
Since all the issue
can be given,
Is that which runs
in her leg.
So old,
So wondrous old,
in the nonage of time
Ere-Adam wore a beard
she was in her prime.
Of losing her
there is no doubt.
Nor need you ask
where she does dwell:
For you may easily
scent her out,
As hounds do find
their game by the smell.
So old,
So wondrous old,
in the nonage of time
Ere Adam wore a beard
she was in her prime.
The second part, To the same tune.


HEr nose and chin
are now grown friends,
and meet together
lovingly:
From danger these
her mouth defends,
So near they join
in unity.
So old,
So wondrous old,
in the nonage of time
Ere Adam wore a beard
she was in her prime.
Her painting serves
her turn no more,
Her face is like
(...)'s wall
That has so often
been plastered ore,
With age at length
it needs must fall.
So old,
So wondrous old,
in the nonage of time
Ere Adam-were a beard
she was in her prime.
Her husband has
no cause to dread,
(As many be
through jealousy)
That any will
defile his bed,
There Is none will use
such charity.
So old,
So wondrous old,
in the nonage of time
Ere Adam wore a beard
she was in her prime.
What has been spoken
is not meant
Any old woman
to disgrace,
But she who is
to marriage bent,
When deaths character's
in her face.
So old,
So wondrous old,
in the nonage of time
Ere Adam word a beard
she was in her prime.
FINIS.
Printed at London for Thomas Lambert, at the sign of the Hors-shoe in
Smithfield.


