Collegium S.S. et Individuae Trinitatis in Academia Cantabrigiensi


A PETITION THO THE LORDS CHANcelours of both universities, and to all the
noble LL. of Albion and Ierne, to help reformation of errors bred by not
Knovving that To Katelthein eis adou in the Creed means

A going up to Paradise: and no going to Gehenna: nor feeling of Gehenna
torment. The ignorance of which article has vvroght much ruin to the Gospel:

VVher men give over all resistance. D. BANCROFT complained, R. H. to the LL.
of Amsteldam, when j was preaching at Middelburg, that j called him Athean,
vilain, jevv, traitor. To these four j must answer. For the three first: he
is no further charged then an allovver of the common notes: and so long the
King cannot help him. The jevv Pharar has caught him. Let him accept my
defense for him, printed, and sent him, then if he any wit have, he will
svvear that my pen clears him from all blames which he would fasten upon him
self. Now touching the treason of the Libel: The Earl of Argiles cousin
Germane, which was with me at Geneva, told the K. how the senators shevved
him, that upon Bancroftes libel, scoffing my hope in the scottish mist, a plot
was Laid to kill me: hindering some hopes more then 40000 soldiers* and 300.
french crowns were offered me to hasten away: j believed it not, till it came
so nere that even Beza made account j should never go away All this, ypon
Ba^croft his scophing of the Scottish mist. Touching the Divinity that to
Descend to Hell in the Creed is to go yp to Heaven: your honors see, that D.
Bilson has most mightily proved that: so Bancroft allowing Bilson scoffeth
him self: when he scoffeth that which D. Bilso^ proved to be most sure: that
he must be a most open atheist scoffing him self in the depth of Divinity, or
the K. must be the matter of his Libel: as the K. often swore in Scotland,
that I should have what I would: for my dangers in his cause. And thus I
ansvvear. when the K. has geven sentence, he may mot plead against that. I
hope the K. will bridle him from that: by your Lps honorable advertisement:
and remember his vowed recompense.

Your Lordslips most humble. Hugh Broughton.


