AN ANSVER VNTHO THE COMPLAINT OF R. CANT. That he is an athean, Jew, vilain,
traitor, in Rabbi David farars disputation: at Amsteldam 1609. To the King.

A SVBTILE Jew, my Liege Lord, babtized, a child and brought up in our
Christian universities, studied maliciously to over throvv the Gospel and in
six poinctes he had caught infinite milliones of ours by our notes in Athean
vilanie of judaisme with him. I printed a purgation of al our Bishops: that in
allowance of my book shevving what concent God gave to scripture, vvher I
discomfited his side from those six quarrels, revoking the errors, they are no
more in athean vilanie of judaisme with him. The jevv says none other could
have cleared our Gospel R. cant. being honored with a copy bestovved terms
intolerable. j complain to your LL. and he to the LL. of Amsteldam: that j
teach him how the jevv had caught in Athean vilanie of judaisme: and vvil not
be cleared. An other complaint of his Libelling against the Scottish mist, your
vvisdome will bid Rich: C. surcease. The time was when the k. fvvare full
often that I should have what I would for Quenching Sinons fire. vvher the
Kings Bench has condemned, he may not plead scandalum: Besides these be
matters of flat Atheism. I wrote a book to the Learned nobility, amending,
errors of our translation in the Bible, and creed, and of successor that he
bre^t. I might as Lavvfully have set croydon on a fire: an other work, and an
other, and an other, and an other allowed by D. wh. and after his death, by
the K. he Brent. and at this hour he imprisoneth about a thousand copies of a
commentary upon Daniel. Bargulus Illyricus might as Lavvfully. I humbly
require justice against him.

Your majesty's most humble subject, Hugh Broughton.


