A DISCOVRSE OF CIVIL LIFE: Containing the Ethike part of Moral Philosophy.
Fit for the instructing of a Gentleman in the course of a virtuous life.

By LOD: BR.

Virtute, summa: Caetera Fortuna.

ANCHORA SPEI



LONDON, Printed for EDWARD BLOVNT. 1606.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, HIS SINGVLAR GOOD LORD, ROBERT Earl of Salisbury,
Vicount Cranborne, Lord Cecill Baron of Essenden, Principal Secretary to his
Majesty, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, etc.
THis book treating of the Moral virtues, being now to come under the censure
of the world, does summon me of it self to crave protection from your Lordships
honorable favor, as the personage, who knowing best their worth, may best
protect him from the injury of any that should attempt to carpe the same. And
my private obligations for your manifold favors (among which, the great
benefit of my liberty, and redeeming from a miserable captivity ever fresh
in my remembrance) does make me hope, not only of your Honors willingness to
patronize both my self and my labor; but also that you will be pleased therein
to accept of the humble and devoted affection, wherewith most reverently I
present it unto your Lordshippe. Vouchsafe therefore (my most honored good
Lord) to yield me the comfort of so gracious an addition to your former favors
and benefits: and to give to all the young Gentlemen of England encouragement to
embrace willingly that good which they may receive by reading a book of so
good a subject, the title whereof bearing in front your noble name, shall give
them cause to think it worthy to be passed with the approbation of your grave
judgment. Which being the most desired fruit of my endeavor, I will
acknowledge as none of the least of your great graces, and ever rest

Your Lordships most bounden and humbly devoted, LOD: BRYSKETT.

TO THE GENTLE and discreet Reader.
RIght well says the Wise man, that there is nothing new under the Sun; and
further, that there is no end of writing books. For howsoever in a generality
the subject of any knowledge be declared; yet the particulars that may be
gathered out of the same, be so many, as new matter may be produced out of the
same to write thereof again: so great is the capacity of man's understanding
able to attain further knowledge then any reading can afford him. And
therefore Horace also affirms, that it is hard to treat of any subject that
has not been formerly handled by some other. Yet do we see daily men seek,
partly by new additions, and partly with ornaments of style, to out-go those
that have gone before them: which happily some atchieue, but many more rest far
behind. This has bred the infiniteness of books, which has introduced the
distinction of good from bad, used in best Commonweales, to prohibit such as
corrupt manners, and to give approbation to the good. For that the simpler sort
by the former drink their bane in steed of medicine, and in lieu of truth (the
proper object of man's understanding) they introduce falsehood decked in truths
ornaments, to delude the vnheedful Reader. Whereas on the other side, the
benefit which we receive by the reading of good books being exceeding great,
they deserve commendation that offer their endeavors to the benefiting of
others with books of better matter. Which has made me resolve to present unto
thy view this discourse of Moral Philosophy, tending to the well ordering and
composing of thy mind, that through the knowledge and exercise of the virtues
therein expressed, thou may frame thy self the better to attain to that
further perfection which the profession of a Christian requires; and that
everlasting felicity, which, assisted with Gods grace (never refused to them
that humbly and sincerely call for the same) thou may assuredly purchase. As
my meaning herein is thy good chiefly: so let thy favorable censure thankfully
acknowledge my labor and goodwil, which may move me to impart after unto thee
another treating of the Politic part of Moral Philosophy, which I have
likewise prepared to follow this, if I shall find the favorable acceptance
hereof such as may encourage me thereunto. The book written first for my
private exercise, and meant to be imparted to that honorable personage, qui
nobis haec otia fecit, has long layne by me, as not meaning (he being gone) to
communicate the same to others. But partly through the persuasion of friends,
and partly by a regard not to bury that which might profit many, I have bin
drawn to consent to the publishing thereof. Gather out of it what good thou
can: and whatsoever thou may find therein imperfect or defective, impute
charitably to my insufficiency and weakness; and let not small faults blemish
my travel and desire to benefit thee.

But say to thy self with that worthy bright light of our age Sir Philip
Sidney, Let us love men for the good is in them, and not hate them for their
evil. Farewell.

A DISCOVRSE, CONTAINING THE ETHICKE PART OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY: FIT TO
INstruct a Gentleman in the course of a virtuous life.
Written to the right Honorable ARTHVR late Lord Gray of Wilton: By LOD:
BRYSKETT.
WHen it pleased you (my good Lord) upon the decease of master John Chaloner,
her Majesty's Secretary of this State, which you then governed as Lord Deputy
of this Realm, to make choice of me to supply that place, and to recommend me
by your honorable letters to that effect, I received a very sufficient
testimony of your good opinion and favorable inclination toward me. And
albeit your intention and desire in that behalf took not effect, whether
through my unworthiness, or by the labor and practice of others: yet because
your testimony was to me instar multorum Iudicum; and because that repulse
served you as an occasion to do me after a greater favor, I have evermore
since carried a continual desire to show my self thankful to your Lordship.
For when at my humble suit, you vouchsafed to grant me liberty without
offense, to resign the office which I had then held seven years, as Clerk of
this Council, and to withdraw my self from that thanklesse toil to the
quietness of my intermitted studies, I must needs confess, I held my self
more bound unto you therefore, then for all other the benefits which you had
bestowed upon me, and all the declarations of honorable affection, whereof you
had given me many testimonies before. And therefore being now freed by your
Lordships mean from that trouble and disquiet of mind, and enjoying from your
special favor the sweetness and contentment of my Muses; I have thought it
the fittest means I could devise, to show my thankfulness, to offer to you the
first fruits that they have yielded me, as due unto you, from whom only I
acknowledge so great a good. That they will be acceptable unto you, I make no
doubt, were it but in regard of the true and sincere affection of the giver;
who in admiring and reuerencing your virtues, gives place to no man alive.
Howbeit there will be other respects also (I doubt not) to move your liking and
acceptance of the same. For if the travel and industry of those men be
commendable, who curiously seek to transport from far and foreign
countries, either for the health and use of the body, or for the pleasing of
the exterior senses, the strange grafts, plants and flowers, which excel,
either for any medicinable quality, or for delight of the eye, the taste, or
the smell: how much more will you esteem of my endeavor, and be delighted with
my translation of these choice grafts and flowers, taken from the Greek and
Latin Philosophy, and ingrafted upon the stock of our mother English-tongue?
Especially being such as will not only promise delight and pleasing to the
senses, but assuredly yield health and comfort to the mind oppressed and
diseased? Neither is it unlikely but that the receiving of so unlooked for a
present out of this barbarous country of Ireland, will be some occasion to
hold it the dearer, as a thing rare in such a place, where almost no trace of
learning is to be seen, and where the documents of Philosophy are the more
needful, because they are so geason. Perhaps the want of that same sweeter
taste and relish, which those Clymes of Athens and Rome could give unto them,
and ours here of England and Ireland cannot afford, may make them seem unto
your Lordship at the first somewhat harsh and unpleasing: But the wholsomnesse
of their fruit will easily supply the desire of the pleasing taste, and
satisfy you rather with that it has, then mislike you for lack of that it
cannot have. For although our English tongue have not that copiousnesse and
sweetness that both the Greek and the Latin have above all others: yet is it
not therefore altogether so barren or so defective, but that it is capable
enough of terms and phrases meet to express all those conceits which may be
needful for the treating and the discoursing of moral Philosophy. And the
doctrine and consent of the wisest and best learned Philosophers being truly
set down and declared, though it be not done with that flowing eloquence
wherewith Plato and Tullie did utter their learning, having the use of two such
noble and flourishing languages: yet will not the appearing of this fair
virgin-stranger in her homely weeds and attire, be any impediment (I presume)
why she should not be as welcome and as willingly embraced as if she had come
decked in all her gorgeous ornaments and apparel. For of her nakedness I do not
fear she shall need to be ashamed, though of her pomp and garnishments she
have no cause to be proud and haughty. That your Lordship will not reject her,
but courteously entertain her, though she be but the hand-maide of the
doctrine of Grace, I do the rather assure my self because I have been an
admitted testimony, how often and very willingly you were pleased to recreate
your self with her company, at such times as either the weighty affairs of
this your government would spare you, or that you found cause to refresh your
mind by drawing it from the depth of your other studies. For if I did persuade
my self that you would, as soon as you saw her, frown and auert your
countenance from her, as some men of this our age do, and say, that, where her
Lady and mistress is, she is not only needless, but also perilous; I would
truly have kept her from your presence, contenting my self alone with her
company, and presuming that my familiarity with her should neither inueigle
me to like the less of her said Lady and mistress, or to use her otherwise
then as the servant and hand-maide, fit to make her Lady the more reverenced
and the more honored. To your Lordship therefore I now direct her, that under
your honorable favor and patronage she may be denizened: For I nothing doubt
but that the example of your courteous entertaining of her, will easily draw
many others to delight in her conversation, and to feel the true taste of the
healthful and delicious fruits which she has brought with her to furnish
this our English soil and clime withal. Whereby we may with the less labor
and cost henceforth have them to delight and nourish our minds, since we shall
not be constrained to fetch them from Athens or from Rome, but may find them
growing at home with our selves, if our own negligence and sloth cause us not
to foreslow the culturation and manuring of the same. The course which I hold
in this treatise, is by way of dialogue (which I have chosen as best pleasing
my mind) to discourse upon the moral virtues, yet not omitting the
intellectual, to the end to frame a gentleman fit for civil conversation, and
to set him in the direct way that leads him to his civil felicity. Wherein
though I have (I fear me) hazarded my self to be reprehended by such as look
after formalitie in all things: yet because my intention is to give light as
well to the meaner learned (whose judgments can be content to busy it self
rather to learn what they know not, then to find faults) as to the learneder
critiques that spend their eyes to find a hair upon an egg; I have the more
boldly followed mine own liking: making account, that if I may purchase your
liking and allowance of my labor, to whose satisfaction I do most recommend
it; I shall the less esteem the censure of any that may hap to carpe or
mislike whatsoever part of the same. For as I can be content to acknowledge my
infirmity and weakness, and to confess and take upon me those faults which I
may have committed, when they are ciuilly and without malice discovered and
made known unto me: even so shall the ouer-curious searcher of errors or
escapes, to make them faults, very little molest me; being resolved to content
mine own mind with the good that I hope will be found in the work, rather then
to dismay my self or be grieved because I cannot do a thing in that high
degree of excellency, that there were no fault to be found by any man in the
same. The occasion of the discourse grew by the visitation of certain
gentlemen coming to me to my little cottage which I had newly built near unto
Dublin at such a time, as rather to prevent sickness, then for any present
grief, I had in the spring of the year begun a course to take some physic
during a few days. Among which, Doctor Long Primate of Ardmagh, Sir Robert
Dillon Knight, M. Dormer the Queens Solicitor, Capt. Christopher Carleil,
Capt. Thomas Norreis, Capt. Warham, St Ledger, Capt. Nicolas Dawtrey, and M.
Edmond Spenser late your Lordships Secretary, and Th. Smith Apothecary. These
coming of their courtesy to pass the time with me, and chauncing to meet
there one day, when M. Smith the Apothecary was come to visit me also, and to
understand what success the physic he had prepared for me did take; Sir
Robert Dillon with a smiling countenance asked of him to what intent (I being
to all their judgments in health and well) he with his drugs should make me
sick, and force me to keep the house, whereby neither I could come to the
city, nor they being come to me might have my company to walk about the
grounds, to take the pleasure of seeing how the works of my hands did prosper,
now that the season of the year filling the plants and all other living things
with the natural humor, which the sharp cold of the winter had restrained and
kept within the inwardest parts, did bud and break forth, to give proof and
tokens of their prospering.

To which M. Smith answered, that he had ministered nothing to me but what my
self had prescribed: and that if I was sick therewith, it was mine own doing
and not his, who by his trade and profession could not refuse to compound and
minister such physic as should be required at his hands. But to tell you the
truth sir (quoth he) I could find in my heart to give him a potion that should
purge him of his melancholy humor, because he has no small need thereof in my
opinion.

And whereby perceive you any such humor to reign in him, replied sir Robert
Dillon; for in my judgment neither his complexion accuses him of any
disposition thereunto, nor his behavior and manner of life gives any token of
sadness or desire of solitariness, which commonly all melancholy men are much
given unto: whereas he is not only desirous of good company, but always
cheerful and pleasant among his friends.

Yea marry (said M. Smith) thereof he may thank you and these other gentlemen
his friends, that by coming often to visit him do keep from him those fits
which otherwise it is likely enough he would fall into; whether that his
complexio^ draw him to it or no, which often times deceives the most cunning
Physicians, or whether it proceed of any accidental cause. But (I pray you)
for proof of my words, who but one more then half mad or in a frenzy, would
of his own accord, not being compelled thereunto, have given over such an
office as he has resigned? which besides, that it was of good reputation and
profit, gave him the means to pleasure many of his friends, and kept him still
in the bosom of the State, whereby he might in time have risen to better
place, and more ability to do himself and his friends both pleasure and good?
All which in a melancholy mood he has let slip, or rather put from him: for
which I, among other that love him, could find in my heart to disple him very
well.

In troth (quoth sir Robert Dillon turning to me) master Smith seems to have
spoken more like a Physician, or rather like a Counselor, then like an
Apothecary: and it will behoue you to satisfy him well, lest we all begin to
think of you as he does, and agree with him that it were expedient to give you
a dose of Ellebore, which the Physicians say, has a peculiar property to purge
the melancholy humor. And therefore you shall do very well (I think) to
declare unto him, what reasons induced you to resign that office, wherein I my
self can testify with how good contentment of all the table you did serve so
many years. For withal some of us, that have not yet understood upon what
foundation this resolution of yours is set and grounded, shall in like sort
rest the better satisfied, if from your self they shall be made capable of
some reasonable cause that might induce you thereunto. And henceforth believe,
it has bin well done, not because you did it, but because you have done it
with reason and judgment: which although we be all sufficiently persuaded you
take to be your guides in all your actions, yet these words of master Smiths,
and the like discourses, which we hear very often among some that love you and
wish you well, does make us sometimes half doubtful to allow of this retiring
your self from the State. Because we suppose that a man of your condition and
qualities should rather seek to be employed, and to advance himself in credit
and reputation, then to hide his talent, and withdraw himself from action, in
which the chief commendation of virtue does consist. And to say truly what I
think, a man of your sort, bred and trained (as it seems you have bin) in
learning, and that has thereto added the experience and knowledge, which
travel and observation of many things in foreign countries must breed in him
that has seen many places, and the manners, orders, and policies of sundry
nations, ought rather to seek to employ his ability and sufficiency in the
service of his Prince and country, then apply them to his peculiar benefit or
contentment. For you that were in so good a way to raise your self to credit
and better employment, whereunto that office was but the first step and trial
of what is in you, to forsake suddenly so direct a path, leading you to
preferment, and to betake your self to a solitary course of life, or a private
at the least, seems a thing not agreeable to that opinion which every man
that knows you, had conceived of your proof: and that of you it may be said,
Grauior est culpa clara principia deserentis, quam non incipientis; Non enim
magna aggredi, sed perseuerare difficile. What is the end of parents in the
education of their children, wherein they bestow so much care, and spend their
wealth to purchase them learning and knowledge; but a desire to make them able
to be employed, and a hope to see them raised to credit and dignity in the
commonwealth? Or who is he that does not strive by all the means he can to
advance himself, and to press forward still even to the highest places of
authority, and favor under his Prince, though oftentimes with no small hazard
and danger, if he may once lay hold upon that lock, which, men say, Occasion
has growing on her forehead, being bald behind; showing thereby how foolish a
thing it is to let her slip after she has once presented her self to be
apprehended? No doubt but this folly will be laid to your charge by many, and
not without good appearance of reason, since you having had the occasion offered
unto you, as well to enrich your self, as to rise in credit and reputation,
have nevertheless let her go, after you had fast hand in her foretop, and
abandoned so great a hope, nay, so assured a reward proposed to you for your
labor and pains, to be sustained some while in that place.

Sir (quoth I) to have answered M. Smiths imputation, I suppose would have bin
very easy, since the greatest matter therein was the neglecting of my profit,
and the abandoning a mean to pleasure my friends. For the first is rather a
commendation (though not so conceived by him) then any just blame: and the
other is no more but a partial complaint of him and others of his disposition,
that look to their own private interest, and consider only what they may
miss, by not having a friend in such a place, who might stand them in stead,
and regard no whit the contentment or coffeehouse of their friend, which
they are not able to measure; as wanting the general rule by which it ought to
be measured according to reason; and so consequently frame the measure
according to their own minds: using their own judgments, even as the
ancient Greeks were wont to say of the Lesbian rule, which being made of
lead, the workmen would bend and fit to their work, and not frame their work
by a right rule. But having added to his objection your own censure of me,
whose judgment and prudence is so well known, and so much by me to be
respected, I can no less do, then make some further Apology for my self
touching that point, and open so much of my counsel and purpose in that behalf
as I shall think needful to give you and others, that will prefer reason
before their opinions, sufficient satisfaction. And first where you say, that
my service in the place was acceptable unto you all, I cannot but therein
acknowledge my good hap, rather then impute it to any sufficiency in my self.
Neither would I, in regard of that great courtesy and favor which I received
therein, have willingly done any thing whereby I might have seemed unthankful,
or to have made so small estimation of so worthy a favor. But my not having
bin brought up or used to much writing and long standing, (which of ordinary
that office does require) besides the extraordinary occasions which the service
brings forth, to travel, to sit up late, and disorder the body, had bred
such an increase of rheum in me, and of infirmities caused thereby, as I could
not without manifest and certain peril of shortning my days have continued
the exercise of that place. Whereupon having in dutiful sort made known the
cause of my desire to resign the office to the Lord Deputy, who was in like
sort privy to some other just occasion I had to further that my resolution; it
pleased him with his accustomed prudence and favor toward me, to consider and
to allow of my request, and to grant me his honorable consent to the
accomplishme^t of the same. Neither can this be rightly termed in me a retiring
my self from the State, or a withdrawing from action to hide my talent. For
leaving aside the uncertainty and vain issue for the most part of those hopes
that commonly draw men on into ambitious heauing and shouing for dignities and
places of credit and commodity; from which to be freed, little do men know or
believe what gain it is; as of things that, when they obtain them not, vex
and torment their minds, and when they obtain them, do soon glut and weary
them. What comparison can a man of reason and judgment make between them, and
that contentednes which a well tempered and a moderate mind does feel in a
private life, employed to the bettering and amending of the principal part,
which distinguishes him from brute beasts? Surely for my part I confess
frankly unto you, and protest I speak truly, I have found more quietness and
satisfaction in this small time that I have lived to my self, and enjoyed the
conversation of my books, when the care of my little building and husbandry
has given me that ordinary intermission which it must have, then I did before
in all the time that I spent in service about the State: the toil whereof was
far too high a price for the profit I might make of my place, and the
expectation which was left me of rising to any better. Which nevertheless,
suppose it had bin much greater then ever I conceived, or then you have seemed
to make the same: so free am I from ambition or couetise (howsoever M. Smith
would have me to frame my mind thereto) as I am not only content not to flatter
my self with the show of good, which the best hopes might have presented unto
me; but resolved also to put from me and tread under foot whatsoever desire or
inclination, that either nature, ill custom, or daily example might urge me
unto, or stir up within me. It is a perilous thing for men of weak brains
to stand in high places, their heads will so soon be giddie, and all cilmbing
is subject to falling. Let men of great spirits, of high birth, and of
excellent virtues, possess in Gods name those dignities and preferments, which
the favor of the Prince and their sufficiency may purchase unto them: for it
is they, that (as the Poet says) Posuere in montibus vrbem: and of whom you
might justly say, Grauior est culpa etc. For as for me, I am one of those of
whom the same Poet said, Habitabant vallibus imis. And so I had rather to do
still, then to forsake my studies which I have now begun to renew again:
having applied my endeavor to lay hold upon the foretop, which Lady Occasion
has offered me to that effect: for to any other intent, she never yet did so
much as once show her self to me a far off, much less present her self to
me so near as I might reach to catch her, or fasten my hand in her golden
lock. I wish my friends therefore rather to allow, and give their consents to
this my resolution, grounded (as I think) upon a reasonable consideration, and
an exact weighing of mine own ability and disposition, then to concur with
M. Smith in opinion, or with any others that would lay to my charge folly, or
lack of judgment for the same. And that generally all men would believe the
Italian proverb, which says, that the fool knows better what is good and
meet for himself, then does the wise man what is fit for another man. Not that
I would thereby reject good counsel and friendly advice, which I know well
enough how beneficial a thing it is to all men in matters of doubt and
difficulty: but my meaning is only to reserve to a man's own understanding
the judgment of such particular and private determinations, as concern the
contentment or coffeehouse of his mind; the circumstances of which perhaps
are not meet to be communicated to others. The example whereof Paulus Aemilius
has given us, with that grave and wise answer he made unto his friends that
would needs reprehend him for repudiating his wife, alleging her many good
qualities, as her beauty, her modesty, her nobility, and other such like:
when putting forth his leg, he showed them his buskin, and said; You see this
buskin is well and handsomely made, of good leather, and to your seeming fit
enough for my foot and leg, yet none of you knows (I am sure) where it does
wring me. Even so my self may happily say to any whom my former answer may not
fully satisfy, that although to their seeming my state and condition was
better by holding that office, not only in respect of the benefit and
commodity my self and my friends might reap thereby; but also in regard of
the expectation of preferment and advancement that I might have had by the
exercise of the same: yet is it to them unknown what other particulars might
move me to conceive thereof ootherwise, and to like rather of the private life I
now lead, then of all those benefits and commodities which the other could
promise unto me.

Although the reasons by you before alleged, might well enough be answered,
quoth sir Robert Dillon, yet this last objection you have made to conclude your
speech withal, is such, as I should hold him unwise that would go about to
remove you from your determination. For it were a point of overmuch curiosity,
to search so far into your mind and drift in that behalf. But since it
seems that your desire is now bent to the renewing of your studies, and to
apply your self to the bettering (as you say) of that part which is proper
unto man, which is the mind, or reasonable power of the soul, from whence
indeed all operations worthy commendation do proceed, I pray you let us hear
from you what kind of study that is, by which you intend to purchase to your
self this so great a good. For it is not every science that can afford the
same, since we see oftentimes men of great learning in sundry professions, to
be nevertheless rude and ignorant in things that concern their carriage and
behavior: insomuch as it has bin fitly used for a proverb among us, that the
greatest clerks are not always the wisest men. And as I for one, am desirous
to know your determination and opinion touching that point: so do I think that
the rest of these gentlemen here, will be willing and glad to spend this time
which we have all disposed to visit you and keep you company, in hearing you
discourse upon so good a Theme, by which there cannot but arise some good and
profit to every of us. Because we nothing doubt, but that, as you have maturely
debated with your self the reasons that have induced you to take upon you this
resolution; so you can declare the same, and make us partakers with you of so
much of your contentment, as the love and good will we bear you, will thereby
fasten upon us.

Sir (said I) you have right well alleged and applied our common proverb, in
my opinion: for it is not indeed every kind of knowledge and study that
bettereth the mind of man, as daily experience teaches us: since we see many
men use the same as an instrument to work their mischief and wickedness
withal the more artificially and the more dangerously. For though nature has
engrafted in every man a fervent desire of knowledge, which discovers it
self in children, even in their infancy; yet have we all from the corruption
of her, a disposition likewise to abuse the same, and to turn it rather to
evil than to goodness, if special grace, or an excellent education (which
cannot be without grace) do not fashion and frame the mind to the right use
thereof. The general scope of parents, when they set their children to
learning, tends only to the enabling of them, thereby to attain some means
to live by the profession either of Law, of Physic, or of Divinity: for of
the meaner intentions I will not speak. And too common an error it is in
scholars themselves, when they are entered into the Arts, which are called
liberal, to spend their time in curious searching of subtilties, frivolous, and
to no use: or else in purchasing rather an appearance of learning in the science
they apply their studies unto, thereby to win the shorter way to profit, then
the profound and exact knowledge of sciences themselves; whereof every one
nevertheless being thoroughly attained, would yield no small help and
furtherance to that bettering of the mind, which I have spoken of.

But who is he that in the profession of the Law, aymeth at any other mark,
then at sufficiency to plead well at the bar, to draw him the more clients,
or to rise to such dignities as thereby others climb unto: or in Physic, then
to have a reputation of skill, to procure him much practice to enrich himself:
or in Divinity, then to be accounted a good Preacher, whereby he may get a
fruitful benefice, or be invested with some Bishopric and title of honor? Or
which of them do we see, that when he has hit the mark he shot at, and is
come to the height that his profession can raise him unto, does show himself
sincere, or incorrupt of mind, or so master over his own passions, as either
through covetousness, or ambition, or love, or hatred, he will not forget the
duty which he owes to that place, whereunto he is called, and to him that
has given him the gift as well of the mean as of the thing it self?

To answer you therefore directly what kind of study I affect or think may
most better my mind, I will say that it is none of these before mentioned: for
albeit I acknowledge the true study of Divinity to include all that knowledge,
which may any way be required for the perfection of man's life: yet because
there is a more special calling thereunto, then to any other, and ought to be
applied in a more reverent manner, and to a further end, then that every man
might presume to take it in hand, I dare not venture to make my self a
professor of it. As for the profession of the Law, I will not in these years,
and with this mind, alienated from troubles and business, give my self to the
same, it being the principal mean and high way to lead me again into the
labyrinth which I desire most to eschew and void. To Physic I was by my
fathers choice appointed; for the performance of whose will, as became me in
duty and obedience, all the time I spent by his direction in study, I
employed in the knowlegde of the principles thereof: and since, as well for
the use thereof to mine own behoof, as for the delightfulness, which the
discovery of the secret operations and effects of nature works (I suppose) in
every man as it does in me, I have (when time and leisure would permit) bent my
most study and reading to the authors of that science; but intention to
profess it, or to practice it, in very deed as yet had I never none. For how
soever the providence of my father, or mine own industry had fashioned me to
be meet to make a Physician, yet the higher providence had otherwise
determined, making me to take another course of life, which before was never so
much as once thought of by either of us, and made me of a scholar to become a
servant. By which occasion being drawn into this country, and left my
studies, I have so many years led my life here in such sort as you have seen.
But having now withdrawn my self from the toilesome place I held, and
gathered my self into a little compass, as a snaile into his shell, my
purpose is (if God shall please to give me his gracious assistance) to spend my
time in reading such books, as I shall find fittest to increase my knowledge
in the duties of a Christian man, and direct me in the right path of virtue,
without tying my self to any particular kind. And as I have (God be thanked)
some store of all sorts; so shall I dispense my time accordingly, sometime in
perusing such as may instruct me more and more in the true manner of serving
God; sometime in reading of histories, which are as mirrours or looking-glasses
for every man to see the good and evil actions of all ages, the better to
square his life to the rule of virtue, by the examples of others; and
sometimes, and that for the most part (as thus advised) in the study of Moral
Philosophy, which frames men fittest for civil conversation, teaching them
orderly what moral virtues are, and particularly what is the proper action of
every one, and likewise what vice is, and how unseemly a thing, and how
harmefull to a good mind the spot and contagion thereof is. To this have I ever
had a special inclination, and a greedy desire to instruct my self fully
therein; which hitherto, partly through the course I held whiles I was a
scholar (as before I said) I could not well do, and ever since my continual
business and attendance about mine office, have diuerted me therefro. And to
profess plainly the truth, not any one thing has so much prevailed to make me
resolve the giving over that place, as the longing I had, and have to return
to the course of reading Moral Philosophy, which I was even then newly entered
into, when I was called to be employed in that office; and the delight whereof
was so great unto me, for that little which I had begun to read, and the
expectation such, which I had conceived of the use thereof (as by which a man
learneth not only to know how to carry himself virtuously in his private
actions, but also to guide and order his family, and moreover, to become meet
for the service of his Prince and country, when occasion of employment may be
offered unto him) that I was half doubtful when I was summoned to come and
take the place, whether I should accept thereof or no.

Then said M. Dormer, Yea but it seems to me that these your words imply a
contradiction, when saying that you have so earnestly desired to withdraw your
self from the exercise of your office, wherein you had so good means, not only
to make show of your own sufficiency and virtue, and to do your Prince and
country service, and withal to pleasure many of your friends, you seem
nevertheless to direct your studies to such an end, as aims not only at the
knowledge of virtue, but also at the practice thereof, whereby a man is made
fit and enabled for such employments as the Prince or State shall lay upon him.
For indeed it is an approved saying among Philosophers, Virtutis laus, actio:
and you know what Tullie says, and Plato before him, Non nobis nati sumus,
partem patria, partem parents, partem amici sibi vendicant. So as M. Smiths
accusation (for ought I see) may be held as yet very reasonable against you,
unless you can allege us some better reason in your defense then hitherto you
have done.

In faith (quoth I) if you be all against me, I shall have much ado to defend
my self, since the old proverb is, that, Ne Hercules quidem contraduos: and
how can I then resist so many? But I hope that some of this company will take
my part, though he have forestalled me of the two chief men, whose patronage
might best have served me, having gotten you two lawyers to plead for him. Yet
because I suppose you have not bin entertained by him for that purpose with any
fee, and that you are here, not as lawyers or advocates to maintain his cause,
but rather as indifferent Judges, to determine who has the best right on his
side; I hope that upon better information, you will be drawn to judge
uprightly, and not be carried away with apparances, which oftentimes hide and
cast a cloud over the truth. And to answer therefore to your objection, which
carries with it some probability, I would easily confess my self in fault,
if this resigning of my office had bin an absolute retiring my self from
action, or that I had (as they say) forsworn any employment for the service of
the State or my Prince. But if you please to consider how this my resolution
has bin grounded upon a desire to be freed only from a place of such
continual toil and attendance, as suffered me to have no time to spare,
wherein I might almost breathe, or take any reasonable recreation; and not to
live idle, or sequestered so from action, as I should only spend my time in
reading or contemplation, I doubt not but you will find my words to agree well
enough without any contradiction, and my course of life well enough fitting a
man that means not to live to himself alone. For if such had bin my purpose,
I would have sought out a meeter dwelling then this so near the city, and I
could well enough have devised to have bin far from such co^ptrollers as M.
Smith, and to have avoided this judgment that I am now subject unto, not
without hazard of my reputation, having two such persons to assist my accuser,
and bear up his cause. You see that I have not so estranged my self from all
employments, but that I can be content to take pain in the increasing of her
Majesty's revenue, by the care I have of her impost: I refuse not any other
ordinary employments, as of traveling in such commissions as the Lord Deputy
and Council often times direct unto me for the examining of sundry causes:
neither do I so give my self to be private, but that you and other my friends,
who vouchsafe of their courtesy sometimes to visit me, find me apt enough to
keep them company, either here at home, or else abroad: so as though I desire
to know how to do these things as perfectly well as I might, and to that end
frame my self as much to study as conveniently I can, yet do I not therein
contradict the reasonable and just disposition I have to employ my self for
the service of her Majesty, when occasion serves: neither does my endeavor in
that behalf any way oppose it self to my desire, of retiring from a painful
employment to a more quiet life, which now (I thank God) I enjoy: wherein I
may frankly and truly protest unto you, I find more sweetness and contentment in
one days expense, then I could taste in seven years before, whiles I was
Clerk of the Council. And were it but in regard of that same contentment, I
know not what man of reasonable sense and understanding, would not esteem the
purchase thereof at a far higher rate then any office in Ireland whatsoever.
M. Smith therefore may well enough put up his pipes, and hold his peace
henceforth, and I hope not only ye two, but all the rest of this company
will hold him sufficiently put to silence, and begin to allow of this my
resolution, especially seeing it aims at so high a mark as humane felicity.

At which word the Primate seemed as it were to start, and said, what sir?
though we can be content to admit your reasons against M. Smith, and to allow
of your resolution, as having chosen (as our Savior said to Martha of her
sister) the better part; yet must you not think that we will let every thing
go with you which you say: but by your leave, pluck you a little back by the
sleeue, when we see you press forward presumptuously, as now in my opinion you
do, when you seem to shoot at such a mark as humane felicity, which is
without, not your reach only, but all men's, whiles they are here in this low
and muddie world: for I wis that is no where to be found but above the stars:
man's felicity is placed only in heaven, where God of his mercy has appointed
it for him to be found, and not here on earth. I say of his mercy, because
albeit he had ordained the same for man from before all ages; yet our first
father by his disobedience depriving himself and all his posterity of all
possibility thereof, the same was eftsoons by the infinite goodness and mercy
of God purchased to him again at a dear price, even the precious blood of his
dearest Son, which he was content to shed for the ransom of mankind, entrapped
by the devil, and taken captive, whereby he might return into his heavenly
country again, to enjoy that happy inheritance prepared there for him.
Whosoever therefore shall seek to get his felicity here in this world, will
find himself deceived: and although it be said to some purpose fitly, that he
that shoots at a star, aims higher then he that shoots at a furbush:
yet well ye wot, that to shoot up to the stars, is but mere folly and
vanity; and no less do I hold your aiming at so high a mark to be, which is
so far out of your reach.

I cry you mercy, my Lord, quoth I, if I have stepped into your marches
before I were aware. But I may the better be excused, because I had no
intention or purpose so to do; but simply, and after the common manner of speech
have used the general word in stead of the particular. For though I said I
aimed at the high mark of humane felicity, yet for so little as I have read
in Moral Philosophy, I have learned that Plato has made mention of two
distinct felicities of man (and others besides him) the one a contemplative
felicity (which some men happily draw near unto, but cannot perfectly attain
in this life;) the other an active or practicke felicity, consisting in
virtuous actions, and reducing of a man's passions under the rule of reason.
Which practicke felicity may not only be achieved here on earth by man's
endeavor, assisted with Gods grace and favor: but is also a great help and
mean for such as obtain the same, to bring them after this life unto the
other in heaven. Of this latter, the rules whereof are to be taken from you
Churchmen and Divines; I meant not when I said, I aimed so high, at the
lestwise my purpose was not properly to say, that I shot at that mark by my
study, for then I should have contradicted my former words, when I protested I
durst not presume to the study of Divinity, which (I well understood)
required a particular calling. But only my meaning was to get your
approbation, in that I had resolved by the study of Moral Philosophy to
compass, so far forth as my endeavors could prevail, that humane practicke
felicity, which of all men in all ages has been so highly esteemed; and for
the directing of men whereunto, so many great learned Philosophers have taken so
great travel and pains to find out the ready way unto it, and by their
writings to make the same known to others: whereby not only particular
persons might in this life attain to live happily, but also purchase the same
happiness to their families, yea to whole Cities and Commonwealths. This
felicity (I think) every well disposed man is to labor for in this life; and
the better he is borne, the more ought he to bend his study to learn by what
means the same is to be attained: and by working accordingly, to prepare
himself to be fit and capable of that other when soever he shall be called out
of this world, knowing how assured promises thereof are given to them that in
this life live virtuously; and how certain he may be, that the further that
good which his virtuous actions shall extend to the benefit of others in this
life, the greater shall be his reward in the life to come, where that felicity
is prepared for them, that by the treading down of their passions and sensual
appetites, shall endeavor to reduce their soul to that pureness and cleannes
which is required in them to whom that everlasting bliss and felicity is
promised. For my part, the thing which I most earnestly desire, is to learn
the shortest way to compass the same: and happpie should I think my self if
I could find any man whose knowledge and learning might help me to direct my
study to that end; because I know right well how hard it is for a man by his
own labor to search out the ready way to understand those precepts, which
have bin set down in the learned writings of Philosophers that have treated of
that matter, especially in the Greek and Latin tongues, in which it has bin
substantially handled. For although I cannot truly pretend ignorance in the
Latin, in which the works of Plato and Aristotle are to be read: yet I
confess that I do not find that facility in the conceiving of their writings,
as I could wish, or as the greediness of my desire to apprehend might
overtake. For Plato has couched his sense thereof so dispersedly in his
dialogues, as I think he must be a man of great learning and exact judgment
that shall pick them out, and sever them from the other parts of Philosophy,
which he indeed most divinely discourses upon. And Aristotle is not to me so
clear nor so easily understood without deep study, as my mean capacity
would require; specially without the interpretation of some better scholar then
my self. And herein do I greatly envy the happiness of the Italians, who
have in their mothertongue late writers, that have with a singular easy
method, taught all that which Plato or Aristotle have confusedly or obscurely
left written. Of which, some I have begun to read with no small delight, as
Alexander Piccolomini, Gio. Baptista Giraldi, and Guazzo, all three having
written upon the Ethick part of Moral Philosopie both exactly and
perspicuously. And would God that some of our countrymen would show themselves
so well affected to the good of their country (whereof one principal and most
important part consists in the instructing of men to virtue) as to set down
in English the precepts of those parts of Moral Philosophy, whereby our youth
might without spending of so much time, as the learning of those other
languages require, speedily enter into the right course of virtuous life. In
the mean while I must struggle with those books which I understand, and
content my self to plod upon them, in hope that God (who knows the
sincerenesse of my desire) will be pleased to open my understanding, so as I
may reap that profit of my reading, which I travel for. Yet is there a
gentleman in this company, whom I have had often a purpose to entreat, that as
his leisure might serve him, he would vouchsafe to spend some time with me to
instruct me in some hard points which I cannot of my self understand: knowing
him to be not only perfect in the Greek tongue, but also very well read in
Philosophy, both moral and natural. Nevertheless such is my bashfulnes, as I
never yet durst open my mouth to disclose this my desire unto him, though I
have not wanted some hartning thereunto from himself. For of his love and
kindness to me, he encouraged me long since to follow the reading of the
Greek tongue, and offered me his help to make me understand it. But now that
so good an opportunity is offered unto me, to satisfy in some sort my desire;
I think I should commit a great fault, not to my self alone, but to all this
company, if I should not enter my request thus far, as to move him to spend
this time which we have now destined to familiar discourse and conversation, in
declaring unto us the great benefits which men obtain by the knowledge of
Moral Philosophy, and in making us to know what the same is, what be the
parts thereof, whereby virtues are to be distinguished from vices: and finally
that he will be pleased to run over in such order as he shall think good, such
and so many principles and rules thereof, as shall serve not only for my better
instruction, but also for the contentme^t and satisfaction of you al. For I
nothing doubt, but that every one of you will be glad to hear so profitable a
discourse, and think the time very well spent, wherein so excellent a knowledge
shall be revealed unto you, from which every one may be assured to gather some
fruit as well as my self. Therefore (said I) turning my self to M. Spenser, It
is you sir, to whom it pertains to show your self courteous now unto us all,
and to make us all beholding unto you for the pleasure and profit which we
shall gather from your speeches, if you shall vouchsafe to open unto us the
goodly cabinet, in which this excellent treasure of virtues lies locked up
from the vulgar sort. And thereof in the behalf of all, as for my self, I do
most earnestly entreat you not to say us nay. Unto which words of mine every
man applauding most with like words of request, and the rest with gesture and
countenances expressing as much, M. Spenser answered in this manner.

Though it may seem hard for me to refuse the request made by you all, whom,
every one alone, I should for many respects be willing to gratify: yet as the
case stands, I doubt not but with the consent of the most part of you, I
shall be excused at this time of this task which would be laid upon me. For
sure I am, that it is not unknown unto you, that I have already undertaken a
work te^ding to the same effect, which is in heroical verse, under the title of
a Faerie Queen, to represent all the moral virtues, assigning to every virtue,
a Knight to be the patron and defender of the same: in whose actions and feats
of arms and chiualry, the operations of that virtue, whereof he is the
protector, are to be expressed, and the vices and unruly appetites that oppose
themselves against the same, to be beaten down and overcome. Which work, as I
have already well entered into, if God shall please to spare me life that I may
finish it according to my mind, your wish (M. Bryskett) will be in some sort
accomplished, though perhaps not so effectually as you could desire. And the
same may very well serve for my excuse, if at this time I crave to be forborne
in this your request, since any discourse, that I might make thus on the sudden
in such a subject, would be but simple, and little to your satisfactions. For
it would require good aduisement and premeditation for any man to undertake the
declaration of these points that you have proposed, containing in effect the
Ethicke part of Moral Philosophy. Whereof since I have taken in hand to
discourse at large in my poem before spoken, I hope the expectation of that
work may serve to free me at this time from speaking in that matter,
notwithstanding your motion and all your entreaties. But I will tell you, how I
think by himself he may very well excuse my speech, and yet satisfy all you
in this matter. I have seen (as he knows) a translation made by himself out
of the Italian tongue, of a dialogue comprehending all the Ethick part of Moral
Philosophy, written by one of those three he formerly mentioned, and that is by
Giraldi, under the title of a dialogue of civil life. If it please him to bring
us forth that translation to be here read among us, or otherwise to deliver to
us, as his memory may serve him, the contents of the same; he shall (I warrant
you) satisfy you all at the full, and himself will have no cause but to think
the time well spent in reuiewing his labors, especially in the company of so
many his friends, who may thereby reap much profit, and the translation
happily fare the better by some mending it may receive in the perusing, as all
writings else may do by the often examination of the same. Neither let it
trouble him, that I so turn over to him again the task he would have put me
to: for it falls out fit for him to verify the principal part of all this
Apology, even now made for himself; because thereby it will appear that he
has not withdrawn himself from service of the State, to live idle or wholly
private to himself, but has spent some time in doing that which may greatly
benefit others, and has served not a little to the bettering of his own mind,
and increasing of his knowledge, though he for modesty pretend much ignorance,
and plead want in wealth, much like some rich beggars, who either of custom,
or for covetousness, go to beg of others those things whereof they have no
want at home.

With this answer of M. Spensers, it seemed that all the company were well
satisfied: for after some few speeches, whereby they had showed an extreme
longing after his work of the Faerie Queen, whereof some parcels had bin by
some of them seen, they all began to press me to produce my translation
mentioned by M. Spenser, that it might be perused among them; or else that I
should (as near as I could) deliver unto them the contents of the same,
supposing that my memory would not much fail me in a thing so studied, and
advisedly set down in writing, as a translation must be. And albeit I alleged
for mine excuse, that I had done it but for mine exercise in both languages,
not with purpose to have it seen, nor so advisedly, as had bin needful to come
under their censures: yet would they have no nay, but without protracting time
in excuses, I must needs fulfill their desires; and so with a courteous force
they made me rise from where I sat to go fetch my papers. Which being brought
before them, I said: Lo, here you may see by the manner of these loose
sheets, how far I meant this labor of mine should come to light: and the
confused lying of them, and the blots and interlinings which you see, may give
you well enough to understand, how hard a thing it is to have it read before
you, as you pretended. Besides that, it is of such a bulk and volume, as you
may easily understand, it cannot in a short time be run over. And therefore
since you have so easily acquitted M. Spenser of that charge which you all with
me seemed so desirous to impose upon him: you may do well in like courteous
manner to discharge me of the like burden that you would lay upon me.

Then said sir Robert Dillon, though it appear indeed unto us, that the lose
and disorderly placing of the papers with the interlinings, do make it unfit to
be read as we desired, and that the often interrupting of the sense to find out
and match the places, would take away the best part of the delight which the
subject might yield us: yet because we know that you, having translated the
whole, may easily with your memory supply the defects of the papers; I for my
part do think, and so I suppose do the rest here present, that it is no
sufficient reason to free you from so profitable a labor, as this, whereby you
may acquaint us with those worthy conceits in our own language, which you have
in the Italian found to be so delightful, and fit to be communicated by your
travel to others. Therefore if you shall not think it good to read it unto us
as it is set down in the translation precisely; at the least yet this we will
urge you unto, that you will be content to deliver unto us the general points
of the same, marshalling them in their order, though in the circumstances of
the dialogue and persons you follow not exactly the form of the author; and
our dispensation in that case shall serve to deliver you from the blame, that
otherwise as an interpreter you might be subject unto. For being done to us,
and at our request, we shall be your warrants, notwithstanding any law or
custom to the contrary. Be you only willing to gratify us, and for the rest
fear you no danger; since we sit not here as in the courts, to examine whether
there be as well due form, as sufficient matter in bills and pleadings that
are brought before us: but are here to pass the time with you in honest and
virtuous conversation. And the drift of our speeches having grown to this
issue, that we should spend this short space which we may be together, in the
discoursing upon the Ethick part of Moral Philosophy, and you having the
subject so ready at hand, in Gods name we pray you, delay us not by losing time
in frivolous excuses, but begin to open to us this treasure, which you would so
feign hide from our eyes.

Here they began all to second his speeches, and so importunatly to entreat me
to accomplish their desire, that being no further able to say them nay: I
answered.

Since such is your will, I can no longer resist you: only thus much I must
protest unto you, that you are guilty, not only of whatsoever fault or error
I shall commit against the laws of an interpreter, but also of breach of the
law of hospitality, in ouerruling me in mine own house. And as for this I may
justly complain of violence, yet perhaps find no redress, so if any shall find
fault with me for not observing the precise rules of a translator, let him
impute the same not to me, but unto you, having some compassion upon me, that
besides being constrained to produce that which I purposed to have kept to my
self, I am also forced to do it, not according to mine own choice, but in
such sort as it has pleased you to compel me. Well then, to gain as much
time as may be, I will omit the introduction of the author to his dialogue, as a
thing depending upon former matter and occasion, by which the persons
introduced by him are fitted for his purpose, and supposing this present
company to be as apt to conceive the reasons by him set down, and to make as
pertinent objections as they did, I will begin even there where he, following
the course of most others that have written upon that subject, makes entry
into his discourse. But with this prouiso, that, because this day will not
serve us to run over the whole, you will be content, that, as he has divided
his whole work into three dialogues, so we may meet here three several days,
to give every several dialogue of his one day to explane the same: for so much
(I think) may well be performed every day. To which they all agreeing, I took
my loose papers in hand, and began in this manner following. I must now
presuppose that ye, who^ I esteem to be as those gentlemen introduced by this
author, have likewise moved the same question, which they did, to wit, what
manner of life a gentleman is to undertake and propose to himself, to attain
to that end in this world, which among wisemen has been, and is accounted the
best; beginning from the day of his birth, and so guiding him therein until he
be meet to purchase the same end. And likewise where any occasion of doubt or
question, for the better understanding may happen in the discourse, that some
one of you desiring to be resolved therein, will demand such questions as shall
be needful. Wherein you shall find this author plentifully to satisfy your
expectations, not tying himself absolutely to follow neither Plato nor
Aristotle, but gathering from both, and from other excellent writers besides,
so much as may yield you the greater and fuller satisfaction. Give ear
therefore unto his words.

THe end in all things that men do in this world, is the first that is
considered, though afterward it be the last to be put in execution. And as,
when it is brought to perfection, it bears the name of effect, so is it the
cause that moves all other to bring it to effect. And therefore to treat of
that end, which is now the motion inducing us to discourse hereupon, we must
come to the first principles which may be the causes to bring a man to this
end. In which respect it were needful for me first to speak of the generation
of man, since as all seeds bring forth their fruit like to themselves; so
falls it out for the most part in men: for such as are the father and the
mother, such are most commonly the children. I should likewise declare, how he
that will be a commendable father, ought to have a special care, not of
himself only (for him we will suppose to be a man endewed with all the
ornaments required for a well composed body and mind) but of the mother also.
For albeit she receive the seed of generation from the man; yet howsoever it
be, the children when they be once conceived, take their nourishment from the
mother, and in her womb, until the time of their birth: whereby we see the
children very often to retain the vices of the mother. Also that in regard
hereof, every man that intends to take a wife, ought to be very careful in
the choice of her; so that she may not be base of parentage, vicious, wanton,
deformed, lame, or otherwise imperfect or defective: but well borne, virtuous,
chaste, of tall and comely personage, and well spoken; to the end that of
father and mother, by kind gentle, virtuous, modest, and comely of shape and
proportion, like children may between them be brought forth. For from wise men
has proceeded that warning to men, that such wives they should choose as they
wished to have their children. And Archidamus King of Sparta, was condemned by
his citizens to pay a fine, for having taken to wife a woman of very low
stature; because (said they) she is like to bring us forth no kings, but
dandiprats. Thereby declaring how they accounted no small part of the majesty
of a king, to consist in the comely presence and stature of his body; and not
without cause. For it is written, that the goodly show and appearance of a man,
is the first thing worthy sovereignty. But because in the request made to me,
I am required to begin only at his birth, I think it shall suffice, if I
declare unto you in what manner he ought to be nourished, and brought up, and
instructed, till he come to such ripe years and judgment as he may rule
himself, and be his own guide to direct all his actions to that same end,
which in all humane things is the last and best. Nevertheless before I begin
therewith, I would have you to understand, that the first gift which the father
bestows on the son after he is borne, is his name, by which he is all his
life time to be called. Which name, is to be wished, may be decent and fit, so
as it may seem the life of the child is marked with a sign or pronostication
of good hap, and of being framed to the course of virtue: for some are of
opinion, that the name oftentimes presageth the qualities and conditions of the
child. And therefore they are not to be commended that name their children by
the names of brute beasts, as in some countries is used; where the names of
Leo, of Orso, of Astore, of Pardo, of Cane, and such like are in use: as if
their desire were that their children should resemble those wild and brute
beasts in their conditions. Let men therefore in Gods name be entitled with
names meet for men, and such as may signify or carry with them dignity, or
rather holiness and religion, and leave to brute beasts their own possesion.

Then, said sir Robert Dillon, before you proceed any further, I pray you let
us understand whether that point be clear or no, of the nourishing all manner
of children. For among Lycurgus his laws, there was one, whereby it was
ordained, that such children as were borne imperfect in any part of their
bodies, crooked, misshapen, of ill aspect, should not only, not be fostered
up, but also be thrown down from the top of a high rock, as creatures
condemned by God and nature in their conception; and so marked by them, to the
end that men might know, that such (if they were through ignorance bred and
nourished) were likely to bring harm and ruin to the houses and
commonwealths wherein they should live. Let us therefore hear your authors
opinion concerning that law.

There is no doubt (said I) but that such was the opinion of Lycurgus, and such
his law, though cruel and unjust. Nevertheless though the felicity of man be a
perfection of all the good gifts of body and mind, and he that is so borne,
cannot indeed be properly termed happy in the highest degree of worldly
happiness: yet much more prudently have those wise men determined, who say, that
the imperfections of men's bodies which are borne with them, are not to be
imputed to them as hurtful or shameful, because it is not in their power to
avoid them. And who is he that can be so hard hearted as to slay an infant so
cruelly, only because nature has shaped him imperfect in any of his lims? The
mind of any good man abhors to think such a thing, much more to put it in
execution.

Indeed (replied sir Robert Dillon) pity ought always to be before the eyes
of al men, as a thing natural to them, and without which they are unworthy the
name of humanity: yet must not this pity extend so far for any particular
compassion, as thereby to confound the universal order of things. The pity
which Hecuba had of Paris (as Poets have taught us) was the cause that Troy was
burnt, and Priamus with all his worthy family destroyed: which things (say
they) had never happened, if contrary to the direction of the Gods (who by her
dream forewarned her of those evils) she had not saved him. If then it were
true, as Lycurgus affirmed, that the marks or tokens, so brought into the
world by children from their mothers womb, should foretell such to be likely
to bring ruin or calamity to their cities or countries; were it not better
that he that is so brone, should rather die in his cradle, then be nourished to
become the overthrow and desolation of a whole people? We know that by the
opinion of the wisest, it is expedient rather one should die to save a
multitude, then by sparing his life a number should perish.

That opinion (said I) is not unworthy wise men, but it is deeply to be
considered, and their meaning to be looked into, for so shall we find no such
sense therein, as you infer: for those men spoke not of children newly borne,
who are not able, either by speech or deed, to give any sign or token, whereby
it may be gathered, that they will prove either good or evil; but of such, as
being commonly heads and ringleaders of factious and seditious people, do make
themselves authors of the destruction of noble families and whole cities: such
as were both the Gracchi in Rome, and sundry others in Greece. And so it is to
be applied, to wit, that such a man shall rather die, then for the saving of
his life, a whole city or people should go to wrack. Or otherwise, when in
time of war, by the joining of two armies in battle, a great multitude were
likly to be slain, it were far better that one, or two, or more, in certain
number on each side should fight and hazard their lives in stead of the rest,
then their whole powers to meet, and venture the slaughter of the most part of
them. As in the beginning of the State of Rome, the Horatij and the Curiatij
did to keep from hazard of battle both people, which were ready armed and
prepared to fight together. In like manner may that saying be applied, in case
a whole city be in danger of desolation, and that the death of one man may
redeem the same. As by Curtius the same city of Rome was preserved: who with
so great courage threw himself armed on horseback into that pestilent pit
which infected the whole city, to the end that by his death he might save the
people from that mortality and infection. And the same effect (but far more
excellently) did our Savior likewise work, who to redeem mankind from the
bands of hell, took upon him all our sins, through which we were become
thrals to Satan; and for our salvation yielded himself willingly to a most
bitter death. But as in such cases it is to be allowed, that one should die for
the people: so is it much more to be discommended then I can declare, that an
infant newly borne should be killed, though by defect of nature, want of seed,
or any strain or mischance of the mother, or through abundance of ill humors,
or any other strange accident, it be borne imperfect, or marked as is said.

Well, said sir Robert Dillon, it is true indeed that the law of Lycurgus was
too cruel and unjust. But Plato in his books de Repub* devised a more mild and
reasonable way: for he allowed not that such children should be killed, as
holding it inhumane, yet he ordained that they should be brought up in some
place appointed out of the city, and that they should be debarred all
possibilite of bearing any rule or magistracy in the Commonwealth. For it
seemed, he thought that through the intemperance and disordinate living of the
parents, children came to be engendered no less deformed and corrupt in mind
then in body: and therein the excess of drinking wine to be a principal
cause. In which respect he forbad as well to the man as to the woman the use of
wine at such times as they were disposed to attend the generation of children.

Plato (said I) must not be left unanswered, neither will I spare to say (by his
leave) that his law, though it be milder then the other, was never the more
allowable for the causes above specified. For it is not always true, that the
imperfections of the body are likewise in the mind: or that a fair body has
evermore a fair mind coupled unto it. Have we not seen men of misshapen
bodies that have had divine minds, and others of goodly personages that have
bin very furies of hell? as Plato himself constrained by the force of truth
and daily experience could not but confess. The good or bad shape of the body
therefore, must be no rule for us to bring up, or not to bring up our children,
though it be to be esteemed a great grace to be borne with seemly and well
proportioned members: and that it is a special point of happiness to have a
fair mind harbored in a comely body, because both together bear with them a
natural grace, pleasing and grateful to the eyes of men, constraining in a
sort the love of all that behold them: which thing Virgil well understanding,
when he spoke of Eurialus, said,

Gratior and pulchro veniens in corpore virtus, Adiuuat, etc.

For although virtue of it self be lovely and to be highly esteemed, yet when
she is accompanied with the beauty of the body, she is more amiable
(whatsoever Seneca the Stoicke, more severe then need, please to say) and with
more affection embraced of all them that see her. Which thing appeared in
Scipio Africanus, when he met with Asdrubal his enemy in the presence of king
Siphax: for as soon as the subtle African had beheld the comely presence and
grateful countenance of Scipio, he forthwith conceived that, which afterward
fell out, to wit, that Scipio would draw Siphax to join with the Romans,
against the Carthaginians. But for all this we are not in any wise to esteem a
person in body misshapen or deformed, less worthy to be nourished, or to be
admitted to magistracy, if he be virtuous, then the other that is of grateful
presence. For though Aristotle think the deformity of the body to be an
impediment to the perfect felicity of man, in respect of exterior things; yet
he determines, that it is no hindrance to the course of virtue. To conclude
therefore this point, though children be borne weak, crooked, misshapen, or
deformed of body, they are not therefore to be exposed, but as well to be
brought up and instructed as the other, that they may grow and increase in
virtue, and become worthy of those dignities which are dispensed in their
commonweals. And, me thinks, Socrates that wise man spoke very well to his
scholars, and to this purpose, when he advised them, that they should often
behold themselves in looking-glasses: to the end (said he) that if you see your
faces and bodies comely and beautiful, ye may endeavor to set forth and grace
the gifts of nature the better, by adjoining virtues thereunto: and if ye
perceive your selves to be deformed and il-fauoured, you may seek to supply
the defects of nature, with the ornaments of virtue, thereby making your selves
no less grateful and amiable then they that have beautiful bodies. For it is
rather good to see a man of body imperfect and disproportioned endued with
virtues, then a goodly body to be naught else but a gay vessel filled with
vice and wickedness. Children are to be bred, such as nature gives them unto
us, and we are to have patience to abide their proof, and to see what their
actions will be: and if theirs that be of deformed body, do prove good and
virtuous, they are so much the more to be commended, as they seemed less apt
thereunto by their birth. And on the contrary side, they that being beautiful
of body, are lewd and vicious, deserve to be driven from the conversation of
civil men; yea chased out of the world, as unthankful acknowledgers of so great
a gift bestowed upon them, and as unworthy to live among men. These how fair
soever (be they children or men) that carry one thing in their tongue, and
another in their heart, be they that deserve to be hunted out of all civil
society, that are ingrate for benefits received; who hurt, or seek to hurt
them that have done them good, and hate them, only because they cannot but
know themselves to be bound unto them. These be they that in very truth are
crooked, misshapen and monstrous, and might well be condemned to be buried
quick: not simple innocent babes, who, having no election, can yield not
tokens either of good or evil; against whom to pronounce sentence of death
before they have offended, is great injustice and exceeding cruelty. And this
(lo) is the sentence of this author touching the doubt proposed, wherein (if
you rest satisfied) I will proceed.

All the company assented to the same: and then Master Dormer said; Now then
(I pray you) let us hear you declare what this end is, whereof you were
discoursing when this doubt was proposed, and withal we must expect that you
shall show us and set us in the way wherein we are to travel for the attaining
thereof, and give us precepts whereby that perfection may be purchased, unto
which all men desirous to become happy in this life, direct their actions and
their endeavors.

Of this expectation (quoth I) you need not fear to be frustrated, for here
shall you have enough (I assure my self) to fulfill your desire: and
therewith, perusing my papers, I thus followed. The end of man in this life, is
happiness or felicity: and an end it is called (as before was said) because
all virtuous actions are directed thereunto, and because for it chiefly man
labors and trauelleth in this world. But for that this felicity is found to
be of two kinds, whereof one is called civil, and the other contemplative: you
shall understand that the civil felicity is nothing else then a perfect
operation of the mind, proceeding of excellent virtue in a perfect life; and is
achieved by the temper of reason, ruling the disordinate affects stirred up in
us by the unreasonable parts of the mind, (as when the time shall serve will be
declared) and guiding us by the mean of virtue to happy life. The other which
is called contemplation, or contemplative felicity, is likewise an operation
of the mind, but of that part thereof which is called intellectiue, so that
those parts which are void of reason, have no intermedling with the same: for
he which gives himself to follow this felicity, suppresseth all his
passions, and abandoning all earthly cares, bends his studies and his
thoughts wholly unto heavenly things; and kindled and inflamed with divine love,
labors to enjoy that unspeakable beauty, which has bin the cause so to
inflame him, and to raise his thoughts to so high a pitch. But forasmuch as our
purpose is now to entreat only of the humane precepts and instructions, and
of that highest good, which in this vale of misery, may be obtained* ye shall
understand that the end whereunto man ought to direct all his actions, is
properly that civil felicity before mentioned; which is, an inward reward for
moral virtues, and wherein fortune can challenge no part or interest at all.
And this end is so peculiar to reason, that not only unreasonable creatures
can be no partakers thereof, but young children also are excluded from the same.
For albeit they be naturally capable of reason, yet have they no use of her,
through the imperfection of their young age, because this end being to be
attained by perfect operations in a perfect life, neither of which, the child,
nor the young man is able to perform, it follows that neither of them can be
accounted happy. And by the same reason it comes to pass, that though man
be the subject of felicity, yet neither the child nor the young man may be said
properly to be the subject thereof, but in power and possibility only: yet the
young man approaches nearer thereunto then the child. And thus much may suffice
for a beginning, to satisfy the first part of your demand.

Then said Captain Carleil, seeing you have proposed to us this end, which is
the mark (as it were) whereat all civil actions do leuel, as at their highest
or chiefest good, we will now be attentive to hear the rest, and how you will
prescribe a man to order his life, so as from his childhood, and so forward
from age to age, he may direct his thoughts and studies to the compassing of
this good, or summum bonum, as Philosophers do term it.

That shall you also understand, quoth I, but then must the discourse thereof be
drawn from a deeper consideration. Those men that have established laws for
people to be ruled by, ought to have framed some among the rest for the
foundation of man's life, by which a true and certain form of life might be
conceived, and such, as beginning to lead him from his childhood, might have
served him for a guide, until he had attained to those riper years, wherein
he might rather have bin able to instruct others, then need to be himself
instructed. For the foundation of honest and virtuous living, begins even in
childhood: neither shall he ever be good young man, that in his childhood is
naught; nor a wicked young man lightly prove good when he is old. For, such as
are the principles and beginnings of things, such are the proceedings.
Whereupon the wisest men of the world, have ever thought, that the way to have
cities and commonwealths furnished with virtuous and civil men, consisted in
the bringing up of children commendably. But among all the laws of our time,
there is no one that treats of any such matter. There are orders and laws
both universal and particular, how to determine causes of controversy, to end
strifes and debates, and how to punish malefactors: but there is no part in the
whole body of the law, that sets down any order in a thing of so great
importance. Yet Plato held it of such moment, as knowing that the well bringing
up of children, was the spring or wel-head of honest life: he thought it not
sufficient, that the fathers only should take care of nurturing their
children, but appointed besides public magistrates in the commonwealth, who
should attend that matter, as a thing most necessary. For though man be framed
by nature mild and gentle, yet if he be not from the beginning diligently
instructed and taught, he becomes of humane and benign that he was, more
fierce and cruel then the most wild and savage beast of the field. Whereas if
he be conveniently brought up, and directed to a commendable course of life: of
benign and humane that he is, he becomes through virtue in a sort divine. And
to the end the cause may be the better known, why so great diligence is
needful and requisite, you must understand, that although our soul be but one
in substance, and properly our true form, yet has it not one only part,
power, or faculty, or virtue (as we may call it) but diverse, appointed for
diverse and sundry offices. For we being participant of the nature of all things
living, and those being divided into three kinds; it is necessary that man
should have some part of every of those three. There is then one base and
inferior kind of life of less estimation then the rest, and that is the life
of trees and plants, and of all such things as have root in the earth, which
spring, grow, bloome, and bring forth fruit: which fruit Aristotle says,
comes from them in stead of excrement, together with their seed. And these
trees and plants, and such like growing things, have only life, deuoid of
feeling (though Pythagoras thought otherwise) or of any knowledge: but by the
benefit of nature only, they spring, they grow, and bringforth fruit and
seed for the use of man, and for the maintaining of their kind. There is
another kind of life, less imperfect then that, which is the same that perfect
living creatures have (for of that life, which is in manner a mean between the
life of plants and this of sensible creatures, we need not now to speak; or if
it were, we should resemble it to that which Physicians call Embrio, and is the
creature imperfect in the womb, whiles it is between the form of seed, and
of the kind whence it comes) which life of perfect living creatures, has in
it by nature power to feel, and to move from place to place. For we see they
stir and feel, and have power to desire those things that are meet for the
maintaining of their life and of their nature. And by natural inclination, and
for the increase and continuance of their kinds, they covet the joining of
their bodies, to yield unto nature that, which of nature they have received,
that is, to engender the like unto themselves. But this power of the soul,
cannot use that force and virtue which naturally it has, if it have not
withal that former part which is proper (as is said) to plants, and is called
vegetative (you must give me leave to use new words of Art, such as are proper
to express new conceits, though they be yet strange, and not denizened in our
language) because it gives life and increase to growing things, and without it
the power of feeling does utterly fail. Next after this, comes that excellent
and divine part of the soul, which brings with it the light of reason,
containing in it the powers, faculties, or virtues of the other two. For it
has that life which proceeds from plants; it has sense or feeling, and
motion from place to place, proper to the second kind; and it has besides that
other part, whereby it knows, understands, discourses, co^sulteth, chooses,
and gives it self to operation, and to contemplate things natural and
divine: and this part is proper only to man. And as by the two other faculties
before mentioned, we are like to plants and to brute beasts: so by this last,
we do participate of the divine nature of God himself. Wherefore Aristotle
said, that man was created upright, for no other cause, then for that his
substance was divine, whose nature and office is to know and understand. And
truly this gift is given unto us by the maker and governor of all things,
because we might know our selves to be of a nature most perfect among earthly
things, and not far inferior to the divine. And that we have received so
singular a gift from Almighty God for no other cause, but only to the end we
might perceive how all other things that grow and live on earth, are
corruptible, and do resolve into their first principles or beginnings, and
cease any more to be, as soon as the soul of life departs from them: but
that our minds are immortal and incorruptible, whereby we may rest assured of
an eternal life. Since then these three faculties of the soul are in us, it
is clear, that as the plants, among things that bear life, are the most
imperfect; so that part of the soul is most imperfect which is proper to their
kind: but it is so necessary to all other kinds, as without it there is no
life, and with it the rest of the faculties that are joined therewith, though
they be worthier, decay and fall. And this necessity of nature, that without
it she gives no life, makes the same to be most base and ignoble. For among
natural things, those, which are so necessary, as without them nothing can be
done, are always held and reputed the most unworthy. Which thing we may see in
that we call Materia prima: which though it be in nature before the form, yet
because of the necessity thereof, it is esteemed of no nobility in comparison
of the form. And even so likewise among the senses, that of feeling is held
the basest, because no perfect living creature can be without it, nor yet the
rest of the senses, unless that be present. And therefore Aristotle said, that
the other senses were given to man, that thereby he might live the better; but
the sense of feeling was given him, because without it he could neither be, nor
live. Now for so much as life may be without sense, because the sensitive soul
is not of such necessity as is the vegetative, therefore is that of more
nobility then this somewhat, yet inferior to the intellectiue, which can no
more be without the sensitive, then the sensitive without the vegetative. And
because the intellectiue soul is not of necessity serving to any other
faculty or power, therefore is she as Lady, Mistress, and Queen over all other
the powers, faculties, or virtues of the soul; so as there is none proper unto
man, but that whereby he may be either good or bad, happy or unhappy: and the
same is it, whereby we understand and make choice rather of one course of life
then of another. This great gift has God bestowed upon us, to show his great
grace and goodness, and for this purpose, that, as he has invited us through
virtue of our understanding to the knowledge of truth, and by this knowledge to
become like unto himself; so we should bend all our study and endeavors
thereunto, as the end and scope of our life in this world. Of which, the
occasion of this our present speech did first arise.

Here I pawsing a while, as to take breath, and withal to order some of the
papers, the Lord Primate spoke, saying: Having treated thus far of the
powers, faculties, virtues, or parts of the soul, I think it not impertinent
to move a question, whether they be in man separate, and in several places; or
whether they be united all together, and seated in one place?

This question (quoth I) is very pertinent to this place, and by the author
here resolved as a doubt, not lightly or easy to be answered. First, for that
there have not wanted some, who would needs have that these three powers of the
soul, were three distinct souls, and not joined in one soul, appointed for
several offices. But because that opinion has bin esteemed but vain, it
needs not to be insisted upon; but briefly that I declare, what Aristotle and
Plato, with their followers, have held. The first, with his scholars, affirm
the reasonable soul to be in substance indivisible: and albeit they assign
unto her diverse virtues, yet will they not have them to be indeed several and
diverse, but that the diversity should proceed and consist only in the manner of
understanding them: supposing them to be in the soul after such a sort, as in
the line of a circle, the inner part which is hollow or embowed, and the
outward which is bended. Which two parts, though we understand them diversely,
yet are they but one line, and not several. Neither do they assign unto her
diverse places: but say that she is all and whole in all our body, and in every
part of the same, and apt there to exercise all her functions, if the parts
were apt to receive them. But because every part is not disposed to receive
them, therefore she makes show of them only in such as are made fit
instruments to execute her powers and faculties. So gives she virtue to the
eye to see, to the ear to hear, and to the rest of the members that are the
instruments of our senses. But Plato and his sect, have given to every power of
faculty of the soul, a peculiar seat in man's body: for though they held the
soul to be but one, endued with several virtues or powers; yet they affirmed
that every one of those had a several seat appointed in man's body. To the
vegetative (from which, as from a fountain, they said, the concupiscible
appetite does flow) they appointed the Liver for her place. To the sensitive,
whence comes (say they) the fervent passion of anger, they gave the Heart. But
the reasonable soul (as being the most divine thing under heaven, they
assigned to hold her seat, like a Queen in a royal chair, even in the head:
unto which opinion, all the Greek authors of Physic have leaned, and
specially Galen the excellent interpreter of Hippocrates, who has not only
attributed three several seats to the three several faculties of the soul,
in respect of their operations; but has also showed with what order those
members are framed, that must be the receptacles of those faculties. For he
shows how the first member, that takes form after the conception, is the
liver, from whence spring all the veins, that like small brooks, carry blood
over all the body. And in this member does he place the living or nourishing
soul, which we have termed vegetative, affirming it to be most approaching to
nature. Next unto this, he places the heart, wherein all the vital spirits
are forged, and receive their strength: for the generation whereof, the liver
sends blood thither, where it is refined, and made more pure and subtle; and
from thence by the arteries (which all spring from the heart) the same spirits
are spread thoroughout the whole body. And these two principal members, are
the seats of the two principal appetites, the irascible and the
concupiscible; of that the heart, of this the liver. And because all this while
the creature has yet no need (as being imperfect) of sense or motion, it is
busied about nothing but receiving of nourishment. Somewhat further off from
the heart, begins the brain to grow, and from it do all the senses flow;
and then (lo) begins the child to take form and shape of a perfect
creature, the face, the hands, and the feet being then fashioned, with the
other parts of the body, apt for feeling and voluntary moving: and from thence
be derived the sinews, the bands or ligaments, and muscles are framed, by
which the motions of the members are disposed. This part is the seat of the
reasonable soul, by virtue and power of which, we understand, we will, we
discourse, we know, we choose, we contemplate and do all those operations which
appertain unto reason. And as nature has placed the brain a good distance
off from the other two principal members; so has she framed a cartilage, or
thin rynd, or skin to sever the heart from the liver and other inward bowels,
as with a fence or hedge between them and the other baser parts that are less
pure. For the heart is purer, and so is that blood which conueyeth the spirits
from it throughout the body, then the liver; or the blood which is engendered in
the same. And in this respect was Aristotle justly reprehended by Galen, in
that he gave to the heart alone, that which appertained to all three the
principal members aforesaid. For though he assigned diverse virtues or powers
to the soul, yet he placed them all in the heart alone; from which he said
(contrary to that which common sense and experience teaches) that all the
veins, arteries and sinews of the body were derived. But because we should go
too far astray from our purpose, if I should discourse particularly all that
which may be said in this matter, I will return (if you so think good) to our
former purpose, which I left to satisfy your demand.

Thus much (said the Lord Primate) has not a little opened the understanding
of this matter, and therefore you may proceed, unless any other of the company
have any other doubt to propose. But they all being silent, and seeming
attentive to hear further, I said; Now that you have understood what the
powers and faculties of the soul are, it follows to be declared, how the
ages of ma^s life have similitude with the same. As the soul of life therefore,
called vegetative, is the foundation of the rest, and consequently of the
basest: so is the age of childhood the foundation of the other ages, and
therefore the least noble, for the necessity which it carries with it. And
because upon it, the other ages are built, there ought the greater diligence to
be used about the same, to make it pass on toward the other more noble then
it self: so as we may reasonably conceive a hope, that from a wel-guided
childhood the child may enter into a commendable youth, and thence pass to a
more riper age, by the direction of virtue. But first ye must understand, that
Aristotle will in no wise yield, that this inferior soul should be capable of
reason; and therefore places in the sensible soul, both the concupiscible and
the irascible appetites. And contrariwise, Plato (as before is said)
distinguishes these two affects, into both these faculties of the soul,
giving to the first the concupiscible, and the irascible to the other. And
because Plato his opinion has generally bin better allowed then Aristotle's, I
will speak thereof according as Plato has determined. This baser soul then,
being that, whereby we be nourished, we grow, we sustain life, and receive our
body and being; about whose maintaining and increase, she uses continually,
whether we wake or sleep, without any endeavor of our own, her virtue and
operation (if food and nourishment fail not) is in her full force, chiefly in
childhood: and as soon as the child is borne, stirs up the desire of food,
to the end that by little and little it might gather strength of body, to
become apt for the use of the soul, whose organ or instrument it is, for the
accomplishing of the more noble operations meet for man. And because the milk
of the mother, or of the nurse, is the first fit food for the infant; it were
to be wished, that it should receive the same rather from the mother, then from
any strange woman: for, in reason, the same should be more kindly and natural
for the babe then any other. In consideration whereof, the instructors of
civil life, have determined and taught, that it is the fathers office to teach
and instruct the child, but the mothers to nourish it. For wise men say, that
Nature has given to women their breasts, not so much for defense of the heart,
as because they should nourish their children: and that she has given them two
paps, to the end that they might nourish two, if by chance they should be
delivered of two at once. And truly it cannot be, but that would much increase
both the love of the mother to the child, and likewise that of the child to the
mother. Nevertheless, if it fall out (as oftentimes it does) that the mother
cannot give suck to her child, or for other considerations she give it forth
to be nursed to another woman; yet is there special regard to be had, in
getting such a nurse as may be of good complexion, and of loving nature, and
honest conditions, that with milk it may also suck a disposition to a virtuous
and commendable life.

By your license (said M. Dormer) let me ask you a question, whether you
think that the mind takes any quality from the nutriment of the body: for if
the mind be divine, me seems it is against reason, that it should not be of
greater power, then to receive corruption from the nutriment of the body.

You say very well, quoth I, and here shall you be resolved of that doubt. That
the mind is a divine thing, cannot be denied. And if the virtue of the mind
(which is reason) could be freed from the company of those other two faculties
of the soul, void of reason, in respect of themselves, it would doubtless
remain still in perfection of one nature, and not receive any vice from that
nutriment, which yields matter to the basest faculty of the soul to
maintain and increase the body, but evermore practice her proper operations
and virtue: but because it happens too often, partly by the ill quality of the
nutriment, and partly for want of care in the education, that the part wherein
the vegetative power lies, gets overmuch strength, and allured by the
delights of the sensible part, gives it self wholly to follow the pleasures of
the senses, the mind being oppressed, cannot perform the offices and functions
pertaining thereunto. And for this cause Plato affirmed, that unhealthful
bodies make the minds weak. And the body can never be sound or healthful,
when it is given to follow that baser part of the soul, and the lusts and
sensualities of the same, whereby it forces the mind prevailing against
reason. Not but that the mind is nevertheless divine, but because the body being
the necessary instrument of the mind, when it is wrested and drawn to an ill
habit, the mind cannot use it as it would, and the light of reason is darkened
and hindered, not through any defect of the mind, but only in respect of the
instrument that is become rebellious. Even as if a candle should be put into a
close vessel, that the light thereof could not appear: for the not yielding
of light, should not proceed from the defect of the candle, but of the vessel
that enclosed the same. To the end therefore that the child receive not any
vicious habit by the quality of his first food and nourishment; wise men have
advised, that the nurse to be chosen for a child, should not be base or of vile
condition, that the child might be the apter to be brought up to virtue: that
she be not of strange nation, lest she should give it strange or unseemly
manners, unfit or disagreeable to the customs and conditions of the house or
city wherein it is borne, and wherein it is to live: and lastly, that she be
of good and commendable behavior, to the end that with the milk it may suck
good conditions, and an honest disposition to virtuous life. And because the
nurse may be kept in house, or suffered to carry the child to her own dwelling
place; of the two, it is to be wished that the parents should rather keep her
in their own house, to the end that even from his infancy it might learn to
know the father and mother, and the rest of the family, and take by little and
little the fashions and manners of the house. For the minds of children, whiles
they be young, are like to the young tender slips of trees, which a man may bend
and straighten as he list; and are fashioned to such customs and conditions as
may best beseem them. For look what behavior they first learn, the same
they retain and keep a long while after. Wherefore Phocilides said right
well: Whiles yet in tender years the child does grow,
Teach him betimes conditions generous.


Great is the care then that fathers ought to use in framing the manners and
disposition of their children, when they be young and tender in their own
houses, and are yet in their nurses laps. Having regard not to use them either
ouer-curstly, or ouer-fondly: for as the first ouer-aweth them, makes them
dull and base, and vile minded, by taking away the generositie of their minds;
the other brings them to be wantons and waiward, so as they will never be
still, but ever crying and wrawling for they wot not what. For being yet but
new in the world, and not acquainted with those things, the images whereof are
presented to them by the senses of hearing and seeing; they easily give
themselves to waywardnes and crying, when they see any strange sight or images,
or hear a fearful sound or noise, the rather by reason of the melancholy
humor, which they bring with them from the mothers womb, (reason having yet
little or no force in them, and their judgments being too weak to distinguish
good from evil, or what is hurtful, from what may do them good:) not that
naturally they be so, for that tender age is rather sanguine and aeriall; but
thorough the remnant of that blood, from which they received their nutriment in
their mothers belly: unto which their crying, the usual remedy is the moving
them from place to place, the rocking of them in their cradles, and the
dandling of them; for such motions do divert them from those fearful
impressions, and make them the less wayward and combersome, quieting the
inward passions of the mind. Besides that, such stirring of them, wakeneth and
kindles in them that natural heat which helps the digestion of humors in
them, and makes them apt to be well nourished and strengthened against those
outward fears, which cause their waywardnes and crying. Hereunto may be added
the singing of their nurses, whereby they commonly still them, using it, as
taught by nature only: which some men think comes to pass, by reason that
the soul is (as they say) composed of harmony, and therefore is delighted with
that which is proper and natural to it self. Others (happily of better
judgment) say, that children are stilled by the singing of their nurses,
because one contrary expels and drives away another, when it is the
stronger: so as the nurses singing being louder then the child's crying,
therefore it prevails. But the most effectual reason is, that the vegetative
power or faculty being of most force in that age, and it taking pleasure in
things delightful, and abhorring those that are displeasant and noisome; when
with crying it finds it self annoyed, it does more willingly admit the
nurses singing, and becomes calm and still by hearing the numbers and
sweetness of the voice delighting them. Thus then are children drawn from way
wardnes to be still, from crying to mirth, and become thereby the more lively
and fuller of spirit, and stirred up to a better kind of life; growing by
little and little apt to understand, and to speak as nature may permit the^.
In which time specially, great diligence is to be used, that they neither hear
any dishonest or unseemly speeches, unfit for a generous mind to conceive, nor
see any sights that be shameful or indecent to behold. For these two senses,
of all the rest, are of most importance in this life; for that the images of
things are represented to the mind by the eyes, and by the ears do the
conceits and words enter into the same. And of these two senses, do the ears
so much the more help us toward the learning of a civil life, as the
sentences of wise men pass thereby into our understanding. And whereas the
things which we learn by the eyes, are but dumb words: so do the ears hear
the lively voices, by which we learn good disciplines, and the true manner of
well living. And therefore Xerxes said, that the mind had his dwelling in the
ears, which were delighted with the hearing of good words, and grieved at the
hearing of unseemly. And the ancient wise men considering the great profit
which the ears yielded toward the attaining of knowledge, accounted them as
consecrated to Prudence and to Wisdom. In which respect also, when they met
their children, they kissed them on the ear, as if they meant to make much of
that part chiefly, by which they hoped their children were to learn wisdom.
And for this cause ought they that have the care of bringing up children to be
very circumspect, never to pronounce any word before them, but such as are
modest, and may tend to the instruction of a good life. For though it seem
not, that young children mark such things; yet what they hear and see, does
secretly enter into their tender minds, and there take insensible roots:
which, when men think least of any such matter, brings forth fruit
agreeable to the seed was sown. And of ill seed, the fruit cannot but also be
evil. Let fathers then take great heed to the modesty of speech and honest
behavior of all his family, and specially of the nurses, in whose bosoms their
children are ever held, and in whose faces their eyes are always fixed;
because they note and observe most what they do or say, having less regard to
others. And thus, understanding, increasing in the child with years, as soon
as he is come to be capable of any precept, before all other things it is
expedient that care be had to make him conceive a knowledge of that simple,
pure and omnipotent nature, the most high and everliving God, and that the same
be so imprinted in his heart, as he may learn God to be the Creator of all
things, the giver of life, and maintainer thereof, the disposer of all gifts and
graces, and the only dispenser of al goodness: so as he may be made to
understand, that he receives al goodness from his divine Majesty. Therefore they
that give unto him any thing, how small soever a trifle it be, or a toy, shall
do well to offer it unto him, as a thing sent unto him, or made for him by God,
by little and little to acquaint his mind, and to fashion it to the knowledge
of God, and of his divine power and goodness. For by this means shall there be
a sure and firm foundation laid, whereupon a strong and neuer-failing frame of
good manners and godly instructions may be built: and without this foundation,
all other care will be spent but in vain. For he that is void of religion, and
of that fear of God, which is in effect but a due reverence unto his Majesty,
can never in all the whole course of his life, do any thing worthy praise or
commendation. Whereas on the other side, he that has this holy fear fixed in
his mind, will always abstain from doing any thing unfitting or dishonest, or
that may offend God, and bring him to his wrath and indignation. And if perhaps
through the frailty of our nature apt to offend, by reason of the spot of
sin, wherein we are conceived, through the disobedience of our first father
Adam, he happen to fall sometime into any sin, he is forthwith stricken with
that same religious fear and reverence, and being ashamed of himself, seeks
to make reconciliation therefore, to the end he may not dwell in the wrath and
displeasure of Almighty God, from whom he acknowledges as well his life and
being, as whatsoever good besides he has in this mortal life. To the
attaining of this religion, will the example of the father greatly further the
child, if to him he show himself such, as he wishes he should become. For
though the children of Socrates (as it is written) proved not capable of good
discipline, though the father were a pattern or fountain of honest and
virtuous life, yet are we to assure our selves, that the example of the fathers
life is the true and perfect mirror for the child to fashion himself by, that
he may attain a commendable course of life. For if the dumb and senseless
images of excellent men, which the ancient Romans held in their houses, were
sufficient to stir up in young men, when they beheld them, a desire to follow
their steps, and to resemble those noble personages of their ancestors, whose
resemblances they beheld; endeavoring themselves not to degenerate from the
virtues and the nobility of their parents: how much more, may we think, that
it will move the child to see in his fathers lively face, and in his actions
virtue imprinted, and daily represented. I know right well, that sometimes the
contrary is seen, through the inconstancy of humane things: but if we consider
what happens for the most part, we shall find that good examples commonly are
causes of good, and bad examples causes of evil. Since the child therefore is
chiefly to learn of the father his form of life, it is the fathers part to be
to him in his tender years a lively pattern of virtue, as we have said,
whereby he may (as it were) ingraft into his child's mind that good and
commendable kind of life, which may bring him by virtuous actions to honor and
estimation. But because it comes oftener to pass then were requisite, that
the father being busied about other matters concerning the order of his house
and family, or else in the managing of the affairs of the commonwealth, he
cannot attend the bringing up of his child with that care that he ought,
therefore must he provide for his education, so as the same be not neglected.
For as the true images of virtue are easily imprinted in the minds of children
whiles they be tender: so do they quickly wear out and vanish, if they be not
refreshed and revived by the discretion and industry of some meet person
appointed for that purpose, and their contraries as soon ingraued in their
places. The father therefore ought in any wife to make choice of some such man,
to whom he may commit the charge and instruction of his child, when he is past
the age of three years, as may be meet to give him good example of life, and
season him with such doctrine, as he may not degenerate or decline from that
virtuous course of life which he has endeavored to put into the babes mind,
even whiles he was yet in his nurses arms, and under the charge of women. For
if in those first days of infancy, when yet he had almost no understanding, so
great care was to be taken (as we have said) to lay a good foundation, how much
more diligence is there now to be used, when he begins to have some
knowledge and judgment, that the building may rise answerable to the same.
Wise men have wisely said, that nature is the best mistress we can have: and the
custom of virtuous behavior and wholesome doctrine being taken in tender
years, is converted not only into an habit, but even into nature. Wherefore
let the father at those years give his child in charge to some virtuous and
godly man to be trained and instructed, who must be neither too mild nor too
severe; but such, as may in some things agree with the manner of the nurses
bringing up, to the end he may gently turn to other manners and behavior then
he had learned when he was most among women. For to take a child from the
breast, and from his nurses bosom, and to put him suddenly under the hard
government of a cursed master, would be too violent a change, and force that
tender nature overmuch. But if he that shall then have the ruling of him, shall
discreetly win him with mildnes from being fond after the nurse, and by little
and little draw him to a more firm kind of behavior, in such sort as he
scarce perceive that he has forsaken his nurses lap: the child will quickly
delight to be with him as much as with his nurse, yea or with his father or
mother: and prattling or childishly craving, now one thing, then another of him,
there will soon spring in his mind a desire of knowledge: which desire, though
indeed it be natural and borne with us, yet has it need to be helped and
stirred up to come forth and put it self in action; for else will it lie
hidden and covered with the unworthiest part of the soul, like to the fire
which is covered with ashes: which though it have naturally virtue to give
light and heat, yet unless that impediment be taken away, it will do neither
of both, nor be apt to work his natural effect. And therefore (as before is
said) he which shall take the charge of the child after the nurse, must be very
discreet to win him to his discipline without bitterness or stripes, which do
rather dull and harden the child's mind, then work any good effect. And the
servile fear which the ouersharpe and unadvised usage or beating of the child
brings him unto, (not fit for a generous mind) makes him to hate the thing
he should learn, before he can come to know it, much less to love it. It is
also a thing very profitable for his better instructing, that there be others
of like years in his company to learn with him; for so will there arise a
certain emulation among them, through which, every of them will strive to step
before his fellow: besides that the conversation of such as are like in age and
quality, well bred and brought up, is a very fit occasion to make them all well
mannered and of good behavior, those young years being (as before is said) apt
for the simplicity thereof, to take whatsoever form is given unto them. And
for this cause was Merides King of the Egyptians greatly commended among the
ancient wise men, for that as soon as his son Sisostres was borne, he
caused all the children that were borne in the city that same day, to be
gathered together, and brought up with his said son, where they were instructed
in all those disciplines and noble arts, that in those days were in
estimation, and meet to direct to a commendable life. And that the manner of
good education is to proceed by degrees, it appeared by the order which the
Kings of Persia held in the bringing up of those who were to succeed them in
their Empire. But because our discourse tends not to the instructing of
Princes children, but only of such gentlemen of meaner quality as may be fit
instruments for the service of their commonwealth or country: it will be best
to pass that over in silence.

Whiles in this place I was pawsing a while, as to take some breath, Captain
Carleil said in this sort: I hope your author gives not over so this matter.
For howsoever his purpose was to discourse of the civil life of private men,
yet the declaring of the order which was held in the instructing and training
up of the children of those Princes, cannot but be as well profitable as
delightful. Therefore let us (I pray you) hear what is said by him touching
the same.

That shall I willingly do, said I, for that the like request was made to him by
one of that company; and thus he proceeds, saying, that though it might
suffice to refer them to what Xenophon in his Ciropaedia has left written of
that subject, having learnedly and diligently under the person of Cirus, framed
an idaea or perfect pattern of an excellent Prince: yet he meaning to follow
Plato and Aristotle in his treatise, will therefore report what he has
gathered out of Plato to that purpose, and add thereunto briefly as much out of
Aristotle as may serve for the better understanding of the rest. You shall
understand then that the custom among these kings, was to give the child who
was to succeed in the kingdom, soon after he was borne, into the hands of
those Eunuchs that were esteemed of best life in the court: whose care was
chiefly to fashion his body with all diligence, that it might be straight and
most comely of shape and proportion; because the first thing that is offered to
the sight in a King, is the grace and comeliness of his person, which makes
him to be reverenced of his people, and beloved of his Peers. His infancy
being past, he was given in charge to others, that exercised him in handling
his weapons, horse-manship, and feats of arms; and likewise in hunting, as a
meet exercise to frame him fit for military discipline. And this the father
did, because he was persuaded that the knowledge of war was one of the surest
foundations for the upholding of a State or kingdom. When he was come to the
age of 14. years, then was he delivered over to four other excellent
personages, who were called the royal schoolmasters, the one most wise and
prudent, the other most just, another most temperate, and the last most
valiant. The first instructed him to know and honor God, and taught him the
knowledge of things divine and eternal, and withal, such as appertain to the
life of a good Prince: by which he became learned, as well in things
contemplative, as in things concerning the actions necessary and convenient for
a King. For they exercised him daily in the understanding of sciences, and in
the knowledge of good and virtuous behavior, as two most necessary things to
humane life, and which should lead him the ready way to his felicity and
happiness in this world; making him to know, that nothing was more miserable in
man then ignorance, and how by the general consent of the most wise men, he
that is ignorant is esteemed an ill man. To which purpose it is said by Cicero,
that there is no greater evil can befall a man then to be ignorant. And Plato
(from whom the other drew his sentence) says, that all ignorant persons were
in that respect also miserable. For Temperance being the rule and measure of
Virtue, upon which depends man's felicity; the opinion of this divine
Philosopher was, that he that was ignorant could not know temperance, and
consequently must be to seek in the way of virtue: the defect whereof
estrangeth a man from God, even as the having of this singular virtue of
temperance (whereof we shall speak hereafter more at large) does draw him near
unto his Majesty, to his great comfort and satisfaction. Ignorance therefore
being a mortal infirmity unto man's mind, and such a one as suffers him not
to enjoy his felicity, to which (as to the mark proposed) he leuelleth all
his actions: it is written that they of Mitilene intending severely to punish
certain of their confederates, who being armed with them in the field, had
forsaken them, made a decree against them, that from thenceforth they should
not set their children to school to learn arts or sciences. This first
schoolmasters teaching him thus, Religion and the fear of God; and training
him in the ma^ners and behavior appertaining to a King, did so long hold him
under his governance, till it appeared he had taken well and perfectly that
discipline. Then the second master taking him in charge, taught him that which
in consequence next follows to religion, that is, that there is nothing more
fitting for a King then truth and verity; that special care was to be taken
so to embrace the same, as he should never have one thing in his mouth, and
another in his heart, as wicked and deceitful men have, who are borne for the
destruction of virtue, and of honest and wel-disposed persons: and that those,
who were to be taxed therewith, were not only deceivers, but worthy the name of
traitors. In regard whereof (as Philostratus writes) among the Indians, if any
man bearing magistracy, were detected of a lie, he was presently deprived of
his magistracy, and disabled for ever after to bear any. And this did they,
because they conceived (and that rightly) that he which respected not truth in
matters of moment, destroyed as much, as in him lay, the society and civil
conversation of men, since no man can trust or beware of a liar. Therefore (as
Plutarch reports) Epenetus affirmed, that all injuries and wickedness
proceeded from a liar. This schoolmasters gave him to understand, that as the
nature of God is pure and simple, never deceiving us, whether we sleep or
wake: so, seeing there was no dignity under God so great as the Kings, he
ought first, and above all things, to conform himself and his actions unto
that high and eternal truth, the fear and knowledge of whom, had bin formerly
taught him. And as it seemed to them, that by truth he attained a resemblance
of God himself: so did they think that by lying, a man was worthy to loose the
title of a man. Which thing happily he meant, who devised Pan to be the son of
Mercury, the inuenter of speech, as Poets have fained; signifying by the shape
of Pan, under which is comprehended as well the false speaker as the true; that
the upper part of his body bearing humane shape, betokens truth (then the
which nothing is more proper to a man of virtue) but by the lower parts being
crooked, and of shape like a goat, false and untrue speaking was signified:
inferring that man by speaking untruth, becomes monstrous, and of a reasonable
creature falls to be a brute beast: whence also proceeded that among the
Persians, a lie was reputed a most heinous offense. And we see that even now
among us, it is reputed so great a shame to be accounted a liar, that any other
injury is cancelled by giving the lie; and he that receives it, stands so
charged in his honor and reputation, that he cannot disburden himself of that
imputation, but by striking of him that has so given it, or by chalenging him
the combat*

Captain Norreis hearing thus much spoken of truth, and of the lie,
interrupting me, said; God grant your author follow this theme a while, that
we soldiers may also have some instruction from him. For this matter of the lie
giving and taking, is grown of late among us to be confused and dangerous, so
as a man can hardly tell, how to carry himself in so many occasions, and
sundry cases, as daily happen in companies, wherein perhaps the authority and
reasons of such a man may yield us no small light.

Your wish therein (quoth I) shall not be frustrate, for the matter is by him
handled at large: but let us hear what be the points that you would specially
be resolved in; for it is not unlikely but that they will iump with the
question proposed by one of those persons supposed in his dialogue.

Marry sir (said he) I would gladly know, since he has spoken of truth and
untruth, and declared how the injury received by taking the lie, cannot be
cancelled, but by striking or chalenging the party who gave it; whether this
kind of chalenging and fighting man to man, under the name of Duellum, which is
used now a days among soldiers and men of honor, and by long custom
authorized, to discharge a man of an injury received, or for want of proofs in
sundry causes, be ancient or no? whether it concern honor or no? and whether
it appertain to civil life, and that felicity which we are discoursing upon
or no?

You have (said I) moved your question very right, and to the purpose; which to
answer at full, would require along speech: so deep roots like an ill weed,
have the opinions of men taken concerning the same in this our age; which to
cut down or root up, many sithes and howes would scarce suffice. But as
briefly as may be, you shall be satisfied in part; and he will make it appear
unto you, that the reasons which are set down in defense of this foolish
custom and wicked act, are false and absurd. And first of all you shall hear
him say, that this manner of combatting, which through the corruption of the
world has taken strength, and is permitted of some Princes, is nothing
ancient at all. For in histories it is not to be found, that for revenge of
injury, for want of proofs, for points of honor, or for any such like causes,
this wicked and unlawful kind of fight, was ever granted or allowed in
ancient time. For when any difference or controversy fell out among men of
honor, which might concern their credit and reputation for matter of valor,
they never tried the quarrel by combat between themselves, but strove to show
which of them was most worthy honor, by making their valor well known in
fight against their common enemies, as in Caesar's Commentaries we have a
notable example. And the singular fights or combats, that are mentioned in the
Greek or Latin histories, or fained by the Poets, happened evermore between
enemies of contrary nations, or otherwise in time of public war, though
perhaps the quarrel might be private between some of the chief men of both
camps, as between Turnus and Aeneas, Paris and Menelaus. Turnus laboring that
Aeneas might not have Lauinia to his wife: and Menelaus seeking to recover his
wife whom Paris had taken from him. Or else they fought for the public
quarrel, one to one, or more in number on each side, for preventing of greater
bloodshed, as did the Horatij and the Curiatij before Rome. Or by the ordinance
of some public games, as those called Pithij and Olimpici among the Greeks,
and those called Circenses among the Romans, whether they were celebrated in
honor of their Gods, or at the funerals of their dead, or for other causes. In
which games or spectacles were produced certain men, named by the Romans
Gladiatores, and by the Greeks Monomachi, to fight together; the first
invention whereof, appears to have come from the people of Mantinea. But other
private combats for causes above mentioned, was never so much as heard of among
them, much less received or allowed in their commonweals, which were well
ordered and maintained by honest and virtuous laws. The name of Duellum was
given by the Latins, not to singular fight between man and man, but to the
general war between two nations or States, as may be seen by Plautus,
Horace, Liuie, and other authors. And as for them that say, the name of Duellum
was improperly applied to an universal war, they are not to be heard or
believed, because they that so used it, were the fathers of the Latin tongue,
who knew better the propriety of the words of their own language, then these
fellows now do. But rather they are to be blamed for wresting that ancient
name to so wicked a fight, which they rightly gave to the general war
allowed by the laws, and by all civil and politic constitutions.

The Primate, who had bin attentive to this speech, said, as concerning the
Latins, it is true that has bin alleged: but it seems, the Greeks knew very
well this combat, as may be gathered by the word Monomachia, which signifies
the fight of one man against another. And I remember Plato in his dialogue
entitled Laches, makes mention of this same singular fight, which shows,
that in his days the combat of body to body was known and used.

Two things (said I) the author has said, the one, that this sort of battle
or fight which is now in use, and called Duellum, was not known to the ancient
Greeks nor Romans in their wel-ordered Commonweals, and that therefore they
gave no such name unto the same: the other, that the Romans gave that name of
Duellum to the public war between two people or nations, being enemies. But
that the Greeks gave not the name of Monomachia to those singular fights which
were used among them, that has he not said. But though the name of Monomachia
were used among them, yet was it not meant of this kind of combat which we
speak, but of that only which was sometimes used in their public games and
spectacles, or else might fall out sometimes accidentally in their wars. And
that same place of Plato which you have alleged, does sufficiently declare it.
For if my memory fail me not, he says there, that when the general battle
cease, and that it is requisite either to fight with them that resist, or to
repulse those that would assault, in such a case the Monomachia, or fight of
man to man was meet to end all strife. Which word of Monomachia, nevertheless I
remember not to be used by Aristotle in any place of all his works, from whom
nevertheless these men that defend this folly, seem to fetch their arguments,
as hereafter I shall declare. But by this you may perceive that the use of
Monomachia, was a fight between two men in their public games and shows, not
for private quarrel or hatred, nor for want of proofs, or for points of
honor. And further I will say, that in well ordered martial discipline, and
wars lawfully enterprised, after the fury of the battle was ceased, it was
not lawful to kill or hurt the public enemy. Which thing is clearly set
forth by Xenophon in the person of Chrisantas, who although he had cast down
his enemy, and fastened hold in the hair of his head, ready to have stricken it
off; yet hearing the trumpet sound the retreit, forbear to strike him, but let
him go: holding it not fit to offend his enemy after the time of fight was
past, signified by the retreit sounding. This sort of fight was likewise
suffered against public enemies by the Romans when their state flourished.
For we read in their histories of sundry that have in the wars fought hand
to hand with their enemies; but yet could not the Roman soldier, though he
were provoked by his enemy to singular battle, fight with him without the
license of his General or Captain. And this was so religiously observed among
them in that Commonweal (which was the pattern of all others) that the
father spared not to condemn and slay his own son, who had gotten a notable
victory in his absence, because he had without his fathers license attempted to
fight with the enemy. True it is, that for contention of valor, we read that
Alexander granted a combat between Diosippus and his adversary, both being his
soldiers and in his camp, though the one were a Macedonian, and the other an
Athenian; which Diosippus unarmed, having only a clubbe for weapon, overcame
the Macedonian armed with spear and sword, and other armor on his body. But
this was not for quarrel of injury received, for revenge or want of proofs.
Neither from this one example, is any conclusion to be drawn, that for strife
of valor the combat should be granted. For the not admitting it afterward in
wel-ordered commonweales, nor by any other general that we can read, above
once, does plainly show that it was rather a toy of Alexanders head, then
grounded upon any reason: who among so many virtues as he had, wanted not other
disordered motions, which stained his noblest and most glorious actions, as
that of the death of Calisthenes and some others. By this then you may
understand that among the Greeks our manner of combat was unknown, and that it
was not that which they call Monomachia. But this wicked and detestable custom
of the combat sprung first among the Longobards, a barbarous people; and much
more barbarous is the thing it self grown, by the abuse thereof in our days.
For though they in some cases granted the combat, yet suffered they not their
champions to fight with weapons of steel or iron, but only with staves and
targets, unless it were in cases of treason. But now upon every quarrel they
come to fight with swords and daggers, and other like sharp weapons, and with
minds cruelly bent to murder and mischief like most wild and savage beasts.
And thus much concerning the first question may serve, since time will not
permit to treat of every one at large.

Yea but, I think, said captain Carleil, that if the combat be lawful in cases
of treason or injury to the Prince, the same reason should make it lawful also
for other causes.

Not so, said I, for treasons or offenses against the Princes persons, offend
the public State, which reposeth upon the person of the Prince, and therefore
the injuries of private men are not to be compared unto them. And as touching
the second point, whether it concern honor or no: my author says, that he
that takes so unjust a course to revenge his private wrong, is so far from
getting honor thereby, as he rather loses whatsoever honor or reputation he
had before; the combat being a thing odious and offensive unto God. For it is
said, that he reserueth revenge unto himself; which, they that by combat seek
to wreake themselves, take upon them to do by their own power and strength,
against all laws divine, natural and positive, in contempt of magistrates,
contrary to the orders and constitutions of all wel-founded Commonweals: and
finally contrary to all equity, and all civil and honest conversation. Howbeit
I know there want not some, who with their confused arguments go about to make
men believe, that so great an injustice should be equity: not knowing, or
faining not to know, that equity is the tempering or mitigating the rigor of
the law, which otherwise (like a tyrant) condemns without mercy; being far
from favoring the rigor of so unreasonable and so sharp a conflict, then the
which, none can be imagined more furious or contrary to the nature of man. Yet
forsooth to equity do these maintainers of the combat seek to draw this
cruelty; arguing that of two evils, it is the lesser; and that the lesser
evil is to be reputed in liew of a good, if not truly, yet respectively. Which
argument is no way to be admitted, since that (God be thanked) without this
lesser evil, so many good Commonweals have ever bin ruled, and at this day
are ruled with good and politic government; and the same never permitted, but
where men forsake to follow reason, and like mad and desperate people are
transported by rage and fury. For what commonwealth, either ancient or
modern, well framed upon honest and godly laws, has ever admitted this
lesser evil? And yet, Iwis, in all places and in all ages have injurious words
and deeds past between men. Nay, the same has evermore bin forbidden utterly,
and the inquiry and punishment of the wrong-doers bin reserved to the
magistrates. Neither does their allegation of being included within the kind of
war general, serve to their purpose. For the combat is not contained under
war, as the particular under the universal: for those things that are
contained under any universal, are of the same nature that the universal is:
as we see man has the nature of the living creature, under which he is
contained,even as is the brute beast; but the combat is clean contrary of
nature to the universal war, as shall be declared. First great Lords and
Princes who make war, have no magistrates over them to decide by justice, and
to end their controversies, as private men have. Besides that, when war is
moved against any Prince, the State and Commonweal is offended, public
orders are perverted, honesty put in danger, the way laid open to all injury to
the offense of Almighty God, and finally, whatsoever is good or honest in
city or country, brought into confusion. And man being borne for the behoof
of his country, his Prince, his kindred and friends, and for the defense of
religion, public honesty and of virtue; it is the duty of every man of virtue
and honor, to oppose himself against the fury of the enemy for the defense of
all those things above specified. Furthermore, the universal war is allowed
by the laws of all those who have bin founders of famous Commonweals, to
take away seditions, and reduce such as were rebellious to obedience, and to
maintain temperance and order among all subjects. And God himself is called
the God of hoasts, but not the God of combats: for they are none of his works,
but of the devil himself. Whereupon it is also said in the Scripture, that
the strength of war consists not in the multitude of soldiers, but that it
comes from heaven. And S. Augustine says, that war is not unjust, unless
it be raised with purpose to usurp or to spoil: and S. Ambrose in like sense
affirms, that the valor of those men that defend their country from
barbarous people, is full of justice. By all which may clearly be seen how
far they are astray, that would bring this kind of combat to be comprehended
under the kind of war universal. And if in all ages, civil wars have bin
odious and accounted cruel, what praise or commendation can be justly given to
two gentlemen of one city or country that fight together with purpose to kill
one another? whereas then the circumstances above mentioned make the universal
war just and lawful: this wicked kind of private fight or combat, is void
of them all, and cannot therefore be but most unjust and unlawful. With like
wrong do they also labor to make it seem commendable, affirming that men
thereby show their valor and fortitude. For valor or fortitude being a
principal virtue, how can it have place in so unjust and so unnatural an
action, proceeding only from anger, rage, fury, and rashness? Finally, these
men that will needs have Aristotle to be their warrant, might (if they list)
see that he in his Ethikes, where he directs man unto virtue, and to civil
felicity, puts not among those whom he calls fortes, or men of valor,
such men as are delighted in revenge, but gives them the title of warlike or
bellicosi. And in the same books he says, that whosoever does any thing
contrary to the laws, is to be accounted unjust. And (I pray you) what can be
more directly contrary to the laws then this kind of combat or private fight?
And if by taking justice from the world, all virtue must needs decay, because
she is the preserver and defender of virtue; how can this so excellent a virtue
of fortitude be in them, that despising the laws and the magistrates, and
neglecting all religion, and good of their country and weal public, do
practice this wicked combat.

Moreover, they perceive not, that Aristotle in his Ethikes (from whence the
rules of civil life are to be drawn, and not from his Rhetorikes, out of
which these men fetch their doutie arguments, because elsewhere they can find
none for their purpose) says, that to fight for cause of honor, is no act of
fortitude. Whereupon ensues, that such as come to the combat upon points of
honor, as men do now a days for the most part, make not any show of their
fortitude, but only of their strength and ability of body, and of their
courage: whereas true fortitude, is to use these gifts well and honestly,
according to reason. And what honesty or reason can there be in this so
mischievous and wicked a fight? which nevertheless these men so far allow and
commend, as they are not ashamed to say (moved surely by some devilish spirit)
that a man for cause of honor may arm himself against his country, the
respect whereof is and ever was so holy; yea eue^ against his father, and with
cursed hands violate his person, unto whom (next after God) he must acknowledge
his life and being, and what else soever he has in this world. This cannot be
but a most pestiferous opinion, and a speech hardly to be believed could come
out of the devils own mouth of hell; who though he be the author of all evil,
yet scarce think I that he durst father so abominable a conceit or sentence.
But it is a world to see how solemnly men will become stark mad, when they once
undertake to defend a mad cause. For to make their frantike fancy to seem
reasonable, they utter such absurdities as are not only detestable to me^, but
eue^ brute beasts also abhor. For among beasts, many there are, that by
natural instinct, not only fear and respect their begetters, but do also
nourish them diligently when they are waxen old, and not able to purchase food
for themselves, repaying thankfully the nouriture which themselves received
whiles they were young, as it is certainly known the Storke does. But here to
color their assertions, they say, that so ought children to do to their
parents, and citizens to their country, so long as the one cease not to be a
father, and the country forgets not her citizens: a saying no less foolish
then the other. For when can that come to pass? what law of nature, or what
civil constitution has taught us this lesson? or out of what school of
Philosophy have they learned it? what injuries can a father or a man's country
do unto him that may make him not to acknowledge his country, which ought to
be deerer unto him then his life, or to cast off the reverence due to his
father? Good God what else is this but to inuit men, and as it were to stir
them up to parricide, a thing odious even to be mentioned. It is no marvel
therefore, if such as attribute so much to points of honor, and will needs defend
the combat in that respect, fall by Gods sufferance (as men blinded of the
light of natural reason) into such absurd opinions, fit for senseless men:
which opinions, in very truth, are no less to be condemned then wicked
heresies, and the authors of them worthy sharp punishment to be inflicted upon
them by such as have authority in that behalf. And this do they the rather
deserve, because they seek to mask and disguise the good and commendable
opinions of the best Philosophers, and to wrest them in favor of their
damnable and wicked doctrine. But I should digress too far if I should say all
I could to confute this impiety, and these wicked writings and cruel
opinions: and therefore returning to our purpose of honor, whereof we were
speaking, you may understand by that which I have already said, that honor
there is none to be gotten by the combat; yet because among other things they
say the combat has bin devised for cause of honor, I must let you know that
in true and sound Philosophy, they that respect honor as the end of their
actions, are not only unworthy to be accounted virtuous men, but deserve blame
and reproach. But hereof I shall have occasion to speak more amply in a fitter
place. Only this I will now add, that no actions are commendable but those
that are honest, and where honesty is not, there can be no honor. And
honesty in truth there is none (as before has bin said) in such a fight
contrary to all virtue, odious to all laws, to all good magistrates, and to
God himself; though the folly of the favorers of this devilish device seek
most wrongfully to draw the sum of all virtues to this injustice.
Furthermore, either the offenses done to men, may be avouched before Princes
and magistrates in judgment, as no wrongs, but lawful acts, or not. If they
may be so avouched and proved, then a thousand combats cannot take them away:
neither is there any cause of combat if so wicked a custom were allowable. If
not, then he that has done the injury, is already dishonest and dishonored;
and the victory over such a man, in faith what honor can it purchase? Plato
the divine Philosopher, and Aristotle his disciple after him, considering the
nature of injury, and finding that it carried with it always vice and reproach,
affirmed that it was better to receive an injury then to do it. And Plato
concludes, that he that does injury, cannot attain to happiness: both which
sayings are most agreeable to Christian religion. Aristotle affirms, that the
magnanimous or great minded man, utterly despises all injuries, for that an
ill man cannot by any injury he can do unto him, blemish those virtues
wherewith he must be adorned to be truly magnanimous. With these worthy men
therefore I conclude, that injuries are to be contemned and light set by,
specially of magnanimous men. For, as Seneca says, a magnanimous man will
never think that a vicious man has done him injury, though his meaning were
to do it; but refer the punishment of his ill intention to the magistrate,
and the revenge to God. And whosoever does otherwise, entering into this
reuengefull humor of the combat, he does not only not purchase any honor to
himself thereby, but heapeth on his own head Gods wrath and indignation, and
shame of the world in the judgment of wise men, who know what is honest, and
what not, what things deserve praise, and what blame; and how, when, and
wherefore a man of virtue ought to venture his life. For he that thinks by
the combat to right himself, takes upon him the office of God, and of the
magistrate, as if himself were superior to them both, and were able of
himself (as sovereign Lord) to do justice: which thing how dangerous it is in
a wel-ordered Commonweal, all laws, and reason it self does plainly teach
us.

But yet these goodly defenders of this abuse say, that a man, both by order of
nature, and by the opinion of Philosophers, may well repulse an injury by his
own virtue, and not by law. And I say (as before) that if the injury be done
unto a man of magnanimity; the way to shake it off, is to despise it, because
the excellency of his virtue is greater then any injury that can be done unto
him: and if it be done to him that is not come to that degree of virtue as to
be magnanimous, he may perchance at the instant repulse the same, or revenge
himself in hot blood without any great reproach. But to reserve a malice or
hatred any long time, and thereupon to come to the combat with a reuengefull
mind, as brute beasts do; will always be esteemed of wise men, a vicious
action, and contrary to all laws and civil order. And they that are of such
reuengefull minds, are termed by Aristotle bitter and sharp men, as if he
would say without reason. In which respect he judges them to be (as hereafter
shall be showed) men unworthy of civil conversation. And by him it is esteemed
the part or office of a virtuous civil man, and a point of magnanimity to
pardon and forgive offenses and injuries. For Plato and his followers were ever
of opinion, that magnanimity was given to man, not because he should dispose
himself to hatred, fury, revenge and wrath, but to honesty and virtue.
Wherefore Seneca also said, that it was a kind of revenge to forgive. And the
temple of the Graces (according to Aristotle's opinion) was placed in the midst
of the city of Athens, because all men might thereby understand, that they
were to render good for good, not ill for ill. For as by the first, cities are
the better preserved and maintained: so by the other, they are destroyed and
brought to ruin. Yet if the magnanimous man would wish him chastised that has
offended him, he will not vouchsafe himself to file his hands upon so base and
vicious a person as those be (by Plato and Aristotle's judgment) who are
injurious to others; but suffers the magistrates according to the order of
law to revenge his cause by the punishment of the offender, according to his
desert, to the end the virtue of the one, and the vice of the other may be
manifested, and the one chastised, and the other honored thereby. And what more
glorious revenge can a man desire, or what more notable testimony of his
virtue, then to have him corrected, and rest infamous by the punishment which
law shall inflict upon him who has done him injury? Or what else do these
furious minded men seek in fine by their combat? But yet they allege further
(as wiling to maintain their wrong opinions with some show of reason) that
combats are sought only in cases of injuries, not determinable by law. Which
answer is as inconsiderate as the rest. For what kind of injuries can grow
between man and man, whereunto the authority of the Prince and of the
Magistrates does not extend? who indeed are not to regard the obstinacy of the
parties, but to punish them by imprisonment, and such other means as law does
allow and permit; to bridle the insolency and disobedience of such as will not
obey and be ameinable. For if in civil actions that course be held, wherefore
should not the same rigor be the rather used in this so unlawful and beastly a
debate? Neither is there any reason in that they speak of public and private
injuries, since the cases are far unlike. For public injuries come from
lawful enemies, such as offend or offer wrong to States or Cities: but they
that are privately iniuried in their person, cannot call them their lawful
enemies that so have done them injury: rather they themselves are to be
esteemed lawful enemies to their country, whiles in following their rage and
furious appetite of revenge, they oppose themselves against the public and
civil government, and deserve in that respect to be severely punished by the
magistrate, as men that esteem more their private injustice then public
justice. And thus much for the second part of your question. Now touching the
last point, whether it appertain to civil felicity or no: you may easily
gather by that which is already said, that there can be nothing more contrary
to good discipline in a wel-ordered commonweal, then this wicked and unjust
kind of fight, which destroys, so far forth as it bears sway, all civil
society. For it breeds the contempt of God and his commandments, of
Religion, of laws, constitutions and civil government, of Princes, of
magistrates, and finally of country, parents, friends and kindred: to all which
men are bound by reason natural and civil, and for defense of them to spend
their lives in manner aforesaid: but not at their own appetite, instigated by
rage and fury to be prodigal thereof, or for revenge of private quarrels or
injuries. Will you see how absurd and senseless a thing these men maintain,
that set up and magnify this glorious combat? then take but this one instance.
They say, in good sooth, that if two gentlemen, subject to the self and same
laws, stirred by this furious conceit, have challenged the one the other to the
combat, and that their sovereign Lord or Prince forbid them to proceed
therein, that they are not to obey him, but to seek to accomplish their
challenge elsewhere out of his jurisdiction. And can any reasonable man, or a
good subject endure to hear such a proposition maintained without stomach or
displeasure? That which among the Painims and Gentiles was not lawful without
special license of the superiors to be attempted against a public enemy,
armed to the ruin of their State and Commonweal: will these jolly
politicians have now to be lawful among Christians in despite of their
natural and lawful Lords and Princes, upon whom the foundation of well
pollicied States is laid, and in the obedience toward whom, civil felicity
it self does rest? But we need not to marvel, if such men contemn humane
laws and ordinances, when they stick not to disobey God himself; unto whom
they knowing manifestly this kind of fight to be odious and displeasing; yet
are they not ashamed by public writings to maintain it, and thereby to draw
soldiers and men of valor into their errror of a wilful madness and
mischievous mind. It is a more mockery, and a thing worthy to be laughed at, to
see how busily such fellows build upon a false foundation, as if their
building were like to stand. For leaving and forsaking the pattern and true
rules of virtuous behavior, of policy and states, and of good laws written
by that excellent Philosopher Aristotle, they take hold (forsooth) of some
fragments or parcels of his Rhetorikes to work upon: as though from thence men
were to take the precepts of civil conversation or politic government,
whence only the rules and method of well speaking are to be taken, and not of
civil felicity. Out of his Rhetorikes they have culled out namely this place,
where he says, that God helps those that are wronged, not understanding, or
seeming not to understand, that Aristotle in that place speaks of civil
judgments or criminal; and not of battles or combats, such as this that he
never knew, ne yet ever heard spoken of: and if he had, would have sought to
have driven it out of the frantike fancy of all men. It is not to be denied,
but that in good and godly judgments managed by men desirous to maintain
justice, God is always at hand to help and uphold the right, and to tread
down and overthrow the wrong. For by him have judgments bin appointed and
ordained, and magistrates to rule and ouersee them, not only for the common
benefit of men, but also for the defense of truth and righteousness, and for
the punishment of untruth and wickedness. Moreover it is to be understood,
that only such places in Aristotle's Rhetorikes are to be approved and allowed
in civil or politic life, as are by him confirmed in his Ethikes and
Rhetorikes: as that it is lawful for a man to repulse an injury, and to defend
himself, and such other like. For, as himself affirms, the drift of his
book of Rhetorikes, is to instruct a man how to frame his speech to persuade,
and how to move the minds of Judges to anger, hatred, revenge, compassion, and
such like other affects, which oftentimes wrest the truth, and make wrong to
prevail. So as if the Orator prevail, and attain the end he seeks, which
is to persuade, or use the means to attain it artificially, he has done his
duty. By which it appears, that Rhetorike is ordained for judgments and
controversies, but not for instruction of civil life and manners. But let us
see what they get by this place taken out of the Rhetorikes. For my part, I see
not wherefore any man should look or hope for any help or favor at Gods hands
in this so unjust, unlawful and wicked an action, most offensive to his divine
Majesty, as contrary to his express commandment, and a work most pleasing
and acceptable to the devil, by whose instigation the same is wholly set
forward. Nay rather may the prevailing of them that have the wrong cause to
defend, as oftentimes we see it happen in the combat, serve for a most clear
argument, that it falls out by Gods special permission to vnseele the eyes
(if it were possible) of such as are so wilfully blinded, to the end they might
see how unjust the conflict is, which these men say, was first invented (among
other causes) that truth might be known, and right from the wrong. But how is
truth or right found out, if he which has right on his side be overcome, as
oftentimes it falls out? Forsooth they answer, that it so happens by reason
of some other offenses of him that is overcome, and that God will have him so
punished for the same. By which reason it should follow that God (who is truth
it self) suffers in this fight (which they say was devised for trying out of
the truth) that in respect of punishing him for other offenses that maintains
the truth, the other who has the wrongful cause in hand, should triumph in
his unjust victory, and truth should be borne down and defaced. Then which
reason, what can be imagined more contrary to the goodness, justice, and power
of God? as if he could not otherwise punish sinners, then by a mean that
should spot and overthrow truth, in which he is so well pleased. It is therefore
a most evident sign and certain testimony, that this kind of proof or trial
of truth is most uncertain, and the fight to that end unjust and wicked. And
that it is no other then the work of the very devil, who being the author of
all discord, hatred, debate, falsehood, seditions, unjust wars, of death, and
mortal enemy to truth, reioiceth when he sees right overwhelmed with wrong,
reason oppressed by injustice, truth defaced by falsehood, and by means
thereof, men drawn to everlasting damnation. And when it does come to pass,
that he which maintains the right does prevail (if any right or reason may
be supposed in so wicked and unlawful an action) even that it self is to be
imputed to the subtlety of the devil, to draw men on as with a bait, because
he is loath to lose the great gain of souls which he makes by the humor of
this detestable combat. By which, not only the champions themselves, but they
that having power, permit them or grant them liberty to fight; all they that
counsel them thereunto, and all they that give them the looking on in so
damnable an action, become subject unto him, and enemies to God their Creator
and Redeemer. And indeed there is no vice or sin in the world, whereby he
wins more to his kingdom, then by this; because at once he purchases
thousands of souls: so foolishly do men flock to be the beholders of a
bloody spectacle, with inhumane desire to see the spilling of man's blood. But
now to conclude this matter, it is a lamentable thing that any Christian
Prince, or other general commander, should permit so pernicious and so
damnable a thing, and consent, that under their authority it should be lawful
for one man to kill another for private quarrel, and they to sit themselves
protribunali, to behold so unjust and cruel a fight. For they ought rather to
consider, that they are Gods ministers, and by his divine providence called to
so high and so eminent a place, not to favor or give reputation to the devils
works (among which there is none more wicked then this) but to execute his
will, to which the combat is directly and expressly contrary, though it have bin
accepted and allowed by ill use, or rather abuse, and been entitled by the
name of a custom by such as defend the same: who consider not that custom is
to be observed in good and commendable things, and not in wicked and unlawful,
as this is. And if it happen that any abuse do grow and shroud it self under
the name of a custom, the same ought to be taken away and abolished; and
thereto do all Philosophers agree. Of which kind, this combat being manifestly
one, it should be rooted out, and not suffered to continue under that name. For
good customs are agreeable to Nature, in which respect it is said, that
custom is another nature. But that which is contrary to nature (as this is)
ought not to be named a custom, but a vile abuse, be it never so much cloked
with the name of custom: the rule whereof is prescribed by Aristotle in his
second book of Politikes, and should therefore not only not be permitted or
maintained, but being crept in, be removed and banished as a most pestilent and
dangerous thing. And whereas Aristotle in his Rhetorikes says, that revenge is
better then pardon, that is to be ruled according to the civil orders and
constitutions of good commonweals. For he says not so universally, but only
in respect of an Orator, and (as is said already) he in his Rhetorikes teaches
but what is requisite for an Orator to consider, to persuade, and not what is
meet in civil life, as he does in his Ethikes.

And thus much this author having said effectually to the purpose of your
demand, I may, if you please, proceed to the former matter, from which this
question has occasioned him and us to digress.

All the company agreed thereunto, and having well allowed of the discourse,
framed themselves attentively to hear the rest.

Wherefore I said, You remember well (I doubt not) that the next was to speak
of the third master of the Kings son; who after the good instructions given by
the former two to their disciple, taught him that his appetite was in all
things to be subject to reason, and that he ought never to suffer himself to
be drawn from that which was honest by any inticement: for that honesty was
the end and scope of all virtue. He sought to persuade him, that the chiefest
thing that makes a King to be known for a King, was to know how to rule
himself before he ruled others, and to master his own appetites rather then
other men's. So the first having fashioned him to Religion, and the second to
truth, this third framed him to be temperate and just. Whereby it came to
pass, that although he know himself to be above the law, yet did he not only
not seek to overrule the law, but became a law to himself: so as he was
never led, either by love or hatred, in his judgments (whether he punished or
rewarded, nor by anger, or desire to benefit any man) from that which was just
and honest. Thus holding under reasons awe the disordinate appetites of his
mind, with the direct rule of justice, (under which, Plato says, all virtues
are contained, because it is grounded upon truth) he always directed his
actions to the mark of honesty, ever doing good, but never harming any. And
knowing, that who so is subject to his own appetites, deserves not the title
of a free man, much less of a King: he framed himself to be most continent,
and showed in himself an example of honest life and behauior to all his
subjects. His benignity he declared to them by his liberality, and by showing
more care of the public good then of his own; and that he would rather give
of his own, then take from them their goods. With his mildness and
affability he made himself singularly beloved, and wan their hearts, and with
gentleness in word and deed, and with love toward his people, and truth in all
his actions, he made them understand that indeed he approached as near to God
in these excellent qualities, as a mortal man could do. By means whereof, no
man fearing harm from him, he was beloved and reverenced as a God among them.
Now having learned of his three first masters, Religion, Prudence and Wisdom,
Truth, Justice and Temperance, with those other virtues belonging unto them;
the fourth then taught him all that appertained to Fortitude, and made him
understand, that only he is to be esteemed a man of fortitude and valor., who
can hold a mean between fury and fear. And that when occasion of peril and
danger is offered unto him, bearing with it honesty, and wherein he might make
show of his virtue and courage, did readily embrace and take hold of the same.
And that albeit he were dear to himself, in respect of those virtues which he
knew himself to be possessed of; yet esteeming more an honest and a glorious
death then a natural and reproachful life, he would make no difficulty to
hazard his life for the benefit of his country, knowing that an honorable end
would be crowned with immortal fame. And forasmuch as it is seldom seen,
that men can use this princely virtue as it ought to be used, and when it
should be used, with such other circumstances as are requisite thereto;
therefore did his master instruct him and make him understand, that he which
matcheth not his natural courage with Prudence, and those other virtues, which
the former masters had taught him, could not rightly be called a valiant man.
And how that this virtue, being stirred up by magnanimity, stoutly pursued
honest things without respect of difficulties: and that though things
formidable and terrible be naturally shunned of men, yet the valiant man
despises them, and feels them not in respect of justice and honesty,
whereby such men became equal to the Gods, as Poets fained. And that if
Prudence and Temperance were not joined with this royal virtue of Fortitude,
the same was turned into foolish hardiness. And because his disciple should
know how to avoid this vice, he declared to him how such men as, to avoid
infamy, only exercised their valor, and exposed their lives to peril, or
only to purchase honor, were not to be called properly valorous men; but they
only who for honesties sake made trial of their valor, because honesty is
the only end of virtue, by which humane felicity is to be achieved. And that
he likewise was not to be accounted valiant, who for fear of pain or
punishment, took in hand fearful and dangerous enterprises, nor yet they
that through long experience in warfare, or because they have bin often in the
brunt and danger of battles, went cheerfully or courageously into the wars to
fight, as it were by custom, for that they did it rather by art and practice
then by free election, without the which can be no virtue. Neither he that by
rage and fury suffered himself to be transported to attempt any danger; since
there can be no virtue, where reason guides not the mind. And for this cause
wild beasts (though they be terrible and fierce by nature) cannot be termed
valiant, because they being stirred only by natural fierceness, wanting
reason, do but follow their instinct, as do the Lions, Tigers, Bears, and such
other like. Nevertheless he denied not but that anger might accompany fortitude;
for that it is rather a help unto it, then any let or impediment, so long as
reason did temper them, and that it served but for a spur to prick men
forward in the defense of just and honest causes. Moreover he declared unto his
scholar, that there is a kind of fortitude that has no need of any such spur
of anger: which kind concerned the bearing of grievous and displeasing
accidents, and the moderating of a man's self in happy and prosperous
successes. And this is that blessed virtue which never suffers a man to fall
from the height of his mind, being called by some men patience: who will not
only have her to be a virtue separate from the four principal virtues, but
also that she should be above them. But this opinion of theirs is not well
grounded, since in truth she is but a branch of fortitude: through which (as
Virgil says) men bear stoutly all injuries, whether they proceed from wicked
persons, or from the inconstancy and changeableness of fortune; but remains
always invincible and constant against all the crosses, thwarts and despites
of fortune. This virtue is fitly described by Cicero, where he says, that it
is a voluntary and constant bearing of things grievous and difficult, for
honesties sake. And in the Scriptures it is said, that it is better for a man
to bear with invincible courage such things, then to be otherwise valiant, or
to hazard himself, how, where, and when it is fit. For who so bears stoutly
adversities, deserves greater commendation and praise then they which overcome
their enemies, or by force win cities or countries, or otherwise defend their
own, because he ouercometh him self, and mastereth his own affects and
passions. Having respect to these things, this wise schoolmasters showed his
disciple, that the valiant man was like a square solid body, as is the die,
whereunto Aristotle also agrees, which in what sort soever it be thrown, ever
stands upright: so he being still the same man, which way soever the world
frame with him, or the malice and envy of wicked men, or the freakes of
fortune toss him; which fortune, some call the Queen of worldly accidents,
though, as a blind cause, she always accompanies her self with ignorance.
Moreover he added that hope of gain or profit ought not to move a man to put
his life in apparent danger: for if it chanced (as often it does) that the hope
began to quail, forthwith courage failed withal, and the enterprise was
abandoned, because vain conceived hope, and not free choice of virtue had
guided him. A thing which never happens to them that in honest causes hazard
their lives. For though any unexpected terror chance unto them, so as on the
sudden they cannot deliberate what were best to do: yet even by habit which
they have made in the virtue of fortitude, they loose not their courage; but
the more difficult and fearful the accident appears, the more stoutly will
they resist and oppose themselves against the same. Likewise he declared to
him, that it was not true fortitude, when men (not knowing what the danger was
which they entered into) did undertake any perilous enterprise: for it must be
judgment, and not ignorance, that shall stir men to valorous attempts.
Neither yet that they were to be esteemed properly valiant, who like wild
savage beasts, moved by rage and fury, sought revenge, and to hurt them that
had provoked them to wrath: for such were transported by passion, and not
guided by reason. Last of all he concluded that he was justly to be accounted a
man of valor, who feared not every thing that was perilous, yet of some
things would be afraid. So as true fortitude should be a convenient mean
between rashness and fearfulness: the effect whereof was to be ready and
hardy to undertake dangerous actions, in such time, place, and manner as
befitted a man of virtue; and for such causes as reason commanded him so to do:
and because the doing thereof was honest and commendable, and the contrary was
dishonest and shameful. All these points did this worthy schoolmaster seek to
imprint in the young Princes mind, that he might become stout and haughty of
courage, to the end that he (who was borne to rule and command) might not
through any sudden or unlooked for accidents be daunted with fear, or become
base and cowardly minded: nor yet by overmuch rashness or fury wax fierce
and cruel; but with mild, yet awful behavior, govern and command the
people subject unto him. These were the seeds of virtue, which these wise and
worthy masters did cast into the tender minds of those young Princes, from
whence (as out of a fertile soil) they hoped to reap in their riper years
fruit answerable to their labor and travel. And this is all (said I) that
this author has discoursed upon this matter, and as much (I suppose) as is
needful for the education of children, till they come to years of more
perfection, wherein they may begin to guide themselves.

And then sir Robert Dillon (who as well as the rest had given a very attentine
ear to the whole discourse) said: Truly these were right good and worthy
documents, and meet to train a Prince up virtuously; neither could any other
then a glorious issue be expected of so virtuous principles and education. And
though this diligence and care were fitting for so high an estate as the son of
a mighty monarke, yet has the declaration thereof bin both pleasing and
profitable to this company, and may well serve for a pattern to be followed
by private gentlemen, though not with like circumstances; since the same
virtues serve as well for the one as for the other to guide them the way to
that civil felicity, whereof our first occasion of this days discourse
began. But evening now hasting on, and the time summoning us to draw homeward,
we will for this present take our leaves of you; having first given you hearty
thanks for our friendly entertainment, especially for this part thereof,
whereby with your commendable travel in translating so good and so necessary a
work, you have yielded us no small delight, but much more profit; which I am
bold to say as well for all the company as for my self: whereunto they all
accorded.

But, said the Lord Primate, we must not forget one point of your speech, which
was, that you tied us to a condition of three days assembly; that as the
author had divided his work into three dialogues, so we should give you three
days time to run over every day one of his dialogues. Supposing therefore
that you have finished his first, we will to morrow (if this company please to
give their consent thereunto) be here to understand whether he have as
sufficiently set down rules for the fashioning a young man to the course of
virtue, as he has done for the education of his childhood. Therefore you may
look for us, and prepare your tongue, as we will bring attentiveness to hear
his doctrine by your study made ready for our understanding. And so they
departed all together toward the city.

The second days meeting, and discourse of Civil life.
WHen the next morning was come, which appeared fair and clear, the company
(which the day before had bin with me) came walking to my house, all, save
only M. Smith the Apothecary, whose business being of another sort, was not
so desirous to spend his time in hearing discourses of that nature, which
brought no profit to his shop. And being entered into the house, they found me
ready to go walk abroad to take the sweet and pleasant air: wherefore
though they had already had a good walk from the city thither, being somewhat
more then a mile; yet were they not unwilling to bear me company, and would
needs go with me. So I led them up the hill to the little mount, which stands
above my house, along a pleasant green way, which I had planted on both sides
with young ashes: from whence having the prospect not only of the city, but
also of the sea and haven, we there sat us down, and some commending the
air, some the delightfulness of the view, we spent the time in sundry
speeches, until one of the servants came to summon us to walk home to dinner.
Whereupon returning home, and finding the meat on the table, we sat us down;
I telling them that they found a Philosophers dinner, for so I would now begin
to take upon me to entitle my self, since they had made me (at the lest) the
trucheman or interpreter of one that was worthy that name. And that I had the
rather prepared no greater store of meat for them, because I would imitate the
temperance of a Philosopher, as we were in number a convenient company for a
Philosophical dinner.

Why, said the Lord Primate, what mean you by that? is there any determinate
company appointed for such meals as are fit for Philosophers?

Yea sir, quoth I, if my memory fail me not, I have read that to such
refections as might as well feed the mind as the body, there would not be any
such great company of guests invited, as by the confusion of their talk and
communication, the serious and yet delightful discourses that might be
proposed, should not be imparted to all, nor yet so few, as for want of matter
the same were to be omitted. Therefore it was determined that the number should
be between the Graces and the Muses, that is to say, not under three, nor
above nine. We are therefore a fit company for a Philosophical dinner., and
your entertainment shall be according for your cheer.

Well, said sir Robert Dillo^, you shall need no shifts with us, for as we will
not commend your cheer (which is the thing is commonly begged by the excusing
of want of meat) so shall you not need to take any care, either for the
satisfying of our appetites with dainty fare, or to entertain us with
Philosophical discourses at dinner: for we expect such a at your hands after
dinner in that kind, as we shall the better pass over our dinner without them,
which we desire in that respect may be the shorter, to the end that our bodies
being fed temperatly, our minds may be the sharper set to fall to those other
dainties which you have prepared for us.

Yea but let not our dinner I pray you (said Captain Dawtrey) be so temperate
for sir Robert Dillons words, but that we may have a cup of wine: for the
Scripture tells us that wine gladdeth the heart of man. And if my memory
fail me not, I have read, that the great banquet of the Sages of Greece,
described by Plutarke, was not without wine; and then I hope a Philosophical
dinner may be furnished with wine: otherwise, I will tell you plainly, I had
rather be at a camping dinner then at yours, howsoever your rerebanket will
happily be as pleasing to me as to the rest of the company

Whereat the rest laughing pleasantly, I called for some wine for Captain
Dawtrey; who taking the glass in his hand, held it up a while betwixt him and
the window, as to consider the color: and then putting it to his nose, he
seemed to take comfort in the odor of the same.

Then said the Lord Primate, I think (Captain Dawtrey) that you mean to make
a speculation upon that cup of wine, you go so orderly to work, as if you were
to examine him upon his qualities; whereof two principal you have already
resolved your self of, by the testimony of your two principal senses. The
color, we all determine with you is good, the smell seems not to mislike
you: it is consequent therefore that when you have drunk it up, you will also
resolve us whether all three the qualities concurring together, it may deserve
the title of vinum Cos or no: for such was the wine wont to be entitled among
the ancient Romans, that carried the reputation to be the best.

And what (I pray you, said I) might be the cause that their best wine was so
called? for I have heard that question sundry times demanded, but I could
never hear it yet answered sufficiently to my satisfaction.

It is no marvel (said the Lord Primate) for although the matter have bin long
in controversy, and debated by many full learned men, and among them some that
loved wine so well, as their experience might make them believe that their
verdit should be very sound; yet for ought I find, we may say adhuc sub iudice
lis est. Some say it should be taken for vinum Cossentinum, as coming from a
territory so named, which commonly bare the best wines near about Rome. Others
interpret it by letters, saying that Cos is to be taken for corpori omnino
saluberrimum. But they that presume most to have hit the mark, say that it is
so to be understood, that Cos should signify the wine to be best by these
three qualities, which Captain Dawtrey seems to insist upon, that is to say,
coloris, odoris, and saporis; which three reco^mending a wine, it cannot but be
called very good. And this is as much as I have read or heard, and will be
content to be of the Jury with Captain Dawtrey to give my verdit whether this
of yours be such or no.

In good faith (said Captain Dawtrey) if I be the foreman of the Jury, as I
have bin the first to taste the wine, I will pronounce it to be indeed singular
good, and well deserving the title of Cos: for all three those qualities which
you have said wine is to be commended for.

If the wine be good (said I) you may be sure I am right glad, as well because
I have it to content such my good friends, as because I have made my provision
for my self so well; whereby I hope you will all think me worthy to be a
taster for the Queens advantage, and my office to be well bestowed upon me,
since I can taste a cup of wine so well; for it is indeed of mine own choice.

Marry sir (said M. Dormer, who had even then finished his draught) me thinks
it fares not with you according to the common proverb, which says, that none
goes worse shod then the shoomakers wife: for in good sooth this is a cup of
wine fit to recommend your taste, and consequently your self to be employed in
your office. But since you asked my Lord Primate the meaning of vinum Cos: and
withal said that you never heard that question answered to your contentment;
let us (I pray you) hear what is your conceit therein, and whether you can
give any more probable sense thereof then those which he has told us.

Nay in good faith, said I, that will I not presume to do; for I am not so
affected to mine own conceits, as to prefer them before other men's. A better
interpretation I will not therefore offer unto you: but if you will needs have
me tell you how I, among others, conceive of that vinum Cos: which is read of,
I think that it was so called for that the custom being in those days, that
wheresoever the Roman Consul came, when he went in his journey toward his
government, or else within his province, they of the good towns or cities
presented him with such dainties as the place affoorded, and specially with the
choicest wines that were there to be had, thereupon the best and most excellent
wine was termed vinum Consulare, to wit, such as of choice was taken for the
Consul himself. And the common abbreuiation of Consul being written in all
ancient authors with these three letters Cos: so comes vinum Cos: to be
understood (as I have said) for vinum Consulare, which was the best. And this
is my opinion, which if it be worthy to be admitted to go in company with the
rest, I will not desire it should go before them: and if you will be pleased to
accept of this my interpretation of vinum Cos: together with the wine which you
say is so good, and let the same supply the badnesse of your fare, (wherein my
wife has the greatest fault) I shall go the more cheerfully to the rest of my
task, which I am comforted by your speeches, you are so well disposed unto, as
it makes you hasten to make an end of your bad dinner. Fruit therefore being
brought, and the table taken up, sir Robert Dillon said; It is an approved
opinion of all antiquity, that after dinner a man should sit a while, and
after supper walk a mile: we must not therefore so suddenly rise from dinner to
go to our rerebanket; yet may we gather up some of the crumbs of yesterdayes
feast, how full soever our bellies be with the good meat we have eaten here. I
remember then that the substance of a child's education, that was to be set in
the right way to his civil felicity, was yesterday declared by the example of
the order held by the Kings of Persia, in the training of their sons, which
were to succeed them in their kingdom. Which order, though it were both
pleasing and profitable to be understood, and that with change of circumstances
it might well serve for the direction of a private gentleman how to bring up
his child: yet I for my part think that it would have bin very good that there
had bin set down a course more particularly, in what learning or study of the
liberal arts the child should have bin exercised. For I have found by
experience, that the care and diligence of parents may advance very much the
forwardness of their children, so as some being well plied, shall not only
read perfectly, but be also well forward in his Grammar, when the other of
like wit and capacity shall for lack of plying drag and come very far
behind.

That is (said I) most true, and I can verify it in my self; for such was my
fathers care (who not only in the education of his children, but also in the
ordering of his household, was second to no man of his degree that ever I knew)
as before I was full five years of age, I had gone through mine Accidence, and
was sent to school to Tunbridge, 20 miles from London, and if either the air
of the place, or some other disposition of my body had not hindered my health by
a quartaine ague that took me there, I might have bin a forward scholar in my
gra^mer at 6 years old, and have bin ready to have accompanied my learning with
those corporal exercises which by some are set down as fit to be used by
children between the years of five and ten, as well to harden their bodies
and to make them apt for the wars (if their disposition be thereunto) as for
health. But by that unhappy accident, not only the health and strength of my
body, but my learning also met with a shrewd check, which I could never
since recover sufficiently. Nevertheless as much as my father could
perform, he omitted not to have me trained both to my book and to other
exercises agreeable to his calling and ability, following (as I suppose) such
precepts as he had found set down by some worthy authors treating of that
matter. The exact form of which education perhaps is hard to be observed, but
by such as have together with a fatherly and vigilant care, wealth and means
answerable to find in their own houses schoolmasters to instruct and
fashion their children according to those rules and precepts. For by them,
before the child attain the age of 14. years, he should not only have learned
his Grammar, but also Logike, Rhetorike, Music, Poetry, drawing and
perspectiue, and be skillful at his weapons, nimble to run, to leap and to
wrestle, as exercises necessary upon all occasions where fortitude is to be
employed for the defense of his country and Prince, his friends, and of his
faith and religion. And this is that which I conceive your meaning was, when
you said, that you thought it had bin needful there had bin some more
particular course set down for the dispensing of the child's time in his
learning. All which Piccolomini has so exactly set down in his learned book
of Moral institution, written first in the Italian tongue, as it may seem he
rather proposed or set forth a perfect child, as Cicero has a perfect Orator,
and Castiglione a perfect Courtier, then that it were easy to bring up or
train any in that sort or according to that pattern. And therefore since that
which our author has said of the education of the Kings children of Persia,
seems enough if it be fitly applied for the instruction of any children
during their childhood, we may (if you please) now proceed to his second
dialogue, treating of the instruction of a young man from his childhood forward:
for I have made ready my papers, so as I hope without much interruptio^ I may
in English deliver unto you his mind, set down in his own language, though
not with like smoothness of style. But since yesterday I heard you find no
fault, I may the better be encouraged to go on this day with my plain manner
of penning, though it be unpolished.

Yea marry, answered sir Robert Dillon, very willingly: and all the company
assenting thereunto, I arose, entreating them not to stir, for that I would
presently return unto them with my books.

Which being done, and every man lending an attentive ear, thus I began: As
yesterday the infancy or childhood of man was resembled unto that part of the
soul which gives life, and is called vegetative, being the foundation of the
other parts: so must youth now be likened to that part which gives sense and
feeling, and is named sensitive. And as it is harder to rule two horses to
guide a coach or charret then one: so is there far greater difficulty in
guiding a young man then a child: for he is stirred much more with passions then
the simple age of a child, and is more violently carried away with things that
delight him; because he has now the second power of the soul in force to draw
him, which for the most part is much more contrary to reason then the first.
For whereas that first coueted only that which was profitable, and which might
nourish the body without any great regard of that which was honest, as whereof
it had no knowledge at all; this other being wholly bent to delight, respects
little any other thing: which delight having greatest force in young minds,
draws them sundry ways, and by allurements makes them so much the more
greedy to attain the things they take pleasure in, as the spurs wherewith
they be pricked are more sharp and poignant. This appears by their actions
most manifestly. For hunting egerly after pleasure, they are never quiet until
they compass their desires: and albeit that their desires be vehement in every
thing they fancy, yet do they most of all discover themselves in the lusts of
the flesh, which in them are fiery, by reason of the abundance of blood and
natural heat that is in them, increasing those their disordinate desires
beyond measure, yea they grow infinite in them, and variable, as themselves are
inconstant misliking this day that, which yesterday they liked; which
proceeds only because their said desires are not forged in that part of the
mind where reason has her firm seat, and proper dwelling. To this
imperfection of lust, is also added the violent motion of anger, to which they
are subject, and thereby soon drawn from the course of reason and justice. By
this passion are they provoked to enter in to debate and quarrels upon every
light occasion, and as people desirous of honor and reputation, as soon as
they think they receive any injury, they fear no peril nor danger of their
lives, but boldly and rashly undertake to fight, led by a desire of revenge,
and hope to have the victory over their enemies. Of money or goods they make
small reckoning, through lack of experience, because of their youth, and want
of prudence, which grows from experience: and therefore little know they, how
necessary the goods of fortune are to humane life, and into what inconveniences
they fall that are without them. So as they spend and consume without
discretion, not regarding the time to come, but supposing the world will
always be at one stay. They be easily deceived, not knowing the saying of
Epicarmus, that not to believe rashly was the sinews of wisdom, And because
they consider not how variable are the resolutions of this world and humane
affairs, they are ever full of good hope, seldom fearing that any thing may
befall them other then well: which hope lays open the way to such as lie in
wait to entrap them and deceive them. They seem likewise to have a touch of
magnanimity, by reason of the heat of their youth, which stirs them up to
undertake great matters, but yet inconsideratly, as folk moved rather by
nature then by election: and so are they inclined rather to attempt things
seeming honorable, then things profitable. They love their friends much more
fervently then any other age, because they delight more in company, and measure
not friendship by profit or by honesty, but only by their delight, as they
find them conformable to their appetites. They fly easily into that which is
in all things vicious, that is, too much; which too much, is harmeful even in
justice it self: whereupon is grown (I think) our English proverb, that too
much of a man's mothers blessing is not good: not considering the precept of
Chilo, who with three words taught the sum and effect of all virtue, Ne quid
nimis. Whereby we may understand, that virtue consists in the mean between
two extremes, which on either side are too much or too little, wherein young men
do most incline to that extreme of too much: for they love too much, they hate
too much, they hope too much, they fear too much, they trust too much, they
spend too much, they believe too much, they presume too much: and by presuming
too much, they build more then they ought to do upon the uncertain and
variable chances of fortune, without setting before their eyes those good
courses by which men through virtuous and commendable acts do attain a happy
life. And this is the cause why they give so deaf an ear to friendly
admonitions, and to wise and grave advice and counsel. For they, not knowing
their own ignorance, think they know all things, such is the quickness and
vehemency of spirit which reigns in them, and gives them a certain shadow
of nobility of courage, by which they presume they are able to do all things
of themselves well and commendably; but they find themselves far deceived
when they come to the trial. They do oftentimes injury to others, rather
unadvisedly then maliciously of purpose to harm or offend. And having
generally a good opinion of all men, simply measuring others words by their
own heart: they are soon moved to compassion and pity. They delight
exceedingly (as void of care) to laugh, to sport, and to be merry: and with
quips and biting speeches to taunt their fellows, and such as converse with
them: and hear more willingly pleasant conceits and merry tales, then grave
sayings or ancient admonitions of wise and learned men.

In faith (said Captain Norreis) you have painted or described a young man in
so strange a figure, as to me it seems, I see a monster before mine eyes,
with more heads then the ancient Poets said that Hydra had, the same that gave
Hercules so much to do to overcome her: and it is to be marvelled, that all
young men are not soon weary of that age, which brings with it such variety
of imperfections, and all contrary to reason and virtue. You make us almost to
conceive an opinion, that there can be no Art nor prudence sufficient to
deliver us from such a multitude of errors that enuiron us on every side.

If there were cause of complaint that youth should be thus described, said I,
yet am not I the man you should complain of, but rather of mine author, or of
Aristotle, who long before described the same eue^ as he has done: and of
Horace in like sort, who taking the matter out of Aristotle, concluded it in
substance much like, though in fewer words, saying: The young man on whose face
no beard yet shows,
When first he creeps out of others charge,
Delights to have both horse and hound at will,
With them to hunt, and beat the woods and fields,
Like wax to vice is easy to be wrought,
And sour to them that tell him of his fault:
Too late he learnes his profit for to know,
And in expense, aye too too lavish still,
His heart is high, and full of hot desires,
And soon he loathes that erst he loved dear.


And truly the nature of a young man is very perilous, and unapt of it self
to be ruled and directed to any good course; partly because of the ignorance
accompanying that age, and partly for that following the vanities and delights
which the worser part of the soul or mind does set before him, he respects
not that which is honest and virtuous, as a thing he never knew or tasted. And
therefore being intent only to pleasures and delights, he considers not any
thing but what is present before him. For wanting (as is said) experience,
meet to foresee accidents to come, he believes much more them that entice him
and flatter him, by praising all he does, then those men that reprove or check
him for doing ill, or show him the way to virtue, by telling him the truth.
Neither is there any thing that more sets a young man astray from the course
of virtue, then flattery: and specially are young Princes to take heed thereof,
about whom are continually flatterers to win their favor, and by harming them
with that subtle engine, to purchase to themselves as much gain and profit as
they can. These, who (as Aristotle says) bend all their wits to evil, with
continual lying and soothing, make young men believe that they are excellent in
all things above course of nature; whereunto they (simple) giving a readier
ear then they should, become so blind and foolish, that they discern not
their own good: but pricked forward with those false praises, apply themselves
to that only which is pleasant and delightful, and become a prey unto their
flatterers, who like Parasites affirm all that they hear their master say,
and deny whatsoever he denies. In which respect Diogenes did right well say,
that flatterers were worse then crows, who feed but on the carcasses of the
dead, but these jolly companions devour the minds of men alive, making them
become (as Seneca says) foolish or mad. From whose conceit Epicarmus varied
not much, who said, that crows pick out the eyes but of dead carcasses, but
flatterers pick out the eyes of the mind, whiles men are yet alive. And to say
truly, this cursed generation, with their leasings and soothing, induce such as
harken to them and believe them, to be their own foes, and to bar themselves
from the attaining of true glory, whiles they make them glory in the false
praises of wicked flatterers. Who to the end they may be the better believed
when they flatter, use all art possible to show themselves affectioned (though
counterfetly) to them, in whose hearts they seek to pour their poison. For
they kill in them all seeds of virtue, and they take from them the knowledge of
themselves, and of all truth: to which, flattery is a most pestilent and
mortal enemy. And happy might indeed Princes think themselves, if they had
about them men that would frankly and resolutely resist the attempts of
flatterers, such as was Anaxarcus Eudemonicus about Alexander the Great. This
Anaxarcus misliking that Alexander through the flattery and false praises of
such as magnified his acts, grew so proud, as he would needs be esteemed a God,
and seeing on a time his Physician to bring him a potion to ease the grief of
his disease when he was sick, said, Is it not a woeful case, that the health
of our God should consist in a draught of licour and drugs composed by a man?
Words full well beseeming the sincere mind of a free hearted man. As on the other
side it was vile adulation which Demades the Athenian used, who being at an
assembly of Council, proposed a decree, by which he would have had Alexander
to be reputed for the thirteenth of the great Gods. But the people perceiving
his flattering purpose and small reverence to divine things, condemned him in a
fine of an hundred talents. If Princes, and such as manage States, would follow
this example, and have an eye to such fellows, there would not be such store
of Sycophants as now a days there are; and the virtues and merits of honest
men, worthy honor and favor, would be better known and regarded then they
are; and rewards and recompenses would be given to such men, and not to
flatterers, who seek to put them besides themselves. This I say of such as
suffer themselves to be seduced by these charmers, but not of wise Princes, who
give no more ear to their enchantments, then does the serpent to the charmer;
because they know that their praises and soothings are but stra^gling morsels
smeared over with honey. Philip of Macedon, the father of Alexander, had a
flatterer in his Court, called Cisofus (or as some say Cleophus) who did not
only affirm and deny all that Philip said or denied, but also on a time when
Philip had a sore eye, and ware some band or scarf before it, he in like
manner came before the King with the like: and another time when Philip having
hurt one of his legs, limped upon it, and had clothes wrapped about it, the
flatterer came likewise with his leg so wrapped and halting into the Court;
seeking thus not only by his words as other Parasites do, but also with his
gestures and whole body to transform the King, and put him beside himself.
But although Philip took delight in this skim of men, yet could they never
draw him by their charming to incur those vices which his son ran into:
who albeit he was of a most noble nature and mind, yet did he so much attribute
to these bad companions, and was so carried away with their flattering praises,
that he could not endure the truth that Calisthenes told him, but miserably
slew him, spotting with so cruel and barbarous a fact, all that ever he did
before or after, were it never so noble and worthy of glory. But contrariwise,
Agesilaus did so despise and hate all flatterers, that he would never give any
man leave to commend his virtues, but only such as had authority to reprehend
his vices. Whereas Alexander was so distraught and ravished with the delight of
such flatterers, that he not only suffered himself to be persuaded by them
that he was the son of Jupiter, but became also so foolish as to endure
sacrifices to be made unto him, and to be worshipped like a God. From which
folly he could never be brought, until such time as he was grievously wounded
in an encounter with an arrow. Out of which his wound Deposippus the Athenian
wrastler seeing the blood to run abundantly, said, to tax Alexanders vain
glory; Why then, do the Gods immortal bleed as we mortal men do? which his
words Alexander hearing, and feeling the pain and smart of his wound, he
perceived himself to be mortal and no God; opening thereby in such sort the
eyes of his mind, as when Anaxander the Philosopher (though unworthy that name
because he was a flatterer) standing once by Alexander when it thundered, asked
him, whether it were he that had caused that thunder-cracke, as the son of
Jupiter? No, said he, mildly rejecting his flattery, I will cause no such
terror unto men. And another time when a medicine which he had taken troubled
him grievously in the working, and Nicesias had said unto him, What shall we
mortal men do, if ye Gods endure such pain and agony? he looking angrily
upon him, answered, What Gods? I fear me rather that the Gods do hate us. This
noble King likewise, after sickness and hurts had made him know himself, did
a worthy and noble act toward Aristobulus the Historiographer. For this
Aristobulus having written a book of the deeds of Alexander, and being with
him in boat upon the river Hidaspe in India, he besought leave that he might
read his book unto him: which when he had obtained, and that Alexander
perceived, by the untrue reports made in his praise beyond all measure, that he
was a flatterer, and no Historiographer: despising his shameless flattery, he
took the book out of his hands, in a rage throwing it into the river, and
fiercely turning to him, said, Thou wretch, thou have thy self deserved to be
thrown after thy book, since thou have not bin ashamed to set down to the
memory of posterity the reports of my acts in such a false and flattering
manner. By this, which we have said, may easily be gathered, that they, who
once give ear to flattery, cannot discern the harm and deceit of flatterers
toward them, until some bitter storm or cross of froward fortune befall
them, to open their eyes, and to give them to understand how they have bin
deceived by such lying companions, and harmed more then by their mortal
enemies. Which thing this wicked generation well considering, lest Princes
should perceive their flattery, they never cease, as soon as they have gotten
trust and credit by their lies, to use all means and devices possible, to put
into their disgrace and hatred all such as they think may be like to discover
their subtilties, and to make known the harm which they procure. To which
purpose of inuenting false and colorable causes, they labor to remove them
from being about the Prince, that they may the better turn topsie-turuie all
at their pleasure. By this means they so blind the eyes of those poor Princes
whom they possess, that whiles they are in prosperity they not only love
them and hold them dear, but also bestow upon them offices, lands, and great
Lordships. As by Philip before named it appeared, who made Thrasideus the
flatterer, Lord of his country, though otherwise he were a man of little worth
and wisdom. And that Philip who was the last King of Macedon overcome by the
Romans, had a flatterer in his Court, whose name was Proclides: who albeit he
were a stranger (to wit, a Tarentine) and a very vain fellow, yet crept he so
far into the said Kings favor, that he was able to breed great broils and
troubles in the kingdom. These and such like inconveniences would not happen,
if the ignorance of young men (not discerning themselves) did not open the way
to flattery, and lead her as it were by the hand into the presence of Princes,
inducing them to delight in her. Hereof I have spoken the more, because, the
number of flatterers being infinite, and very many those that by them are
blinded and seduced to esteem them and raise them into reputation, all young
gentlemen, and Princes specially might be forewarned of the harm they may do
unto them, if before they offer their poison of lies and soothing praises, they
be not armed to repulse their practices, and advertised of their snares. Which
thing the Thessalians considering, when they had taken a city called Melia,
they razed it, only because it bare the name of flattery in the Greek
language, so much did they hate and abhor even the name of so abominable a
vice. And where some Princes happily think themselves wise enough to take heed of
such caterpillars, and therefore care not to rid their Courts of them: let them
assure themselves that therein they do like men that will feed on hurtful
meats, and presume they shall not offend their stomachs. For these gallants can
so cunningly watch and epsy their times to work their feate, that in the end
they cast out their poison, and infect their minds with some fawning device or
other before they be aware: so as there is no other means to avoid this
mischief, but only to keep it far off, and not to suffer it to approach.
True it is nevertheless, that if Princes (having flatterers about them) would
look well into themselves, and learn the precept of Nosce teipsum (which
only precept is of such importance, as without it no man ca^ be happy) they
might reap profit by their flattery: not by delighting in it, but by using it
as a rule or a square to examine their minds and their actions by. For when
they shall find themselves praised and magnified by any flatterer, they will
endeavor themselves to garnish their minds with those virtues, for which they
were by him commended and extolled, and were not before in the^; to the end
they might afterward be truly and deseruingly praised for the same by men of
virtue and honesty, whose property is to exalt and celebrate the actions of
worthy and famous men, and not to lie and flatter, to purchase favor to
themselves, and to draw ruin upon the heads of those that they shall have put
besides their wit, as flatterers do. Diogenes was so great an enemy to
flattery, that he chose rather to live in his tub, then in the courts of
mighty Princes, who offered him favor and entertainment, disdaining to have
abundance of things gotten by so vile a vice. Contrariwise Aristippus, though
he were one of the disciples of Socrates, did so degenerate from the doctrine
and behauior of his master, that he became a parasite to Dionysius tyrant of
Sicile, esteeming more the profit he got that way, the^ the reputation he might
have won by the profession of Philosophy: and grew in the end to be of so base
a mind, that although the Tyrant did spit in his face, yet would he not be
angry; but being rebuked for enduring so vile a disgrace, he laughing at them
that rebuked him, said: If fishermen to take a small fish can be content to go
to sea, and to be washed all over with the waves; shall not I endure that the
King with a little spittle wet me, to the end I may catch a Whale? This same
Aristippus seeing Diogenes on a day to wash a few herbs which he had gathered
for his supper, he said to him: Go to sir, if you would frame your self to
follow the humor of Princes, you should not need to feed upon herbs. Neither
thou (said Diogenes) if thou knew thy self to be (I will not say) a
Philosopher, but a man, thou would not be (as thou art) the dog of Dionysius.
For dogs for their meat fawn upon their masters; and so did this Philosopher
show how base and vile a thing it is to be a flatterer. Which, by this
digression, my author has in like sort labored to make apparent by reasons
and examples. But now returning to his former matter, because he has rather
showed the harm that comes by flattery, and how it increases vice in young
men's minds, then instructed them which way to root it out, you shall hear how
he goes about to pull up the ill weeds that choke the natural good seeds in
their minds, that by the increase of the good, they may have sufficient store
to furnish them in the way of their felicity. It is already declared what bad
qualities and conditions the two worser powers of the soul stir up in young
men's minds, for that they be mighty and vehement, and apt to oppose themselves
against reason, and to resist her. And how reason in young folks is scarce felt
or perceived, such is the force of the two foresaid faculties, which draw them
to lustful appetites and disordinate passions. The cause whereof, Heraclitus
ascribes to the humiditie, wherewith these two ages abound: for it seemed to
him that dryness was the cause of wisdom, and therefore said, that the
wisest mind was nothing else but a dry light. To which opinion Galen leaning,
thought the stars to be most wise because they be most dry. But leaving them
with their opinions, and imputing the cause only to the worser powers or
faculties of the soul, let us follow our two first chose^ guides, Aristotle
and Plato. They say then, that the soul which gives sense or feeling, and
contains in it the other that gives life, is not yet so rebellious against
reason, but that she maybe subdued, and brought to be obedient. So as you must
not think, but that youth, though it be incombred with those passions and
desires before mentioned, may nevertheless be directed to that good course
which leads man to his most perfect end in this life, and for which all
virtues are put in action. For above or over these two powers or faculties, is
placed a third, like a Lady or Queen to command if she be not hindered in the
execution of her charge. And if these two unruly and wild powers, which are the
spring and fountain head of all disordinate affections, be once well tamed and
broken, they do no less obey her commandments, then the well taught horses
obey the coachman. For we are all drawn as it were by two unbridled colts in
this life, by these two baser powers of the soul. Whereof the one shows it
self in most vigor and strength in childhood, and the other in youth.
Concerning the first of which, Aristotle and his master do disagree. But when
they both are joined together, and strong, they become the more unruly, unless
the former (as was said yesterday) be well tamed and made meek by good
instruction and diligent care of education. For if childhood be fashioned
according to the good precepts of the learned; that first power comes humble
and obedient to be coupled with the other, and thereby is there the less labor
requisite for him that shall have the guiding of them both in youth. But in
youth described even now, as you have heard, in whom both these faculties are
rude and undisciplined, the passions are altogether incited and ruled by the
natural powers. For though nature (if she be not hindered) bring forth her
effects perfectly in respect of their substances; yet are they often imperfect
in regard of the accidents. And for this cause is Art and industry needful to
induce virtuous habits, to supply that wherein nature accidentally may be
defective. Whereby it comes to pass, that although the virtues and faculties
of the soul have all that which nature can give unto them; yet have they need
of man's wit and discipline to bring forth laudable and perfect operations. And
this is done by that part of Philosophy which is called Moral, because from
it we do draw the form of good manners, which being actually brought into the
mind of a young man, as well as by the doctrine and wise instruction of others:
and so by long custom, converted into an habit, do break and make supple
those parts which by nature are rebellious to reason. And of so great
importance is the well training up of childhood, even from the first, that it
may be assuredly believed, that the youth succeeding such a childhood as was
yesterday prescribed, must needs be civil and well disposed: and on the
contrary side, that the life of such youths will be wicked and disordered, as
having bin ill brought up in their childhood, do enter into so hopeless a
course, as may be likely to be the foundation of all vice and wickedness
during the whole life to come. And hopeless may they be thought indeed, who by
ill doing begin even from their tender years to induce an ill habit into
their minds: for from age to age after it increases and takes root in such
sort, as it is almost impossible to be rooted out or taken away. Neither can
there be any greater evil wished to any man, then that he be ill-habituated,
which thing by Aelianus report, the Cretans were wont to wish to their enemies
whom they hated most extremely, and not without cause. For he that is fallen
into an ill habit, is no less blind to virtuous actions, then he that wants
his sight to things visible. And as the one is ever plunged in perpetual
darkness: so does the other live in everlasting night of vice, after he has
once hardened himself to evil. And this is the worst kind of youth that may be,
which Aristotle advised should be driven out of the city, when neither for
honesties respect, nor for admonitions, nor shame, nor for love of virtue or
fear of laws, they could possibly be reclaimed to virtuous life.

I pray you (said Captain Norreis) let me interrupt you a little, so shall you
the better take breath in the mean while. I noted not long since a saying of
your author, which me seemed somewhat strange, and that is, that the substance
of the soul should be made perfect by the accidents.

You say right, quoth I, but let not that seem strange unto you: for it ought
rather to seem strange unto you if it were otherwise; because the substance of
every thing is so called, by reason that it is subject unto accidents; neither
can there be any accident (to which it is proper to be in some subject) but it
must fall into some substance: and hardly would the substance perhaps be
discerned by sense, but that the accidents do make it to be known. Yet has
nature given to the substance all that she could give to enable the same, to
wit, that it might by nature be of it self alone, having no need of any other
thing in respect of being; and that it should be so necessary to all things
else that is not a substance, as without it they should be nothing. Therefore
the nature of the soul is such, as the parts thereof have their virtues and
faculties perfect: but in that concerns the directing of them to civil life,
man cannot by nature only compass it, nor attain to that end of which we
treat.

Then said Captain Norreis, If it be so, as by nature we cannot have that
wherewith we should compass our felicity, it must belike be in us contrary to
nature. And, all things contrary to nature, being violent, and of no
continuance; I cannot perceive how this felicity of ours may stand.

Sir (said I) it follows not, that whatsoever is not by nature, must needs be
contrary to nature. But most true it is that the means to guide us to this
felicity; or our felicity it self, is in us not by nature: for if it were so,
all men should naturally be happy, and by nature have the means to purchase the
same, because all men should of necessity work after one sort. For things
natural, unless they be forced or hindered, do always bring forth the same
effects, wheresoever they be; and the powers which nature bestows, are
indifferently dispensed to all alike. Which thing is to be understood by the
vegetative part of the soul, which in plants and in creatures sensible
attends only by nature, without counsel or election, to nourish, to
increase, to procreate, and to preserve: ne cease at any time from those
offices, but always produces like effects in all things that have life. And
the se^sible soul evermore gives the power and virtue of feeling to creatures
sensible, and never alters her operation, nor cease to yield the same
whiles life endures, except by some strange accident she be forced. Seeing
therefore the diversity of man's will, the variety of his operations, and how
differently they use the faculties of the soul, we must needs conclude, that
in respect of civil life, they work not according to nature. But we must not
therefore say, that their working to purchase their felicity, and the end we
speak of, is contrary to nature. For such things are properly said to be
contrary to nature, as are violently forced to that which is not natural, and
whereunto they have no aptness or disposition at all. As for example, if a
stone (which is naturally heavy, and therefore coueteth to move to the center of
the earth) be cast upward into the air by force, it is to be said, that the
motion of that stone so forced upward is contrary to nature; because it has no
instinct or moving from nature to go upward: and though it were thrown up ten
thousand times, so often would it fall down again, if it were not retained
otherwise from falling. And if fire, which is light, and couets to ascend,
should be forced downward, that force would be contrary to nature, and the
force ceasing, it would by nature ascend again, because it has not any virtue,
or principle, or motion to descend, but only to ascend, by which it strives
to come to the place which is proper to it by nature, as it is fire, and by
which it is fire naturally. For the elements have always their essence most
perfect, when they are nearest to the place assigned them by nature. But man
being a creature capable of reason, and thereby apt to receive those virtues,
the seeds whereof nature has sown in his mind, it cannot be said, that the
means (by which he is to be led to so noble an end as his felicity) should be
in him contrary to nature. For never any thing works contrary to nature, in
which is the beginning of that operation that it is to do.

Why, said Captain Norreis again, since you say that the seeds of virtues are
in our minds naturally, it seems strange to me that they should not bring
forth generally in all men their fruit; as the seed which is cast into the
earth, springs, buddeth, flowreth, and lastly in due season yields fruit
according to kind.

Marry (said I) and so they do. For if man's care and industry be not applied to
manure the earth diligently, and to weed out the il weeds that spring among the
good seed which is sown, they would so choke the same as it would be quite
lost. And even so, if the seeds of virtue be not helped with continual
culture, and care taken to pull up the vices which spring therewith, and whereof
the seeds are naturally as well in our mind, as those of virtue, they will
ouer-grow and choke them, as the weeds of the garden ouer-grow and choke the
good herbs planted or sown therein. For so grow up the disordinate appetites,
unreasonable anger, ambitions, greedy desires of wealth, of honor, wanton
lusts of the flesh, and such other affections spoken of before, which have
their natural roots in those two baser parts of the soul deuoyde of reason.
And as we see the earth, without manuring to bring forth wyld herbs and weeds
more plentifully then other good seed, which by industry and labor is cast into
the same: so do those passions, affects, and appetites of those baser parts of
the soul, spring and grow up thicker and faster then the virtues; whereby (for
the more part) the fruit of those good seeds of virtue is lost, if the mind be
not diligently cleaned from them by the care of others. And these ill qualities
are in young men the worse, when they suffer themselves to be transported
without regard of reason or honesty, and their right judgment to be
corrupted, and their crooked to prevail. Which crooked judgment is in effect
the cause of all vices and ill affections, and turns the brain, making them
like drunken men, much like as coccle does to them that feed thereupon. But
this happens not unto that youth which succeeds a well fashioned childhood,
such as yesterday was spoken of; though it be not sufficient to have a child
either well brought up or well instructed. For a new care must be taken, and
new diligence be used to cherish the growth of the good seeds bestowed and
manured in the mind of the child: which made Aristotle say, that education
only was not enough to make a man virtuous. For though the child be so well
bred as has bin prescribed, yet unless some care be had to bridle it (so
unpleasing a thing it is for youth to live within the compass of modesty and
temperance) it is easily turned to that part, to which pleasure and delight
does draw it. Nevertheless that first culture bestowed upon childhood, does so
much avail, as the young man that is disposed to hearken, to good admonitions,
shall have the less to do to live virtuously, and to tame that sensitive part
which he has only to strive withal, and to make obedient to the rule of
reason.

Captain Carleil then said, I pray you (before you go any further) let me ask
this one question, why until now your author having spoken of this moral
science, has all this while made no mention of the speculatiue sciences,
wherein me thinks a young man has special need to be instructed? for they
also (I suppose) are necessary to happiness of life.

That doubt the author answers thus, said I: Virtues are generally divided
into Speculatiue and Practike; or we may say, into Intellectiue and Active. The
speculatiue habites are five in number, viz: Understanding, called by the
Latins Intellectus, Science, Wisdom, Art, and Prudence. And because hitherto
he has spoken only how men in civil life may attain to be good, or decline
from being evil; and that the speculatiue sciences declare, but how wise, how
learned, or how prudent they be, and not how good or virtuous they be: and that
these two first ages are not of capacity sufficient to embrace them, therefore
he reserueth the treating thereof until a fitter time, which the course of our
speech will lead us unto.

Yea but Aristotle says (quoth the Lord Primate) that young men may be
Arithmeticians and Mathematicians, and finally therein wise, but yet he
affirms that they can not be prudent.

That place of Aristotle (said I) is to be understood, not of this first degree
of youth, whereof the author has spoken hitherto, but of the perfection and
ripeness that in time it may attain, as after shall be declared when time
does serve.

That time (said Captain Carleil) we will attend. But because we see both
virtues and sciences are to be learned, and that I have heard question and
doubt made of the manner of learning them, I pray let us* hear whether your
author say ought thereof, and specially whether our learning be but a
rememorating of things which we knew formerly, or else a learning a new.

This is indeed (said I) no light question which mine author handles also even
in this place: and there are on either side great and learned authors, as Plato
and Aristotle first, whereof the one was accounted the God of Philosophers, and
the other the master of all learned men: and each has his followers, who with
forcible arguments seek to defend and maintain the part of their master and
captain. But before we enter into that matter, you must understand that Plato
and Aristotle have held a several way each of them in their teaching. For
Plato from things eternal, descended to mortal things, and thence returned
(as it were by the same way) from the earth to heaven again; rather affirming
then proouing what he taught. But Aristotle from earthly things (as most
manifest to our senses) raised himself, climing to heavenly things, using the
mean of that knowledge which the senses give, from which his opinion was, that
al humane knowledge does come. And where sensible reasons failed him, there
failed his proofs also. Which thing, as it happened to him in divine matters, so
did it likewise in the knowledge of the soul intellectiue (as some of his
interpreters say): which being created by God to his own likeness, be has
written so obscurely thereof, that his resolute opinion in that matter cannot
be picked out of his writings; but that reasons may be gathered out of them, in
favor of the one part and of the other: as though the treaty of a matter so
important and necessary to our knowledge, were (as schoolmen say) a matter
contingent, about which arguments probable may be gathered on both sides: yet
had he before him his divine master, who (as far as man's wit could stretch
without grace) had taught him clearly that which was true, that man's soul is
by nature immortal, and partaker of divinity; howsoever some of the
Peripatetikes seem out of Aristotle to affirm that Plato was contrary to
himself, as making the soul somewhiles immortal, and otherwhiles not: which
in truth is not in Plato to be found, if he be rightly understood. But to the
purpose. The opinion of Aristotle was, that our soul did not only not record
any thing, but that it should be so wholly void of knowledge or science, as it
might be resembled to a pure white paper: and therefore affirmed he, that our
knowledge was altogether newly gotten; and that our soul had to that end need
of sense; and that sense failing her, all science or knowledge should fail
withal. Because the senses are as ministers to the mind, to receive the images
or forms particular of things: which being apprehended by the common sense,
called sensus communis, bring forth afterward the universals. Which common
sense, is a power or faculty of the sensitive soul, that distinguishes
between those things that the outward senses offer unto it; and is therefore
called common, because it receives commonly the forms or images with the
exterior senses present unto it, and has power to distinguish the one from
the other. But as those senses know not the nature of things; so is the same
unknown also unto the common sense, to whom they offer things sensible.
Wherefore this commonsense being (as we have said) a faculty of the sensitive
soul, offers them to the faculty imaginatiue, which has the same
proportion to the virtue intellectiue, as things sensible have to the sense
aforesaid. For it moves the understanding after it has received the forms or
images of things from the outward senses, and lays them up material in the
memory where they be kept. This done, Aristotle and his followers say, that
then the part of the soul capable of reason, begins to use her powers; and
they are (as they affirm) two: the one intellectus possibilis, and the other
intellectus agens: these latin words I must use at this time, because they be
easy enough to be understood, and in English would seem more harsh; whereof
the first is as the matter to the second, and the second as form to the first.
Into that possible faculty of the understanding, do the kinds or species of
things pass, which the fantasy has apprehended, yet free of any material
condition: and this part is to the understanding, as the hand is to the body.
For as the hand is apt to take hold of all instruments; so is this power or
faculty apt to apprehend the forms of all things, from whence grow the
universals: which though they have their being in the material particulars
which the Latins call indiuidua; yet are they not material, because they are not
(according to Aristotle) yet in act. In which respect it is said, that sense is
busied about things particular, and that only things universal are known,
because they be comprehended by the understanding, without matter. It is
nevertheless to be understood, that the kinds of things are in this possible
part thus separated from matter, but blind and obscure: even as colors are
still in substances, though the light be taken away; which light appearing and
making the air transparent which before was darkened, it gives to things that
illumination, by which they are comprehended and known to the eye, whose
object properly colors are. And the Sun being the fountain of light, wise
men have said, that the same Sun gives colors to things; for that by means
of his light they are seen with those visible colors which naturally they
have nevertheless in themselves, though without light they could not be
discerned, and remain there as if they were not at all. This part of the soul
then, wherein reason is, works the same effect toward things intelligible
that the Sun does toward things visible; for it illumineth those kinds or
forms which lie hidden in that part possible, dark and confused, deuoyde of
place, time, and matter, because they are not particular. And hence it comes
that some have said this possible understanding (as we may term it) to be such
a thing, as out of it all things should be made, as if it were in stead of
matter; and the other agent understanding to be the worker of all things, and
as it were the form, because this part which before was but in power to things
intelligible, becomes through the operation of the agent understanding to be
now in act. And for this cause also is it said, that the understanding, and
things understood, become more properly and truly one self same thing, then of
matter and form it may be said. For it is credible, that both the forms of
things and the understanding being immateriall, they do the more perfectly
unite themselves, and that the understanding does so make it self equal with
the thing understood, that they both become one. To which purpose Aristotle
said very well, that the reasonable soul, whiles it understands things
intelligible, becomes one self same thing with them. And this is that very
act of truth, to wit, the certain science or knowledge of any thing: which
knowledge or science is in effect naught else then the thing so known. And
this knowledge is not principally in man, but in the soul, wherein it remains
as the form thereof. This is briefly the sum of the order or manner of
knowledge, which those that follow Aristotle do set down: who therefore
affirm that his sentence was, that who so would understand any thing, had need
of those forms and images which the senses offer to the fantasy. From which
sentence some (not well advised in my opinion) have gone about to argue, that
the soul of man should be mortal, because Aristotle assigned no proper
operation unto her, as if such had bin his opinion. But they consider not that
Aristotle in his books de Anima, spoke of the soul as she was natural, and
the form to the body, performing her operations together with the body, and as
she was the mouer of the body, and the body moved by her, but not as she was
distinct or separate from the body. And right true it is, that whiles she is
tied to the body, she cannot understand but by the means of the senses: but
that being free and loosed from the body, she has not her proper operations,
that is most false. For then has she no need at all of the senses, when being
pure and simple, she may exercise her own power and virtue proper to her,
(which is the contemplation of God Almighty, the highest and only true good)
nor yet of any other instrument but her self. And in this respect, perchance
the better sort of Peripatetikes following their masters opinion, have said,
that the soul separated from the body, is not the same she was whiles she was
linked thereunto, as well because then she was a part of the whole, and was
troubled with anger, desire, hatred, love, and such like passions common to her
with the body; as because being imprisoned in the body, she had need of the
senses; but now that she was freed from that imprisonment, nor any way bound to
the body, she might use her self and her virtue much more nobly and worthily
then before. And therefore Aristotle said, that the soul, separated from the
body, could no more be called a soul, but equiuocally. But here is to be
noted, that it is one thing to speak of the intellectiue soul which is divine
and incorruptible, and another thing to speak of the soul, simply. For
doubtless, the vegetative and sensitive souls, which cannot use their virtues
and operations but by mean of the body, die with the body. But the
intellectiue soul, which is our only true form, not drawn from the
material power, but created and sent into us by the divine majesty, dies not
with the body, but remains immortal and everlasting. And thus much touching
the manner of our learning, according to Aristotle's opinion may suffice. But
Plato doubtless was of opinion that our soul, before it descended into us,
had the knowledge of all things; and that by coming into this mortal prison
(which his followers have termed the sepulcher of the soul) she was plunged as
it were into profound darkness from a most clear light, whereby she forgot
all that erst she knew. And that afterward by occasion of those things, which
by means of the senses come before her, the memory of that she knew before
being stirred up and wakened, she came to resume her former knowledge, and in
this sort by way of rememorating, and not of learning a new, she attained the
knowledge of sciences; so as we learned nothing, whereof before we had not the
knowledge. In conformity of which their masters sentence, the Platonikes say,
that since the body brings with it the seeds that appertain unto it by
nature, it is to be believed, that the soul likewise, being much more perfect,
should bring with it those seeds that appertain to the mind. And to this
reason they add, that men even from their first years desiring things that
are good, true, honest and profitable: and since no man can desire a thing
which he knows not after some sort, it may be concluded, that we have the
knowledge of those things before. But because it would be too long a matter to
rehearse all the arguments which Plato his followers bring to prove this, by
our desiring of things, by seeking them, by finding them, and by the discerning
of them; it may suffice to refer you to what Plato has left of this matter
written under the person of Socrates, in his dialogs entitled Menon and
Phoedon, and diverse other places. And likewise to that which his expositors
have written, among who^ Plotinus, though he be somewhat obscure, deserves the
chief place, as best expressing Plato his sense and meaning. But let our
knowledge come how it will, either by learning anew, or by recording what the
soul knew before; she having need (howsoever it be) of the ministry of the
senses, and seeing it is almost necessary to pass through the same means from
not knowing to knowledge: we shall ever find the like difficulties, whether we
rememorate or learn anew. For without much study, great diligence, and long
travel, are sciences no way to be attained. Which thing Socrates (who happily was
the author of Plato his opinion) showed us plainly. For when the curtizan
Theodota scoffing at him said, she was of greater skill then he: for she had
drawn diverse of Socrates scholars from him to her love, where Socrates could
draw none of her lovers to follow him: he answered, that he thereat marvelled
nothing at all: for (said he) thou leadest them by a plain smooth way to lust
and wantonness; and I lead them to virtue by a rough and an uneasy path.

Here Captain Norreis said, Though this controversy between two so great
Philosophers be not (for ought I see) yet decided, and that if we should take
upon us to discern whose opinion were the better, it might be imputed to
presumption: yet would I for my part be very glad to know what was the reason
that induced Plato to say that our soul had the knowledge of all things before
it came into the body; and I pray you, if your author speak any thing thereof,
that you will therein satisfy my desire.

Yes marry does he sir, said I, and your desire herein shows very well the
excellency of your wit, and your attention to that which has bin said: and
both may serve for a sufficient argument, what hope is to be conceived of a
gentleman so inclined and desirous to learn. Thus therefore he says to your
question. That whereas we according to truth believe, that our souls are by
the divine power of God, incontinently created and infused into our bodies,
when we begin to receive life and sense in our mothers womb. Plato contrarily
held, that they were long before the bodies created, and produced in a number
certain by God, and that they were as particles descended from the Gods above
into our bodies: and therefore he thought it nothing absurd, that they should
have the knowledge of al things that may be known. For that they being in
heaven busied in the contemplation of the divine nature, free from any
impediment of the body: and that divine nature containing in it (as he said)
the essential Ideas of all things, which Ideas (according to his opinion) were
separate and eternal natures remaining in the divine mind of God, to the
pattern of which, all things created were made, they might (said he) in an
instant have the knowledge of all that could be known.

If this opinion were true, said Captain Norreis, happy had it bin for us,
that our souls had continued still, after they were sent into our bodies, to be
of that sort that they had bin in heaven, for then should we not have needed so
much labor and pain in seeking that knowledge which before they had so
perfectly. And being so perfect to what end did he say, they were sent into our
bodies to become imperfect?

His opinion (said I) was, that the souls were created in a certain number,
to the end they might inform so many bodies: and therefore if they should not
have come into those bodies, they should have failed of the end for which they
were created. In which bodies, the Platonikes say further, that they were to
exercise themselves, and were given to the bodies, not only because they
should give them power to move, to see, to feel, and to do those other
operations which are natural; but to the end that they should in that which
appertains to the mind, not suffer us to be drowsy, and lie (as it were)
asleep, but rather to waken and stir us up to the knowledge of those things
that are fit for us to understand: and this was the most accomplished operation
(said they) that the soul could give unto the body whiles it was linked
thereunto.

I cannot see (said the Lord Primate) how this hangs together. For I have
read that these kind of Philosophers held an opinion, that our souls all the
while they were tied to our bodies, did but sleep: and that all, which they do
or suffer in this life, was but as a dream.

It is true (said I) that the Platonikes said so indeed; and that was, because
they knew that whatsoever we do in this life is but a dream, in comparison of
that our souls shall do in the other world, when they shall be loosed from those
bands which tie them to our bodies here: through which bands they are hindered
from the knowledge of those things perfectly which here they learn. In regard
whereof Carneades, Arcesilas, and others the authors of the new Accademie said
constantly, that in this world there was no certain knowledge of any thing.
And Nausifanes affirmed, that of all those things which here seem to us to be,
we know nothing so certainly as that they were not. Unto which opinion
Protagoras also agreed, saying, that men might dispute of any thing pro and
contra; as if he should say, that nothing could be assuredly known to us
whiles we are here, as our souls shall know them whenever they shall be
freed from our bodies, and lie no more inwrapped in these mortal shadows,
because then they shall be wholly busied in the contemplation of truth: neither
shall they be deceived by the senses, as in this life they are oftentimes, who
offer unto them the images of things uncertainly, not through default of the
senses, but by reason of the means whereby they apprehend the forms of
things. For the sense by his own nature (if he be not deceived or hindered in
receiving of things sensible) comprehends them perfectly, nay becomes one
self same thing with them. And this is the cause why it is said, that our
souls sleep whiles they remain in this life, and that our knowledge here is
but as a dream. According to which conceit, the inamoured Poet, speaking of
his Lady Laura, said very properly upon her death in this sort: Thou have
(fair Damsel) slept but a short sleep,
Now waked thou art among the heavenly spirits,
Where blessed souls interne within their maker.


Showing that our life here is but a slumber; and seeming to infer that she was
now interned or become inward in the contemplation of her maker, being wakened
from her sleep among those blessed spirits, as she had bin, before she was
enclosed in this earthly prison. And likewise he seemed to lean to Plato his
opinion in another place, when speaking of her also, he said she was returned
to her fellow star. For Plato thought the number of souls created, was
according to the number of the stars in heaven: and that every soul had a
proper star to which it returned after this life. But as for our knowledge,
in truth it is but a shadow in respect of the knowledge our souls shall have
by the contemplation of the divine essence. Whereupon Socrates, one of the
wisest and most learned me^ that ever were, yet evermore affirmed resolutely,
that the only thing he knew, was, that he knew nothing. And to say truly, this
his knowing of nothing, might well be termed a learned ignorance.

Well (said the Lord Primate) captain Carleil and captain Norreis have by
their demands ministered a very fit occasion unto you, to discourse out of your
author the considerations of the manner of our knowledge, and consequently of
the soul of man, and to declare withal the opinions of two so excellent
Philosophers and of their followers. But though both agree in this, that
whether the soul learn of new, or by rememorating, she has always need of
the senses as her ministers to attain knowledge: yet is it to be believed, and
that assuredly, that the soul of man being created by God Almighty to his
own image and likeness, she has also some proper operation or action
resembling his; to the accomplishment whereof, she has no need of the senses.
And that being dissolved from the body, or after, when he shall be reunited to
the same in the resurrection, she having then the same image and likeness of
God still in her, she shall everlastingly be wholly and only intent to the
contemplation of his divine majesty, who is the only true and perfect good
and happiness. The perfection of which divine majesty, is the knowledge of
himself; and knowing himself to know all things by him created and produced.
But it is time now for you to return to the matter you had in hand, when you
were drawn by their demands to make this digression.

And even so will I, since you be so pleased, quoth I, and so proceeded in this
manner. In the beginning of youth, the young man is fitly to be resembled to a
traveler that is arrived in his journey to a place where the way is divided
into two parts, and stands in doubt which of them he shall take: for in
either of them he sees a guide standing ready to lead him; whereof, the one
inuiteth him to pleasure, and the other to virtue. The first proposing to him
his delights and ease, and the other labor and travel. And forasmuch as that
age is inclined naturally to pleasures, and enemy to paine-taking and labor,
it is greatly to be doubted that the young man leaving the way that leads to
virtue, will betake himself to the other guide to follow the way that leads
to delight. Wherefore if at any time it be needful for the father to have a
watchful eye upon his son, it is then most important when his child is to
make his passage from his childhood into his youth: and at that time to set
before his eyes continually instructions, whereby he may conceive how honesty
and good behavior, with civil conversation, are the foundation of good and
happy life: and this chiefly is he to do by his own example. For though it be
very good, that his son in those years, and at all other times, should see the
whole family so ordered, as he may learn nothing therein but virtue and
honesty; yet must he not think but that his son will better believe and
follow what he shall see himself do or say, then all the family besides. And if
Aristotle advise masters to endeavor themselves to give good example to their
servants and slaves; how much more ought the father to be careful to do the
like to his own children, who are dearer to him then his servants, being his
own lively images. For as it is the mothers care and office to breed and
nourish her child; so is it the fathers duty to see him well instructed and
taught in virtues and good behavior: and the speeches and demeanor of the
father in his household or family, are to his children as laws in a city to
the citizens, and do assuredly enter into the minds of children with far
greater force then men would think. Which made Xenocrates to say, that the
stopping of young men's ears was more needful then the arming of their bodies
against the strokes of their enemies; because the danger was greater which they
incurred by hearing an unseemly speech, specially from their parents mouth,
then that which they might fear by fighting with their enemies. The father
therefore must be very circumspect that his son hear him not speak any word
indecent or dishonest: for nature with a certain hidden virtue persuades
youth, succeeding a weltaught childhood, to bear great reverence and respect
to the grave and ripe years of their parents, and of all aged persons; who
even in the first view represent unto them virtue, prudence, and all good and
grave behavior. And such is he to show himself to his son, as even in his
countenance, gestures and words he may as in a table behold therein the laws
of honest life. And that his actions may be in all points to his son a pattern
and example of civil conversation and virtuous living.

It is a very necessary and important instruction and advertisement (said M.
Dormer) that you have last mentioned for fathers to observe. But I would feign
that you should tell me, whether you have not seen (as I oftentimes have done)
wicked children begotten of very good and honest parents.

Yes (quoth I) oftener then I would. Neither can it be denied, but that as
there are some young men by nature and through their happy constellation wholly
bent to virtuous and honest conditions; so are there others naturally disposed
to vice and lewd behavior: yet since it seems not credible, that of good
parents ill children should come; and that diligent care in bringing them up
should not pluck up (if not wholly, yet in part) those evil weeds which choke
the good seeds, so as the fruit might in due season be expected: seeking to
find the reason hereof, I have called to mind the precept of Hippocrates given
to the Physicians, to wit, that it is not sufficient for recovery of the sick
patient, that the Physician be well disposed to cure him, and employ his
diligence to that effect: but that other things must likewise concur for the
recovery of his health, as the care and solicitude of such as watch and tend
him, with other exterior things. For even so me thinks, that to the good
proof of a young man, besides the example of the father, and of the rest of
the family, be it never so virtuous, there must also concur the goodness of
his conversation abroad, to make his domestical familiarity work due
effect: since many times I have seen it fall out, that the haunting of ill
company from home, has done a young man much more hurt, then all the good
instructions or virtuous examples domestical could do him good. So soft and
tender are the minds of young men, and apt (as was formerly said) to be wrought
like wax to vice. And this comes to pass, by reason that the sensitive part
calling youth to delight, and diuerting it from the travel and pain which
learning and virtue require, is hardly subdued and brought under the rule of
reason, by which it esteems it self forced, when it is barred from that it
desires. And if by any exterior occasion it be pricked forward, it fares as
we see it oftentimes do with young hard-headed colts, who take the bit in the
mouth, and run away with the rider, carrying him, will he, nill he, whether
they list. It ought therefore to be none of the least cares of the father to
provide, that the foreign conversation of his son may be such as shall rather
help then hinder his care and home-example. To which effect, it would be very
good, if it might be possible, that the young man were never from his fathers
side. But forasmuch as many occasions draw men to attend other waightier
affairs, as well public as private, whereby they are driven to have their minds
busied about exterior things, and to neglect their children who are their own
bowels. Therefore is it their parts in such cases to appoint for their
children, when they are past their childish years, some learned and honest man
of virtuous behavior to govern them and take care of them, whose precepts
they may so obey, as they shall fear to do any thing that may breed reproach
or blame unto them. For such things are mortal poison to young men's minds, and
not only put them astray from the path that should lead them to virtue, but
imprint in them also a vicious habit that makes them unruly and disobedient to
all wholesome admonitions and virtuous actions. This man so chosen to have the
charge of youth, must be careful among other things to foresee, that his
disciples may have such companions, as the Persian Princes had, provided for
them, to wit, equal of age and like of conditions, with whom they may be
conversant and familiar. For such similitude of age and conditions does cause
them to love and like one another, if some bar or impediment fall not
between them. The ancient wise men assigned to youth the Plannet of Mercury,
for no other cause (as I suppose) but for that Mercury being (as Astronomers
say) either good or bad, according as he is accompanied with another plannet
good or evil: even so youth becomes good or bad, as the companies to which it
draws or gives it self. And therefore ought not young men to have liberty
to haunt what company they list, but to be kept under the discipline of wise
men, and trained up in the company of others of their age well bred, until it
may be thought, or rather found by experience, that they be past danger, and
become fit to guide themselves: having brought their mind obedient to reason so
far, as it cannot any more draw him to any delights, but such as are honest
and virtuous. This delight in virtue and honesty, is best induced into a young
man's mind by that true companion of virtue that breeds fear to do or say any
thing unseemly or dishonest: which companion Socrates sought to make familiar
to his scholars, when he would tell them how they should endeavor themselves to
purchase in their minds prudence, into their tongues truth with silence, and in
their faces bashfulnesse, called by the Latins verecundia, deriuing it from the
reverence which young men use to bear to their elders. This we call
shamefastness, and is that honest red color or blushing which dies a young
man's cheeks when he supposes he has done or said any thing unseemly or
unfit for a virtuous mind, or that may offend his parents or betters: a
certain token of a generous mind, and well disciplined, of which great hope
may be conceived that it will prove godly and virtuous. For as a sure and firm
friend to honesty and virtue, like a watch or guard set for their security,
it is ever wakefull and careful to keep all disordinate concupiscences from
the mind, whereby (though of it self it be rather an affect then a habit)
nevertheless she induces such a habit into a young man's mind, that not only
in presence of others he blusheth, if he chance to do any thing not
commendable, but even of himself he is ashamed, if being alone he fall into
any error. For though some say, that two things chiefly keep youth from
evil, correction, and shame, and that chastisement rather then instruction
draws youth to do well; yet I for my part never think that young man well bred
or trained up, who for fear of punishment abstaineth from doing things
shameful or dishonest: punishment being appointed but for them that are evil:
which made the Poet say: For virtues sake good men ill deeds refrain:
Ill men refrain them but for fear of pain.
For the wickedness of men has caused laws to be devised and established for
the conservation of honest and virtuous society, and civil life, whereunto man
is borne: which laws have appointed penalties for the offenders, to the end
that for fear thereof, as Xenocrates was wont to say, men might fly from ill
doing, as dogs fly harm doing for fear of the whip. And because Plato formed
his Commonweal of perfect and virtuous men, therefore set he down no laws in
his books de Repub. because he supposed the goodness of the men to be
sufficient for the government thereof without a law, either to command good
order, or to punish offenders. Nevertheless the same divine Philosopher
considering how the imperfection of man's nature will not suffer any such
Commonwealth to be found: he wrote also his books of laws to serve for the
imperfection of other Commonweals, which were composed of men of all sorts,
good and bad, mean or indifferent, in which both instruction and punishment
were needful, as well to make the evil abstain from vice, as to confirm the
good, and to reduce those that were indifferent to greater perfection. Laws
therefore have appointed punishments, that virtue might be defended and
maintained, civil society and humane right preserved. But young men bred as
our author would have them, are by all means to be framed such, as for virtues
sake, for fear of reproach, for love and reverence to honesty, and not for
fear of punishment to be inflicted on them by the magistrates or their
superiors for doing of evil, they may accustom themselves never to do any
thing, for which they should need to blush, no not to themselves alone. Which
thing they shall the better perform, if they use to forbear the doing of any
thing by themselves, which they would be ashamed of if they were in company. It
is written, that among the ancient Romans one Julius Drusus Publicola having
his house seated so as his neighbors might look into it, a certain Architect
offered him for the expense of five talents to make it so close as none of his
neighbors should look thereinto, or see what he was doing. But he made him
answer again, that he would rather give him ten talents to make it so, as all
the city might see what he did in his house; because he was sure he did
nothing within doors whereof he need be ashamed abroad, though every man
should see him. For which answer he was highly commended. True it is that
Xenophon esteems this blushng to a man's self, to be rather temperance then
bashfulnes: but let it be named how it will, it is surely the property of a
gentle heart so to do. And therefore Petrarke said well: Alone whereas I walked
mongs woods and hills,
I shamed at my self: for gentle heart
Thinks that enough, no other spur it wills.
Yet would I not neither, that our young man should be more bashful then were
fit, as one ouer-awed or doltish, not able to consider perils or dangers when
they present themselves, not yet to loose his boldness of spirit. For
Antipater the son of Cassander through the like quality cast himself away,
who having invited Demetrius to supper with him at such a time, as their
friendship was not sure but stood upon doubtful terms, and he being come
accordingly: when Demetrius afterward as in requital of his kindness invited
Antipater likewise to supper, though he knew right well what peril he thrust
himself into if he went, considering the wyly disposition of the said
Demetrius: yet being ashamed that Demetrius should perceive him to be so
mistrustful, would needs go, and there was miserably slain. This is a vice,
named in the Greek Disopia, and which we may in English call unfruitful
shamefastness, wherewith we would not wish our young man should be any way
acquainted, but only with that generous bashfulnesse that may serve him for a
spur to virtue, and for a bridle from vice. But because Plato says, that
though bashfulnesse be most properly fit for young men, yet that it is also
seemly enough for men of al years. And that Aristotle contrariwise thinks it
not meet for men of riper years to blush: it may therefore be doubted to
whether of these two great learned men's opinions we should incline. For
clearing hereof, you must understand that the Platonikes say two things among
others are specially given to for a divine gift unto man: Bashfulnesse the one,
and Magnanimity the other: the one to hold us back from doing of any thing
worthy blame and reproach: the other to put us forward into the way of praise
and virtue; whereby we might always be ready to do well only for virtues
sake, to the good and benefit of others, and to our own contentment and
delight. Of which course, the end is honor in this world, and glory after
death. But because the force of the Concupiscible appetite is so great, and
sets before us pleasure in so many sundry shapes, as it is hard to shun the
snares which these two enemies of reason set to entrap us, and that the
coldness of old age cannot wholly extinguish the fervor of our appetites; for
my part I think that as in all ages it is fit that Magnanimity inuit us to
commendable actions; so also that we have need of shamefastness to correct us
whensoever we shall go beyond the bounds or limits of reason in what years
soever, and to check us with the bridle of tempera^ce. For though Aristotle
say, that shame ought to die red in a man's cheeks, but for voluntary actions
only: yet Plato considering that none but God is perfect without fault; and
that every man, even the most virtuous falls sometimes through humane
frailty, thought (according to Christianity) that ripeness of years or
wisdom should be no hinderance to make them ashamed, but rather make them the
more bashful whenever they should find in themselves, that they had run into
any error indecent or unfitting for men of their years and quality. Not
intending yet thereby that the errors of the ancienter men were to be of that
sort that young men's faults commonly are, who through incontinencie run
oftentimes into sin wilfully: whereas men of riper years err or ought to err
only through frailty of nature. Much better were it indeed for men of years
not to do any thing of which they might be ashamed, if the condition of man
would permit it, then after they had done it to blush thereat: and much more
reproachful is his fault, if he offend voluntarily then the young man's. But
since no man (though he have made a habit in well-doing) can stand so assured
of himself, but that sometime in his life he shall commit some error: it is
much better (in what age soever it be) that blushing make him know his fault,
then to pass it over impudently without shame. And accordingly Saint Ambrose
said in his book of Offices, that shamefastness was meet for all ages, for
all times, and for all places. And for the same cause perhaps have wise men and
religious held, that an Angel of heaven assisteth every man to call him back
from those evils, which the ill Angel with his sugared bait of delight and
disordinate appetite inticeth him unto, only for his ruin. For they thought
that our forces were not able to resist so mighty prouocations. As for Plato
and Aristotle, seems they differed in opinion, for that, the one considered
humane nature as it ought to be, and the other as it commonly is indeed. Which
may the better be believed, because Aristotle in his book of Rhetorike,
restrained not this habit of shamefastness so precisely to young men, but
that it may sometimes beseem an aged man's cheeks also, though so far as
grace and wisdom may prevail, it would best beseem him never to do the
thing whereof he need be ashamed, as before was said. And the same rule ought
young men also to propose to themselves, whereby they shall deserve so much the
more commendation, as the heat of their years bears with them fiery
appetites, and they the less apt to resist so sharp and so intolerable
pricks. The way to observe that rule, is to strive in all their actions to
master themselves, and to profit in virtue: whereunto will help them chiefly,
that they endeavor themselves to bridle such desires as they find most to
molest them, not suffering them to transport them beyond the limits of
honesty. But because the day goes away, and that to treat particularly of
all that might be said concerning the direction of youth to virtue, which
leads him to his felicity, would require more time then is remaining, I will
briefly knit up the rest that concerns this matter. Young men have natural
heat so much abounding in them, that they cannot rest, but be still in motion
as well of body as of mind. The one with running, leaping, and other exercises,
and when all they fail, the tongue cease not, which by reason of their age
is the more bold and ready. The other with passing from one discourse to
another, and from one passion to another; now loving, now hating, now boiling
with anger and choler, now still and quiet, with such like motions of the mind.
And because the motions of the body, and the affections of the mind must have
their measure and their rule, and the one and the other convenient exercise and
moderate rest: therefore did the ancient wise men devise two special Arts,
most apt and fit for both these purposes. Whereof, the one they called
Gymnastica, which is a skillful and moderate exercise of the body; and the
other Music, by which name it is well known in all languages. And when they
had caused their youth to spend part of the day in learning those sciences and
disciplines which they thought fit for that age (for of all other things they
abhorred the training them up in ignorance, because seldom can an ignorant man
be good, and that men without knowledge and learning are but figures of men,
and images of death without soul or life) then would they draw them to honest
exercises of the body by degrees. For they held it a thing most necessary for
the wel-founding of a Commonwealth, to be continually careful of the framing
youth both in body and mind; because they knew right well that good education
makes young men good: and that such are Commonwealths and States, as are the
qualities and conditions of the men which they do breed. Touching the body
therefore, they did devise to strengthen and harden it with convenient and
temperate exercises: as the play at ball, leaping, running, dansing, riding,
wrestling, throwing the bar, the stone or sledge, and such like. For the
mind, they thought best to stay and settle it self with the harmony of
Music: and from these two they resolved, that two great good effects did
ensue: From the first, strength of body and boldness of spirit; and from the
latter, modesty and temperance, inseparable companions for the most part unto
fortitude. For some of them were of opinion, that our souls were composed of
harmony; and believed that Music was able so to temper our affects and
passions, as they should not far or discord among themselves, but be so
interlaced the one with the other in a sweet consent, as well guided and ordered
actio^ should proceed from the same, even as sweet and delightful Music
proceeds from the wel-tempering of tunable voices, or well consorted
instruments. Neither would they have the one to be exercised, and the other
omitted: for that they thought, if young men should give themselves only to the
exercises of the body, they would become too fierce and hardy; and so be rather
hurtful to their commonweales then otherwise. And if they should follow only
Music, which is proper to rest and quietness, and used as a recreation of the
mind, as Aristotle says, they would become soft minded and effeminate. But by
joining both these faculties together in one, they sought to make a noble
temper, and to induce a most excellent habit, as well in the mind as in the
body. So that if valor were required for the defense of their country, or
vanquishing of their enemies, they were made fit and apt thereunto by the
exercises of the body; but with such measure and temper as should not exceed.
Which measure and temper, they obtained from that harmony which Music
imprinted in their minds: under which they comprehended not only the ordering
of the voice and sounds of instruments, but all other orderly and seemly
motions of the body; which upon their stages, or Scaenes in the acting of
Tragedies, was chiefly to be discovered. And that all orderly motions were
comprehended under Music, was held so certain by Pythagoras, Archetas,
Plato, Cicero, and other famous Philosophers, that they were of opinion, that
the orderly course and motions of the heavens could not be such as it is, or
continue without harmony, though Aristotle do oppose him self to their
opinion. And for this cause did Lycurgus devise that Music should be conjoined
with the military discipline of the Lacedaemonians, not only to temper the
heat and fury of their minds in fight; but also to cause them to use a
certain measure in that marching, and other occasions of war. In which respect
they were wont to battle without certain pipes, according to the times
whereof they understood how to use their bodies and weapons: from which respect
also comes our using of drums and trumpets to give soldiers knowledge when to
march, when to stand, when to assault, and when to retire: and consequently how
to join order and measure with their valor against the enemy: and the
Lansknight and the Switzer use also the fife at this day with the drum. And to
say truth, great is the force of Music skilfully used to stir up or to
appease the mind. For we read, that Pythagoras finding a wanton young man
enraged with lust, ready to force the door of an honest woman, he so calmed
his mind, only by changing the Phrigian tune and number into the Spondean,
that he gave over his wicked purpose. And Therpander, when a great sedition was
raised among the Lacedaemonians, he with his music so quieted their minds bent
to fury, that he reduced them to a perfect peace. It is also written of the
great Alexander, that he was so moved by that tune and number of Musikes, which
the greeks called Orthios nomos, which was a kind of haughty tune to stir
men to battle, that he rose from the board to arm himself, as if the trumpet
had sounded the alarm. But what talk we of the ancient opinions concerning
the force of Music to move men's minds, when we find they believed that their
Gods were forced by the virtue of Music to appease their wrath? For, the
Lacedaemonians being infested with a great pestilence, Thales of Candia was said
by music to have mitigated their anger, and so to have delivered them from
that mortality. The which thing Homer also signified, when he said, that the
yongmen of Greece with their songs did appease Apollo his wrath, and caused the
plague to cease which had infected their camp. And the Romans likewise being
annoied with a great pestilence, received then first the singing of Satires
into the City though but rudely tuned then, as a remedy for that infectio^.
The force and efficacy of music then being such as I have declared, it is no
marvel that the Aegiptia^s, after they had once received it into their
Commonwealth, as meet for the instruction of their youth, would never after
allow that it should be altered or changed, but such as it was when they first
admitted it, such they continued it without altering the space of ten thousand
years, according to their manner of contemplation, having a conceit or rather a
firm opinion that they could not alter music but with danger to their State.
Which opinion the Lacedaemonians likewise so embraced, that when Timotheus an
excellent Musition in Sparta, had presumed to add but one string to the
Cyther, they banished him out of the city and territories, as a violater of
laws, and a corrupter of honest discipline. Albeit with Phrine they dealt more
mildly, who having added to the Cyther two cords, one sharp, and another grave
or flat, they only caused him to take them away again, supposing that seven
strings were enough to temper the sound thereof, as a number comprehending all
music; and that the increasing thereof was but superfluous and harmefull. These
ancient examples and considerations, are not slightly to be passed over: for
though many other occasions of corruption in our age may be assigned; yet one
of the principal, in the judgment of wise men, may well be imputed to the
quality of that corrupted music which is most used now a days; carrying with
it nothing but a sensual delight to the ear, without working any good to the
mind at all. Nay, would God it did not greatly hurt and corrupt the mind. For
as music well used is a great help to moderate the disorderly affections of
the mind: so being abused it expels all manly thoughts from the heart, and
so effeminateth men, that they are little better then women: and in women
breeds such lascivious and wanton thoughts, that oftentimes they forget their
honesty, without which they cannot be worthy the name of women. Not that I
would hereby infer, that music generally were to be misliked, or unfit for
women also: but my meaning is of this wanton and lascivious kind of music,
which is now a days most pleasing, and resembles the Lydian of old time,
which Plato so abhorred, as he would not in any sort admit it into his
Commonweal, lest it should infect the minds of men and women both. And from
him may we learn what kind of music he would have men to embrace, to stir
their minds up to virtue, and to purge the same from vice and error. Like as
also from Aristotle in his 8. book of Politikes, taken perchance out of the
writings of his master. But if that ancient kind of music, framed and
composed wholly to gravity, were now known and used, which kind was then set
forth with the learned and grave verses of excellent Poets, we should now also
see magnificall and high desires stipped up in the minds of the hearers. Which
verses contained the praises of excellent and heroical personages, and were
used to be sung at the tables of great men and Princes, to the sound of the
Lyra; whereby they inflamed the minds of the hearers to virtue and generous
actions. For the force of Music with Poesy, is such, as is of power to set
the followers and lovers thereof into the direct way that leads them to their
felicity. Socrates demanding of the Oracle of Apollo, what he should do to
make himself happy: he was willed to learn Music; whereupon he gave
himself forthwith to the study of Poesy, conceiving with himself, that
verses and Poetical numbers are the perfectest Music, and that they enter
like lively sparks into men's minds, to kindle in them desires of dignity,
greatness, honor, true praise and commendation, and to correct whatsoever is
in them of base and vile affection. In ancient time therefore men caused their
children to be instructed in Poesy before all other disciplines, for that they
esteemed good Poets to be the fathers of wisdom, and the undoubted true
guides to civil life, and not without cause. For they raise men's thoughts from
humble and base things, such as the vulgar and common sort delight in, and make
them bend their endeavors wholly to high, yea heavenly things. As who so list to
attend diligently the excellency of the Psalms and Hymns composed by the
Kingly Prophet David, and others called the singers of the Hebrew Church, shall
easily discern. But since our music is grown now to the fulness of wanto^ and
lascivious passions, and the words so confusedly mingled with the notes, that a
man can discern nothing but the sound and tunes of the voices, but sense or
sentence he can understand none at all; even as it were sundry birds chanting
and chirping upon the boughs of trees: young men are much better in the
judgment of the wise, to abstain from it altogether, then to spend their time
about it. For as good disciplines are the true and proper nourishment of
virtue: so are the evil the very poison of the same.

Then said Captain Carleil, as concerning the difference between the ancient
music and ours in this age, I do easily agree with you, and wish it were
otherwise, that we might see now a days those wonderful effects of this
excellent Art, which are written of it in ancient authors. But where you so
highly extol the study of Poesy, you make me not a little to marvel,
considering how Plato, being so learned a man, did not only make small
estimation thereof, but banished it expressly from his commonweal.

Let not that seem strange unto you, said I: for Plato condemned not Poesy,
but only those Poets that abused so excellent a faculty, scribbling either
wanton toys, or else by foolish imitation taking upon them to express high
conceirs which themselves understood not. And specially did he reprehend those
Poets, who in their fictions did ascribe to the Gods such actions as would have
bin unseemly for the most wanton and vicious men of the world: as the adultery
of Mars and Venus, those of Jupiter with Semele, with Europa, with Danae, with
Calisto, and many more. Though some have under such fictions sought to teach
moral and marvelous senses, which Plato likewise in his second Alcibiades
declares. But he blamed not those Poets, who frame their verses and
compositions to the honor of God, and to good examples of modesty and virtue.
For in his books of Laws he introduces Poets to sing Himnes to their Gods,
and teaches the manner of their Chori in their sacrifices, and to make prayers
for the Commonweal. Howbeit, to say truth, though he so do, he would not have
it lawful for every man to publish any composition that he had made, without
the allowance and view of some magistrate elected in the city for that
purpose. Which magistracy he would have to be of no fewer in number then fifty
men of gravity and wisdom: of such importance did he hold the compositions
of Poets to be. Which regard if it were had now a days, we should not see so
many idle and profane toys spread abroad by some that think the preposterous
turning of phrases, and making of rhyme with little reason, to be an excellent
kind of writing, and fit to breed them fame and reputation. Supposing (as men
blinded in their own conceits) that they exceed all other writers, and that
from them only others that write in that kind should take their rules and
example. So drowning their corrupted judgments in their ignorance, that where
they be worthy blame, they esteem themselves comparable to the most famous and
excellent Poets that ever wrote, and that they ought to be partakers of their
glory and greatest honors. But to men of judgment, and able to discern the
difference between well writing and presumptuous scribbling, they minister
matter of scorn and laughter, when they consider their disioynted phrases,
their misshapen figures, their shallow conceits lamely expressed, and
disgraced, in stead of being adorned, with improper and unfit metaphors, well
declaring how unworthy they be of the title of Poets. Such are they, who being
themselves full of intemperance and wantonness, write nothing but dishonest and
lascivious rimes and songs, apt to root out all honest and manly thoughts out
of their minds that are so foolish as to lose their time in reading of them.
These indeed ought to be driven out, and banished from al Commonweales, as
corrupters of manners, and infecters of young men's minds: who may well be
compared to rocks that lie hidden under water, amid the sea of this our life,
on which, such young men as chance to strike, are like to suffer shipwreck, and
sinking in the gulf of lust and wantonness, to be drowned and dead to all
virtue. But true Poesy well used, is nothing else but the most ancient kind of
Philosophy, compounded and interlaced with the sweetness of numbers and
measured verses. A thing (as says Musaeus) most sweet and pleasing to the
mind, teaching us virtue by a singular manner of instruction, and covering
moral senses under fabulous fictions: to the end they might the sooner be
received under that pleasing form, and yet not be vulgarly understood, but by
such only as were worthy to taste the sweetness of their inventions. For so
did the Philosophers of old write their mysteries under similitudes, to the end
they might not be straight comprehended by every dull wit, and lose their
reputation, by being common in the hands and mouth of every simple fellow. This
manner first began among the wiser Aegiptians, and was afterward followed by
Pythagoras and Plato. And Aristotle, though he wrote not by similitudes and
allegories, yet wrapped he up his conceits in so dark a manner of speech and
writing, as hardly were they to be understood by those that heard himself
teach and expound his writings. But to make an end with Poets, he that marketh
those fictions which Homer has written of their Gods, like as those of Virgil,
and other of the heathen Poets, though at the first they seem strange and
absurd; yet he shall find under them natural and divine knowledge hidden to
those that are not wise and learned: which neither time nor occasion would,
that I should here insist upon. Let it suffice that young men are to make great
account of that part of Music which bears with it grave sentences, fit to
compose the mind to good order by virtue of the numbers and sound; which part
proceeds from the Poets, whom Plato himself called the fathers and guides of
those that afterward were called Philosophers. But this that by variety of
tunes, and warbling divisions, confounds the words and sentences, and yields
only a delight to the exterior sense, and no fruit to the mind, I wish them to
neglect and not to esteem.

Indeed (said captain Carleil) I agree with you, that our music is far
different from the ancient music, and that well may it serve to please the
ear: but I yield that it effeminateth the mind, and rather diuerteth it from
the way of bliss and felicity, then helps him thereunto. But are there not
other disciplines, besides these two which you have specified last, wherein
young men are to be instructed to further them to the attaining of that end,
about which all this our discourse is framed?

Yes marry (said I) and so far as youth is capable, it might well be wished
that he had knowledge of them all. But of these our author has first spoken,
supposing that from Grammar, and such other the liberal Arts, as those first
years could reach to understand, he should be straight brought to the
exercise of the body and to Music. Nevertheless it is requisite withal, that,
as his years increase, he should apply himself without loss of time to
learn principally Geometry and Arithmetike, two liberal arts, and of great use
and necessity for all humane actions in this life; because they teach us
measure and numbers, by which, all things man's life has need of are ordered
and ruled. For by them we measure land, we build, we devise Arts, and set them
forth, all things are directed by number and measure, as occasions serve: and
without the help of these two faculties, all would be confused and disordered.
And therefore did the Egyptians set their children carefully to learn them:
for that by them they decided the discords and differences growing among the
dwellers along the banks of the river of Nyle, which with her inundations, and
breaking of their meares and limits did give them often cause to fall at
variance and strife among themselves. For navigations likewise how needful they
are, all men do know, that know the necessity of the use thereof for humane
life, since all that nature produces to all people and nations in the world
particularly, is thereby made common to all, with the help of commutation and
of coin. From these two also comes the exact knowledge, not only of the
earth and of the sea, but of the heavens likewise and of their motions, of the
stars and course of time, of the rising and setting of the plannets: and to
conclude all in few words, of the whole frame and order of nature, and of her
skill, by which she knitteth and unites together in peace and amity things in
themselves most contrary. All done so cunningly by number and measure, as a
whole years discourse would not serve to display the same at large. The Art of
war in like manner, so needful for States and Commonweales, to keep in due
obedience stubborn and rebellious subjects, and to repel the violence of
foreign enemies, if it were not directed by measure and number: what would it
be but a confusion, and a most dangerous and harmfull thing, which would soon
fall from the reputation it has and ever had. For these considerations
therefore and others, is youth, that bends his course to virtue, to exercise
it self in Geometry and Arithmetike, which in ancient times men would acquaint
their children withal, even from their childhood: as Arts that have more
certainty then any other. But they are not to be attained without Logike,
because from it are gotten the instruments and the manner to divide, to
compound, to invent and find out reasons and arguments; and finally to discern
and judge of truth and falsehood. But here I must tell you, that he means not
of that Logike which is used now a days most in schools, standing for the
most part upon brawlings and contentions, and propounding of frivolous
questions, serving to naught else but subtilties, and inextricable knots,
fitter to nourish arguments then to teach or explane the truth. Which abuse
Antisthenes misliking, said, it was meeter to instruct him that contended, then
by contention to overcome him. For Logike being indeed the way and mean to
instruct and teach, and (as before is said) the proper instrument of sciences,
such as learn it only to contend, forsake the right end and scope of that
Art, and are as fruitless to their followers or scholars, as mire is to the
way faring man, which besides the defiling of his garments, does oftentimes
make him also to fall. Therefore Plato in his time cried out upon the same,
judging it not without cause to be a mere folly that hindered the knowledge of
truth, and the learning of those things which the soundest and wisest
Philosophers taught as well touching virtuous and civil actions, as natural
and divine sciences: from which, this vain science puts men astray, so long
as it teaches only to argue and to contend. Whereby it comes to pass, that
whiles they are more intentive to the words and circumstances then to the
matter, the more they strive to seem learned and subtle, the less they show
themselves to understand. Next to Logike is Rhetorike to be placed, or the Art
of Oratory, which Leontinus did prefer before all other, because it makes it
self Lady over men's minds, not by force or violence, but by their own
consents and free will. And as Zeno expressed the difference between these two
Arts, by resembling the former to his hand closed, and the latter to his hand
stretched out. So does Rhetorike use arguments with less force and efficacy
then Logike; yet fetches them from Logike, as from a fountain or well head,
not to seek out the truth exactly, but only to persuade or dissuade with them
that, which he thinks most profitable for the speaker, or the person for whom
he speaks. And of this Art, have all public and private actions appertaining
to civil life need to persuade what is good and profitable, and to dissuade
what is hurtful or unprofitable, to appease tumults and dissentions, to treat
of leagues and peaces, to stir up the minds of men to the defense of their
friends, their parents, their Prince and country, and their Religion: to search
out and inuestigate the truth of all things, to assist the innocent and
oppressed in courts of judgment, to accuse the faulty and offenders: and
finally to give unto virtue her due praise and commendation; and unto vice due
blame and reproach. By these means and studies which we have briefly touched,
rather then perfectly declared, ought a young man to be framed to civil
conversation, and instructed with all carfulness, that he may learn to
bridle his concupiscible desires, his angry and disordinate motions, occasioned
by the senses, and stirred up by those two parts of the mind, which are
rebellious and contrary to reason: whereby he may give himself wholly to honest
and virtuous endeavors. And because store of wealth often times causes young men
(when they possess it) to turn aside from virtue, because riches is the nurse
of wantonness in those years, great regard is to be had, that as the father,
so far as his state requires, is not to suffer his son to want any thing
that is necessary for his calling; so must he take heed that he be not so fed
with money, as feeding thereby his lusts and sensual appetites, he may abandon
the good thoughts of virtue, and receive in steed of them the seeds of unruly
and disorderly affections, which of themselves are by nature in youth much more
mighty then were fit, and need not to be helped by plenty of riches. For to
give a young man money at will, to dispose as he list (unless the father find,
as in some young men it happens, that he has prevented his years with
staidness and discretion) is even as much as to put a sword into the hands of
a furious or mad man.

By this the Sun was so far declined toward our horizon, as all the company
thought it time to depart, that they might before sunset reach to the city.

Wherefore sir Robert Dillon rising up, said: Howsoever the latenes of the day
call us away, yet the desire to hear on further the discourse of so good a
matter, has drawn us on in such sort, as we have scarce perceived how the
time is past. And for your second feast, you have right daintily and
plenteously entertained us. We must now expect the third, which to morrow (God
willing) we will not fail to come and accept: in hope that though we be
co^bersome and troublesome unto you, yet as well in regard of discharging your
promise, as of accomplishing the desire of so many your friends, you will not
think it much to afford us your patience and your breath in delivering to us
the substance of your authors third dialogue of Civil life; by which we may
learn as much as he has written of the Ethike part of Moral Philosophy,
teaching the ready way for every man in his private course of life to attain
his felicity, and that end, of which all this discourse of yours has had his
beginning. And so taking their leave all together they departed.

The third days meeting, and discourse of Civil life.
I Was not yet fully apparelled on the next morrow, when looking out of my
window toward the city, I might perceive the company all in a troop coming
together, not as men walking softly to sport, or desirous to refresh themselves
with the morning deaw, and the sweet pleasant air that then invited all
persons to leave their sluggish nestes; but as men earnestly bent to their
journey, and that had their heads busied about some matter of greater moment
then their recreation. I therefore hasted to make me ready, that they might not
find me in case to be taxed by them of drowsinesse, and was out of the doors
before they came to the house: where saluting them, and they having courteously
returned the good morrow unto me; the Lord Primate asked me whether that
company made me not afraid to see them come in such sort upon me being but a
poor Farmer: for though they came not armed like soldiers to be cessed upon
me, yet their purpose was to coynie upon me, and to eat me out of house and
home. To whom I answered, that as long as I saw Counselors in the company, I
need not fear that any such unlawful exactio^ as coynie should be required at
my hand: for the laws had sufficiently provided for the abolishing thereof.
And though I knew that among the Irishry it was not yet clean taken away, yet
among such as were ameynable to law, and civil, it was not used or exacted. As
for soldiers, besides that their peaceable manner of coming freed me from doubt
of cesse, thanked be God the state of the realm was such as there was no
occasion of burthening the subject with them, such had bin the wisdom, valor
and foresight of our late Lord Deputy, not only in subduing the rebellious
subjects, but also in ouercoming the foreign enemy: whereby the garrison
being reduced to a small number, and they provided for by her Majesty of
victual at reasonable rates, the poor husbandman might now eat the labors of
his own hands in peace and quietness, without being disquieted or harried by
the unruly soldier.

We have (said sir Robert Dillon) great cause indeed to thank God of the
present state of our country, and that the course holden now by our present
Lord Deputy, does promise us a continuance, if not a bettering, of this our
peace and quietness. My Lord Gray has plowed and harrowed the rough ground to
his hand: but you know that he that sows the seed, whereby we hope for
harvest according to the goodness of that which is cast into the earth, and
the seasonablenesse of times, deserves no less praise then he that manureth
the land. God of his goodness grant, that when he also has finished his
work, he may be pleased to send us such another Bailey to ouersee and preserve
their labors, that this poor country may by a wel-ordered and settled form
of government, and by due and equal administration of justice begin to
flourish as other Commonweals do. To which all saying Amen, we directed our
course to walk up the hill, where we had been the day before; and sitting
down upon the little mount awhile to rest the company that had come from
Dublin, we arose again, and walked in the green way, talking still of the
great hope was conceived of the quiet of the country, since the foreign
enemy had so bin vanquished, and the domestical conspiracies discovered and
met withal, and the rebels clean rooted out, till one of the servants came to
call us home to dinner. Where finding the table furnished we sat down, and
having seasoned our fare with pleasant and familiar discourses, as soon as the
board was taken up, they solicited me to fetch my papers that I might proceed
to the finishing of my last discourse of the three by me proposed. But they
being ready at hand in the dining chamber, I reached them, and laid them before
me, and began as follows. Hitherto has bin discoursed of those two ages,
which may for the causes before specified, be well said to be void of election,
and without judgment, because of their want of experience. For which cause
have they had others assigned to them, for guides to lead them to that end,
which of themselves they were not able to attain, that is, their felicity in
this life. And now being to speak of that age which succeeds the heat of
youth; we must a little touch the variety of opinions concerning the same.
Tully says, that a citizen of Rome might be created Consul (which was the
highest ordinary dignity in that city) when he was come to the age of 23.
years. Pliny in his Panegyrike says, that it was decreed lege Pompeia, that
no man might have any magistracy before he were thirty years old. And
Vlpian, lege S. Digest. treating of honors, writes, that under the age of 25.
years no man was capable of any magistracy. Among these three opinions, the
last of the civil lawyer holds the medium, and is therefore the fittest to
be followed: for then is a young man's mind settled, and he is become fit (being
bred and instructed as has bin before declared) to be at his own guiding and
direction: and then does the civil law allow him liberty to make contracts
and bargains for himself, which before he could not do, being in pupillage
and under a tutor. Howbeit our common law cutteth off four years of those,
and enableth a young man at 21. years of age to enter into his land, and to be
(as we term it) out of his wardship. Which time being (I know not for what
respect) assigned by our laws, may well be held not so well considered of, as
that which the civil law appoints, if we mark how many of our young men
overthrow their estates by reason of their want of experience, and of the
disordinate appetites which master them: all which in those other four years
from 21. to 25. do alter to better judgment and discretion. Whereby they are
the better able to order their affairs.

Why, said Captain Dawtry, I have known, and know at this day some young men,
who at 18. years of age are of sounder judgment and more settled behavior,
then many, not of 25. years old only, but of many more, yea then some that are
grey-headed with age.

Of such (said I) there are to be seen oftentimes as you say some, that beyond
all expectation, and as it were forcing the rules of nature, show themselves
stayed in behavior, and discreet in their actions when they are very young, to
the shame of many elder men. Of which company, I may well of mine own
knowledge, and by the consent I think of all men, name one as a rare example
and a wonder of nature, and that is sir Philip Sidney; who being but seventeen
years of age when he began to travel, and coming to Paris, where he was ere
long sworn Gentleman of the chamber to the French King, was so admired among
the grauer sort of Courtiers, that when they could at any time have him in
their company and conversation, they would be very joyful, and no less
delighted with his ready and witty answers, the^ astonished to hear him speak
the French language so well, and aptly, having bin so short a while in the
country. So was he likewise esteemed in all places else where he came in his
travel, as well in Germany as in Italy. And the judgment of her Majesty
employing him, when he was not yet full 22. years old, in Embassage to
congratulate with the Emperor that now is his coming to the Empire, may serve
for a sufficient proof, what excellency of understanding, and what
stayednesse was in him at those years. Whereby may well be said of him the
same that Cicero said of Scipio Africanus, to wit, that virtue was come faster
upon him then years. Which Africanus was chosen Consul being absent in the
wars, by an universal consent of all the tribes of Rome, before he was of age
capable to receive that dignity by the law. But these are rare examples, upon
which rules are not to be grounded: for Aristotle so long ago said, as we do
now in our common proverb, that one swallow makes not summer. Among young men
there are some discreet, sober, quick of wit, and ready of discourse, who
show themselves ripe of judgment before their years might seem to yield it
them: so are there among aged men on the other side some of shallow wit and
little judgment; of whom the wisest men of al ages have esteemed, that to be
old with a young man's mind, is all one as to be young in years. For it is not
gray hairs or furrows in the face, but prudence and wisdom that make men
venerable when they are old: neither can there be any thing more unseemly, then
an old man to live in such manner as if he began but then to live; which caused
Aristotle to say, that it imported little whether a man were young of years or
of behavior. Nevertheless, because daily experience teaches us, that years
commonly bring wisdom, by reason of the variety of affairs that have passed
thorough old men's hands, and which they have seen managed by other men: and
that commonly youth has need of a guide and director, to take care of those
things which himself cannot see or discern. Therefore have laws provided
tutors for the ages before mentioned, until they had attained the years by
them limited, and thenceforth left men to their own direction, unless in some
particular cases accidental, as when they be distraught of their wits, or else
through extreme old age they become children again, as sometimes it falls
out. Knowledge then is the thing that makes a man meet to govern himself;
and the same being attained but by long study and practice, wise men have
therefore concluded, that youth cannot be prudent. For indeed the variety of
humane actions, by which, from many particular accidents, an universal rule
must be gathered; because (as Aristotle says) the knowledge of universalities
springs from singularities, makes knowledge so hard to be gotten, that many
years are required thereunto. And from this reason is it also concluded, that
humane felicity cannot be attained in young years, since by the definition
thereof it is a perfect operation according to virtue in a perfect life: which
perfection of life is not to be allowed but to many years. But the way unto it
is made open by knowledge, and specially by the knowledge of a man's self. To
which good education having prepared him and made him apt, when he is come to
riper judgment by years, he may the better make choice of that way which
shall lead him to the same, as the most perfect end and scope of all his
actions. And this by considering well of his own nature, which having annexed
unto it a spark of divinity, he shall not only as a mere earthly creature, but
also as partaker of a more divine excellency, raise himself, and have perfect
light to see the ready way which leads to felicity. To this knowledge of
himself, so necessary for the purchasing of humane felicity, is Philosophy a
singular help, as being called the science of truth, the mother of sciences,
and the instructor of all things appertaining to happy life: and therefore
should young men apply themselves to the study thereof with all carfulness,
that thereby they may refine their minds and their judgments, and find the
knowledge of his wel-nigh divine nature, so much the more easily. And as this
knowledge is of all other things most properly appertaining to humane wisdom;
so is the neglecting thereof the greatest and most harmefull folly of all
others: for from the said knowledge (as from a fountain or well head) spring
all virtues and goodness; even as from the ignorance thereof slow all vices and
evils that are among men. But herein is one special regard to be had, which is,
that self love carry not away the mind from the direct path to the same: for
which cause Plato affirmed, that men ought earnestly to pray to God, that in
seeking to know themselves, they might not be misled by their self love, or by
the ouer-weening of themselves.

M. Spenser then said: If it be true that you say, by Philosophy we must
learn to know our selves, how happened it, that the Brachmani men of so great
fame, as you know, in India, would admit none to be their scholars in
Philosophy, if they had not first learned to know them selves: as if they had
concluded, that such knowledge came not from Philosophy, but appertained to
some other skill or science.

Their opinion (said I) differs not (as my author thinks) from the opinion
of the wise men of Greece. But that the said Brachmani herein showed the self
same thing that Aristotle teaches, which is, that a man ought to make some
trial of himself before he determinate to follow any discipline, that he may
discern and judge whether there be in him any disposition whereby he may be apt
to learn the same or no. And to the same effect in another place he affirms,
that there must be a custom of well-doing in the^ that will learn to be
virtuous, which may frame in them an aptness to learn, by making them love
what is honest and commendable, and to hate those things that are dishonest and
reproachful. For all men are not apt for all things: neither is it enough that
the teacher be ready to instruct and skillful, but the learner must also be apt
of nature to apprehend and conceive the instructions that shall be given unto
him. And this knowledge of himself, is fit for every man to have before he
undertake the study of Philosophy, to wit, that he enter into himself to
try whether he can well frame himself to endure the discipline of this mother
of sciences, and the patience which is required in all those things besides,
which appertain to honesty and virtuous life. For he that will learn virtue
in the school of Philosophy, must not bring a mind corrupted with false
opinions, vices, wickedness, disordinate appetites, ambitions, greedy desires
of wealth, nor wanton lusts and longings, with such like, which will stop his
ears that he shall not be able to hear the holy voice of Philosophy.
Therefore Epictetus said very well, that they which were willing to study
Philosophy, ought first to consider well whether their vessel be clean and
sweet, lest it should corrupt that which they meant to put into it. Declaring
thereby withal, that learning put into a vicious mind is dangerous. But this
manner of knowing a man's self, is not that which I spoke of before, though it
be that which the said Indian Philosophers meant, and is also very necessary
and profitable. For to know a man's self perfectly, according to the former
manner, is a matter of greater importance then so. Which made Thales, when he
was asked what was the hardest thing for a man to learn, answer, that it was,
to know himself. For this knowledge stays not at the consideration of this
exterior mass of our body, which represents it self unto our eyes, though
even therein also may well be discerned the marvelous and artificial
handiwork of Gods divine Majesty, but penetrateth to the examination of the
true inward man, which is the intellectual soul, to which this body is given
but for an instrument here in this life. And this knowledge is of so great
importance, that man guided by the light of reason, knows that he is, as
Trismegistus says, a divine miracle, and therefore not made (as brute beasts
are) to the belly and to death, but to virtue and to eternal life, that
thereby he may unite himself at the last with his Creator and maker of all
things, when his soul shall be freed from these mortal bands and fetters of
the flesh. Toward whom nevertheless, it is his part of raise himself with
the wings of his thoughts even whiles he is here in this world, soaring above
mortal things, bending his mind to the contemplation of that divine nature,
the most certain root of all goodness, the infallible truth, and the assured
beginning and foundation of all virtues. And therefore said Aristotle, that the
science of the soul was profitable to the knowledge of all truth. Whereunto
may be added that which Plato and his followers have affirmed, to wit, that the
soul knowing her self, knows also her maker; and disposes her self not
only to obey him, but also to become like unto him: whereof in another place
occasion of further speech will be ministered. Moreover, a man by knowing
himself, becomes in this life sage and prudent, and understands that he is
made not to live only, as other creatures are, but also to live well. For they
that have not this knowledge, are like unto brute beasts: and he sees
likewise, that nature, though she produces man not learned, yet she has
framed us to virtue, and apt to knowledge. And that a man is placed as a mean
creature between brute beasts and those divine spirits above in heaven,
having a disposition to decline (if he list) to the nature of those brute
beasts, and also to raise himself to a resemblance of God himself. Which
things he weighing and considering, he reaches not only to the knowledge of
himself, but of other men also. And by the guiding of Philosophy, to direct
himself and others to the well governing of himself, of families, and
Commonwealths, to the making of laws and ordinances for the maintaining of
virtue and beating down of vice; and finally to set men in the way to their
felicity, by giving them to understand, that they only are happy which be
wise and virtuous, and meet to be Lords and rulers over other men, and over
all things else created for the use of mankind. Of all which things when they
shall consider man only to be the end, maruelling at his excellency, they are
driven to acknowledge how much they are bound to the heavenly bounty and
goodness, for creating him so noble a creature, and setting him so direct a
course to everlasting joy and felicity. Hence grows a desire in them of what
is good, beautiful, and honest, and of justice, and to make themselves like
unto their maker: who (as the Platonikes say) is the center, about which all
souls capable of reason turn, even as the line turns about the
mathematical point to make a circle: and so by good and virtuous operations to
purchase in this life praise and commendation, and in the life to come eternal
happiness. These were the men whom the Lacedaemonians accounted divine, and the
Platonikes called the images of God.

Then said Captain Carleil, this your discourse, whereby you have showed the
importance and right meant of knowing our selves, has bin very wise and
fruitful, and fit to declare how we ought to frame our life in this world. But
I make a doubt, whether all this that you have laid before us to be done, be
in our power or no? for it seems strange, that, if it be in our power to give
our selves to a commendable life, there be any (as we see there are many) so
perverse, and of so crooked judgment, as to bend themselves to wickedness and
naughty life, who, when they might be virtuous, would rather choose to be
vicious. And this makes me oftentimes to think that the doing of good or
evil is not in our power; but that either destiny (which as Thales was wont
to say) ruled and mastred all things, or the stars with their influences does
draw us to do what we do.

To this demand of yours, said I, you shall have an answer, such as mine author
makes, who, as a Philosopher naturally discoursing of the actions of the
soul, delivers his mind according to the sentence of all Philosophers. But
because some part of your question touches a point now in controversy
concerning Religion, it is good we have a safe conduct of my Lord Primate, that
his sense as a Philosopher may have free passage without danger of his censure.

That shall you have (said my Lord Primate) with a good will: for since we are
here to discourse of Moral Philosophy, we will for this time put Divinity to
silence, so far forth as your author say not any thing so repugnant to the
truth, as that it may breed any error in the minds of the hearers.

Then (said I) the demand of Captain Carleil has three several points or
articles: the one is, whether virtue and virtuous actions be in our power or
no? Another, that it seems strange, if vice and virtue be in our power, that
any man should be so senseless as to apply himself to vice and forsake virtue.
The last is, whether the good or evil we do, proceed from the influence of the
heavens, or from necessity of destiny, and not from our own free election.
And my author begins with the last, which he affirms to be most contrary
to truth, and to the excellency of man's nature, proceeding thence to the
second, and lastly to the first. Therefore he says, that whosoever holds
man's will and election to be subject to the necessity of destiny, destroys
utterly (according to Aristotle's saying) all that appertains to humane
prudence, either in the care of himself or of his family, or in the ordering
of laws, and the universal government of Kingdoms and Commonweals, as well
in peace as in war: for if it were so, what need have men to do any thing,
but idly to attend what his destiny is to give him or to deny him, or to
provide for any of those things whereof our humane life has need. What
difference were there between the wise man and the fool, the careful and the
rechlesse, the diligent and the negligent? The punishment of malefactors, and
the rewarding of wel-doers, should be unjust and needless. For every thing
being done by the order of fatal disposition, and not by election, no man
could either deserve praise, or incur blame. Besides, nature should in vain
have given us the use of reason, to discourse or to consult, or the ability to
will or choose any thing; for whatsoever were appointed by destiny, should of
necessity come to pass; and if of necessity, then neither prudence,
counsel, nor election can have any place. And the use of free will being so
taken from us, we should be in worse state and condition then brute beasts;
for they guided by instinct of nature, bend themselves to those things
whereunto their nature inclines them: whereas we notwithstanding the use of
reason, should be like bond-slaues, tied to what the necessity of destiny
should bind us unto. This was the cause why Chrysippus was worthily condemned
among all the ancient Philosophers, for that he held destiny to be a
sempiternal and inevitable necessity and order of things which in manner of a
chain was linked orderly in it self, so as one succeeded another, and were
fitly conjoined together. By which description of destiny appears, that he
meant to tie all things to necessity. For albeit he affirmed withal, that our
mind had some working in the matter, yet did he put necessity to be so
necessary, that there could no way be found, whereby our mind might come to
have any part. For to say that our mind or will concurred, by willing or not
willing whatsoever destiny drew us unto, was naught else but a taking away of
free choice from our understanding or will, since our mind like a bond-slaue
was constrained to will, or not to will, as destiny did inuit it, or rather
force it. And like to this were the opinions of Demetrius, of Parmenides, and
of Heraclitus, who subjected all things to necessity, and deserved no less to
be condemned then Chrysippus Prince of the Stoikes. Among which, some there
were, who seeing many things to happen by chance or fortune; whereby it
appeared that it could not be true, that things came by necessity, lest they
should deny a thing so manifest to sense, they supposed the beginnings and the
endings of things to be of necessity, but the means and circumstances they
yielded to be subject to the changes and alterations of fortune. And of this
opinion was Virgil (as some think) in the conducting of Aeneas into Italy.
For it should seem that he departed his country to come into Italy by fatal
disposition, that he might get Lauinia for his wife: but before he could arrive
there, and win her, he was mightily tossed and turmoyled by fortune; which
nevertheless could never cross him so much, but that in the end he obtained
his purpose, which by destiny was appointed for him. But howsoever Virgil
thought in that point, which here need not to be disputed, sure I am, that he
in the greatest part of his excellent Poem, is rather a Platonike then a
Stoike. Howbeit some Platonikes (as I think) were not far different in
opinion from the Stoikes: for they say, that fortune with all her force was not
able to resist fatal destiny. Though Plotinus thought otherwise, and indeed
much better, who answering them that would needs have the influence of stars
to induce necessity, proved their reasons to be vain only by an ordinary
thing in daily experience: which is, that sundry persons borne under one self
same constellation, are seen nevertheless to have diverse ends and diverse
successes, which they could not have, if those influences did work their
effects of necessity. And as for Epicures opinion, which was, that the falling
of his motes or Atomi should breed necessity in our actions; he rather laughed
at, then confuted. Yea he was further of opinion, that not only humane
prudence, and our free election, was able to resist the influences of the
stars, but that also our complexio^, our conversation and change of place
might do the like: meaning that the good admonitions, and faithful advice and
counsel of friends, is sufficient to overcome destiny, and to free our minds
from the necessity of fatal disposition. Wherefore though it be granted that
there is a destiny, or that the stars and heavens, or the order of causes,
have power over us to incline or dispose us more to one thing then to another;
yet is it not to be allowed that they shall force us to follow the same
inclination or disposition. For though the heavens be the universal principle
or beginning of all things, and by that universality (as I may call it) the
beginning of us also according to natural Philosophy; yet is it not the only
cause of our being and of our nature: for to the making man, a man must
concur, and so restrain this universal cause to a more special. And as the
heaven, or the order of higher causes, cannot engender man without a man
(speaking according to nature): so can they do nothing to bind the free
election of man without his consent, who must voluntarily yield himself to
accomplish that whereunto the heaven or the order of causes does bend and
incline him. And if we have power to master our complexion, so, as being
naturally inclined to lust, we may by heed and diligence become continent; and
being covetous, become liberal (though Aristotle say, that couetise is as
incurable a disease of the mind, as the Dropsy or Ptisike is to the body):
what a folly is it to believe that we cannot resist the inclinations of the
stars, which are causes without us, and not the only causes of our being; but
have need of us, if they will bring forth their effects in us? The beginning of
all our operation is undoubtedly in our selves: and all those things that have
the beginning of their working in themselves, do work freely and voluntarily.
And consequently we may by our free choice and voluntarily give our selves to
good or to evil, and master the inclination of the heavens, the stars, or
destiny, which troubles so much the brains of some, that in despite of
nature they will needs make themselves bond being free: whom Ptolomie does
fitly reprehend, by saying, that the wise man ouer-ruleth the stars. For well
may the heavens or the stars, being corporal substances, have some power over
our bodies, but over our minds which are divine, simple, and spiritual
substances, can they have none: for between the heavens and our minds is no
such correspondence, that they may against our wills do ought at all in our
minds which are wholly free from their influences, if any they have. And
therefore do the best of the Platonikes say very well, that man must oppose
himself against his destiny, fighting to overcome the same with golden arms
and weapons, to wit, virtues, which is (as Plato says) the gold of the mind.
For he that behaueth himself well, that is to say, rules well his mind or
soul, which is the true man indeed, as we have formerly showed, shall never be
abandoned to destiny or fortune: against which two powers man's counsel and
wisdom resists in such sort, if he set himself resolutely thereunto, as it
may well appear that he is Lord and master over his own actions. Neither
without cause did Tully say, that fatal destiny was but a name devised by old
wives, who not knowing the causes of things, as soon as any thing fell out
contrary to their expectation, straight imputed it to destiny; joining
thereunto such a necessity, as it must needs (forsooth) force man's counsel
and prudence. A thing most false, as has bin declared. Is it not said in the
Scripture, that God created man, and left him in the power of his own
counsel? How then does Menander say, that men did many evils compelled by
necessity? I mean not by necessity, as commonly we do, want or poverty, but
by necessity of destiny. We may then conclude, that our will and election is
free, and that it is in our power to follow vice or virtue. Nevertheless true
it is that man may abuse this his liberty, and of a free man make himself
bond if he will: and therefore do the Platonike say, that a good and a
wel-minded man does all his actions freely; but that if he give himself to do
evil, forsaking the light of reason, he becomes a brute beast, and loses
the divine gift of his liberty: for thenceforth does he work no more freely of
himself, but yields his mind, which ought to be the Lord of our liberty,
slave to the two basest parts of the soul, and then reigns no more the
reasonable soul, but the brutish, which makes him abandon the care of the
mind, and only to attend the pleasures of the body, as brute beasts do.

Hitherto (said my Lord Primate) I find nothing to be misliked in your
discourse, which (as a Philosopher) is declared according to moral reason.
But, as a Christian, what says your author to Gods predestination? Is it not
necessary, that whatsoever God has determined of us from the beginning in his
foreknowledge (being the most certain and true knower of all things) shall
come to pass?

This is (said I) no small question to be fully answered, and being also not
very pertinent to the matter we have in hand (being merely moral) my author
medleth not with the particular points of the same: only hereof he says, that
Euripides had little reason to say, that God had care of greater things, but
that he left the care and guiding of the lesser to fortune. For we are bound by
holy writ to believe (and some of the ancient Philosophers have likewise so
thought) that there moves not a leaf upon a tree, nor falls a hair from
our heads, but by the will of God. Whereupon the holy Prophet David said, that
God dwells on high, and beholds the things that are humble in heaven and in
earth. And the Peripatetikes seemed to consent thereunto, when they said, that
the heavenly providence foreseeing that the particulars were not apt to
preserve themselves eternally, had therefore ordained that they should be
continued in their universalities, which are the several kinds or species,
containing under them the particulars, which of themselves are mortal and
perishable, but are made perpetual in them through generation. He says also,
that predestination is an ordinance or disposition of things in the mind of God
from the beginning, of what shall be done by us in this life through grace. But
he thinks not that it tieth our free will, but that they go both together; that
our well doing is acceptable and pleasing to God, and our evil deeds
displeasing and offensive to his divine Majesty: and that for the good we
shall receive reward, and punishment for the evil. The further discussing
whereof appertaining rather to Divines then Moral Philosophers, he thinks
fit to refer unto them, and to believe that this is one of those secrets
which God has laid up in the treasury of his mind, whereunto no mortal eye
or understanding can reach or penetrate, humbling our selves to his holy will,
without searching into that which we cannot approach unto. And if Socrates in
that time of darkness and superstition of the heathen could exhort men to
assure themselves, that God having created them, would have no less care of
them, then a good and just Prince would have of his subjects: how much more are
we to believe that our heavenly Lord and God Almighty, who has sent his only
begotten Son to redeem us from the bondage of Satan, does dispose and
ordain of us as is best for us, and for the honor of his divine Majesty. For
as they are to be commended that refer themselves humbly to whatsoever he
has determined of them, doing their best endeavors to purchase his grace and
favor: so are they to be misdoubted, who ouer-curiously will needs take upon
them the judgment of Gods predestination or prescience. And that sentence
cannot but be very good, which says, that he that made thee without thee,
will not save thee without thee. For were a man certain to be damned, yet
ought he not to do otherwise then well, because he is borne to virtue and not
to vice: which the very heathen by the only light of reason could well
perceive. Besides, it is thought, that al they, that are signed with the
character of Christ in baptism, may steadfastly believe that they are
predestined and chosen to salvation: not that our predestination gives us a
necessity of well doing, but because we having the grace of God to assist us,
dispose our selves by the same grace to keep his commandments for our
salvation, and for the honor and glory of his majesty: whereas by doing
otherwise it is our own wickedness that excludes us from that bliss. And
further mine author says not.

In good sooth (said sir Robert Dillon) this seems to me to be well and
Christian like spoken. For he that acknowledges not so great a gift from God,
being a special mark or token by which we are distinguished from brute
beasts, who wanting the use of reason, can have no free election, is not only
unthankful, but does foolishly thrust himself into the number of unreasonable
creatures, while he will needs deprive himself of that he has specially
different from them. Neither does the reverent regard to Gods providence
impeach our free will: which providence the Platonikes partly understanding,
affirmed (as I have heard) that it did not alter or change the nature of
things, but guided and directed destiny: imposing no necessity of doing good
or evil upon us. And if any it did impose, it should be only to good, and
never to evil. For what is divine must needs work divinely, and divine
working can produce none but good effects. Wherefore they concluded that our
election was not constrained by Gods providence. This they confirmed by common
experience. For (said they) if providence tie things to necessity, then chance
or fortune can have no place in the actions of men. But we see daily many
things maturely debated, which should by the natural and ordinary course of
causes have a determinate and certain end, yet miss their effect whereunto
they are ordained, and another produced which was never intended, which is the
proper work of fortune. I have also heard some Divines say, that it should
seem strange, if wise and prudent men in this world by their providence and
foresight, seek evermore to bring perfection to those things which are under
their government, God contrariwise (who is the fountain of all wisdom and
prudence, and the true and absolute preserver and conseruer of all things by
him produced) should not give perfections and continuance through his
providence to so singular a gift given unto man above all other creatures of
the earth, but should suffer it to perish, to bind us to servitude. And that if
his providence should tie our free will to necessity, he should do that which
is contrary to his own nature: for that thereby he should take from us the
reward of virtue, since doing well by necessity, we could deserve neither
praise nor recompense; he should also take from us all counsel and
deliberation, which is needless and superfluous in all things, that of
necessity must come to pass: and lastly justice it self, whereby malefactors
are punished, if constrained by necessity they did wickedly, for then were
their punishment unjust: which made S. Augustine say, that God would never
damn a sinner, unless he found that he had sinned voluntarily. We may
therefore (as I think) conclude, that being created by God, and endowed with so
excellent a gift, as free choice and election, which, besides the place of
Scripture above mentioned, is confirmed by another, where it is said, that God
set before man life and death, good and evil, that he might take whether he
list to choose; he by his divine foresight does rather give perfection
thereunto, then take it from us. Yet the particular consideration and debating
of this matter being fitter for Divines then for us, let us leave the scanning
of it to them, and be content like men seeking by the rules of Moral
Philosophy to find the ready way to humane felicity in this life, to refer
our selves in that point to the merciful goodness of Almighty God. And
therefore (I pray you) proceed to the rest of your discourse, and show us the
cause why so many give themselves rather to vice then to virtue, when they may
do otherwise, which your author said he would declare in the second place.

So shall I (quoth I) and for the resolving of the same, you shall understand
that Plato was of opinion, that no man willingly was wicked, because the habit
of vice was not voluntarily received by any man. And for confirmation of this
his opinion, this reason he made: as virtue (said he) is the health of the
mind, so is vice the infirmity of the same: and as the body receives
willingly his health, and sickness against his will; even so the mind
receives willingly virtue as his health, and vice unwillingly; knowing that
thereby it becomes sick and infected. But Plotinus assigned another reason,
not needful here to be rehearsed. Now Aristotle was of another mind, for he
affirmed that man had free will by his own choice and election.

How can man voluntarily embrace vice (said M. Dormer) which of all things is
the worst, since the same author says, that al men covet what is good, and
since without virtue there can be no good.

These two sayings (said I) are not contradictory: for the most wicked man
alive desires what is good: and if vice should show it self in his own
proper form, he is so ugly and so horrible to behold, that every man would
fly from him: therefore knowing how deservedly he should be hated and
abhorred, if he were seen like himself, he presents himself under the shape
of goodness, and hiding all his il favored face, deceives the sensitive
appetite; which being intised by the false image of goodness, is so seduced, and
through the corruption of his mind and judgment, by the ill habit, contracted
from his child hood, he embraces that which (if his judgment were sound) he
would never do. Wherefore Plato his meaning was (as it may be thought) that no
man was willingly vicious, since, evil covering it self under the cloak of
goodness, he was induced to do evil, thinking to do good: and so the opinions
of both Philosophers concur. But Pythagoras by the report of Aristotle, lib.
8. Ethicor. assigns another cause, to wit, that ill doing is an infinite
thing, and that by a thousand ways men are led to wickedness and vicious
actions, all easy to be taken: but to virtue there is but one only way, and
the same so environed and crossed with the bypaths that guide men to vice, as
it must needs be hard to keep it without entering into some of the by-ways
leading to vice and error. For the eye that is not made clear sighted by
Philosophy, is not able to discern that way from the rest.

It should seem (said M. Dormer) by this, that ignorance is the cause of well
doing, and not man's choice or election: for where ignorance is, it may be said
there is no election.

Not so (said I) if Aristotle be to be believed, who says that ignorance so
far forth as it concerns men's actions, is of two sorts: the one is, when a
man does ill, not through ignorance, but ignorantly: the other is, when he does
it of mere ignorance, because he neither knows nor might know that such an
action was evil. In the first case, are those that are hasty and cholerike,
and drunkards: for though they knew before, that hastiness and drunkenness be
evil, yet when the heat of choler, or the disordinate appetite of wine
blinds them, they err ignorantly, but not of ignorance. In the latter are
they that fall through mere ignorance, not knowing that what they do is evil.
As if a Prince make a restraint or prohibition, that no man upon pain of death
shall enter into his Forest to hunt there, and a stranger not knowing this
restraint, comes thither with his hounds to hunt, as in former time happily he
had done. This stranger breaks the will of the Prince, and commits a
fault, but altogether through ignorance, because he had no knowledge of the
prohibition. But if a hasty man knowing of the restraint, pursuing his enemy
in his rage, or a drunken man, when wine has made him not to discern his way,
entering into that forest, have his dog following him, and the dog kill a
Dear; his fault though it be ignorantly committed should not be through
ignorance. And as the stranger, being sorry for his offense, and thereby
showing that he meant not to break the Princes commandment, were worthy
pardon: even so the other were justly to be punished, since knowing the
penalty threatened to the offender, he would not bridle his fury, or abstain
from wine, but by following his passion or unruly appetite, incur the danger
of the same. And as the one may well be judged to have made a fault against his
will; so may the other be deemed to have wilfully broken the commandment. In
which latter case of ignorance are all they that be vicious or wicked, who
through the ill habit which they have made in vice, do any act contrary to law
and the civil society of men, for which they deserve to be adjudged wilfully
evil, and by their own free choice and election. For all men ought to know
those things that generally are to be known, touching honest and civil
conversation; and if they do not know them when they do il, it is because they
choose not to know that which is necessary for them to know. In which respect it
is determined, that who so for want of knowing this generality will do amiss,
should be esteemed wicked by his own free will and election. Seneca said very
fitly, that such men did in the mids of the clear light make darkness to
themselves. And this is that ignorance which Plato calls the defiling of the
soul. Let us suppose that there may be one that knows not adultery to be sin
or vice, and that in ignorance commits adultery; shall we say he deserves to
be excused? God forbid: for he is cause of his own ignorance, since it is in
his power and in the power of all reasonable men to know what is fit and honest
for virtuous life; and that the same is made known, as well by Gods law, as by
the ordinances and customs of man, to all those that will not wittingly
hood-winke themselves. Wherefore it is a wilful sin committed by free
election, and worthy punishment as a voluntary offense. And S. Augustine said
not without cause, that all ignorance was not worthy pardon, but only that of
such men as had no means to attain knowledge or learning: but they that have
teachers to instruct them, and for want of study and diligence abide in their
ignorance, and so do evil, are not only unworthy excuse, but deserve also
sharp punishment. So in another place he says, that no man is punished for
that which naturally he knows not: as the child for that he cannot speak, or
because he cannot read. But when he will not set his mind to learn as he
ought, being of years, and urged thereunto, he deserves to be chastised,
because it is in every man's power to be able to learn all that is necessary
for him to know how to live well, and what things are to be embraced as good,
and what to be eschewed as evil: and he that will not learn them, remains
wilfully in his ignorance.

Yea but if I should chance (said Captain Dawtrey) to be abroad with my bow
and arrows, and perceiving somewhat to stir in a bush, should shoot
thereat, supposing it to be a Dear or some other game, and should so kill my
wife that were hidden there, as Cephalus did, should not my ignorance in that
case excuse me?

This case (said I) appertains to the second part of ignorance, already
spoken of, which is about the circumstances of the particular things, the
ignorance whereof deserves excuse, and so should this. But this ignorance
should become wilful wickedness, if when you saw you had slain your wife,
intending to kill a Dear, you were not heartily sorry therefore, but rather
glad to be so rid of her: and so far should you then be from excuse, that you
should deserve to be severely punished for the fact. Much like to the case of
Cephalus was that of Adrastus, but more miserable, in slaying of Atys the son
of Croesus King of Lidia. For Croesus having given in charge to Adrastus his
son, and they being one day gone to hunt a great wild Bore that did great
harm in the country, accompanied with many young gentlemen of Lidia, whiles
the Bore was rushing forth, Adrastus threw a dart at him, and Atys coming by
chance in the way, the dart hit him and slew him. Now though Atys were the only
son of Croesus, and were slain by the hand of him that had him in charge;
yet finding that it was done by mere mischance and through ignorance, and
knowing how grievously Adrastus sorrowed for the same, he not only freed him
of any punishment therefore, but frankly pardoned. him. And the repentance of
the fact might have sufficed the doer; but he overcome with extreme grief slew
himself at the funeral of the dead young Prince, being unable to bear with a
stout courage the anguish and vexation of mind that his mishappe did breed
him. But this showed Adrastus to be rather faint-hearted and weak of mind,
then otherwise: for the purchasing of death to avoid grief or any other
annoyance of the mind, is not the part of a valorous and courageous man, as the
best among the ancient Philosophers have always held. And because we know by
the rule of Christ, that it is no matter disputable, it needs not that
thereof any further words be made.

You say well (said my Lord Primate) and I know that Aristotle is of mind,
that it is a vile act for a man to kill himself to avoid ignominy or
afflictions. But to omit the judgment of the ancient Romans, who held it the
part of a stout heart, for a man to kill himself rather then to suffer shame
or servitude, as we read that Cato did, and Cassius and Brutus: yet it seems
that Plato, whom your author determined to follow as well as Aristotle, makes
Socrates (in his dialogue entitled Phoedon) to say, that a Philosopher ought
not to kill himself, unless God lay a necessity of doing it upon him. Out of
which words it may well be gathered, he thought that not only the common sort,
but even Philosophers themselves, when necessity constrains them, might
rid themselves of their life.

That place (said I) is advisedly to be examined: for Socrates there meant not
that any man willingly should lay violent hands upon himself; but if there be
no remedy but that die he must, and that diverse kinds of deaths are proposed
unto him, he may choose that kind which is less noisome to him or less
grievous: as Socrates chose to die with the juice of hemlocks, and Seneca by
the opening of his veins.

You may happily conster that meaning out of that place (said my Lord Primate):
but what will you say to that which is in his books of the Commonweal, where
he writes, that a man sick of any grievous or long infirmity, when he shall
see himself out of hope to procure remedy, he should then make an end of his
life.

To that place I say (quoth I) that it is to be considered how Plato sought to
frame his Commonwealth in such sort as it should be rather divine then humane:
and therefore as the citizens of the heavenly Commonwealth live in continual
happiness and contentment, without feeling any annoyance or molestation at
all: even so was his purpose, that the citizens of his Commonwealth should
have no grieuance, pain or molestation among them: but in an ordinary humane
Commonwealth he would not have set down any such precept.

You have salued that sore reasonable well also (said my Lord Primate) though
there might be objections made against your answer. But how will another place
of his be defended, which is in his book of Laws, where he says, that
whosoever has committed any offense in the highest degree, and finds, that
he has not power to abstain from the like eftsoons, ought to rid himself
out of the world.

The answer to that (said I) is easy: for Plato his meaning therein is, that
whosoever is wickedly given, and of so evil example as there is no hope of his
amendment, should rather kill himself, then by living inuit so many others to
the like course of life: not unlike to the opinion already recited, that it is
better one die for a people, then that his life should be the occasion of the
death of many. For Plato aimed evermore at the purging of all cities from such
caterpillars; which appears manifestly by the pain he would have inflicted
upon parricides. But that it was abomination to him for a man to kill
himself, he plainly shows in his ninth book of Laws, by the sentence he
sets down against such men. Nevertheless this indeed may be found in
Plato, that vice was so odious unto him, that he would rather have a man to
die, then to undertake any vile and vicious action, which might breed him
perpetual infamy. And Aristotle in this point agrees with his master (though
in many he delight to carpe him) that a man ought to choose rather to die then
commit any abominable or grievous fact, or do that which might be for ever
reprochful unto him. And Plato his express sense of this matter, is to be
understood in the same dialogue which you first spoke of, where Socrates is
brought to say, that the Lord and Ruler of this whole world having sent us into
this life, we are not to desire to leave it without his consent: and who so
does the contrary, offends nature, offends God. And this is the mystery of
that precept of Philolaus, which forbids a man to cleave wood in the high
way: meaning that a man should not sever or divide the soul from the body,
whiles he was in his way on this earthly pilgrimage; but should be content,
that as God and nature had united and tied the soul to the body, so by them
it might be unloosed again: therefore the Peripatetikes also thought, that
they which die a violent death, cannot be thought to have ended their days
according to the course of time and nature. And with this my Lord Primate
rested satisfied. I turned me to Captain Carleil, and said: Now (sir)
concerning your doubts proposed, you may have perceived, that whatsoever
destiny be, neither it, nor the divine providence of Almighty God imposes
any necessity upon us: that virtue and vice are in our power, virtue growing
in us by the right use of our free choice, and vice by the abuse of the same,
when through corruption of the judgment to do that is in appearance good, it
chooses the evil: and lastly what kind of ignorance is excusable, and which
not.

Concerning my demands (said Captain Carleil) I am resolved. But since I see
our doings proceed from election, I would gladly know of you what manner of
thing it is; for I cannot perceive whether it be a desire, or an anger, or an
opinion, or what I should call it.

None of all these (said I) but rather a voluntary deliberation, following a
mature and advised counsel: which counsel by Plato was termed a divine thing.
For election is not made in a moment; but when a thing is proposed either to be
accepted or refused, there must first be a counsel taken, respecting both the
end of the action, and the means by which the same is to be compassed: so as
there is required a time of consultation: and therefore it is said, that have
is enemy to counsel, and that oftentimes repentance follows them that
resolve without discussing or debating of matters. Next unto counsel comes
judgment, and after judgment follows election, and from election issues
the action or the effects that are resolved upon, and accepted as the best. And
because fortune (though she be a cause rather by accident then of her self)
has no small part in most of our actions, the wisest men have said, that
counsel is the eye of the mind, by help whereof, men of prudence see how to
defend themselves from the blind strokes of fortune, and eschuing that which
may hurt them, take hold of that which is profitable.

Why then (said my Lord Primate) it should seem that our counsel were wholly in
our power. But Xenophon is of a contrary opinion: for he says, that good
counsel comes from the Gods immortal, and that their counsels prosper who
have them to be their friends, and theirs not, who have them to be their
enemies.

To have God favorable unto us (said I) in all our doings, is not only
desirable, but that it may please him to grant his grace so to be, ought all
men to crave by humble prayer at his hands. But that God is the author of our
counsels otherwise then as an universal cause, is to be doubted: not that the
singular gift of the mind, and the power thereof to deliberate and consult,
comes not from him; for the not acknowledging thereof, were not only a
gross ignorance, but also an express impiety, and an inexcusable
ingratitude. Howbeit since it has pleased him to bestow upon us so great and
liberal a gift as the mind, we may well believe that he will not take from us
the free use thereof. For to say that God were the imediate cause of our
counsel, were as much as to take from us the use of reason, without which we
are not any more men, as of late was said. And therefore besides Aristotle's
authority, grounded in that point upon good reason, we find in the Scripture,
that after God had made man, and given him (by breathing upon him) the spirit
of life, which is the soul of understanding, he left him in the hand of his
own counsel. Whereby it appears, that counsel comes from our selves, and
that election is the office of prudence, which is called the soul of the mind,
and the Platonikes call the knowledge of good and evil: whereunto it seemed
that Tullie agreed, when he said, that prudence was the science of things
desirable, or to be eschued: which sentence S. Augustine reports. And Fabius
Maximus said, that the Gods through prudence and our virtues, did grant us
prosperous successes in our affairs: as if he should have said, that though
God (as an universal cause) concurred to accomplish our deliberations; yet we
were to endeavor our selves, and to sharpen our wits to consult on the best
means to compass our good purposes, if we desire to have his favor, and not
to sit idle, expecting what will fall out. And to end the discourse hereof, the
ancient Philosophers of the best sort held, that the Gods seeing us employ our
virtues and faculties of the mind (which has a resembla^ce unto them) well and
wisely, become our friends, and the rather grant us their help and favor.
According to which opinion Euripides said, that the Gods did help them that
were wise. But because we shall have occasion to speak more largely hereafter
of Prudence, we will now return to that which we left long since to speak
of, by the interposing of the doubts moved: and that is the knowledge of our
selves, as the thing that must guide us to that best and most perfect end; the
inquiry whereof is the occasion of all this discourse. And because we are not of
a simple nature, but compounded of several qualities, and (as we may say)
lives, according to that which in our first days discourse was declared: it is
also necessary that these powers and faculties of the soul which are in us,
and by which we participate of the nature of all things living, should have
their ends and several goods, as I may term them: and that those ends should
orderly answer each to his several power or faculty of the soul, though
Aristotle think otherwise. These ends or goods are first profit, which
respects the vegetative power: next, delight or pleasure, peculiar to the
sensitive power: and lastly honesty, proper to the reasonable part or faculty
of the soul. Wherefore Zeno may well be thought to have bin astray, when he
assigned one only end or good to nature, and the same to be honesty. For
albeit I cannot, nor mean to deny, but that honesty is not only a good, but
also the greatest good among all those that concur to our felicity; and
without which, there can be no virtue: yet to say it is the only good, I
cannot be persuaded. For perusing every thing that has life, common sense it
self shows us, that each kind of life has his peculiar and several end and
good; and that honesty is the only proper good of creatures capable of reason,
and not of other sensible creatures, or of plants and vegetables. And because
it is a greater good, and contains both the other, therefore is it more to be
prised and valued then they. And man being the most perfect creature of the
earth, is by nature framed to have a desire and an instinct unto them all, and
to seek to purchase them all three for the perfection of his felicity in this
life. Now forasmuch as all these three powers are in us, to the end we may
enjoy the benefit that redoundeth from them, we cannot sever them one from
another,if we mean to be happy in this life: neither yet ought we so to apply
our selves to any one, or two of the^ less proper unto us, that therefore we
forsake or neglect that other which is of most worth and proper to our nature;
and that is honesty, which never can be severed from virtue. For that is it
that gives to us dignity and excellency, not suffering us to do any thing
unseemly, but still directing us in all our actions, which proceed from reason.
For he that stays himself only upon profit, or upon pleasure, or upon them
both, shows plainly that he knows not himself: and therefore suffers
those things that are not proper to his nature, to master and overrule him.
And not knowing himself, he cannot use himself, nor take hold of that which
is his proper good and end. Thus following (through the not knowing of
himself) that which is good to other natures, he loses his own good, and
falls into evil, by the desire of profit, or disordinate appetite to
pleasure. The consideration hereof perhaps caused some of the ancient Poets to
feign, that men were turned into brute beasts, and into trees; to signify
under that fictio^, that some proposing to themselves only profit, some only
delight, without regard to reason and their own proper good, had lost the
excellent shape or form of men, and were transformed into beasts or trees,
having made the most excellent part of man, which is the mind and reasonable
soul, subject to the basest and sensual parts and pleasures of the body. And
this ignorance, concerning the knowledge of a man's self, is the cause that he
cannot tell how to use himself. For these unreasonable affections do so darken
the light of reason, that he is as a blind man, and gives himself over to be
guided, as one that has lost the right way, to as blind a guide as himself,
and so wandreth astray which way soever his bad guide does lead him. For he
has lost the knowledge of truth, which Plato says, is the best guide of men
to all goodness, and is comprehended by the mind only, which (according to
the saying of Epicarmus) does only see and hear, all the rest of the parts of
man being blind and deaf. They then which follow profit only, live the basest
life of all, and may well be resembled to flies and gnats, the most imperfect
among living creatures, or like to the shel-fishes that cleave to the rocks,
as these men do to their pelf; and so having proposed to themselves the basest
end of all others, they may worthily be esteemed the basest sort of men.

Nay, in good faith sir (said Captain Dawtry) not so, for I see them only
honored and esteemed that are rich; and I have known, and yet know some of
very base and abject condition, who being become rich, are cherished and
welcome in the best companies, and accepted among honorable personages:
therefore (me thinks) he spoke advisedly that said, Honor and friends by
riches are acquired,
But who is poor shall each where be despised.


And I remember I have read, that sometime there was a citizen in Rome, who was
commonly held for a fool, and therefore in all companies his words were little
regarded, the rather because he was also poor; but after that by the death of
a rich man to whom he was heir, he possessed wealth, he grew to be had in
great estimation, even in the Senate, and his opinion evermore specially
required in matters of greatest moment.

Yea marry (said M. Dormer) and Aristotle also affirms, that the end of the
father of a families care is, the purchasing of riches; which being so, they
are not so slightly to be regarded, as your author says.

Did I not tell you (said I) that truth being gone, the true light and
knowledge of things is taken out of the world; for it is she only that gives
us light to know, what and of what price all things are. And even as if the
Sun were taken away from the earth, there would remain naught but darkness
and blindness among men: so truth being taken away, man is blinded from
discerning any thing aright. This I say, because rich men only for their
wealth are esteemed worthy honor and dignity by such chiefly as want the light
of truth, which is the vulgar sort, whose judgment is so corrupt and crooked,
that they cannot discern what true honor and dignity is. For they being weak
minded and imperfect, admire shows and shadows, being dazeled with the bright
glistring of gold and precious stones, and cannot distinguish between things
necessary and superfluous. Which ignorance of theirs, Byas, one of the seven
sages of Greece, considering answered one of those base minded fellows, who
would needs persuade him, that they were happy that could compass great
wealth: My friend (quoth he) much more happy are they that do not desire the
same. The judgment of the wiser sort, has ever bin far different from this
vulgar opinion. For they understand, that riches is none of those goods which
alone make men happy; and that they do but go and come, as tides flow and
ebb, even at the pleasure of fortune, who gives and takes them as she list.
And therefore they are no otherwise to be esteemed, then as they are necessary
for the sustaining of life, nature being content with little, and the desire of
having being infinite; never content with what it has, but ever coveting what
it has not. Therefore right wise men have held that Alexander the Great was in
truth poorer and needier then he that said Let others hardly seek to hoord up
wealth
For me I force not, though that poverty
Chase from me idleness, and breed me health, etc.


For that man's desires had their determinate stint, whereas Alexanders increased
still, the more he enlarged his dominions, being grieved that he had not
conquered one world, because he had heard say, that Democritus was of opinion
there were many. And although Epicurus in many things has deserved blame,
because he placed the highest good of man in pleasures proceeding from the
senses; yet deserved he praise in that he said, that they to whom a little
seems not enough, a great deal will seem but a little. Much to the like effect
Curious, having conquered the Samnites, and for recompense of his great service
the Romans purposing to give him a far larger portion of the conquered land,
then to the rest of the soldiers: he who had taught his desires to be
brideled, and could cut short the superfluity of his appetites, would in no
wise take any more then a like share or portion, as was allotted to the rest of
the soldiers, that were waxen old in the wars, for their living and
maintenance; saying, that he that could not content himself to live with that
which sufficed others, could not be a good citizen. This worthy man made it
appear, that he indeed is to be accounted rich who desires not to have much:
and that in respect of what is needful for man's life, every man may be rich;
but in regard of our desires, every man is poor, and cannot be rich, because
they be infinite. Socrates (according to the saying of Byas before rehearsed)
said that it was far better not to desire any thing, then to compass what a man
desires. For it was not unknown to that grave wise man, that from immoderate
desires comes greediness of the mind, whereby it is made unreasonable, and
disposed to think a great deal to be but a little; whereas not to desire,
makes a little to seem much. The way therefore to quiet the mind, is not to
increase wealth, but to pluck from a man's desires, which otherwise will still
increase as riches increases: for it is the honest and necessary use of riches
that causes them to be had in consideration among wise men, who esteeming them
accordingly, are easily contented with a little; and where others admire those
that have their coffers full of gold and pelf, they little regard them, but
despising superfluities, turn their minds to better thoughts, meet to make
them purchase that felicity which none of them can have, who amid great
abundance of wealth and worldly riches, are void of virtue. For this respect
did Crates the Philosopher (considering how the great care of gathering them
withdrew the mind, which of it own nature is excelse and high, from the
knowledge of sublime matters, sinking it into the depth of base and vile
cogitations) gave over his patrimony, which was in value near fifteen hundred
pounds, and betook himself to those studies which he thought were aptest to
set him the right course of getting (in steed of exterior riches) the true gold
of the mind, which is virtue. And in truth happy is that man that can get
store of that gold, by means whereof he may compass his felicity, which the
other can never purchase, and are not to be coueted but for humane necessity,
as being of no value, or little among wise men in respect of happiness. For to
say truly, what happiness can there be in any thing that alike disquieteth as
well them that have it, as them that have it not. Since he that wants it, by
desiring it, keeps his mind in continual anguish and trouble; and he that
has it, is evermore tormented with fear of loss of it: and if he happen to
loose it indeed, is miserably crucified for the loss thereof. Which thing made
Democritus to say, that man was in his estimation so far from being made
happy by his riches, as he could not in truth account them to be to him any
good at all. So Solon being with Croesus King of Persia who accounted himself
of all men in the world the most happy, because of his excessive treasure;
when the King had caused his treasury to be be showed unto him, seemed to make
slight estimation of the same: whereupon the King, as one dazeled with the
glittering show of his gold, held him but for a fool. But foolish indeed was
he himself, and not Solo^, who knew very well, that such things came to him by
his great power and soueraignetie, not by his virtue, and therefore could they
not make him happy. Nevertheless Croesus yet desirous to understand what
Solons opinion was touching happiness, asked him if he ever knew any man more
happy then he: who answered him, yes; and among many, one named Pellus a
citizen of Athens, who being a virtuous man, and having begotten children like
himself, was dead in the field, fighting valiantly against the enemy in
defense of his country, leaving after him an immortal fame of his valor. So
much more did this wise man esteem virtue then riches, that he thought so
mighty a Monark with all his treasure not comparable to a mean citizen of
Athens furnished with virtue. For he held them as needless and superfluous to
him that had them without using them, as to them that did admire them and could
not enjoy them. Let us therefore conclude, that plenty of wealth makes not any
man happy: and that they who hunt after profit to become rich, are of al
others the most base and ignoble, though the vulgar sort deem them otherwise.
And when Aristotle said, that the end of Oeconomie (for so he calls the
orderly distributing of things for household) was riches, he spoke according to
the common understanding and phrase: for in his Ethikes he shows plainly,
that riches is but a certain abundance of necessary instruments for the use
of a family. Whereby it may be understood, that for themselves they are not
desirable, but as they are directed to a better end, which end is humane
felicity. As for the Senator you spoke of, whom the whole Senate grew to
esteem when he was grown rich: you may be sure that it was not for naught
that Cicero scoffed at them, when he asked one day in the assembly, whose that
inheritance was, which was called Wisdom. And thus much may suffice for such
as follow profit only. Now for those that apply themselves wholly to their
pleasures and delights, it is to be held, that they neither can be accounted
happy, because forsaking their proper end and good, which is honesty, they
bend themselves to the sensitive part only which is common with them to brute
beasts.

Here M. Dormer interrupting me, desired that I would stay a while to resolve
him of one doubt, which my former words had bred in his mind, which was, that
having said riches were of small account among wise men, and could not make men
happy, it might seem that nature had in vain produced them.

That follows not (said I) of any thing which I have spoken. For I have not
said, that they were not necessary for the use of them: for common sense,
experience, and the want of things behouefull to man's life, would say the
contrary. Besides that, Aristotle in his tenth book of Ethikes affirms, that
not only to the attaining of civil felicity, but also for the contemplative
life, these exterior goods are needful, because a man may the better thereby
contemplate when want distractetth not his mind: though among the Platonikes,
some say the contrary; alleging that men are better disposed to contemplation
without them, then with them. But thus much indeed I said, that they are not
the true end or good of man, nor could yield him happiness of themselves, or
make him worthy honor. And that they, that bend their minds only to scrape
and heap together mucke and pelf, are of all others the basest and
unworthiest: yet being used as they ought to be, for the behoof and
maintenance of man's life, and not as an end, or the proper good of man, I do
not only not discommend them, but do also esteem them in their quality so far
forth as the infirmity of man's nature has need of them; whereof, since we
shall have occasion to speak more hereafter, let us in Gods name proceed to
speak of the life of them that have subjected their minds to that part of the
soul which is wholly bent to sensuality and delight. These men are like unto
brute beasts wanting reason, and worse: for brute beasts following their
natural instinct and appetite, pass not the bonds of nature, and though they
get no praise thereby, yet incur they not any blame in that behalf. But man,
who setting reason aside, chooses vain pleasures as his scope and end, and so
plungeth his mind in them, that reason cannot perform her office and duty,
can in no wise escape from exceeding blame and reproach for the same. Of which
sort of men, the Platonikes opinion was, that they were so far from being
happy, as they were not to be reputed among the living, but the dead: not only
in respect of the body, but of the soul likewise. For they held that the soul
being drowned in delights, might well be reckoned as dead, because beastly
delight (like an ill weed) spreads it self in man's mind, till it ouergrow
all goodness, and so takes away the use of reason, as it depriueth him of the
quality proper to man, and draws him into the pure quality of unreasonable
creatures: which, how grievous and hateful a thing it is, need not be
declared. Aristotle resembles them to wild young Stiers, that must be tamed
with the yoke. But to show you how this disordinate or tickling itch of delight
proceeds, in this sort it is: whereas man is composed of two principal parts,
the body, and the soul or mind: the latter to rule and command, the former to
obey and serve. They, which propose to them their delight and pleasure, only
take a clean contrary course, making the body to command and rule, and the
mind to serve and obey. And as in a household or family, al would go to wrack,
if the master or father of the family being prudent and careful, should be
constrained to obey his son or servant, who were foolish and negligent: even
so must it of necessity be in him, that by vice makes his mind subject to the
body, making it serve only for the delighting thereof, and neglecting that
which he should most earnestly study to maintain and cherish; whence comes
(as Socrates says) all evil and ruins among men. For from these disordinate
pleasures, which spring from the senses of the body, through that power which
the faculty of the soul ministers unto them, do all wicked affections take
their beginning, as angers, furies, fond loves, hatreds, ambitions, lusts,
suspicions, ielousies, ill speaking, backbiting, false joys, and true griefs;
and finally the consuming of the body and goods, and the loss of honor and
reputation. And oftentimes it is seen, that whiles a man spares nothing so as
he may purchase the fulfilling of his appetites, how unruly soever they be, he
loses by infirmity or other unhappy accidents, his own body, for whose
pleasures he so earnestly traveled. For so it is written of Epicurus, who
being grown full of sickness through his disordinate life, died miserably
tormented with pains and griefs: the like whereof we may daily see in many, if
we consider their life and end. In respect hereof, some wise men have thought
that pleasures are not in any wise to be accounted among the goods that are
requisite for the attaining of humane felicity: and Antisthenes so hated them,
that he wished he might rather become mad, then to be over mastered by his
sensual delight. And in very deed they are no otherwise to be esteemed then
mad men, who set their delights and pleasures before them as their end, not
caring what they do, so as they may compass the same. Plato therefore not
without good cause said, that pleasure was the bait which allured men to all
evil. And Architas the Tarentine was of opinion, that the pestilence was a
lesser evil among men then pleasure of the body: from whence came trecheries,
and betraying of countries, destructions of commonweals, murders, rapes,
adulteries, and all other evils, even as from a spring or fountain. The cause
whereof Pythagoras desiring to find out, said, that delight first crept into
cities, then satietie, next violence, and lastly the ruin and overthrow of the
Commonwealth. And to this opinion Tullie in his first book of Laws seems
to lean, where he says, that this counterfetter of goodness, and mother of
all evils (meaning pleasure) intruding her self into our senses, suffered us
not to discern those goods which are natural and true goods indeed, and carry
not with them such a scabbe and itch, which pleasure evermore has about her;
who finally is the root of those principal passions, from which (as from the
maine root) all the rest do spring, as hope and fear, sorrow and gladness.
For we receive not any pleasure, but that some molestation has opened the way
for it into our minds: as no man takes pleasure to eat until the
molestation of hunger call him thereunto, nor yet to drink, if the annoyance
of thirst go not before: to show that the vnnoblest and basest power of the
mind must minister unto us the matter of those pleasures which we seek. And as
we have said that molestation goes before vain and unruly delight, so does
displeasure and grief follow, as if it should finally resolve into his first
principle and beginning. The fear whereof diminishes part of the hope a man
might have to live still contented, and disturbeth the joy which he feels in
his unruly pleasures and delights. But to those pleasures and delights which
accompany virtue, which are pleasures of such a kind as they never carry with
them any displeasure or annoyance at all: whereas the other that are unruly,
begin with pleasure and end with bitter pain. And this moved Aristotle to
say, that the right judgment of those pleasures is to be made at their
farewell, not at their coming; for that they leave behind them evermore sadness
and repentance. So said Theocritus, that he that strove to fulfill his
pleasures and delights, prepared to himself matter of perpetual grief and
sorrow. There was a Sophist called Ileus, who though he had spent his youth
wantonly in pleasures, yet he so called himself home when he was come to riper
years, that he never after suffered any vain delights to tickle him, neither
beauty of women, nor sweetness of meats, nor any other such pleasures to draw
him from a sober and temperate life. To which sobriety and temperance of life
Licurgus being desirous to draw the Lacedaemonians, by his laws he forbad them
all those things that might turn their minds from manly thoughts, and make
them soft and effeminate: for he said, that wanton pleasures were the
flatterers of the mind. And as flatterers by their devices and arts, draw men
that give ear unto them besides themselves, as has bin already declared: so
pleasures through their sweetness corrupt the sense, together with the mind to
whom they are the ministers. And Agesilaus being once asked what good the laws
of Lycurgus had done to Sparta: Marry (said he) they have brought our men to
despise those delights which might have made them to be no men. There are so
many wise and grave sayings to this purpose, that to repeat them all, the day
would be too short. It may therefore suffice what is already said, and
confirmed by the consent of all the wise me^ in the world, to show you
manifestly, that the true and proper end of man is not to be achieved by this
sensual kind of life. And since that which is truly proper to any thing, cannot
be common with any other (as to laugh is so proper to man, as no other creature
can laugh but he) and pleasure is common to other creatures besides man,
therefore it cannot in any wise be proper to him.

It cannot be gainesaid with any reason (said my Lord Primate) and therefore no
doubt but every man ought to apply himself to follow that which is most proper
to his own nature; for that is his best: and pity it is, and marvel eke, to
see such numbers, that neither for love of virtue, nor fear of God, will frame
themselves to a good and comendable course of life, but follow their vain
delights and pleasures insatiably.

Pity indeed it is (said I) but no great marvel, because perfect judgments
are rare; and many there be, who though they know the truth of things, yet
suffer themselves to be carried away with apparances. For their delight
proposing to them certain figures or images of what is good and fair, they
are content to be deceived, and to become bondslaues to their senses, or rather
charmed by them, as by some witch or inchantresse, and by them to be guided.
But this notwithstanding I must advertise you, that I have not so absolutely
spoken against pleasures, that you should therefore infer that virtues should
be without their pleasures also. For albeit pleasure be not virtue, nor yet
man's true good, yet does it follow virtue, even as the shadow follows the
body. And though virtues have difficulties and travels before they be gotten;
yet when they are gotten, pleasure is the inseparable companion unto them; not
such as keeps company with lascivious and wanton affections, and is soon
converted to grief and repentance, but a delight that is permanent and stable:
insomuch as some of very good judgment, have thought there is no pleasure
worthy the name of delight, but that which proceeds from virtue, and makes
our actions perfect. For this cause did Aristotle say, that most perfect was
that delight which was comprehended by the most perfect part of the soul,
which is the understanding. And this delight is so perfectly perfect in God,
that he is far from any annoyance or molestation: for delight is not in God a
passion, as in us our delights are, which never come to us without molestation,
it being (as has bin said) the beginning of them. Therefore the pleasures of the
mind are esteemed so much the more perfect, as the understanding is more
perfect then the sense: which understanding delights only in that pleasure
that is accompanied with honesty, and this pleasure he esteemed to be so
excellent, that he wished some new excellent name to be found for the same. But
we having no other name to give it, call it by similitude with that name which
is fit for the delightfullest thing that the senses can yield us: and therefore
we call as well the imperfect delight of the senses, as that most perfect of
the understanding, by the name of pleasure, though the one of them consist in
extremes which is vicious, and the other in the mean where virtues have their
place.

Here Captain Norreis spoke, saying; We have heard you sundry times say that
virtues consist in the mean between two extremes, but how that mean is to be
found, you have not yet declared to us: therefore (I pray you) let us be made
acquainted with the way to compass the same, that we may learn to take hold of
virtue, and not be deceived with the false semblance thereof to fall into vice.

This mean (said I) is found, when a man does what he ought to do, when time
serves, in manner as he should, for such as becomes him to do, and for causes
honest and conueniet. And whosoever sets this rule to himself in all his
actions, which being so conditioned, shall be far off from the extremes, and
near unto virtue.

Yea (said Captain Norreis) this is soon said, but not so soon done: for it
is not so easy a matter to hitte upon these conditions, but that a man may
more easily miss them. But since by your words, neither delight alone, nor
profit only can work humane felicity, it should seem (the quality and
trade of the world considered) that it may well be gathered, that they which
have them both linked together, are worthy to be esteemed happy: since plenty
of wealth may yield them all their desires, and fulfill their delights. And
this happily may be the cause why Kings and Princes are so accounted in this life.

Of the happiness or unhappiness of Princes, this is no place to treat (said
I) neither appertains it to our matter: only thus much I may remember by the
way, that Antigonus affirmed it to be but a kind of pleasing servitude to be a
King. And Phalaris the cruel tyrant considering well his estate, said likewise,
that if he had known before he made himself tyrant of his country, what
trouble, care and danger followed rule and Segnorie, he would rather have chosen
any state of life then to be a King. Nevertheless no sort of men place their
felicity more in pleasure then Princes do, when they have not due regard to
their charge: for then they think that whatsoever may nourish their delight and
pleasure, is lawful for them to do. But miserable are the people over whom God
has set such to reign, as put their pleasure or their profit only, before all
respects, as the end of their government: though Almighty God who is the King
over Kings, oftentimes in his justice plagueth them, even with those things
wherein they placed their greatest felicity. Dionysius the younger being borne
in wealth and plenty, setting all his thoughts upon his pleasures, was
therefore in the end driven out of his kingdom. For he thinking it lawful for
him to take all that he would have, even in his fathers life time began to
defloure certain virgins of honest families: which thing his father
understanding sharply reprehended him for the same; and among other things
told him, that howsoever himself had taken upon him by tyranny the kingdom
of Sicilie, yet he never had used any such violences. But his wanton son made
him this answer: It may well be (quoth he) for you were not the son of a
King. At which word the father grieuing, replied unto him; Neither art thou
like to leave thy son a King, unless thou change thy conditions. Which
prognostication was verified, in that the son following his lewd course of
life, shortly after his fathers death was chased out his kingdom by his
subjects, and driven to get his living by keeping a school in Corinth: where
on a time one seeing him live so poorly, asked him what he had learned of his
schoolmasters Plato, that he could no better behave himself in his royalty;
taxing him that for not applying himself to Plato his doctrine, he had bin the
cause of his own ruin. But his answer was better then his former carriage, for
he said, that he had learned more then happily he could imagine. And what is that
(quoth the other) I pray you teach it me. I have (said he) learned to bear
this my adverse fortune patiently, and with a frank courage. And had he learned
to observe that worthy sentence of Agesilaus, who was wont to say, that Kings
and Princes ought to endeavor to exceed other me^ in temperance and fortitude,
and not in wantonness and pleasures, he had never brought his high estate to so
base a fortune as to keep a school. But omitting to speak of Kings, I will
tell you that they are greatly deceived that think that profit joined with
delight may make men happy: for the more that profit and delight are knit
together, the more does wanton lust and unruly desires swell and increase, if
they be not tempered by the rule of reason. Which made Ovid to say, From out
the bowels of the earth is fet
That cursed pelf, men's minds on ill to set.


And Plato in his books of laws says, that a very rich man is seldom seen
very good. Which saying you know our Savior Christ confirmed when he said, it
was harder for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven, then a cable to pass
through a needles eye. And though Aristotle in one place says, that riches are
necessary to make up a perfect humane felicity: yet in another he calls them
but a foolish happiness. Yea Plato affirms, that great riches are as
harmeful in a city as great poverty, by reason of the deliciousnes and
wantonness which they breed. For which reasons it may be very well concluded,
that neither wealth nor pleasure, nor yet they both together, ought to draw any
man to propose them to himself for his end: but the more he has of wealth,
and uses it but for his pleasure, the further he goes astray from his
felicity and his proper end. And that riches in a wanton lascivious man's
possession, are like a sword in a mad man's hand. Pythagoras said, that as a
horse cannot be ruled without a bit: so riches are hardly well used without
prudence, which will in no wise dwell with them, who aba^don themselves wholly to
vain delights. If to the vulgar sort therefore such men seem happy, yet are
they in very truth most miserable and unhappy. For these disordinate pleasures
are intestine enemies, which never cease working til they overthrow a man, and
breed him dishonor and shame: neither do they fail to bring him to an evil
end, that suffers them to master him, and uses hs wealth to the pleasing of
his appetites. As by Dionysius aforesaid may appear, and also by Sardanapalus,
who being a mighty Monarke, swimming in wealth and pleasures, and sparing
nothing that might glut his lascivious appetites, grew so effeminate thereby,
that as soon as he was assaulted by contrary fortune, he was driven to consume
himself, his treasure, and all his filthy lusts at once in the fire. Which
two examples among infinite more that might be mentioned, shall for this time
suffice to verify that which has bin said, to wit, that Gods judgments light
for the most part upon such Princes, as, forgetting the great care and charge
which is laid upon them, give themselves to care for nothing but their own
vain appetites and delights. To who^ Antisthenes spoke, when he said, that
riches were no goods if they were not accompanied with virtue that might
instruct men how to use them well. And Chilo the Lacedemonian likewise, who was
the first author of that grave sentence, Magistratus virum indicat, whereunto
he added riches also, because they both together draw him the more easily to
discover himself. Socrates wisely wished that he might have the grace to
esteem no man rich but him that was given to the study of wisdom and
knowledge: for such (he said) had the true gold, which is virtue, a thing much
more precious then all the gold in the whole world, and that which leads man
the right way to his felicity.

Then, said Captain Norreis, since by your discourse, all they are unhappy
that tread the steps which lead to either of those two ends before mentioned
of profit or pleasure; or to them both joined together: it must of force
follow, that happy be they that direct their actions to that end which is
proper to man, whereof I hope your next speech will be.

So must it (said I) for there remains nothing else to be treated of. And if
mine author mistrusted his eloquence (as he does) in a matter meet to be set
forth so effectually as this; what may I say of my self, that am tied to
declare to you in our language, inferior much to the Italian, all that he has
set down touching the same? Sure it is, that if I were able to set before the
eyes of your minds a lively image of this excellent end, you would be so
delighted therewith that in regard thereof you would contemn and set light by
all other pleasures in the world. But howsoever my utterance be, which I will
do my best to fit as well as I can to so high a subject, you shall hear what he
in substance says thereupon; and I assure my self that the quality of the
matter will easily supply whatsoever defect you may find in my phrase or manner
of speech. You are therefore to understand, that as they whose judgments are
corrupted, and minds informed with an il habit, to make them live after the
manner before mentioned, do swerve from the nature of man so much, as they
become like brute beasts or insensible plants void of reason: even so are they
among men, as divine creatures, who apply themselves to live according to
reason. And such have aunciently bin called Heroes, because they approached in
their actions nearer to God then others that lived not so. For they put all
their endeavors to adorn and set forth that part of man which makes him like
unto the divine nature, or rather partaker of the same; teaches him what is
good, comely, honest, and honorable; and inuiteth him continually to that which
may conduct him to the highest and supreme good. This part is the mind, with
the use of reason proceeding from it, as from a root. But because two special
offices appertain to the use of reason (so far forth as serves to this
purpose) the one contemplation, and the other action. Touching the first, it
raises us by the means of Arts and sciences (which purge the mind from base
and corrupt affections) to the knowledge of those things that are unchangeable,
and still remain the same, howsoever the heavens turn, time run on, or
fortune or any other cause rule things subject unto them. By means of which
sciences, the mind climbing by degrees up to the eternal causes, considers
the order and manner wherewith things are knit together, and linked in a
perpetual ba^d. And thence it comprehends the form of regiment, which the
Creator and mouer of all things uses in the maintaining and keeping them
everlastingly in their several offices and duties. And out of the
consideration hereof we learn, that he that directs not his course of
government by this rule, as near as he can, to guide himself, his family, and
the Commonwealth, can seldom or never attain a good and happy end.
Wherefore he draws the celestial government to the use of humane and civil
things, so far as man's frailty will permit. As Socrates did, who was said to
have drawn Philosophy from heaven to the earth, to reform the life and
ma^ners of men. Thus turning himself to the knowledge of his own nature, and
finding that he is composed of three several natures, whereof each has her
several end, yet seeks he to draw the ends of the two less perfect, to the
end of that which is most perfect and proper to him. But finding that
continual contemplation of higher things, would be profitable only to himself
and to none other, in that he should thereby purchase no happiness to any but
to himself. And because he knows that he is not borne to himself alone, but
to civil society and conversation, and to the good of others as well as of
himself, he therefore does his endeavor with all care and diligence so to carry
himself in words and in deeds, as he might be a pattern and example to others
of seemly and virtuous speeches and honest actions, and do them all the good he
could in reducing them to a good and commendable form of life. For the
performance whereof, he perceives how requisite it is, that honesty and
virtue be so united with profit and pleasure, that by a just and equal temper
of them, both himself and others may attain that end which is the summum
bonum, and the thing whereupon all our discourse has bin grounded. This end is
not to be attained but by the means of moral virtues, which are the
perfection of the mind, and settled habits in ruling the appetite which arises
out of the unreasonable parts of the soul: for virtues are grounded in those
parts which are without reason, but yet are apt to be ruled by reason. He
therefore seeing moral virtues are not gotten by knowing only what they be,
but through the long practice of many virtuous operations, whereby they fasten
themselves so to the mind, as being converted once into an habit, it is very
hard afterward to lose the same: even as of vicious actions on the other side
the like ensues: therefore with all carfulness and diligence possible he
laboreth to embrace the one, and to eschew the other; evermore striving to hold
himself in the mean, and to avoid the approaching of the extremes: to which,
profit and delight under deceitful maskes of good, would entise and allure him.

I pray you (said Captain Norreis) tell us (since you say that virtue is in the
mids between two extremes) whether that mean you speak of, wherein virtue
sits, be so equally in the midst, as the extremes which be vicious, be alike
distant from the same or no?

No (said I) they are not in that manner equidistant, for oftentimes virtue
approaches nearer to one of the extremes, then to the other. As for example,
Fortitude, which consists in a mean between fearfulness and
foole-hardinesse, has yet a nearer resemblance to foole-hardinesse then to
cowardice, and consequently is not alike distant from them both, and is in this
manner to be understood, that albeit virtue consist in a mean between two
extremes, whereof the one is a defect, and the other a superabundance, yet she
is neither of them both, as by our example of Fortitude appears, which is
neither foole-hardines, nor yet cowardice, but only a commendable mean or
temper between them both. And therefore Aristotle said right well that the
mean of virtue between two extremes, was a Geometrical mean which has a
respect to proportion, and not an Arithmeticall mean which respects equal
distance: so as you must understand that virtue is not called a mean between
two extremes, because she participateth of either of them both, but because she
is neither the one nor the other.

And why (said Captain Norreis) is the Geometrical proportion rather to be
observed therein, then the Arithmeticall?

Because (said I) though virtues are in the mean, yet do they bend oftentimes
toward one of the extremes more then to the other, as has bin said already:
and by proportion Geometrical they are in the midst, which by Arithmeticall
would not be so. For thereby they must be in the just midst, and equally
distant from both the extremes. As for example, let us suppose 6. to be the
mean between 4. and 8; for 6. has two more then 4, and so has it two less
then 8, and in respect of it self stands just in the midst between 4. and
8, and equally distant from them both. And this is your Arithmetical mean. But
the Geometrical proportion is after another manner. For suppose 2. and 8. to be
the extremes, and 4. to be the mean: here you see that 2. and 4. have a double
proportion, and so has 4. and 8. the one to the other, and so 4. participateth
of that double proportion as well with 8. as with 2, and yet is nearer to 2.
then to 8; which it does likewise in another respect: for if the two extremes
be multiplied together, as 2. with 8. they make 16: and so much does 4.
likewise being multiplied in it self, for four times 4. makes 16. And thus you
see what difference is between Geometrical and Arithmeticall proportion. Now
though every virtue have peculiar extremes between which it is placed: yet
Philosophers say, that they consist all generally about matter of pleasure, or
the contrary.

How can that be (said M. Dormer) when you have told us already, that virtue is
not pleasure?

It is (said I) one thing to say virtue is pleasure, and an other to say that
it consists in matter of pleasure or annoyance. And true it is that pleasure
is not the matter of virtue, neither meant I so to say; but only that virtue
is busied about these two passions of pleasure and displeasure, whereof the
fittest example may be taken from temperance. For as the temperate man
embraces the delight of the mind, so takes he pleasure to abstain from the
unseemly delights of the body. And contrariwise, the intemperate man is sad,
because he has them not.

Well (said M. Dormer) that matter is soon answered: but because I have heard
the Stoikes were of opinion, that virtue was true felicity, and that Plotinus
said, that a man endued with virtue was sufficiently furnished for his
felicity, as being possessed of all the good that could be among men, I pray
you what is your authors opinion in that point?

If I well remember (quoth I) it is a good while since I told you that man's
felicity is attained by virtue; but that virtue is his felicity, that says
not mine author. And sure the opinion of Aristotle is better in that matter
then that of the Stoikes. For reason it self tells us that those things
which are ordained to an end, cannot be the end it self to which they be
ordained. And since virtues are ordained for the attaining of man's felicity,
which is (as has bin said) a perfect action according to virtue in a perfect
life. It is plain, that virtue cannot be felicity, though he that is virtuous
approaches near to his felicity.

You say true (said M. Dormer:) I remember you expounded the clause of a
perfect life to be intended a long life, yet the same Stoikes held that a young
man might be happy: alleging felicity was not to be measured by quantity,
but by quality; and that not length of time, but perfection only is to be
respected, which (they say) may be as well in a young man as in an old. And they
give the example of hunger and thirst: for suppose (say they) that two hungry
or thirsty folk be called to eat or to drink, and the one to assuage his
hunger or thirst be satisfied with a little, and the other require much meat
or drink to be satiated, yet is he as well satisfied with the little whose
nature requires little, as he that requires a great deal: even so (say they)
in humane felicity, the length of time or number of years is not to be
respected, but happiness it self; and as happy is the young man who in a few
years has attained his felicity, as the old man that has bin many years
about it. For Plotinus says, that the happy man cannot reckon upon the years
past of his felicity, but only on the present.

The Stoikes held strange opinions (said I) in many things. But if experience
be needful (as has bin formerly said) and many actions, to make an habit in
virtue, so as a man may by custom be brought to that pass as he shall not do
any thing but according to virtue, then is length of life necessary for the
attaining of virtue, which must first be gotten before a man can hope for any
felicity. Moreover, if Prudence be the very knot and band of all the moral
virtues, and that the young man cannot be prudent, how can he then have perfect
virtue? Wherefore the diffinitio^ of humane felicity to be a perfect operation
according to virtue, has need of this addition in a perfect life, which must
be long and have a happy end. For though a man have run through many years
in continual prosperity, and afterward fall into grievous calamity, though
he cannot be thereby made miserable (which vice only and not adversity may
bring him unto) yet may he not be rightly entitled happy. Youth therefore has
this defect in it, that albeit man be the subject of felicity* yet a young man
cannot be properly and actually the subject thereof, and the child much less,
because he is further off from prudence, and because neither of them can have
either perfect life or perfect virtue. And as for the opinion of Plotinus, he
(as a Platonike) considered the soul simple and pure, freed from the other two
powers that are rebellious to reason: and meant him only to be happy, who
separating the virtues of the mind from the senses, from worldly delights and
concupiscences, did so interne himself with his thoughts in the contemplation
of his Creator, as he despises riches, dignities, and honors, with all
transitory and frail commodities: still looking to that good which is the
highest and perfectest among all goods, which is God Omnipotent. And this he
called the chief action of the understanding, and highest felicity. And
because he supposed that the mind should never depart from that action, he said
that the time past was not to be accounted of in man's felicity. By which it
may appear, that he spoke not in that place of humane or civil felicity,
whereof our discourse is now according to Aristotle's opinion, neither does the
authority of Plotinus help the Stoikes any whit at al, whose opinion is in
that point to be rejected.

Since we are resolved (said Capt. Carleil) that virtues are but the mean to
purchase felicity, and not felicity it self, we would be glad to hear you
declare how many they are, and of what quality, that we may know them, and
make our selves happy by the purchase of them.

To answer you to this question (said I) according as I find the matter set
down by mine author, would perhaps not satisfy you so fully as you would
desire, or I could wish: for that (in my opinion) he has treated of some of
these moral virtues somewhat too briefly, and confusedly: I have therefore to
help mine own understanding had recourse to Picolomini when I came to this
place, in whom having found a more plain and easy method in the description
of them, I have for the more perspicuitie of the translation, added somewhat
taken from him, and (as well as I could) interlaced it with this discourse,
where mine author seemed to me too brief, or too obscure. And if it may work
the same effect in you, that it has done in me, to make you the better
understand how many and of what quality those virtues are, I hope you will not
mislike my attempt therein, but excuse me, though it be not so fully
accomplished as I desire it were. There are then by the general consent of all
men four principal virtues appertaining to civil life, which are, Fortitude,
Temperance, Justice, and Prudence; from which four are also derived (as
branches from their trees) sundry others to make up the number of twelve, and
they are these ensuing, Liberality, Magnificence, Magnanimitic, Mansuetude,
Desire of honor, Verity, Affability, and Vrbanitie: of every of the which
virtues, I will speak particularly, following chiefly mine author; but where
need or occasion shall require, I will for the cleerer understanding of the
matter, supply out of Picolomini what I think is wanting. And to begin first
with Fortitude. This virtue stands in the mean between foole-hardinesse and
cowardice; which two passions may justly be termed matter of Fortitude: and
this virtue is exercised in things terrible and fearful, which are also
difficult, causing grief and pain, which the valiant man is willing to endure
for virtues sake. For though his life be dear unto him, as it ought to be to
every man of virtue, in respect of himself, of his friends, and of his
country; and will not therefore upon small occasions expose himself to
peril: yet when time and occasion require it, and that any honest cause call
him thereunto, he will undertake cheerfully whatsoever dangerous enterprise,
and with a stout courage, and readily perform the same. Neither shall labor
or travel, hazard, nor death it self dismay him; but esteeming more his
reputation then his life, he will resolutely aduenter him self for honesties
sake. But among all the actions of Fortitude, to fight for our country, and
(if need be) to die for defense of the same, deserves the greatest praise and
commendation: as on the other side, to quarrel, and put a man's life in danger
upon every trifling occasion, is not the part of a valiant man, but of a
foole-hardy. Cato the elder therefore said very well, that to know a valiant man,
it imported much, to understand whether he made more account of his life or of
his virtue, because not the aptnes to quarrel for every occasion, but the
venturing his life for virtue and honesty makes a man to be accounted valiant
among wise me^, who hold such men to be fools and miserable that thrust
themselves rashly into quarrels, as many do, through the corruption of our age,
upon fantastical points of honor, as if they were weary of their lives.
Nevertheless there are some kinds of death, which a virtuous man abhors, as
to die by tempest at sea, by thunder, by earthquake, and such other violent
deaths where virtue ca^ have no place. All which deaths, though they cannot
dismay a virtuous mind, yet he cannot but be sorry that he is brought to such an
end, as affoordeth him no means to make of his valor. There be sundry vices
which have a resemblance of this virtue: but because we have in our first days
discourse spoken of them sufficiently, we shall not need at this time to say any
more concerning the same. It is also to be considered, that this is a virtue as
well of the body as of the mind: for to the exercise of fortitude, a man must
have a strong body, and of a good complexion, his lims well framed, and thereto
a stout and a constant mind fitly coupled, that it may rule and guide the body
prudently. For (as Isocrates said to Demonicus) unless strength of body be
matched with wisdom, it is doubtless harmfull to him that has it. The mind
must be so disposed and armed against fortune, be she froward or favorable, it
may stand always invincible against all misfortunes and adversities, and yet
not raise it self for prosperous successes. For it is as true a token of a
base mind to be proud and insolent in prosperity, as to be daunted and
faint-hearted in adversity and affliction. Amid which afflictions, that part
of Fortitude which is called patience has place, of which Plato has written
largely, and among other things this he says, that the valiant man has gotten
such a habit in his mind of Fortitude, that amid pleasures or amid calamities,
he is always the same man; resisting the assaults of fortune with the virtue
of his mind. But the Christian writers have much more extolled this virtue
then any other; yet Aristotle touches it, where he says, that the virtue of
Fortitude is clearly discerned by the voluntary enduring of grievous accidents,
which in effect is that same habit whch we call patience. Alexander Mamea (as
Herodian reports) was wont to say, that valiant men, and modest or temperate
men, ought to wish for prosperous estate: but that if things fall out contrary
to their desire, they are to bear them with an invincible courage. And
Plotinus defining the said virtue, said that it was a habit of the mind, which
was not subject to passions: as in another place he describes the valiant man
to be he, that is not moved from the virtuous habit of his mind, neither by
pleasing or delightful accidents, nor yet by grievous or displeasant; yea he
so abhorred that a man should be mastered by happy or unhappy accidents, that
he sticked not to affirm, that from this baseness of mind proceeded that
opinion which would take from us our free election. For their cowardice, who
suffer themselves to be overcome by such passions, persuades them that such
things happen of necessity, and through the immutable order of things: and so
they make themselves wittingly slaves where they were free, wanting either will
or power to use that liberty of their mind, either in the one fortune or in
the other. For who so is armed with true fortitude, outward things whatsoever
they be, neither give nor take ought from the^. But they that cannot temper
themselves in prosperity, nor bear adversity stoutly, make it apparent that
fortune mastreth them. Whereunto S. Ambrose alluding, says to Simplician, that
virtuous men become neither greater nor meaner by the change of mortal
successes, because by this virtue they overcome both fortunes. Such a man was
Socrates, whose wife said of him, that whatsoever had befallen him, he never
came home but with one and the self same countenance, never altered or
changed. To the same effect Seneca said, that a well disposed mind holds
evermore one course howsoever the world fare; whether fortune bestow her gifts
plentifully upon him, or frowardly take them away. For the valiant man never
grieueth at any thing that happens in this life to other men, Fortitude being
a sure shield for humane weakness, which makes all the darts of fortune how
sharp soever they be, to turn point again, without once so much as rasing,
much less entering thereinto. There is nothing in the world that ought to be
more dear to a man then his children, who are his true and lively images, and
after a sort the ministers of his immortality: wherefore the loss of them
(especially when they are virtuous) should of all other things be most grievous
unto him. Nevertheless Anaxagoras when news was brought him that his only
son was dead, answered the messenger, It is no new thing that thou tellest
me, for I having begotten him, know right well that he was mortal. So well had
Philosophy taught him to bear the freakes of fortune, and armed his mind in
such sort, as it could not be surprised with any sudden passion. Our very birth
has death fastened unto it: therefore the Poet said right well: Whiles borne
we are we die, so that our ending
From our first being takes his beginning.


And to conclude touching this virtue, we must have such an habit thereof in
our minds, and so accompany the same with Prudence, as Fortune either good or
bad may not prevail against us; never thinking our victory over her assured,
until we have clean daunted and beaten her down. Carneades in this behalf
advised well, that in time of prosperity we should forethinke some adversities,
and suppose them to be already fallen upon us, whereby we might be the better
prepared in mind to bear them if they came indeed. And Zeno when he received
advertisement that a ship wherein he had great wealth was wracked and cast
away, showed himself far from being grieved thereat: for he thanked fortune,
that by taking again those goods which she had given him, he had gotten so
good an occasion to forsake the care of enriching himself temporally, and to
betake himself wholly to the study of Philosophy.

Next follows the virtue of Temperance, whose subject is that power of the
soul whence comes the concupiscible appetite; and she is exercised specially
about the senses of tasting and feeling, but chiefly about the wanton lusts of
the flesh: for though the taste ill used, be a cause of intemperance, yet is it
by the mean of the sense of feeling. In which respect it may be said, that the
disordinate lust of the body that makes men intemperate, is in the sense of
feeling, not over all the body, but only in those parts which serve for those
delights. And they being most mighty, are by temperance to be restrained with
the bridle of modesty, and kept within due terms. For which cause Plato
called her the gardien or safe keeper of all humane virtues. For she with sober
and advised language tells us, that nothing is comely that is not honest, nor
nothing honest that is not comely: far from the disordinate appetites
persuasion, which says, whatsoever pleases is lawful, and that all is lawful
that pleases. But Temperance with her wholesome aduertisements withdraws us
from all that is unfitting or indecent, if we give ear unto her. Which
indecency or vnfittingnes comes neither from the senses of seeing, nor yet of
hearing or smelling. For men by delighting beyond measure in the objects of
those senses, are not called Intemperate, but run into other lesser defects,
not needful here to be spoken of. But Intemperance grows principally (as we
have said) out of the taste and the feeling, two senses that make us most like
unto brute beasts, if we suffer our selves to be led by them, following our
delights as they do: for they corrupt man's prudence, put his mind astray, and
take away from him the light of reason, which from other creatures they cannot
take. I remember that among the Grecians it was reported, how under the images
of Anacarsis a most continent Philosopher was ever written, that temperance was
to be used in the tongue, in the belly, and in the privy parts, thereby giving
us to understand in which senses principally Temperance should be used. And
though all other creatures have their exterior senses as well as man, yet none
take delight in them, but accidentally. For the hound delights not in the
sent of the hare, but insomuch as he hops to feed upon her: nor the wolf
delights in the bleating of a Lamb, but as he intends to devour it:
neither does the sight of a bullock please the Lion for any respect, but that
he expects to slake his hunger on the carcass of it. All their principal
delight is in the taste and in the feeling: and because they have no light of
reason, but are guided only by natural instinct, therefore they are not
called temperate or intemperate, as having no free choice, which proceeds
from reason only. But men who have the gift of the mind from God, and are
capable by their judgment to discern and choose what is good, and to eschew
what is evil, unless they be misled by their appetite, deserve, when they choose
that which is just and reasonable, to be called temperate. And to such men
Plotinus was wont to say, that delight of the senses was given for a refreshing
and lightning of the heavy burden of cares and troubles, which this mortal
life brings upon us. Showing thereby that such delights are not in themselves
evil, but only when they be ill used. Which thing Aristotle before him
signified, when he said, that every man was not to be called intemperate, that
sought for some pleasure; but that to such only, as hunted after dishonest and
unlawful delights, that name was to be applied: for honest delights for
recreation of the mind are not to be disallowed; joining therein with
Anacarsis, who said, that the continuance of travel, without intermission, was
a thing impossible: wherefore it was requisite for men sometime to sport
themselves, that they might return the fresher to their honest labors. Whence
Ovid took his verses, saying, Long cannot last the labor that does want
An interchangeable repose some-while:
For it restores the forces languishant,
And does refresh the members spent with toil.


And Cicero the father and light of Roman eloquence, says, that games and
sports were permitted for the refreshing of the mind, even as meat and drink
for the restoring of the body; especially after the attending of grave and
weighty affairs. But such as have made an ill habit, and suffered their
judgments to be corrupted, making choice of dishonest delights to follow their
senses only, are rightly called intemperate, because they procure only the
pleasures of the body, without regard of the mind. And they are so much worse
then incontinent men: as these feel yet sometimes a remorse of their ill
actions, and thereby correct themselves; whereas the other persevere in their
ill choice (if we may properly call that a choice which proceeds from a
corrupted judgment) and care not to amend themselves; and are like to a man
full of dropsy: for their viciousness is as hopeless of recovery, as is the
dropsy when it is full grown within the body. And therefore they may well be
accounted of a lost life, who have contracted so ill an habit, that they still
keep reason subject to their passions and appetites, which is called by
Plotinus the infirmity of the mind. But where Temperance rules and bridleth
the inordinate delights, it is not so: for this virtue which is the mean in
all actions, and a seemlinesse in all things appertaining to civil life, does
increase man's praise and co^mendations, multiplieth honor upon him, lengtheneth
his life, and lightneth the burden of all his troubles: finally it so
fashioneth a man, as whether he be alone or in company, whether he be in
public or in private, he never undertakes any thing but that which carries
withal reputation, dignity and honor. For it withholdeth him from all that is
unseemly, and leads him to all that is honest and commendable. Neither is
this virtue exercised only in things appertaining to the appetite, but (as
Aristotle says) she is the conseruer of prudence: and by Plato his opinion,
she stretches her power to those actions that appertain to Fortitude also.
For she teaches man to know the mean of fearfulnes in cases of danger
apparent, and in what measure pain or trouble is to be endured. Pythagoras
said she was the mean of al things: and therefore as the beauty of the body is a
meet and seemly disposition of the members, breeding grateful sweetness, and
being tempered with fresh colors, draws the eyes of men to behold it with
wonder and delight: even so this virtue causes all the actions of a temperate
man with her bright shining light to be admired and extolled; for she is called
by Pythagoras the rule of al decency and comelines. Of her has youth more need
(according to Aristotle) then old age, because young men are much more stirred
with concupiscence and unruly affections then old men. And the Philosophers
have assigned her for companio^s, shamefastnes (which holds men from doing
any filthy act) honesty, abstinence, continency (which bridleth the
concupiscible passions that they overrule not the will) mansuetude or mildnes
(which tempereth the fury of anger) modesty (which is the rule of decent
motions of the body) and to be short, al those gifts of the mind which
accompany seemlines and decency, of which we shall particularly say somewhat as
briefly as we may. And because this virtue stretches her branches so far,
Plato said it was hard to define her, and more hard to use her: the one because
she is hardly discerned from other virtues: the other, because we bring with us
from our mothers wo^b the desire of delight, whereby we are norished, grow, and
draw out the line of our life: for which cause Arist. said, that it was harder
for a man to resist the pleasures of the body, then pain.

Next follows the excellent virtue of Liberality, which is busied about giving
and receiving conveniently, and is placed between two extremes; the one
Avarice, which takes more or gives less then is meet: the other
Prodigality, which gives more then is convenient: and he that can carry himself
even between these two extremes, may justly be called a liberal man; giving
where, when, to such persons, and in such sort as is fit, for respect of
honesty. Unto liberality is joined magnificence, which is a virtue concerning
riches also; which the magnificall man uses in great things, and such as are
to have long continuance, and are done in respect of virtue, as sumptuous
buildings, rich furnitures, and the like: therefore a poor man cannot actually
attain to be either magnificent or liberal. The liliberall man is not
magnificent, because magnificence is more then liberality: but the magnificent
man is liberal.

Arm in arm with Magnificence goes Magnanimity, waited upon by Mansuetude,
desire of honor, verity, affablity and vrbanity. Al which virtues appertain to
civil conversation, and are very profitable, breeding dece^cy, honesty,
dignity and honor. And though honor be reckoned in the number of those things
that are called exterior goods yet is it highly to be prised among all other,
because it is the certain token of virtuous life, and is the due reward of
virtue. For virtue has two sorts of rewards: the one that is outward, and that
is honor (which comes from others that honor virtue, and is not in the
virtuous man himself): the other inward, which is felicity, the true and
perfectest end of all our virtuous actions whiles we are alive. And man having
all these virtuous habits in him, gotten by continual well doing, which
consists in particulars: he has also need of the conversation of other men,
lest the occasion of doing virtuously should fail him. For though a man have
never so perfect a knowledge of all the virtues, unless he put them in action, he
can never be happy. And specially therefore is friendship necessary for him,
which either is a virtue, or fast linked to virtue, and grows out of the love
which men bear, first to their parents and kinsmen, next to their citizens or
countrymen, and lastly to strangers. For as concerning civil felicity, man
cannot, nor ought not to be alone: in which respect conversation and friendship
are necessary for the accomplishment of the same. Some therefore have said,
that it were as hurtful to take the bright shining beams of the Sun from
the world, as to deprive men of the benefit of friendship: since without
friends, a man is so far from being happy, as it may be said, he cannot
live, or be at all. This friendship is a communion and knitting together of
minds, which neither length of time, distance of place, great prosperity, nor
great adversity, ne yet any other grievous accident may sever or separate. And
Plotinus, though all his drift were to raise man from all base affects of the
mind, and to settle him in contemplation, yet he thought friendship necessary
no less for the mind then for the body. Aristotle said, that he that lived
alone could be none other then either a God or a brute beast. Solitariness
then is evil for all sorts of men, but most of all for young men, who wanting
experience in themselves, have great need of the good instructions and
admonitions of others. Therefore Crates the Philosopher seeing a young man
alone, went unto him, and asked of him what he was doing so all alone: and the
young man answering, that he was discoursing with himself: take heed (said
Crates then) that thou talk not with an il man. Considering wisely, that a man
void of prudence (as young me^ commonly are) is like to busy his head with ill
thoughts, which will provoke him to ill deeds also. Conversation therefore and
friendship are necessary for the accomplishment of civil felicity, which
without love cannot be. And that friendship is firm and durable which grows
out of virtue, and from similitude of behavior and conditions. Plato says,
that beauty bears the greatest sway in friendship, but that is the beauty of
the mind, which virtue brings forth: but if to the beauty of the mind, that of
the body also be joined, they both do the sooner and the faster tie together
the minds of virtuous men. For the exterior beauty of the body prepares the
way to the knowledge of the other inward of the mind, which (as has bin said)
is indeed the true man: but he that loves but the body, loves not the man,
but that which nature has given him for an instrument. And if this beauty of
the body happen to draw any man to love a foul or dishonest mind, that love
cannot be termed rightly friendship, but a filthy and loathsome conjunction of
two bodies, too much frequented by young men with naughty women, who are not
only unworthy any love, but ought of all men to be eschued as abominable, and
driven out of all well ordered Commonweals. This friendship tieth (though
with diverse respects) children to their parents, kindred to kindred, the husband
to the wife, and the minds of men of valor and virtue fast together, as a
thing agreeable to all the qualities which our soul contains: but this
friendship between men of valor and courage, springs from that faculty of
the mind, whence comes reasonable anger, the heat whereof stirs and
inflameth the minds of such men to valor and fortitude. And though this
friendship be good and commendable, yet is that more firm and permanent which
grows out of the that part of the mind which is garnished with reason and
virtuous habits: for it binds men's minds so fast together, and breeds so
firm a consent in them, that they become as one; in so much as it seems that
one mind dwells in two bodies to guide and rule them. Which made Zeno say
that his friend was another himself. Now albeit we see daily friendships to be
broken off upon fleight occasions, yet is that not to be imputed to any
imperfection in the nature of friendship.

It is marvel (said Captain Carleil) that friends should so easily break the
bonds of friendship, if they were so fast knit as you have said: the cause
whereof were worth the knowing.

That shall I declare unto you (said I:) Many apparances of friendship there
are, which be as far from true friendship, as the painted image of a man is
from a man indeed: for some are friends for profit, some for pleasure, and some
for other respects: which respects failing, love also quaileth; and so the
foundation of friendship being gone, it must needs fall to the ground. Others
first love, and after begin to judge of the person: and when they find
themselves deceived in their expectation whatsoever it were, they untie the
knot of friendship faster then they hasted to knit the same before. But if
judgment lead the dance, as it ought to do, and that a man choose to love
another, because he esteems him worthy for his virtues to be beloved; such
friendship is sure and firm, never to be dissolved, nay not so much as a
mislike can grow between such friends. For Aristotle holds, that discord
cannot possibly dwell together with friendship. All other friendships are
subject to quarrels and dissentio^s, but especially that which is grounded upon
profit: whereas those friends whom virtue coupleth together, as they have but
one will, so have they all things common, according to the laws of Pythagoras.
Which laws Plato allowed, and Aristotle likewise, though in the communion of
goods he were contrary to Plato, affirming that where all things were common,
it was not possible that the commonwealth could stand. The steadfastness of
friendship therefore consists in the communion and equality of minds,
between which neither anger, dissension, nor ingratitude can grow; for true
friends provoke not one another with contention, anger or unthankfulness. And
in regard hereof, the opinion of Plato was, that pleasantnes and cheerfulness
was fitter among friends then gravity or severity.

But I pray you (said Captain Norreis) tell us whether this friendship you
speak of may be between many or no?

Sir (answered I) a man cannot in truth be friend to many at once, in this
degree of friendship which we are treating of. For since the worker of this
fast friendship, is the likeness of minds and conditions. As there is a variety
of faces infinite, insomuch as it is a very rare thing to find two altogether
like the one to the other: so falls it out likewise in minds: and the saying
is, that one mind rules two bodies, and not mo; according to which saying,
friendship cannot be in perfection between many. The reason whereof may be,
that love and true affection being the most excellent thing among the effects
of friendship, and things excellent being rare, therefore true friendship is so
rare, as not only in our age, but also in all ages past, we find scarce two or
three couples of friends to be recorded. Neither can a man indeed divide his
love into many shares, without impairing it; nor give like help, use like
conversation, or do other friendly offices toward many, which are needful, and
required between two fast friends, such as we speak of.

I cannot tell (said sir Robert Dillon) why you make friendship so rare a
matter, when daily example shows us, that there are many men who have many
friends. Let us consider privately or publicly our own acquaintances, and we
shall see so many kind offices of friendship stirring, as it may be thought,
the ancient times brought forth men more savage and unfit for amity; or else
that our times are happier in that point then theirs. I remember yet that I
have read of Epaminondas, how he was wont to say, that a man should not come
home from the palace until he had purchased some friends. The like is written
of Scipio the younger, who affirmed that the firmest and most profitable
possession that a man could have in this world, was the having of many friends.
Also the Emperor Traian was accustomed to say, that he accounted that day lost
wherein he had not gotten one friend.

All this (said I) is true: but many are friends in name, who when they be put
to trial prove nothing so. And therefore was it said, that there were many
apparances and sorts of friendship, which properly are not to be esteemed true
friendship, but are rather to be termed civil benevolence, or public
friendship; being a certain general love, which the nature of man, and the
communion of countries breeds of it self. And this love makes one man
courteous, gracious, and affable to another, if he degenerate not from his own
nature which has framed him sociable; it makes him apt to help, and ready to
defend, and to use all the offices of humanity and benevolence that become him
toward all men: but specially toward such as either country, neighborhood,
likeness of exercises or delights, or such like things have united and knit
together. All which breed rather an accidental then a sound and true
friendship. For among many such, few will be found that will expose themselves
to perils or dangers for their friends, or in respect of their friends safety
will set light by their goods, yea their own lives, as these few recorded in
ancient writings have done. This made Demetrius Falareus to say, that true
friends went willingly to be partakers of their friends prosperity if they were
called thereunto: but that if adversity or misfortune did befall them, they
tarried not then to be called, but ran of themselves to offer their help and
comfort. And Anacarsis esteemed one good friend worth many common and ordinary,
such as we daily see called friends, either for countries sake, or because they
keep company together in travel by land or sea, or traffike, or serve
together in the wars, or such like occasions: all which are in truth but
shadows rather of friendship, then friendship indeed. A friend is not so
easily to be discerned, but that a man must (as the proverb says) eat a
bushel of salt with him before he account him a true friend. Whereupon
follows, that there can be no perfect friendship, but after long experience
and conversation. Plato respecting this, said, that friendship was an habit
gotten by love long time grown: and in another place, that it was an
inueterate love, which is all one; to wit, that it must be purchased, and
confirmed by long tract of time. Nevertheless though love be the mean to knit
friendship, yet is it not friendship it self, but the root rather of the
same. And as without the root nothing can prosper nor grow: so without love no
friendship can prosper. Thus then you may understand, that true friendship is
not gotten by public meetings, walkings or trading, nor in one day or two; and
that all sorts of benevolence or mutual offices of courtesy and civility, or
every show of love makes not up a friendship. For once again I will tell you
that friendship is so excellent a thing as it cannot be in perfection, but
only between two good and virtuous men of like commendable life and
behavior. That it is the greatest external good that can be purchased in this
life, and that it is the same which Aristotle said was more needful then
justice, and therefore highly to be prised of the man that labored for civil
happiness. Who although he have all those exterior goods which appertain to
civil life, as wealth, health, children, and such like, without which Aristotle
holds that no man can be perfectly happy in this world, yet if he want
friends, he lacks a principal instrument for his felicity; not only in
respect of the many benefits which friends bring with the^, but chiefly for the
delight of his own virtuous operatio^s, and the exercise of the like with them,
when they shall be induced by him to virtuous actions: which breeds an
unspeakable contentment. Besides that, solitariness bereaueth a man of the
sweetest part of his life that is the conversation among friends, increasing
the contentation of a happy man, as he is to be a civil man: for of that
other solitariness which appertains to contemplation, this place serves not
to speak. We may therefore right well conclude, that without friendship a man
cannot have his civil felicity accomplished. But if I should say all that
might be said concerning friendship, I should be too long; neither would I have
said so much thereof, had it not bin to show you, how solitariness cannot
serve the turn of him that would be happy in this life. Wherefore company
being necessary to felicity, will minister unto the happy man occasions to
use his liberality: for sweet and pleasing conversation, and to supply the
wants and necessities of friends, is the true and comfortable sauce to
friendship. It will make him to show the greatness of his courage in great
things, guided always by judgment and reason, and to direct all his actions
to the mark of honor, a thing esteemed (as we have said) among all others the
greatest external good: not that he shall set honor for his end (for that he
knows would be unfitting) but honorable and virtuous actions, contenting
himself that honor be the reward of them, and virtue be the hire for her
self. For to her, others will give honor as to a divine thing, wheresoever
they shall see her. But Magnanimity is not a virtue fit for every man, but for
such only as are furnished with all other virtues, and among virtuous men are
esteemed in the highest degree. And he that is not such a man, and will yet
make a show of Magnanimity, will be but laughed at and scorned, because vice
and Magnanimity, for the contrariety that is between them, cannot dwell
together in any wise; the one deserving all honor, and the other all reproach
and blame. For Magnanimity produces effects agreeable to all the rest of the
virtues, which is the cause that so singular a gift of the mind is not attained
but with great difficulty: but the more travel is taken in getting it, the
greater is the praise to him that has purchased the same. He that is adorned
with this virtue, ioyeth when great honors fall upon him, he little esteems
any peril, when honesty inuiteth him thereunto, and not anger, nor fury, nor
desire of revenge, nor only respect of honor. In matter of riches he always
observes a due temper as well as the liberal man, whom he excels in this,
that the Magnanimous man exercises his virtue in high matters that bear with
them dignity and importance; whereas the liberal man is busied in things of
less moment. He has also a due regard concerning honors, in the purchase
whereof he is not injurious or threatening, nor puffed up with pride or
ambition, but knowing right well that who so offers injury to another, cannot
be rightly called Magnanimous, he abstaineth from doing any: and if any man
have offered him injury, he holds it for the greatest and honorablest
revenge to forgive, though he have the party in his power, and may satisfy
himself; and thinks that the greatest displeasure he can work to his enemy,
is to show himself evermore garnished with virtue. Moreover, he is always
higher then his fortune, be it never so great, and be she never so contrary she
cannot overthrow him. He will never refuse to spend his life (though it be
dear unto him, knowing his own worth) for the defense of his country, of his
friends, of his parents, of his religion, or for Gods cause, with whom he is
continually in thought, though he be bodily here below on earth conversant
among men, never busied in base conceits or imaginations. His reputation is so
dear unto him, as he will sooner loose his life, then spot it by any vile act:
wherefore if he be in the field with his arms for any the causes before said,
he never turns his back to fly, but fights with a firm resolution,
either to overcome or die. He is much more ready to bestow a good turn or
benefit then to receive it; holding that it is more honorable for a man to
part with his goods, then to take at any other man's hand: nevertheless if he
chance to receive any profit or commodity by any other, he lays it up
carefully in his remembrance, and never thinks himself out of debt until he
has requited it double at the least. A property well becoming a divine mind
rather then an humane: for of al others Ingratitude is the vilest and
abhominablest vice, which among the Persians was severely punished. A vice that
may be accounted not only contrary to honesty, but also a cruel
beastliness. The Comike Poet says, that wicked is the man that knows how to
receive a benefit, but not to recompense the same. Which sentence is in effect
also in Euripides, who says, that he who forgets benefits received, can
never be reputed of an honest or generous mind. Our Christian writers have
said, that it is enemy to grace, enemy to our salvation, to our life, and all
civil society. And accordingly Seneca was of opinion, that no vice was more
contrary to humanity, or did sooner dissolve the unity of men's minds then
ingratitude, more abominable before God, or more odious to al virtuous and
honest minds. But among ungrateful wretches, he that shows ingratitude
toward those that have instructed him in learning and virtue, opening to him
the gate by which he must enter to attain to his felicity, is the most beastly
of all others: for that to them he ought to have more regard then to his own
father, from whom though he has his being, yet from the other he has his well
being, and is made fit and capable of dignity and honor by the mean of
virtue. And as gratitude or thankfulness is the ornament of all other virtues,
from which proceeds the love between the child and the parent, between the
scholar and his master, the charity toward our country, the honor toward
God, the friendship between men, and the reverence toward our superiors: so
no doubt ingratitude cannot be but directly contrary to all these, and
therefore the foulest of al other vices; from which all the evils in the world
proceed, to the perpetual infamy of him that is unthankful. Neither is it to
be wondered, that such men (like infernal furies) cast behind them Religion,
piety, love, faith, all goodness, justice, and humanity it self, seeking like
ravenous wolves to live and feed upon the blood of other men. Not only from
private houses therefore, but from Cities and Commonweals, ought this
pestiferous generation to be carefully banished, as an infection among people,
and the ruin of al conversation, lest their contagion spread that same evil
over all the rest. Pythagoras, who was the first that ever was called a
Philosopher (which is as much as to say, a lover of wisdom, and consequently
of truth) did forbid all men to lodge an unthankful man under his roof. And
because the Swallow (as Plutarke says) betokens ingratitude, he would not
have them to be suffered to nestle in a house. And to say truly, such men are
worse then the most savage and cruel beasts of the field: for of the gratitude
of some of them, even the fiercest, many most notable examples have bin
recorded; namely this: One Elpi a dweller in the I Will of Samos, who traded into
Afrike, coming with his ship on that coast, went a shore, where he met a Lion,
in whose teeth a bone of some beast stuck in such sort as he could not close
his mouth, or make any shift to eat: Elpi pitying the beast, who seemed to
crave at his hands relief, took out the bone, and so delivered him of that
mischief. But this thankful Lion failed not every day after so long as his
ship lay there at rode to bring him duly his share of what prey soever he
took, which was sufficient to feed him and all his company. Yea even among
serpents we read examples of thankfulness: for it is written, that a certain
child brought up a young serpent, and fed it familiarly a long time; but when
it was grown great, one day following the instinct of nature, it left the
child and went to the woods. It happened that some while after that child being
become now meet to travel, passing thorough a wood was assaulted by robbers,
who having taken him were purposed to have slain him: but he with pitiful
voice entreating and crying to them that they should spare his life, the same
serpent (who by chance was then near at hand) heard his cry, and knowing his
voice, came suddenly out with such fury upon the thieves, that they were glad
to take their heels, and to leave the young man there to save themselves, who
by the thankfulness of the serpent was thus saved. But because you may happily
make doubt of these histories, supposing them to be old and fabulous, give me
leave (besides mine author) to recite unto you a strange example of gratitude
in a beast, which I have understood from a person of such credit, as I dare
avouch it for a truth, since himself affirmed that he knew the gentleman in
the west country of England, to whom the thing happened even of late years.
This gentleman had a mastiffe, which he made much account of because he was
very fair and hardy, and therefore cherished him so as as his neighbors
took knowledge of his affection to the dog: in respect whereof, though they
received harm from him (for I must tell you he had a quality to worry sheep
by night) yet sought they no redress, but by complaint to the master, who in
no case could be induced to believe that his dog had that quality, so
cunning was he to take his times and to hide his fault. Howbeit upon the
renewing of complaints he caused a muzzle to be made, and every night to be put
on his dogs head; supposing thereby to be not only assured himself, but to
satisfy his neighbors also, that it was not he that committed those outrages.
But for all this, neither the harm nor the complaints were stopped; for this
dog had gotten the knack with his feet to pull off his muzzle, and then going
abroad to do his feate, at his return he would thrust his head into the
muzzle again, in such sort as any man would have freed him of any such fact.
Yet no other dog being near to do the like but he, and still the harm being
freshly done, his master once resolved to watch his dog a whole night to
satisfy himself and his neighbors of the truth: which thing he did so
discreetly, as he discovered his dogs subtlety, and saw him vnmuzzle himself,
go abroad, and return so cleaned as no spot of blood could be discerned about
him, and thrusting his head into his muzzle to lie him down as if he had bin
free from any such offense. The gentleman thus resolved of his dogs
conditions, went to bed, and slept the rest of the night; and the next morning
coming down, he found his dog lying in the hall, and looking somewhat
angerly upon him, he spoke these words, Ah thou sheepbiter, thou sheepbiter,
thou must be hanged; and so indeed had purposed with himself to have had him
executed. But whiles he was busied in some household affairs, the dog stole
out of doors and ran away; so as when his master gave order how he should be
hanged, he was no where to be found. And these circumstances of the tale I have
the rather related, that you may wonder at the understanding of this beast. Now
for his gratitude, thus it fell out: Some two years after or less that he was
thus run away to escape hanging, it was the gentleman's chance upon some
occasions to travel on foot through the country, and in a certain wood fit
for such purposes, he met two tinkers that set upon him suddenly to rob him:
these two tinkers had with them a mastiffe that carried their packes, as many in
England do; which dog when in the fight (for the gentleman defended himself
manfully) he had known either by his voice or otherwise his old master, he
ranged himself to his party, and set upon his latter masters so fiercely,
that they lost their courages, and being wounded ran away: and then the
gentleman also refigured his old servant, by whose means he was delivered from
so great a danger; and so took home his dog again, who had in the mean time
forgone his naughty quality, and was ever after much made of by his master as
he right well deserved. How shameful a thing is it therefore to man, that
brute beasts should give him examples of gratitude; and he contrariwise, on
whom God has bestowed so great a gift as reason to discern the good from the
bad, should rather follow the example of the worst sort of beasts in doing ill,
then of such as by natural instinct show him the way to goodness? For the
ungrateful man is of the nature of the wolf, of whom it is written, that
being suckled when it was young by an Ewe; when it grew great, in recompense of
his nourishment he devoured her: declaring that the wickedness of the
unthankful person cannot be overcome by any benefits, be they never so great.
But of this abominable vice we have said enough, and more then needed, but
that I was willing to give you to understand, how far it ought to be from him
that is virtuous, and would be raised to the reputation of a magnanimous man:
of whom returning to speak, thus much is to be added, that he uses himself
and all his ability evermore with greatness of courage, spending when
occasion serves magnifically, in works worthy admiration, and in helping of
others honorably. Toward all men he is courteous, gentle, and affable, never
giving occasion of offense or mislike in his conversation: such due regard he
has to place, time, persons, and other circumstances, so as he never does
anything unseemly or unworthy himself. And so he tempereth pleasantness with
gravity, benignity with dignity, that to the humble he never seems proud,
nor to the great ones never base or demisse: but valewing him neither more nor
less then he is worth, insisteth still upon truth, discovering himself
modestly and decently as he is indeed a man of virtue, and with grave, yet
gentle speeches giving satisfaction to all persons of what degree soever. And
finally in all his actions and behauior he takes great heed that he commit not
any thing whereby he may have cause to die his cheek with the purple blush;
but evermore deserve of all men praise and commendation.

If I should not interrupt, or prolong your discourse too much, I would be glad
(said Captain Norreis) to learn what is the cause that shamefastness makes
the red color come into a man's face, and that fear does make him pale?

The reason is (said I) because shamefastnes springs in us for some thing
that we think blameworthy: and the mind finding that what is to be
reprehended in us, comes from abroad, it seeks to hide the fault
committed, and to avoid the reproach thereof, by setting that color on our
face as a mask to defend us withal. And albeit that shamefastness or
blushing seem to be a certain still confession of the fault, yet it carries
with it such a grace, as passes not without commendation, specially in youth,
as has bin said. But fear which proceeds from imagination of some evil to
come, and is at hand, makes the mind which conceiueth it to startle, and
looking about for means of defense, it calls all the blood into the innermost
parts, specially to the heart, as the chief fort or castle; whereby the
exterior parts being abandoned and deprived of heat, and of that color which
it had from the blood and the spirits, there remains nothing but palenesse.
And hereof it comes to pass, that we see such men as are surprised with
fear, to be not only pale, but to tremble also, as if their members would
shake off from their bodies: even as the leaves fall from the tree as soon as
the the cold wether causes the sap to be called from the branches to the
root, for the preservation of the virtue vegetative. But such fear is
unseemly, and a token of a cowardly mind, and is seldom seen in men of valor.
For they are never so suddenly overtaken by any humane accident, but that they
are armed, and know that their virtue is to be made known in fearful and
terrible occasions, which are the very matter and subject of their glory.
Neither does fortune with her smiling, so assure the^, but that they look for
her frowning countenance to follow: and therefore in prosperity prepare
themselves for adversity; whereby when others fall under her strokes, they not
only fear her not, but courageously fight against her, and overcome her. Yet
you must understand that every sort of fear is not reproachful: for that fear
which withholdeth men from doing evil, or things that may breed them shame, is
worthy co^mendatio^: which made Xenophon to say that he was most fearful to do
any thing that was dishonest. And much more commendable is that fear which
grows from the reverence and respect we bear to God, to our parents, and our
superiors: for that leads a man to goodness, whereas the other brings a man
to all evil and wickedness. And now having satisfied your demand, let me
briefly run through the rest of the virtues before mentioned in their order.
Next therefore to Magnanimity comes the goodly virtue of Mansuetude, being a
mean between wrathfulnesse with desire of revenge, stirred up in the
irascible appetite in respect of some injury done or supposed to be done, and
coldness or lack of feeling of wrongs when they are offered: which coldness
or insensibilitie of wrongs, is by this virtue kindled or stirred up to feel
and mislike the injuries which unruly persons do oftentimes offer to men of
virtue. For as it is necessary upon many occasions to be angry, not with
intention to offend others, but for the defense of a man's self, and of those
to whom he is tied, and specially of his reputation, lest by being too dull and
careless in regarding injuries done unto him, he become apt to be ridden and
depressed by every ruffling companion: so to be either too sudden or outrageous
in anger, and thereby to be incited to do any act contrary to reason, cannot in
any sort agree with virtue, or become a gentleman. For to speak of that bearing
which is undertaken for Christian humility, or fear of offending God,
appertains not to this place. This virtue then of Mansuetude, is she that
holds the reins in her hand, to bridle the vehemence of anger, showing when,
where, with whom, for what cause, how far forth, and how long it is fit and
convenient to be angry; and likewise to let them loose, and to spur forward
the mind that is restie or slow in apprehending the just causes of wrath, with
regard of like circumstances: directing the particular actions of the virtuous
man in such cases according to reason; to whom she, as all other the virtues,
is to have a continual eye and regard in every thing.

Desire of Honor succeeds next, and is a virtue that is busied about the same
subject with Magnanimity. For as the magnanimous man respects only great
and excessive honors: so does this virtue teach the mean in purchasing of
smaller honors or dignities, such as civil men of all sorts are to be
employed in. For as there are some that seek by all means possible to catch
at every show of honor, at every office or degree that is to be gotten, and
spare not to undergo any indignity, or to try any base or unlawful means to
compass the same, heauing and shouing like men in a throng to come to be
foremost, though they deserve to be far behind: so are there others so
scrupulous and so addicted to their ease and quiet, that they cannot endure to
take upon them any pains, or any place that may bring them either trouble or
hazard; absolutely refusing in that respect, and despising al dignities and
offices, together with the honor they might purchase by the same. The first
sort of men are called ambitious: the other insensible and careless of their
reputation. Between which two extremes this virtue has her place, to keep
the first from seeking, not by virtue, but by corruption, deceit, or other
unfit means to compass honors, dignities, or authority, as many do,
slandering and backbiting such as are competitors with them; or else most
basely flattering, and with cappe and knee crouching to those that they think
may yield them help, or favor them in their purchase, which they seek and
beg to supply their own unworthiness: and to quicken the other, whose minds
have no care of their credit and reputation, but live in base companies, and
estrange themselves from all civil conversation, like brute and savage beasts.
And in this respect is she worthy high estimation, and necessary for all them
that esteem true honor (as they ought) to be the most excellent good among
exterior things: who nevertheless temper themselves from ambition, so as they
are not drawn to commit any vile or base act for the atchieuing of the same,
but strive evermore by virtue to purchase their honor and reputation. Neither
is this virtue all one with Magnanimity, because it requires not so excellent
an habit as does Magnanimity, though they both be busied about the same
subject: for between them is the like difference as is between Magnificence
and Liberality, whereof we have already spoken.

Verity is the virtue which follows in order, by which a man in all his
conversation, in all his actions, and in all his words shows himself sincere
and full of truth, making his words and his deeds always to agree, so as he
never says one thing for another, but still affirms those things that are,
and denies those that are not. The two extremes of this virtue, are on the one
side dissimulation or jesting, called in Greek Ironia, and on the other side
boasting. For some there are that seek by this vice to purchase reputation and
credit, or profit; or else even for foolish delight give themselves to vanting
and telling such strange things of themselves, as though they be incredible,
yet will they needs have men forsooth to believe them. Others for the same
respects dissemble the good parts that happily are in them, and seem willing to
make me^ believe that their good qualities are not so great as they are; with a
counterfeit modesty faining always to abase themselves in such sort as men
may easily discover them to be plain hypocrites, and that under pretense of
humility they labor to set pride on horseback: yea some even of meriment, or
by long custom of lying, think it sport sufficient never to tell any thing
but exorbitant and strange lies, insomuch as in fine, though they wittingly
speak no truth, yet themselves fall to believing what they say to be most true.
Between these two vices sits this bright-shining virtue of Truth (as she is
a moral virtue) by which men use the benefit of their speech to that true use
for which it is bestowed upon them by God, and purchase to themselves not only
honor and praise, but also trust and credit with all men, so as their words
are observed as oracles: whereas of the others, no man makes more account then
of the sound of bells, or of old wives tales. This is that excellent virtue that
is of all others the best fitting a Gentleman, and makes him respected and
welcome in all companies: which made Pythagoras to say, that next unto God,
truth in man was most to be reverenced: whose contrary likewise is of all other
things the most unfitting, the very destroier of humane conversation the mother
of scandals, and the deadly enemy of friendship: the odiousness whereof may be
discerned by this, that albeit we stick not sometimes to confess our faults,
though they be very great, to our friends, yet we are ashamed to let them know
that we have told a lie.

The virtue of Affability which succeeds, is a certain mean, by which men
seek to live and converse with others, so as they may purchase the favor and
good liking of all men, not forgetting their own gravity and reputation. And
because there are some that think with pleasing speeches and pleasant conceits
to be welcome into all companies, they give themselves to flatter, to commend
and extol every man, to sooth all that they hear spoken, and still to smile
or laugh in every man's face; purchasing thereby in the end to be esteemed but
as ridiculous sycophants or base flatterers: and others, holding a contrary
course, never speak word that may be grateful or pleasing to any man,
supposing thereby to be held for grave and wise men, evermore opposing
themselves to what others say, dispraising al men's doings, and finally with
frowning countenance making themselves odious in all companies. Therefore is
this excellent virtue set as a mean to direct men how to use their words and
behavior in honest and civil conversation, that they may be grateful. For
thereby they know how to distinguish the degrees and qualities of persons, of
times, of places, and by discreet carriage to make themselves welcome every
where, without touch of flattery. And Affability resembles very much
friendship in the particular actions thereof, both having a purpose to please,
and never to displease. But between them there is this difference, that
friendship does all things with a special fervent affection interchangeably
borne; whereas Affability respects not the mutual affection, but only a
desire to be generally acceptable and pleasing to all good men, to every one in
their several degrees and qualities, and without regard of the conditions
before specified. In the exercise of which virtue, among other observations,
this is one principal, never to let pass a word out of the mouth before it be
considered and examined whether it may offend any man or no. For many men
through lack of this consideration have let slip words that they would
afterward have redeemed at a high rate, but could not; whence arise oftentimes
great mischiefs, as daily experience shows us. Lastly, as the body has need
of rest after travel, so has the mind (ouerwearied with study or affairs)
need of recreation, that it may return the fresher to be busied again. And this
recreation is best found in certain pastimes or sports, used by gentlemen when
they meet to be merry together, wherein no baseness or vnseemlinesse is
seen: and therefore are these sports properly called, recreations of the mind.
But because in such meetings where men come to pass the time together, they
fail in their conversation two ways by excess, the one contrary to the
other; therefore is the mean which teaches the tempering of those excesses,
called the virtue of Vrbanitie, a Latin name, which in English we cannot
better, and therefore must give it pass to be denizened among us. The one
excess of too much, is, when men seek in such assemblies or meetings only to
make the company laugh, and so they laugh, care not whether the occasion be
given of any wanto^ speech or scurrilitie, or ouerbitter taunting, without
respect of persons, and if they may break a jest upon any man, either present
or absent, they will not forbear it to show their wit, though it be never so
much to the shame and ignominy of the party; yea and they will laugh thereat
themselves so exceedingly, that they will make others of force to laugh at
their laughter, though they mislike their speech. And such men may be justly
termed iesters, or knauish fools, specially if to their words they add
gestures and countenances indecent for civil men, not sparing also ribald
speeches even in the presence of sober and modest gentlewomen. A thing that
among honest and virtuous men is most odious, whose conversation ought to be
far from uncleanness or malice. Opposite to these are certain persons, who
in all companies never let fall any witty speech themselves, or any merry
conceit; nor yet when they hear them proceed from others, will once afford to
grace them with so much as a smile: but rather bend the brows thereat, or
seem not to know or to conceive any delight therein, behauing themselves like
rude clownes which want capacity to comprehend the substance of a pithy and
pleasant speech. These Aristotle calls harsh and rustike fellows. Now
between this rusticity and this foolish jesting is this virtue of Vrbanitie
the mean, which the Greeks call Eutrapelia, and teaches a man to frame all
his speeches in assemblies and meetings where he chances to be for the
reviving or recreating of his spirits, so as they may be sharp and witty, and
yet not bitter or ouerbiting to offend, nor yet to tax or reprove any man so,
as he may have just cause to complain: though (to say truth) a discreet or
witty jest cannot be much worth, or move men to laugh, unless it have a
certain deceit or offense intended toward some body, who nevertheless must
not be so pricked, as he may have cause to be grieved thereat, but rather be
merry at the conceit. For since words and gestures are the true tokens commonly
of the quality of the mind, he, that in his conversation causes not the
sweetness of his mind and the candor of his noblest part to shine through all
his actions, words and gestures, cannot be esteemed a man of worth and virtue.
He must continually have great regard to the time, place, persons, and other
circumstances, according to which he is so to order his pleasant conceits and
merry jests, not only to move meriment and laughter, but that withal he may
keep his gravity and dignity, and eschew above all things licentious and
wanton speeches, which in no wise become a man that is desirous to bear up his
reputation and credit as a civil man. And thus having given you a taste of
every of the virtues assigned to wait upon Magnanimity somewhat more amply then
mine author, who has (in my opinion) a little too briefly touched them in the
description of a magnanimous man: I will now return to his discourse again, by
which I am come to treat of Justice; the efficacy and power whereof is such,
that some sages have held her only to be virtue, as if she should contain in
her al other virtues: and that the rest that are severally named should be but
as parts of her, diversely entitled in respect of the diverse objects, about
which they are exercised. It is therefore to be considered, that this virtue is
to be taken two ways; the one when she is generally considered, and then is
she alone all the virtues: in which respect Agesilaus was wont to say, that
where Justice was, there needed no Fortitude. And Antisthenes and Plato
likewise were of opinion, that he that was just needed no laws, because this
virtue was sufficient to keep him within the compass of living well and
virtuously. The other way is, when she is taken for one of the four principal
virtues, and so is she a habit, whereby is known what is just, and the same is
accordingly desired and done. This is that incorrupted virgin, which the
ancients so termed, because she is such a friend to bashfulnes and modesty, by
which men are made worthy reverence, by which they learn the measure of
distributions and commutations, giving recompense to virtue as much as it
deserves, not by equality of number, but by equality of measure: to much
virtue great reward, to mean virtue meaner recompense: and this is the
Geometrical proportion which Aristotle speaks of. For where much desert is,
though much be given, and less, where less is deserved, and the rewards
compared together be unequal; yet as they have severally deserved, they are
equally rewarded. With some example we shall make the thing more plain.
Suppose here be two vessels, the one greater then the other, and that you fill
them both with wine or other liquor, the lesser shall nevertheless be as well
full as the greater: and if they both had speech and understanding, neither
could the one complain for having too much, nor the other too little, both
being full according to their capacity, and so receiving his due. In this sort
does Justice distribute to every one that which is his due. She produces
laws, by which virtue is rewarded, and vice punished. She corrects faults
and errors according to their quality. She sets us in the direct way that
leads to felicity. She teaches rulers and magistrates to command, and
subjects to obey: and therefore she is the true rule which shows the
inferior powers and faculties of the soul how to obey Reason, as their Queen
and mistress. Which command of Reason, Plotinus esteemed to be so important to
be exercised over the passions, as he esteemed them only to be worthily called
wise men, who subjected their passions in such sort to reason, that they should
never arise to oppose themselves against her. She instructs man to rule, not
only himself, but his wife, his children, and his family also. She preserves
and maintains States and Commonweals, by setting an even course of carriage
between Princes and their subjects. She makes men understand, how the doing
of injury is contrary to the nature of man, who is borne to be mild, benign
and gentle; and not to be (as wild beasts are) furious, fierce and cruel: for
such they are that hurt others wittingly. And when injuries happen to be done,
she distinguishes them, she seeks to make them equal, or to diminish them,
or to take them clean away: evermore teaching us this lesson, that it is
better to receive an injury then to do it. It is she that makes those things
that are severally produced for the good of sundry nations, common to all, by
the mean of commutation, of buying and selling, and having invented coin,
has set it to be a law, or rather a judge in cases of inequality, to see that
every man have his due and no more. Finally she tempereth with equity (which
may be termed a kind of clemency joined to justice) things severely established
by law, to the end that exact justice may not p^oue to be exact wrong. And
where as laws not tempered by discreet Judges, are like tyrants over men: this
equity was held by Plato to be of such importance, that when the Arcadians
sent unto him, desiring him to set them down laws to be ruled by, he
understanding that they were a people not capable of equity, refused flatly to
make them any laws at all. Agesilaus said, that to be too just, was not only
far from humanity, but eue^ cruelty it self. And Traian the Emperor wished
Princes to link equity and justice together, saying, that dominions were
otherwise inhumanely governed. The Egyptians also to show that laws are to be
administered with equity, expressed justice in their Hieroglifikes by a left
hand open, meaning, that as the left hand is slower and weaker then the right:
so that justice ought to be advisedly administered, and not with force or fury.
And the opinion of some was, that the axes and rods which were accustomably
borne before the Roman Consuls, were bound about with bands; to declare, that
as there must be a time to unbind the axes before they could be used to the
death of any man: so ought there to be a time to deliberate for them that
execute the law; wherein they may consider whether that which the rigor of law
commands may not without impeachment of Justice be tempered and reduced to
benignity and equity. To conclude, Justice is she that maintains common
utility, that gives the rule, the order, the measure and manner of all things
both public and private, the band of humane conversation and friendship. She
it is that makes man resemble God, and so far extends her power in the
conjunction of men's minds, that she not only knitteth honest men together in
civil society, but even wicked men and thieves, whose companies could not
continue, if among their iniustices Justice had not some place. She is of so
rare goodness and sincerity, that she makes man, not only to abstain from
taking another goods, but also from coveting the same.

Indeed (said M. Dormer) if Justice be such a virtue as you have described, me
think that we have small need of other virtues; for she comprehends them all
within herself.

So does she (answered I) if she be generally considered as before has bin
said. But if we call her to the company of the other virtues, as here we place
her, she has as much need of them as they of her, if she shall produce those
effects which we have spoken of. For as one vice draws another after it, as
do the linkes of a chain the one the other: even so are the virtues much more
happily linked together in such sort as they cannot be severed. But though a
man be endued with them all, yet is he called a just man, a valiant, a prudent,
or a temperate man, according as he inclines more to this then to that, or in
his actions makes more show of the one then of the other: for our natural
imperfection will not suffer any one man to excel in them all; which made me say
a while since, that it is so hard a thing to be magnanimous, since the virtue
of Magnanimity must be grounded upon all the rest. But to excel in justice, is
a thing most glorious; for it is said of her, that neither the morning star
nor the evening star shines as she does. And Hesiodus called her the daughter
of Jupiter. Whereupon Plato supposing, that who so embraced Justice contracted
parentage with Jupiter the King of Gods and men, accounted the just man had
gotten a place very near unto God.

Verily (said M. Dormer) and not without cause. For it behooves him that will
be just to be void of all vice, and furnished with all other virtues. And
therefore me thinks, he that said Justice might well be without Prudence,
considered ill what belonged to Justice. For Prudence is most necessary to
discern what is just from what is unjust; and a good judgment therein can no
man have that wants Prudence: without which judgment, Justice can never rule
well those things that are under her government. And as Agesilaus said of
Fortitude, so think I of Justice, that if she be not guided by Prudence (which
is aptly called the eye of the mind) she works more harm the^ good.

You think truly (said I) and of this virtue the course of our author draws
me to treat, and to declare of what importance she is to humane things, and
how beneficial. But let me first put you in mind that hitherto has bin spoken
but of those virtues which have their foundation in the unreasonable parts of
the mind: of which mind they are the habits, consisting in the mean betwixt
two extremes, and busied about the affects and actions of men. Likewise has
bin declared how the affects come from the powers or appetites of the soul, to
wit, the concupiscible and the irascible, and how all commendable actions
proceed from election, before which Counsel must go. And albeit we made
mention there of Prudence, yet it was then referred to a fitter place to talk
thereof more largely, when the drift of our discourse should bring us thither.
Now therefore being come to that place which is proper to her, I am to speak
of thereof. But before I proceed any further, you must understand that there be
two sorts of virtues: for some are moral, concerning manners, of which we have
discoursed hitherto, and showed how they are grounded in those parts of the
mind that are deuoide of reason. Others are of the mind or understanding, in
which respect they are called Intellectiue; and of them henceforth must be our
speech. But you must remember, that though it was said, that those moral
virtues were founded in those parts of the mind wanting reason, yet were they
guided by the light of reason. And this light of reason (as much as concerns
men's actions) is nothing else but Prudence, which is a virtue of the
understanding, and the rule and measure of all the moral virtues concerning
our actions and affects: even as sapience or wisdom is the guide and
gouernesse of speculation. And for so much as reason is capable of two
intellectiue virtues, whereof the one is active, and the other speculatiue,
this latter intends always the knowledge of truth: and the first is busied
about the knowledge of what is good. Which good, when it is come to the height
of his perfection in our actions, is the end of them; and then have we attained
that furthest and absolute term or bound, unto which we have directed all our
civil actions. Hereupon Plotinus said, that there were in us two principles or
original causes of doing; whereof the one is the mind, which calls us to
contemplatio^: the other is reason, guiding us to civil actions; and from her
does that which is good and fair never depart. And though it may be objected,
that both these intellectiue virtues are exercised in or about the knowledge of
truth, as indeed they be; yet is it to be advertised, that it is in diverse
respects that they be so exercised. For that part which is exercised in
contemplatio^, is busied about truth simply; that is to say, about those things
that never change, and are always the same; as God first of all; then all the
universal things which nature has produced: about which Prudence has nothing
to do to busy her self, because they are not subject to man's counsel, nor to
his election: and of such things properly is truth the subject: which truth (as
Plato said) is the guide to lead men to al goodness. But Prudence works
properly about such things as are subject to change; and may be and not be; may
be done or not done; and (when al is said) are fortunable: of which there is no
certain and infallible truth, as is of things eternal. Nevertheless Prudence
in this inconstancy of things sensible, seeks always to apply it self to
that which is most likely to happen, and does seem most probable to the
discourse of reason. And this also is that truth about which she discourses,
seeking still to choose that which is or seems to her best and most fair.
Without Prudence can no virtuous operation be brought to pass. For she only
foreseeth and knows what is convenient and seemly: and withholdeth a man at
all times from vice or any voluntary wicked action: so that he that is not
honest cannot be prudent. It is neither art nor science, but an habit of the
mind, never severed from reason, in the discoursing of those things about which
man is to use reason, for private or public benefit. So as it may well be
said, that in respect of the subject it is all one with that science which is
called Civil: but in respect of the reason of the one and of the other, they be
different. For Prudence is in the prudent man principally for his private good
and profit, and next for the public weal: but the civil or politic man
considers that which is profitable to the Commonwealth. And though both be
busied about the benefit of mankind according to reason, yet so far forth as
the prudent man respects his private good, it is called in him Prudence. But
when it is applied to the universal commodity of the Co^monweal, it is called
the civil faculty or science. Which faculty without prudence will be of small
effect in government: the rule whereof it fetches from Temperance, which is
called the preserver of Prudence. Nevertheless the prudent man may at once
provide both for his private affairs and for the public, though his office be
rather to command others to execute things then to do himself. And albeit in
that point Socrates was deceived, saying that Prudence was all the virtues
together, yet is she so inseparable a companion unto them all, as if she be
taken from them, they remain os small value or effect. The office of this
virtue, is to consider what is profitable, and to apprehend it: and likewise to
eschew all that is hurtful. And to discourse of things sensible and usual,
thereby to show what is fit to be chosen, and what to be forsaken. In regard
whereof Plato said that Prudenee guided us to happiness of life, and imprudence
made us miserable and unhappy: affirming that she only directed us to do all
our affairs well, yea and to know our selves. Among the representations of
virtues, Prudence is commonly set with a looking-glas in her hand: which by all
likelihood is done to give us to understand, that as the glass being clear
shows a man his face; so Prudence well used shows to him himself, making him
to know what he is, and to what end created. The knowledge whereof works in him,
that as he travels to attain for himself profit and goodness; so acknowledging
himself to be borne for the good also of others, endeuoreth to direct the
affairs also of his parents, friends and Co^mon-weale to the same end of
profit and goodness. Now although it has bin said, that Pudence is a science of
good and evil, yet is it to be understood that she is not properly termed a
science; but is (as was said eue^ now) so far from it, that she is busied about
things casual which may happen and not happen, whereof there can be no certain
science: whereas Science laboreth about things certain and eternal. Prudence
considers what is profitable and good; Science searches out truth simply.
And as these two be different the one from the other: so is there difference
between the wise man and the prudent. For the wise man being still busied about
the causes of things, and the marvelous effects which they produce by the
means of Gods goodness, is as it were out of the world, little respecting any
profit, which the prudent has still regard unto. For the wise man has his
mind always raised to the conte^plation of sublime things, whereby these baser
of the earth seem to him worthy no estimation, the rather because he knows
right well that nature has need of very little to sustain her. And although
Plato say that those men are called wise, who by the light of reason, know what
is profitable, not only for themselves and particular persons, but generally
for the commonweal, he there uses the name of a wise man according to the
common manner of speech, and not properly. But that you may the better
understand my authors meaning, you must give me leave to enlarge a little the
ground of this his distinction. You are therefore to consider, that there be
three several things in us, to wit, sense and feeling, understanding and
appetite. Of which the first is the beginning of no action properly, because it
is common to us with brute beasts, who are not said to do any action, for that
they want judgment and election. The appetite, so far forth as it is
obedient to reason, either follows or eschueth things presented thereunto:
and in this part Counsel has place and election, as has bin formerly said:
which election is the inducement to action, for thereby we work either good or
evil; and it is provoked by the appetite, though reason brideling the
concupiscible desire be the minister of good election. But the understanding
stretches further then so. For it travels about things eternal, necessary, and
so true as they never change, nor can be any other then as by nature they have
bin framed. But it is busied about this truth two manner of ways; for either
it seeks the knowledge of principles, from whence true conclusions are
drawn; or else of principles that be the orig^ne of things. If we consider the
understanding according to the first manner, it breeds science in us, which
comes from the knowledge of true principles, which are the grounds of true
conclusions. And in this sort do we know all things natural and corporal, yet
eternal and immutable, as causes natural, nature her self, time, place, the
elements, heaven, the first mouer, so far forth as he is applied to a
moveable body (for so far forth as he is a simple substance, immovable,
indivisible, free from all change: and as he is alone by him self infinite,
neither body, nor virtue contained in a body, the first of all things
naturally moved, yea before the matter it self, and al other the properties
attributed to that simple, pure and divine nature, it is a thing not
appertaining to the natural Philosopher to treat of him) and generally all
other things natural. But taking the understanding according to the second way,
it raises us up to the knowledge of that divine power, from which all things
great and small, mortal and immortal, have their beginning: and this
knowledge is called wisdom: which, together with virtue, we attain by the
means of Philosophy, the only school-mistris of humane and divine learning,
and the true guide to commendable life and virtuous actions, being indeed the
greatest gift that God gives to man in this transitory life. Now as these
virtues before specified direct us to that perfectest end that man in this
world can attain unto by his virtuous deeds: so does this habit, called
wisdom, conduct him to a far more excellent end then this civil or
politic end. And if that which virtue guides us unto, be worthy to be called
perfect in this world, this other (which wisdom leads us unto) may well be
termed most perfect: because this divine habit addresseth us to the knowledge
of the most pure, simple, and excellentest nature, which is God eternal and
immortal, the fountain of all goodness, and infallible truth, the only and
absolute rest and quiet of our souls and minds. For which cause Plato said,
that humane things, if they were compared to divine, were unworthy the
employing any study in them, as being of no price or estimation at all: for
they are rather shadows of things then things indeed, evermore fleeting and
slippery, as daily experience teaches us. But being as we are among men, and
set to live and converse with them ciuilly, the civil man must not give
himself to contemplation, to stay upon it as wisdom would persuade him,
until he have first employed his wit and prudence to the good and profit as
well of others as of himself. Giving them to understand, how man is the
perfection of all creatures under heaven, and placed as the center between
things divine and mortal: and showing to them how great is the perfection of
man's mind, make them know how unworthy and unfit it is for a man to suffer
those parts that he has common with brute beasts to master and overrule those
by which he is made not much inferior to divine creatures: and causing them to
lift up their minds to this consideration, instruct them so to dispose and rule
through virtuous habits those parts which of themselves are rebellious to
reason, as they may be forced to obey her no otherwise then their Queen and
mistress: and through Fortitude, Temperance, Justice, and Prudence, with the
rest of the virtues that spring from them, frame their behavior, and direct
all their actions to that end which we have entitled by the name of civil
felicity, to wit, that perfect action or operation according to virtue in a
perfect life, whereof has formerly bin largely discoursed. Which felicity
once attained, is of that nature, that no man which is possessed thereof can
become miserable or unhappy. For vice only can reduce man to be miserable, and
that is evermore banished from felicity, whose conversation is only with
virtue: to whom she is so fast linked and tied in the mind of man, that he has
no power to dissolve or sever the same. And this felicity is not only a
degree, but even the very foundation of that other, which we may attain by the
mean of wisdom. For after we have once settled and gounded our selves in the
moral virtues, and done well in respect of our selves, and also helped others
as much as we could, we may then raise our thoughts to a higher consideration,
and examining more inwardly our own estate, find that this most excellent gift
of understanding has bin given us to a further end and purpose then this
humane felicity: and therefore bend all our wits to a better use of our selves,
which is to take the way of that other felicity, so to place our selves, not
only above the ordinary rank of men, but even to approach (as near as our
frailty will permit) to God himself, the last end of all our thoughts and
actions. From this perfect knowledge of our selves we ascend by degrees to such
a height, as leaving all worldly cares, we apply al our studies to the
searching of divine things, to the end that by attaining the understanding and
knowledge of our maker, and the Creator of all things, we may plainly discern
that whatsoever is here among us on earth, is but smoke and dust: and that to
be even glutted with all the good that this life can afford, is but a
possession of smoke, and a shadow of the true good which is above. And so
knowing that the mind is the true man, given unto us of special grace to guide
the body, we may turn our selves to that happiness which makes us immortal,
by raising the mind to the height of that heavenly felicity: the sweetness
and delight whereof, is so much greater then that of humane felicity, (though
without this the other cannot be) as the habit of that excellent power of the
virtue intellectiue, is employed about a more noble object, then that which the
virtue active does intend. For it is evermore busied about things eternal and
universal, and about the contemplation of the most high and gracious God. Of
this excellent degree of felicity has Aristotle spoken in his first and tenth
books of Ethikes, declaring how it ought to be the final end of all our
operations, and has attributed this excellent kind of faculty to those men
only who are properly called Sages or wise men: because they, by the means of
actions and of sciences, finding that these mortal things are not able to
bring a man to full and perfect happiness, do so raise themselves from these
baser cogitations, as they apply their mind and understanding wholly to the
knowledge of divine essences. And such men (says he) as have attained that
degree, are rather to be esteemed divine then humane. For whiles they live in
contemplation, they are not like men living among men, composed of body and
soul, but as divine creatures freed from mortal affections arising from the
body, and bent only to that which may purchase the neuer-ending felicity of
the soul; which according to Plato and Aristotle, is the true man. And to this
opinion did our Savior Christ (who is the infallible verity) give authority
and confirmation, when he said, that we ought to have such care of that soul
which is in us according to the image of God, that we should esteem nothing
(how great or precious soever the world esteemed it) at so high a rate, as for
the purchasing thereof we should hurt or loose the same: for his words are,
What avails it a man to gain all the world and loose his own soul? By this
opinion of these two Philosophers, we may plainly understand, that even in that
darkness of ancient superstition, God had yet given such light of reason to
the minds of men to illumine them withal, that they saw how through sciences
and wisdom they were to seek the way that should lead them to their perfect
felicity, that is, to God Almighty himself, who is such an end as no other
end can be supposed beyond him; but to him all other ends are directed, as to
the true and most happy term, bound or limit of all virtues and virtuous
actions, and of civil felicity it self. But because that divine part of the
Intellectiue soul which is in us, is to have consideration not only of our
present state of life, but also to that eternity, wherein our immortal
minds, made to the likeness of God, are to live with him eternally. Therefore
did Aristotle fitly teach, that men ought to bend and frame their minds wholly
to that true and absolute end: for that the mind being divine, it is his
proper office to seek to unite it self to his first principle or beginning,
which is God. Neither has his divine Majesty of his abundant grace bestowed
the virtue intellectiue upon man to any other end, then that he might know it
to be his special duty to raise himself to him, as to the author and free
giver of all goodness: and as he has bestowed on him a soul made to his own
likeness, so he should therewith bend his endeavor to be like him in all his
actions, as far as the corruption contracted by the communion of the body
will permit. Which thing the Platonikes considering, have spoken much more
largely thereof then Aristotle, following therein the steps of their master.
But some will say, that Aristotle spoke the less thereof, thinking that the
soul of man, even concerning the understanding, was not immortal; because it
seems to them, that when the soul has no more the senses of the body to
serve her as instruments whereby she understands and knows, she should no
longer live. For since nature cannot suffer any thing to be idle in the world,
and the soul wanting the body can have no operation, therefore they think it
is to be concluded, that with the body she must needs fall and die: for that
if she should happen to remain after she were separated from the body, yet
she should not have any operation, insomuch as having the understanding for her
proper operation, and seeing she cannot understand but by the ministry of the
senses, from which she can have no help when she is loosed from the body, it
follows that she has no operation, and then must she be idle in nature,
which is in no sort to be allowed. But my author (as before is said) does
think, that these men mistake Aristotle, not considering that he, speaking as
a natural Philosopher of the soul, was not to treat thereof but naturally;
and in so doing, was to restrain himself within the bounds of nature:
according to which, he is not to consider any form separate from the matter,
from which we (as all other natural things) have our bodies. This Aristotle
considering and knowing, that as a natural Philosopher he was not to speak of
the Intellectiue soul, said, that understanding being separated from the other
powers of the mind, as a thing eternal, severed from the corruptible part, it
appertained not to him to treat thereof in that place, where he spoke of the
soul as she was the actor of the body, and used it as her instrument. For he
saw well enough, that though the understanding took beginning with the body,
because it was the form thereof; yet was it not the actor of the body, so as
it should use any member thereof as an instrument: but was only aforme that
was to exercise all the other powers of the other souls. For it is likewise
Aristotle's opinion, that where the understanding is in things corruptible,
there has it also the faculties of all the other souls within it self. Which
thing he showed more clearly in his first book de Partibus Animalium, saying,
that to speak of the Intellectiue soul all that might be said, was not the
office of a natural Philosopher. And this for two reasons. The one is, that
the Intellectiue soul is no actor of the body, because she has in her no
part of motion, either of her self, or accidentally. For she neither
increases nor diminishes the body, she nourishes it not, nor maintains
it; for these are functions appertaining to the vegetative soul; she
changes it not, nor moves it from place to place; for that is the office of
the sensitive soul: and these be the motions which the body can have from the
soul (saving generation and corruption, which are changes made in an instant):
therefore inasmuch as she is intellectiue, she is not subject to the
consideration of the natural Philosopher. The other reason is, for that the
natural Philosopher considers not the substances separated from the matter,
and therefore his office is not to consider the excellency of the Intellectiue
soul, which is not the actor of the body, though she be the form thereof.
And therefore Aristotle tells us in his second book of Physikes, that the
term or bound of the natural Philosphers consideration, is the Intellectiue
soul. For albeit he may consider the soul so far as she moves and is not
moved; as he may also the first mouer: yet does he not consider her essence,
nor the essence of the first mouer: for this appertains to the Metaphysike,
who considers of the substances separated and immortal. And hence comes it
that Aristotle treating in his book of Physikes of nature, as she is the
beginning of all mouings and of rest; when he is come to the first mouer who is
immovable, yet moves all that is moved in the world, proceeded not any
further to show his nature: understanding right well, that the natural
Philosophers office was not, to consider any thing that is simply immovable,
as well in respect of the whole, as of the parts, as the first mouer is. But
let us (without questioning further thereupon) hold this for certain, not
only by that which Christian Religion teaches us, but also by that which
Aristotle has held, that our souls are immorall. For if it were otherwise, we
should be of all other creatures that nature produces the most unhappy: and
in vain should that desire of immortality (which all men have) be given unto
us. Besides that, man, as man, that is to say, as a creature intellectiue,
should not have that end which is ordained for him, which is contemplative
felicity. Neither is it to the purpose to say, that such felicity is not
attained by moral virtues, but by wisdom only, or that there be but few so
wise as to seek this excellent felicity, and infinite the number of those that
think but little upon it: for all men are borne apt unto it, if they will
apply their minds unto the same. And though among all generations of men there
should be but three or four that bent their endeavor to attain it, they only
were sufficient to prove our intention, because it is most certain, that the
number of foolish men is infinite, who not knowing themselves, cannot tell how
to use themselves, and direct their endeavors to that which is the proper end
of man. Of whom it is said, People on whom night comes before Sunne-set. A
wicked generation, whose whole lifetime flies from them unprofitably, in such
sort, as they can scarce perceive that they have lived. For although there be
infinitely more such in this world then of quick and elevated spirits, yet
ought not we to endure, that their negligence, who know not themselves to be
men, should prejudice the minds of such as know what they are, and raise their
thoughts carefully to divine things. And therefore leaving their opinions that
will needs say, that Aristole impiously and madly has held the contrary, it
shall be best to proceed in our discourse of the felicity that is to be
attained by contemplation.

I pray you (said Captain Carleil) since there is a contrariety of opinions
among Philosophers, concerning the immortality of the soul, and that the
knowledge thereof appertains to the better understanding of this contemplative
felicity, let us hear, if your author give any further light thereunto, since
such good fellows seek to cast so dark a mist before our eyes, under the
cloak of Aristotle's opinion. For albeit you spoke somewhat of it yesterday, so
far as concerned our manner of learning according to Aristotle, yet was it but
by the way, and not as it concerned this felicity: and if such a matter as
this were twice repeated, it could not but be profitable to us, though it be
somewhat troublesome to you.

Whereupon I said: that which my author was not willing to undertake, you
press me unto, as if you were the same persons, and had the same sense that
those introduced by him had: and therefore since you also will have it so, I am
content to close up this your feast with this last dish; notwithstanding that
the evening draw on, and that to speak thereof at large would ask a long
time. But knitting up, as well as I can, a great volume in a little room, I
will deliver unto you that which the shortness of our time will permit, and
pray with mine author his divine Majesty, who has given us an immortal
soul, that he will vouchsafe us his grace to say so much and no more of this
matter, as may be to his glory, and to all our comforts. Know ye then that
these men, that out of Aristotle's writings gather our intellectiue soul to be
mortal, take for their foundation and ground this; that the soul is the actor
of the body, and uses it but after the manner before mentioned. And to
maintain this their opinion, they wrest diverse places of his untruly, and
contrary to the mind of this great Philosopher, as shall be declared unto you.
True it is, that while the intellectiue soul is the form of the body, she
has some need of him to understand. For without the fantasy we can understand
nothing in this life, since from the senses the forms of all things are
represented unto us, as yesterday was declared. And this did Aristotle mean to
teach us, when contrary to the opinion of some former Philosophers he said,
that sense and understanding was not all one, although there be some similitude
between them. And because the essences of things are known by their
operations, according to Aristotle; and that the intellectiue soul
understands (which is a spiritual operation;) it follows that simply of her
own nature she is all spirit, and therefore immortal, for else to understand,
would not be her property. Whereunto also Aristotle agrees, in saying, that
some parts of the soul are not conjoined to the body, and therefore are
separable: and that the understanding and the co^templatiue power was another
kind of soul, and not drawn from the power of matter, as the other two are,
whose operations were ordained for the Intellectiue soul, insomuch as she is
the form of the body: which shows plainly that she is eternal and
immortal. And in the twelfth of his Metaphysikes, making a doubt, whether any
form remain after the extinguishing of the matter, he said doubtfully of the
other two, that not every soul, but the Intellectiue only remained. And here
is to be noted, that his opinion was not (though some would have it so) that
the fantasy was the form of the body, for that dies with the body, as
shall be showed hereafter: but he considered the understanding it self, as a
soul, and as the form of the body; and not as a separable intelligence, the
lowest of all others, and common to all men, as Theophrastus and Themistius
(though diversely) have thought. Neither yet that it was God Almighty, as
Alexander supposes: for God is not the form of our bodies, nor has any man
ever doubted whether God were immortal. So as our understanding is neither
God, nor yet a separate intelligence, common to all me^, like those that
govern an universal sphere, as they above mentioned have thought, and as some
of our Christians have dreamed; who being raised to Ecclesiastical dignity,
have chosen rather to follow the Greeks vanity and the Arabians, then favor
the religious and true interpreters of Aristotle's mind. Whereas they ought
rather to have rooted such opinions out of men's minds, as apt to draw them to
perdition, and not to mask them with the vizard of natural Philosophers: as
if things natural, that may seem contrary to Christianity, were to be set
before men in writing, to be confirmed by natural reasons apparent at least,
though not true, to persuade their minds amiss. But Johannes Gramaticus among
the Greeks has declared Aristotle's mind aright; and so has he that is called
the Angelical Doctor in sundry places as a most excellent spirit and a
religious man, whatsoever Scotus write against him. And what better testimony
need we have of the vanity of these men's interpretations, then Aristotle
himself? who most effectually shows the same, where he says, that the
waxing old of man proceeds not from the Intellectiue soul, but from the
body wherein she is (which nevertheless is to be understood as she is the
form thereof:) and in so saying, declares, that every man has his
Intellectiue soul: which soul is a mean betwixt separated substances and
corporal; and therefore partly she communicates with the body to inform the
same, and partly she uses (as proper to her) the virtue of the separated
substances (as much as her nature may bear) in the use of understanding. And
since it is clear, that in nature the most perfect things contain the less
perfect, I cannot conceive from whence proceeds the frenzy of these men,
that will rather draw the soul Intellectiue to be mortal then immortal;
seeing that to understand is the most singular operation that the soul has,
and to whom the powers of the other souls are referred, as to the better end,
and obey as hand-maides to their mistress, in such as propose to themselves to
live like men. Neither does the reason alleged by some serve, who say, that
because there is great imperfection in the Intellectiue soul in comparison of
the separate intelligences, it shows the same to be mortal. For if this
reason were true, they might as well by the same conclude, that the separate
intelligences were also mortal. For since Aristotle says, that only the
first intelligence (who in his phrase is the first mouer) is perfect; and that
all the other compared to him are imperfect, (imperfection being in these men's
fancy the cause of mortalnesse) it must follow, that as imperfect, they should
be mortal: which is as contrary to Aristotle's mind, as any thing can be.
Wherefore we must not say, that imperfection in the intellectiue soul (in
respect of the intelligences separated) causes the same to die with the body,
since her office depends not on the body: but it is only to be said, that
she cease to inform the body through the defect thereof, and not of her
self; who being freed from the body, remains nevertheless perfect in her
being. For albeit she have some respect to the body whiles she informs the
same, yet has she not her absolute being from it. And therefore said
Aristotle, that the virtue of the sense is not equal to the virtue of the
understanding; for that a mighty or strong Sensible, weakeneth, and oftentimes
corrupts the sense; whereas from an excellent Intelligible, the understanding
gathers greater virtue: which thing could not be said, if the understanding
were as these people suppose, a separate intelligence, whereof the particulars
did participate. Wherefore we must needs say he meant of the understanding of
every particular man, as of the form of this man, and that man: for he spoke
of the understanding of particular men, and not of intelligences, as those men
have belike dreamed. And this shows (howsoever any think the contrary) that
as well the Agent understanding and the possible also (whereof this is ordained
as matter to that, and both necessary to understand) are essential parts of
the soul, and not two separate intelligences, as Themistius would have them.
The reason likewise which some allege, is not good, when they argue, that the
soul being the form of the body, should ever have a desire, after she were
separated from the same, to reunite her self again thereunto: but the body
being rotten and corrupted, her desire in that behalf should be vain. For I
say, that since the soul has informed the body, she has done as much as to
her appertained, neither is she to desire any further (to speak naturally)
then she has accomplished: and therefore she remains as a separate
intelligence. Which has made the Peripatetikes to affirm, that the soul
separated from the body, is not the same that she was, when she was in the
body; because that joined to the body she was the form thereof, but
separated she can no more be so. But this difficulty, which natural
Philosophers have not known how to resolve as they ought, our blessed Savior
the Son of God has fully resolved, by rising again the third day (not to
say any thing of others raised by him) and promising to us the like
resurrection.

This (said my Lord Primate) all true Christians believe: but since we are
debating of Aristotle's opinions, where he says, that the passible
understanding dies, and some of his Interpreters say, that it is the possible
understanding, how shall we make this to agree with the immortality of the
soul?

Well enough (said I:) for they that so interpret him deceive themselves: for
there is as great difference (as Aristotle himself teaches) between the
passible soul and the possible soul, as between that which is eternal and
that which is corruptible. The passible understanding according to Aristotle is
the fantasy, or the imaginatiue or cogitatiue power, call it how you please,
the which Auerroes said was taken at large, but not properly for the
understanding; and as an inward sense depending upon the body, receives the
sensible kinds from the common sense, and presents them to the possible
understanding, which is the place of the intelligible kinds or forms, as
Aristotle in sundry places declares. And who so shall well consider
Themistius, where he speaks of the multiplication of the understanding, shall
find that he supposed it not as our Christian writers do, but took the
virtue fantastike for the understanding, multiplied in particular persons. And
therefore she being mingled with the body, fails also with the same: and
this is that interior thing which Aristotle says is corrupted, whereby the
understanding loses his virtue (as shall be showed) which happens not to the
possible understanding, because it is an essential part of the Intellectiue
soul, not mingled with the body, and free from any passion, as a divine
substance. Of which body she uses no part for her instrument to understand,
though she have need of the fantasy to receive the Intelligible forms whiles
she is the form of the body. And this necessity, which the understanding
has of the fantasy to understand, shows the contrary of that which these
fellows infer, who hold the understanding to be mortal in that respect. For
by this it appears, that the understanding proceeds not from the power of
the matter: for if so it were, it should have no need of the fantasy, but
should it self be the fantasy: and therefore Aristotle right well perceiving
that our understanding was not fantasy, nor used any part of the body for an
instrument, said, that the understanding came from abroad, as shall be
declared. It is therefore no good consequence to say, that because the passible
soul dies, therefore the possible soul likewise is mortal.

Yea but (said M. Spencer) we have from Aristotle, that the possible
understanding suffers in the act of understanding: and to suffer imports
corruption; by which reason it should be mortal as is the passible.

Neither is that reason (quoth I) sufficient: for although the name of
suffering agree with the possible understanding, and with the passible*
(leaving the difference between Alexander and Aristotle in that point) the
reason and manner in them is different. For the suffering of the passible
understanding tends to the destruction thereof, whereas the suffering of the
possible is to the greater perfection of the same. And for this cause Aristotle
tells us, that the suffering of the senses, and that of the understanding are
not both of one nature: because the first breeds destruction, and the later
perfection; and that therefore an excellent Intelligible gives perfection to
the understanding, whereas an excellent Sensible corrupts the sense. But not
having any other word meet to express this suffering of the understanding,
whiles it is in that act, we use the same that agrees to the passible, though
the reason of them both be very diverse. The possible understanding (as has
been said already) being the place of the Intelligible forms, stands in
respect of the Agent understanding, as the matter in respect of the form: for
the first is but in power (for which respect Auerroes called it the material
understanding:) and this later is in act. And this Agent understanding, by
illumining the forms which are in him as blind (even as colors are in things
before they be made apparent to the eye by the illumination of light)
understands the kinds of things, and understanding them understands it
self. For in spiritual things, that which understands and that which is
understood, become all one thing: and turning it self about the universal
kinds, understands withal, things particular. And this is that which the
possible understanding suffers from the Agent, receiving thereby that
perfection which you have heard.

Why (said Master Spenser) does it not seem, that Aristotle when he says,
that after death we have no memory, that he meant that this our understanding
was mortal? For if it were not so, man should not lose the remembrance of
things done in this life.

Nay (answered I) what a silly part had it been of Aristotle rather, if he had
thought the intellectiue soul to be mortal, to say that we remembered nothing
after this life, when nothing of us should have remained? And therefore it may
serve to prove the immortality of the soul, and not the corruption, as you
surmise (only for arguments sake) that truth may be sifted out. But our not
remembering then, comes from the corruptible part, which is the virtue of the
fantasy: which being a power of the sensitive soul, that keeps in store the
remembrance of material things, that virtue which should represent them
failing in us, we cannot remember them after death. For the memory is no part
of the understanding, but of the sensitive soul: and therefore Aristotle said,
that memory came from sense, insomuch as creatures wanting reason have
memory, though they have not rememorating as man has: for thereto is
discourse required; which according to Aristotle is nothing else but an action
of the understanding in the virtue imaginatiue. Which thing neither in those
creatures deuoid of reason, nor yet in separated intelligences can have place,
because those want discourse, and these are pure acts (as Philosophers call
them.)

Does not Aristotle (said my Lord Primate) in his Ethikes say, that the
contentme^ts and the troubles of those which live, appertain unto the dead,
and breed them grief or delight? And how is it then that he should say, we
have no memory after this life?

Aristotle in that place (said I) spoke in reproof of Solon, who had said,
that no man could be accounted happy till after his death: and meant there to
show, that although it were granted that man had memory after his death, of
things done in this life, yet could he not be happy when he was dead, by
reason of the strange accidents which this life brings forth: and therefore
he said not simply that we remember; but that supposing we did, yet could we
not be happy when we were dead, so making good his opinion against Solon by
natural reason.

Yet (said Master Spenser) let me ask you this question; if the understanding
be immortal, and multiplied still to the number of all the men, that have
been, are, and shall be, how can it stand with that which Aristotle tells us
of multiplication, which (says he) proceeds from the matter; and things
material are always corruptible?

Marry (Sir said I) this is to be understood of material things, and not of
Intelligible and spiritual, such as is the understanding. And that the
understanding might remain after the matter were gone, as the form of the
body, he has (as before is said) declared in his Metaphysikes, affirming the
Intellectiue soul to be perpetual, though it be separated from the body,
whose form it was.

But how comes it to pass (replied Master Spenser that the soul being
immortal and impassible, yet by experience we see daily, that she is troubled
with Lethargies, Phrensies, Melancholy, drunkenness, and such other passions,
by which we see her overcome, and to be debarred from her office and function.

These (quoth I) are passions of the virtue cogitatiue, fantastike, or
imaginatiue, called by Aristotle (as I have said already) the passible
understanding; and not of the Intellectiue soul. Which passible understanding
being an inward sense, and therefore tied to the body, feels the passions of
the same; whereby it is offended, and cannot perform his office toward the
other, but runs into such inconveniences by reason of his infirmity, and for
want of reasons direction. And whereas Hippocrates says that they that being
sick in mind, and touched with any corporal disease, have little or no
feeling of pain; it shows plainly that it is as I have said. For if you
mark it well, this word feel explaneth the whole, since feeling is a
property of the Sensitive soul, and the understanding feels not. And in
like manner are the words of Aristotle to be understood, where he says, that
such whose flesh is soft are apt to learn, and they that are melancholy to be
wise. For that the Sensitive virtue takes more easily the forms or kinds of
things in such subjects according to their nature, and represents them to the
understanding, from whence knowledge and understanding proceeds, as yesterday
was said. And this happens not only in these passions, but also in all other
alterations, as of gladness, of sorrow, of hope and of fear, with such like
which appertain not to the understanding, to which (said Aristotle) who would
ascribe such affects, might as well say that the understanding laid brick to
build, or cast a loome to weaue.

Why, (say M. Spencer) does your author mean (as some have not sticked even in
our days to affirm) that there are in us two several souls, the one
sensitive and mortal, and the other Intellectiue and Divine?

Nothing less (said I) for that I hold were manifest heresy as well in
Philosophy as in Christianity. For Aristotle teaches us, that the Vegetative
and Sensitive soul, or their powers, were in the soul Intellectiue, as the
triangle is in the square: which could not be if the sensitive were separated
from the Intellectiue. And speaking of the variety of souls, and of their
powers, he says, that the Sensitive could not be without the Vegetative, but
that this latter might well be without the former: and that all the other
virtues of all the three souls are in those creatures that have reason and
understanding. It cannot therefore be said (according to Aristotle) that the
Sensitive soul in man is severed from the Intellectiue. And because man
participateth (as has been said) of all the three faculties of the souls, I
see not why these fellows that mention two, speak not of all three as well,
seeing that in man are the operations of all three. For if they say that it
suffices to speak of the Sensitive, by which man is a living creature, and
contains the Vegetative; why should they not as well say, that the
Intellectiue alone includes both the other? and then is there no need of
seuering at all. By which it may appear, that this frantike opinion gathered
from the Assirians, is not only contrary to Aristotle, but to reason it self.
For Aristotle says, that all things have their being from their forms; and
that in natural things, the more perfect contain the less perfect, when the
lesser is ordained for the more: and that therefore only the Intellectiue
soul which contains within it the natures of both the others, is the only
and true form of man, malgre all such dolts as would have man to be (by reason
of diverse forms) both a brute and a reasonable creature, who seek to set men
astray from the right way with such fanaticall devices. Let us therefore
conclude with Aristotle, that both the passible and the possible understandings
are virtues of the Intellectiue soul, insomuch as she is the particular and
proper form of every man, and that as a humane soul she is everlasting,
impassible, not mingled with the body, but severed from the same, simple and
divine, not drawn from any power of matter, but infused into us from abroad,
not engendered by seed: which being once freed from the body (because nature
admits nothing that is idle) is altogether bent and intent to contemplation,
being then (as Philosophers call it) actus purus, a pure understanding, not
needing the body either as an object, or as a subject. In consideration
whereof Aristotle said, that man through contemplation became divine; and that
the true man (which both he and his divine master agreed to be the mind) did
enjoy thereby (not as a mortal man living in the world, but as a divine
creature) that high felicity, to which, civil felicity was ordained; and
attained to wisdom and science, after the exercise of the moral virtues, as
means to guide and conduct him to the same. And not impertinently have the
Platonikes (following their master in that point) said, that nature had given
us sense, not because we should stay thereupon, but to the end that thereby
might grow in us imagination, from imagination discourse, from discourse
intelligence, and from intelligence gladness unspeakable, which might raise us
(as divine, and freed from the bands of the flesh) to the knowledge of God, who
is the beginning and the end of all goodness, toward whom we ought with all
endeavor to lift up our minds, as to our chief and most perfect good: for he
only is our summum bonum. For to them it seemed that the man whom
contemplation had raised to such a degree of felicity, became all wholly
understanding by that light which God imparteth to the spirits that are so
purged through the exercise of moral virtues; which virtues are termed by
Plato the purgers of the mind: stirring up therein a most ardent desire to
forsake this mortal body, and to unite it self with him. And this is that
contemplation of death which the Philosophy of Plato calls us unto. For he
that is come to this degree of perfection, is as dead to the world and worldly
pleasures, because he considers that God is the center of al perfections, and
that about him al our thoughts and desires are to be turned and employed. Such
does God draw unto himself, and afterward makes them partakers of his joys
everlasting: giving them in the mean while a most sweet taste even in this life
of that other life most happy, and those exceeding delights, beyond which no
desire can extend, nor yet reach unto the same. So as being full of this
excellent felicity, they think every minute of an hour to be a long time
that debarreth them from issuing out of this mortal prison, to return into
their heavenly country; where, with that virtue which is proper to the soul
alone, they may among the blessed spirits enjoy their maker: whose Majesty and
power all the parts of the world declare, the heavens, the earth, the sea, the
day, the night: whereat the infernal spirits tremble and shake; even as good
men on earth bow down and worship the same with continual himnes and praises;
and in heaven no less, all the orders and blessed company of Saints and
Angels do the like world without end.

This (lo) is as much as mine author has discoursed upon this subject, which
I have Englished for my exercise in both languages, and have at your entreaties
communicated unto you: I will not say, being betrayed by M. Spencer, but surely
cunningly thrust in, to take up this task, whereby he might shift himself
from that trouble. But howsoever it be, if it have liked you as it is, I shall
think my time well spent, both in the translating of it at the first, and in
the relating of it upon this occasion in this manner. For as I said before I
began, that I would not tie my self to the strict laws of an interpreter: so
have I in some places omitted here and there happily some sentences (without
which this our Discourse might be complete enough, because they are rather
points of subtiller inuestigation then our speech required, though the Author
therein perhaps aimed at the commendation of a great reader or absolute
Philosopher:) and in the descriptions of some of the moral virtues, added
somewhat out of others. And what has been said concerning civil felicity by
him, and delivered in substance by me, I think you will allow to be
sufficient. Since therefore my task is done, and that it grows late, with
this only petition, that you will be content to bear with the roughness of
my speech in reporting that unto you, which in his language our Author has
eloquently set down, I end.

Here all the company arose, and giving me great thanks, seemed to rest very
well satisfied, as well with the manner as with the matter, at the least so of
their courtesy they protested. And taking their leaves departed toward the
City.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 12. line 17. climbing. page 16. lin. 32 avoid. page 68. lin. 14. speak
of. page 81. lin. 4. mere. page 82. lin. 1. Politikes. page 95. lin. 10. men.
page 109. lin. 15. Dioxippus. page 140. lin. 15. leave out to. page 143. lin
13. supposing that etc* page 145. lin. 6. their marching. page eade^. lin. 7.
they never went. page 163. lin. 17. flow. page 164. lin. 4. determine. page
168. lin. 25. has man. page 173. lin. 9. Platonikes. page 199. lin. 17. leave
out to. page ib. lin. 18. leave out which page 216. lin. 5. make show of. page
ibid. lin. 18. that she be. Page 238. lin. 14. himself.


