To all the most Illustrious Archbishops and Reverend Bishops of Ireland, but
more particularly to those of the Province of Dublin their Honorable Lords,
David Bishop of Osory, John of Fernes, Ross of Kildare, and Matthew Vicar
Apostolical of Laghlein.
1. MOst Illustrious Lords and Reverend Bishops, the Priests of Dublin make
their complaint before you, That the most Illustrious Archbishop of Dublin,
Thomas Flemming, of the Order of S. Francis, without alleging any cause
against them, only for his will, and at his pleasure uses to exile and banish
Priests out of his Diocese. And they protest that in so doing he exercises a
tyranny over the Clergy, contrary unto the Canons of Holy Church, and the
Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom.

2. Most Illustrious Lords and Reverend Fathers in Christ, the aforesaid
Priests do make their complaint, that the same most Illustrious Archbishop of
Dublin, Thomas Flemming, of the Order of S. Francis, though humbly sought unto,
and desired, does refuse to do them Justice in their causes, neither yet will
he permit the Clergy to follow their actions merely civil before the
Magistrate, contrary unto the received custom of this Kingdom, from the first
conversion of the Nation. And they protest that in so doing, he exercises a
tyranny over the Clergy, contrary unto the Canons of the Church, and the Laws
and statutes of this Kingdom.

3. Most Illustrious Lords, and R. Fathers in Christ, the aforesaid Priests do
make their complaint, Tbat the same most Illustrious Archbishop, Thomas
Flemming, of the Order of S. Francis, in inflicting his Ecclesiastical
censures, observes no Canonical proceeding at all, omitting not only the
solemnities of the Law, but those things also that are necessary and essential
in all proceedings thereof, namely citations, and proof of causes. And they
protest that in so doing, he exercises a tyranny over the Clergy, contrary
unto the Canons of holy Church, and the Laws and statutes of this Kingdom.

4. Most Illustrious Lords, and R. Fathers in Christ, the aforesaid Priests do
complain, that the same most Illustrious Archbishop, Thomas Flemming, of the
Order of S. Francis, refused to hear all proofs against the Regulars in the
matter of the eleven propositions condemned at Paris, which testimonies or
proofs two venerable Priests presented unto him the 15. day of November, in
the year of our Lord 1631. in Dublin. And moreover the aforesaid Priests do
profess, that the same Illustrious Archbishop is a favourer and a Patron of
certain new, and never heard of Heresies, published by the Friars of his
Order, and others: of the which Heresies, or rather Blasphemies, being
advertised by a petition, he utterly refused to hear the Accusers and
Witnesses. And they protest that in so doing he exercises a tyranny in the
Church of God, contrary unto the Canons of holy Church, and the Laws and
Statutes of this Kingdom.

5. Most Illustrious Lords and Rev. Fathers in Christ, the aforesaid Priests
do complain, that the same most Illustrious Archbishop Thomas Flemming, of
the Order of S. Francis, did not suppress, extinguish or corrupt (according as
the Canons of the Church and the Laws of Princes do command) a certain
infamous Libell, made, printed and published under the false and feigned name
of Edmund Utsulan, against the good name, fame and reputation of certain
venerable Priests of the Clergy, who in the same aforesaid Libell are
expressly and by name mentioned: but on the contrary the aforesaid Archbishop
reads, commends, publishes, and defends the same, to their irreparable
dishonor and infamy, by whose example also others especially of the Regulars
of this Kingdom are incited, provoked, and animated to do the like. And they
protest that in so doing, he exercises a tyranny over the Clergy, contrary to
the Canons of holy Church, and the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom.

6. Most Illustrious Lords and Reverend Fathers in Christ, the aforesaid
Priests do complain, that the same most Illustrious Archbishop of Dublin,
Thomas Flemming, of the Order of S. Francis, being given to understand by way
of petition, in the behalf of the Clergy of Dublin, That a certain Parish
Priest by name Patrick Brangan, with his assistant James Quin, but a few
months ago, thorough extreme negligence had lost the blessed Sacrament
consecrated in many hosts, and that without hope of recovery. Our aforesaid
Archbishop making small or no account of so great a sacrilege, permit
notwithstanding the aforesaid Priests, whereof the one is most unlearned, the
other Lunaticke, to execute all Ecclesiastical functions, by whose ministry
he daily exposes the Sacraments of the Church to profanation, and abuse. And
in so doing they protest that he offends against the divine Majesty, and the
sacred Canons of the Church. They profess also that in these aforesaid
excesses he has the Regulars his Counselors, ayders and abettours,
especially one John Preston, a Friar of his Order, a most seditious and a
turbulent fellow, to the ruin of the Clergy, and disturbance of the Christian
Commonwealth.

7. Most Illustrious Lords, and R. Fathers in Christ, the aforesaid Priests do
complain, that the same most Illustrious Archbishop of Dublin, Tho. Flemming,
of the Order of S. Francis, does make Parish Priests, young men, unlearned, and
unbred. Others famous for their learning, gravity and virtue being neglected.
And more it is to be lamented for, that such are the times and state of things,
as if we had Augustines, Ambrosies, and Hieromes, it were meet to prefer them
unto the pastoral office (others omitted.) But what may we expect of this our
Prelat? who has ordinarily in his mouth: To what end should Parish Priests be
learned? or preachers? forasmuch as these matters belong unto Regulars.
Moreover the aforesaid Priests do complain, that the most Illustrious
Archbishop Thomas Flemming, of the Order of S. Francis, at the coming unto his
Prelature, found within the walls of Dublin five Parish Priests, men of
learning, ripe years, and incorrupt conversation, in place of whom, either
taken away by death or exile, he has placed only two, and such as we are not
willing to speak of what condition: so as it seems he desires nothing more,
then by this oppression and extirpation of the Clergy, a more easy and
compendious way may be made unto those armies of Monks, and begging Friars,
who in this Kingdom (observing no Regular discipline) do labor to create a
Monarchy unto themselves, as already they have done under this Bishop, to the
destruction of the Church, the impoverishing of the Inhabitants, and no small
detriment to the Commonwealth. And they protest that in so doing, he
exercises a tyranny over the Clergy, contrary unto the Canons of holy Church,
and the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom.

8. Most Illustrious Lords and R. Fathers in Christ, The aforesaid Priests do
complain, That the Illustrious Archbishop of Dublin Thomas Flemming, of the
Order of S. Francis, is accustomed to answer the Clergy complaining of their
grievances unto him: If I do you wrong, you may go to Rome to complain. In
the mean time reporting himself to be so powerful in the Court of Rome, that
he fears no Adversary. And of this that R. Priest Fa. Patrick Cahil, Doctor of
Divinity had experience, who for a year treating of his injuries and
grievances done unto him by the Archbishop of Dublin, could by no means
prevail once to be admitted unto the presence and audience of the most eminent
Cardinal Ludovisius, Vice Chancellor of Rome: which Cardinal notwithstanding
is given by his Holiness unto the Irish as the only Patron and Protector of
the Irish Nation. These things we may remember with grief, but amend them we
cannot. But we profess before Almighty God, his Holiness, and all faithful
people, that this is nothing else but to tyrannize over the Clergy, to the
dishonor of the Church, and no smaell contempt of the Sea Apostolic.

For which and other causes besides to be alleged, and in their due time and
place to be proved against the abovenamed Archbishop Tho. Flemming, of the
Order of S. Francis, we the aforesaid Priests, and hereafter to be named, do
set before your eyes most Illustrious and Reverend Lords these our grievances,
as meet and honorable witnesses of this our deed, writing, and public
instrument, and as far as is possible and lawful for us by the Canons of
holy Church, declining the Jurisdiction of our aforesaid Ordinary by this our
present writing: and from this time forth we appeal unto the Sea Apostolic,
from all Ecclesiastical censures hereafter to be inflicted upon us by the same
Illustrious Archbishop Tho. Flemming, of the order of S. Francis. And in the
mean time providing for our innocence and safety (to the example of S. Paul,
and S. Athanasius) we do invocate the aid of the Secular arm for our present
remedy, against the aforesaid Illustrious Archbishop Tho. Flemming, of the
Order of S. Francis, and all Regulars of what order soever, as well Monks as
begging Friars, Abbettours, Counselors and participants with him in the
premises, as violatours and contemners of all Laws divine and humane, and men
by the law excommunicate. Humbly beseeching your Lordships in the bowels of the
Crucified, that you would be pleased to intimate with as much speed as may be,
this our protestation and appeal unto the Sea Apostolic. And the God of
peace and love long preserve your R. Lordships in safety.

Dated at Dublin, May 3. in the year of our Lord, 1632. Peter Caddell Doctor
of Divinity. Paul Harris Pr. Deacon of the University of Dublin.


Printed at Roan at the sign of the three Lillies, with Edmund Fitzours.


