WHEREAS diverse disordered people inhabiting amongst us, not regarding the good
of this Universitie, and Town of Cambridge, do suffer their channels, streets,
and lanes, to lie unpaved, ungravelled, and uncleansed; and do lay their muck,
mire, dung, dust, and other filth, in the open streets, or under
Colledge-walls, Church-walls, or in other lanes within the Town; to the great
annoyance, as well of the Students in the Colleges, as the Inhabitants of this
Town, and danger of infection to both: For remedy whereof, there has order
heretofore been taken, by composition made between the Universitie and Town,
yet remaining in full force; some particular branches whereof are here
inserted: All which, we (whose names are here under written) do will and
require all the Inhabitants within this Universitie and Town, whom it does or
may concern, strictly to observe and keep, upon pain herein limited, and
further punishment, as shall be thought meet to be inflicted upon the breakers
or contemners of so good and wholesome Orders.

FIRST, that every Inhabitant within this Town, and also every College, Hall,
and House of Scholars, and all Churchwardens of Churches within this Town, and
suburbs thereof, and the Town by their several ministers, do cause the
streets, and channels before their Houses, Colleges, and Colledge-walls,
Churches, and Churchyards, Halls and Houses of Students, the Market places,
and all other common places, streets, and channels, within the Statute of
paving, and gravelling, to be cleansed, and swept twice every week; that is, on
Wednesdaies, and Saturdaies: And all the muck and filth thereof coming, to be
conveied and carried to the common dung-hills of this Town, and to no other
place; upon pain of xx pence of every default, to be levied of the Burser, or
Steward of every College, Hall, or House of Students; and every Churchwarden,
or other Householder for his, or their offense herein, by their competent Judge
therein.

2 If any Inhabitant shall make a muck-hill, or lay, or suffer to be laid any
filth in his own yard, that shall be annoyance or dangerous to his neighbor or
neighbors (those so grieved complaining to their competent Judge) he, or they
offending, shall presently remove the same by a day to be limited them by such
their competent Judge, upon pain of x shillings for every default.

3 That no person or persons whatsoever shall lay, or suffer to be laid in any
street or lane aforesaid, there to remain above six days, any timber, wood,
blocks, or stone; upon pain of xx pence for every default after this present
notice, and so from time to time upon every new warning.

4 If any house or ground stand vacant, then the owner or farmer thereof shall
pave, or gravel, according to the Statute in that case provided; and further
sweep and cleanse the street before it, and carry away the dust, dirt, and
filth, upon pain above rehearsed.

5 That no Butcher, or other person kill or dress any manner of beast in any
part of this Town, except in the now common slaughterhouses, or other places
hereafter assigned for that purpose; nor suffer any blood of any manner of
beast, to run or come in any streets, lanes, or channels in this Town; upon
pain of x shillings for every default.

6 That all Butchers shall cause to be carried and conveied all the paunches,
guts, filth, entralls, and blood of all their beasts unto the usual common
place, called the Pudding-pits, and the valley beyond the Castle-hills, or such
other convenient places, as shall be assigned for that purpose by the
Vicechancellour and Mayor, and no other; upon pain of x shillings for every
offense.

7 That no Inhabitant of this Town shall keep or bring up, within their house
or yard, any hog or hogs, pig or pigs, or any other kind of swine, except he
or they have a convenient yard to bring them up in; nor shall feed or serve any
such swine whatsoever in the streets or lanes; upon pain of iii shillings iiii
pence for every default: nor shall suffer any such hogs or swine, or any other
cattle, to go at large within the streets, or precincts of any College, Hall,
or House of Students, Churchyards, lanes, or other common pastures of this
Town, without a driver, and that only to and from the fallow fields; upon pain
to forfeit for every hog or pig or other cattle, that shall be taken at large
within any of the said places without a driver, iiii pence.

8 If any such hogs or cattle as be mentioned in the next precedent article,
shall break, or be taken away from the pounders, officers, ministers, or other
persons, driving them to the pound, and run into their masters houses, or
yards; then the said pounders, officers, ministers, or drivers, shall demand of
the owners of every such hog so taken at large, iiii pence: which if he refuse
presently to pay to the foresaid pounders or drivers, then the said pounders,
officers, or ministers, and other person, shall make complaint of the offenders
or owners, to the competent Judge; who shall convent such owner of such hog or
hogs before him, and there adjudge him to pay the foresaid sum of iiii pence,
and such other charges, as by the said competent Judge shall be taxed; which if
he refuse to do, then to commit him to ward, there to remain till he submit
himself to such judgment.

9 That no person, owner or tenant, shall lay, or cause to be laid, any dead
beast, or the garbage thereof, or any dog, hog, cat, rat, fowl, vermin, or
fish, as carrion; or any dung, or filth, in any common street, lane, or
Churchyard within this Town, or any other place, within the compass of one
quarter of a mile of the Town; upon pain of iii shillings iiii pence for every
default.

10 That no such person in the next precedent article mentioned, suffer any
dead carrion to lie in any lane or street, before his door or ground, where he
is charged to pave or gravel; but shall either bury it within his own ground
three foot deep, or three foot deep within the ground where the common
dung-hills be appointed, or other place further from the Town, within six
hours after it is known to such persons as are charged with the said paving or
gravelling; upon pain of iii shillings iiii pence for every default: or else
shall within the said time detect unto his competent Judge herein the party by
whom that was there laid. But if the party which did there lay it, or cause it
there to be laid, be not known within the said time, yet afterward is known,
then the offender to forfeit, and pay unto him that is charged with such paving
or gravelling, where such dead beast or carrion was laid, vi shillings viii
pence.

11 That no person sweep into any chanel within this Town, any dirt, dust, or
other filth whatsoever; upon pain of iii shill. iiii pence.

12 That no person do by any means annoy the new current of water brought to
this Town, or sweep into the same, or the channels, or other passages where the
said water does run, or has his course, any dirt, dust, muck, or other
filth; nor cast therein, or into the common rivers any manner of dead beast,
dogs, hogs, cats, rats, fowl, fish, vermin, or other carrion, or any garbage,
dirt, dust, or other rubbish whatsoever, or lay any such there; upon pain of vi
shillings viii pence for every offense.

13 That no persons wash any bucks or clothes in any street, lanes, or common
wharfs of this Town, except by the main rivers side, upon pain of iii shillings
iiii pence for every buck of clothes so washed: nor shall hang any clothes to
dry upon any lines or poles in any Churchyard, or streets within this Town:
nor shall hang or lay any fish, skins, bedding, apparel, hairs, or such other
like things upon the walls of any Church, or Churchyard, payls, rayls of any
bridge, or shambles, upon the like pain of vi shillings viii pence for every
offense.

14 That every Inhabitant in this Town do every fourth night hang out candle
and lanthorn before his door, from five of the clock in the evening until the
bell has done ringing eight: and for the more convenient ordering hereof, we
will that they take due course with their next neighbors, that by turns every
night every fourth house have a candle light the said hours, until fourteen
days after Candlemas next.

15 That no person burn in his house any shreds of cloth, or leather, or hoofs
of beasts which shall be offensive to his neighbor; upon pain of iii shillings
iiii pence.

16 That the Parents, Guardians, Governors, Masters, and Mistresses shall
answer the penalties for the offenses above specified, for their children,
servants, wards, and others being commonly conversant or resident in his or
their house or houses.

17 That all forfeits and penalties above mentioned, which are not by the
foresaid composition otherwise applied, shall be distributed, and limited to
such use and uses, as by the Vicechancellour and Mayor of this Universitie and
Town shall be appointed.

18 That all offenses and offenders in the premises shall be punished before
their several competent Judges, and compelled to submit themselves to such
censure, viz. if he or they be a Scholars servant, before the Vicechancellour;
if a Burgess or Farmer, before the Mayor or his Deputy.

19 That this Order be not prejudicial to either Body, in regard of any
privilege or liberty heretofore granted to them or either of them.

And for the Execution of the premises, we have nominated and appointed the
persons here named in the several Parishes of this Town to be Overseers and
Informers against all offenders in any of the Premises: every of them to take
their courses assigned to them, whom we will and require to make due inquiry
within their several Parishes, and to present unto us, our Deputies or
Successors, every Monday in the forenoon, all persons offending against these
Orders, or any part of them, at their utmost peril.

Given under our hands and seals, this of ANN. DOM. 163

