AN ORATION MADE AT THE HAGE, BEFORE THE Prince of ORANGE, and the Assembly of
the High and Mighty Lords, the STATES General of the United Provinces:

By the Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of Landaff, one of the
Commissioners sent by the Kings most Excellent Majesty to the Synod of Dort.

LONDON, Printed by G. P. for Ralph Rounthwait, and are to sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Flower-deluce and Crown. 1619.

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS and Noble Lords.
MOST EXCELLENT PRINCE.
OUR Lord and King JESUS CHRIST, when he was now about to go unto his Father,
and desirous to leave unto those whom he loved, some excellent benefit, (a
benefit then which the earth cannot yield a greater,) he left them Peace:
Peace at his death as a Legacy, he bequeathed them: My Peace (says he) I leave
unto you, my Peace I give unto you; for neither could men wish from heaven a
greater blessing, neither could the Angels declare unto men from heaven a more
welcome message, then Glory in heaven, and Peace in earth.

This Bond, by which heaven unto earth, and earth unto heaven reciprocally is
united, has so straightly bound the heart of the Kings Majesty of great
Britain, that according to the exceeding care which he has evermore had of
the safeguard and defense of true Religion, of settling Peace and Concord
amongst Christian Princes throughout the world; but especially, Most
Illustrious, Noble, and Magnificent Lords, of procuring the good and
tranquillity of this your State, to which he acknowledges his Kingdom to be
linkt by the Tie of an ancienter and straiter League: He has sent us hither
with this especial charge, that as much as in us lies, we procure your
prosperity, and your Churches Peace.

Certainly, an exceeding desire of Peace and the public good, possessed his
Princely heart, when he commended unto your Lordships the care of Religion.

This his Majesty's provident care can never be unwelcome, if it may please
your Lordships, according to your Wisdom and Piety, to recount the benefit of
the reformed Religion, and the blessings of Gods favor, which like showers
from heaven, have watered your Provinces far and near. I suppose, it cannot be
unknown unto your Lordships, what and how much you owe to true Religion.
Religion it was, which from blood and tempest reduced your State to these
flourishing days of quietness and Sunshine. Religion it was, which first
begat, then enlarged, and finally established your prosperity. Let your
Lordships now consider with your selves, what you will repay unto Christ for
all these blessings. Of your Lordships, Christ, who is King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, requires this, that for and above all his other benefits, you
preserve the Peace which he bequeathed you.

The bond of the public good is Religion, and of Religion, Peace; those
therefore who either themselves raise dissentions in the Church, or cherish
such as are raised by others, what do they else intend, but the rooting up of
Peace and Religion; the banishment of Christ out of your coasts? that by
iarring of Churchmen, the edification of the Church may be hindered, that the
consciences of the multitude be troubled, that wavering and unstable souls be
carried about with every wind of Doctrine, that the contempt of the Minister
bring with it a contempt of his doctrine; till at length these Cockatrice eggs
bring forth the Basiliske, even open Impiety and Atheism. If the
Church-affaires be ill managed, all sorts of men, the people, the Priest, yea
you your selves shall be accountable unto Christ for it. In the people he
requires obedience, in the Priest light and truth, that is, knowledge joined
with holiness of life. But I know not whether I may impute it either to the
corruption of this our time, or to the sleights of the Devil, trying all his
plots and devices now in this declining age of the world, that some are arisen,
who either quite rejecting, or at least too much neglecting purity of life, a
garment which best of all adornes the Priests of God, have altogether diuerted
upon iangling disputes, and unprofitable, yea pernicious contentions. From
hence come feruor, and emulation, and ostentation of Wit; mean while, the
building of the Church is interrupted, yea her ruin by undermining is closely
practiced, by some that lie in wait to betray your happiness.

Awaken and stir up your selves, most Noble Lords, establish that Peace in
the Church, which in the Commonwealth you have established, yea that Peace, I
say, which your Lordships, by the vigilance and prowess of his Excellency,
peaceably, without any noise and tumult, but not without the present assistance
of God, have lately attempted, and at length accomplished, is to be entertained
with the joyful applause of all the Churches, and to be for ever remembered to
your eternal praise and glory.

The reformed Churches throughout Europe, having recovered their liberty, and
shaken off the heavy yoke of Rome, to show themselves more thankful to Christ
their Redeemer, have severally set forth confessions of their Faith, which
though they were many, yet they so well agree in one consent and harmony of
minds, that we may plainly discover, it was the voice of one only Spirit,
which in so many Nations, so many Languages delivered it self. In this
general concord of other Nations, your consent did bear a part; your praises
were in the Gospel, your authority in the Church much set by. But now the
neighbor Churches round about enquire, question, and wonder, what it might be
which in these confessions your Church alone quarrels with: Against which, none
of the rest, sincethe reformation, have taken exception.

Give me leave to ask of you in the Apostles words, Proceeded the Word of God
from you alone? or has it come only unto you? Other Nations and Provinces
preserve the doctrine of the Gospel which they have received, whole and sound,
without any alteration and change, and resolve by Gods help, hereafter so to
continue.

This is that which his Majesty commends unto you, even the unity and consent
of Confession, the spring and original of reformation; he commends unto you
the consent of the Churches, he requires you, that what form of Church you
have received from your Fathers, you will deliver over to your posterity; that
what Doctrine now these twenty or thirty years has been publicly taught
amongst you, you preserve in its former purity; that you shut up all gappe and
inlette, which may every day give way to innovation, that such treasures of
Christ as are committed to your trust, you preserve safe, without suffering
them to be embased by admixtion of false and counterfeit stuff. Unto you are
committed the Oracles of God; keep your Faith unspotted, and undefiled unto
God and Christ the Churches King: You are seriously to take heed, that your
Doctors, leaving the simplicity of holy Scriptures, divert not upon abstruse
and intricate quirkes; that they set not before you smoke, in stead of solid
meat. At least, thus much are you carefully to look to, that those who handle
the Word of Life, abstain in their Sermons to the people, from those deeper
speculations, which pose the Schools themselves, and our sharpest wits, and
may with probability on both sides be disputed: Lest the Faith of the Church,
which is stable and immooueable, seem to be ambiguous and doubtful; and
Scandal creep in, in place of edifying. Your consent in Doctrine with other
Churches, shall be a sacrifice of sweet savor unto God, when one soul of so
many people shall cleave unto him, and it shall be welcome news unto the
Churches, and Honorable unto your Lordships, when they shall understand, that
you hold Brotherly fellowship one with another in Christ; for God gives not
grace and glory to such as walk severally, every one in his own ways, but
such as meet together in one Communion of Saints. Factions and part-takings
have wounded the Church on both sides; on the right hand, and on the left: yet
these wounds, we doubt not, are curable, if they fall into the hands of a
skillful Physician. The true Physic must be administered by the hand of your
authority: as for our labor and industry, if it may be any way available to
the Churches Peace, it shall be evermore ready and at hand: Neither are we
ready only with our labor and care, but if it so please GOD, in whose hands
we are, even with our dearest blood to procure the Churches Peace.

But since the Church which Christ hathredeemed with his blood, according to
the example of our Lord himself, requires not the blood of her Ministers in
peace, but in persecution: by a peculiar fate, (if I may so speak) of the
Church, it falls out, that men prove stronger under the Cross, and in
affliction, then in times of peace. In times of persecution they love not their
lives for Christ: in time of peace they stick not to bandy factions against
Christ. O how difficult is the Churches ease! what straight conditions is she
tied unto, either she suffers persecution with inward peace and joy of the
spirit, or she is outwardly at peace with the world, but with intestine and
civil wars.

The Sons of God, like little children are most easily disciplined under the
rod; lay the rod by, and presently they return to sidings, to faction, to
contentions. But all things turn to the best to those that fear God; and not
only afflictions, but faction and schism, yea errors and heresies themselves;
GOD, who is omnipotent, shall turn to the good of his Church, that those who
are faithful may be tried, and their faith being tried, may be made manifest,
and such as love the Truth, may not be ashamed to conquer and triumph over
their own errors.

This mind we heartily wish may be found in our Brethren, that those who are
always ready to fight unto the death, for that faith which once was given to
the Saints, may striueto excel each other in humility; not sollicitous who
shall overcome, but applying all their strength, their skill, their labor, that
Truth may have the victory, the Church Peace, and God the glory.

FINIS.

