THE PARAENESE or admonition of Io. Coluille (laitly returnit to the Catholic
Roman Religion in vhilk he vas baptesit and brocht up till he had full 14.
years of age) unto his country men.

The contents of this treatise is to be found after the Epistles.

AT PARIS, In the Typographie of Stephanus Preuosteau in S. Io. de Lateran.
besyid the College of Cambrey. 1602.

Hieremie 6. This sayit the lord stand upon the hie vayis and ask in the
ancient streates vhilk is the Good vay, and valk thairin and you salt find
refreching unto your souls. Proverb. 22. Transgres not the auld ter^cs vhilk
thy fathers have set. 2. Thessal. 2. Stand and hold the traditions vhilk you
have lernit either by my sermon or my epistle. 1. Corint. 11. I love you that in
all thingis you remember on me holding my precepts as I have by tradition geuin
tham unto you. Romans 16. I beseech you (my brethring) to mark tha^ yat bring in
dissensiones and sklandres differing from the doctrine yat you have lernit, and
to declin from tham. 1. Corinthians. 14. Hes the vord of God procedit from you, or
hes it cum amang you only. TO MY DEARLY-belouit brethring the Ministres of
Scotland.
ALBEIT (my dearly belouit) the reprehensions or admonitio^s of our friends be
a thousand fold more frutfull and neidfull nor the flattry of foes (according
to yat of Cicero vhar he sayis yat the Medicin does profit most vhilk causit
gretest smart, Proverb. 27.
and of yat of Solomon vhar it is said yat the vou^ds of a friend be better nor
the kisses of ane enemmie) yet daily experience does tech us no thing to be
more fascheux and vnacceptabill specially vhen ve admoniss our friends to
renu^ce such vices as be turnit in habituds and to degrad their self of such
dignity as in their opinion thai can not veill depone vithout oppin discredit.
Vharof their be so many popular exemples boyth in historers holy and profane
as I nead not repeat any of tham namly unto you vhom I knou so veill versit in
such lecture. For this cause did the Comique Poet say. Obsequium amicos,
veritas odium parit: For this cause both Elia and Michea speking the piking
verity var vnuelcum and the 400. falls Prophets pronuncing pleasant lies var
acceptabill unto Achab, and for this same cause did the obstinat Israelites in
the dayis of Esayas say to the sears see not and to their vachmen Esaias. 30.
hear not vissing their Prophets rather to spek plausibill errors nor unpleasant
veriteis. Bot as in the corporal infirmity of my friend nether should his
seiknes stay me still to hold him my friend, nor hinder me to help him to my
pouer housoeuer by force of his fiuer he be transported and scheu him self
vnuilling to use my assistance: euin so (my veilbelou^t) seeing boyth you and
tham yat you lead so dangerurusly diseasit and almost ouergone vith a mortal
malady of the mind I can not abstene to have compassion of your misery the
rether for yat I persaue your disease accompaneit vith the very Sinto^s of
diseases yat be incurabill in yat the same being insensibill you hold opinion
yat you have no nead of Medicin or admonition, lyik* unto yat provoking city
mentionat in Sophonia yat vold resaue no instruction, Sopho. 30.
and lyik unto the man mentionat in the 28. of the Proverbs vho chusit unto him
self a vay vhilk seamit rycht yet the end tharof ledit to damnation. For this
cause housoeuer you lyik or mislyik of my loving affection I will not spair to
present and perform all lefull offices of kyndnes lying in my pouer vharunto
being oblist boyth by the lau of God and nature if I should faill thairin I should
prove rether ane stifhartit stoik nor a te^derhartit Christian, seeing sum of
you be my kinsmen, sum my alliance and old acquenta^ce, all my cuntreymen and
ve all born subjects to one souuerane lord the ornaments of our age and as
sayit Malachy. Malach. 2.
Ve have bot one God to our father vho hes created us all, vharfor then should
eury one of us dispyise his brother* be ^e not commandit eury one of us to bear
ane vthers burthing doing no thing (as sayis the same Apostle in ane other
place) by contension or for vane gloir bot in all humilite eury one esteming
his felloubrother better nor him self. O vhat notable aduyses upon this subject
of mutual love and charity hes this holy Apostle left unto us in many places
of his divine Epistles namlie in the 1. Cor. 13. saying yat vithout this
charity, faith and hoip and all other Christian vertus be no thing at all and
yat by this Christian dilection the ho^ll lau is fulfillit vhilk lau co^sistit
allanerly in Loning our gratius God above all and our nychthore as our sef: in
place varof sayis the said Apostle in ane other place if ve sall mutually byit
brab bill, and vrangill one vith ane other ve sall at leuth bot consum one ane
other. O vhat sueit harmony is amang the Prophets, Euangellistes and Apostles
speking upon this purpos the Royal Prophet saying. O hou Good and plesand is
it to se brethring duel togidde in unity. Sanct Peter and Sanct Io. saying
yat vithout love and charity ve cannot be estemit the childring of God and not
only thai bot Christ him self saying in one place yat he geuit us command not
only to love one ane other bot euin to love our enemis, for God is not the God
of dissension bot of peace, and as Solomon sayis in the 12. of his Proverbs it
is bot the lips of the folish yat mellit vith stryif and vhose mouth
prouoquit unto chyding. Yea this Christian charity hes been of such price
amang the said Apostles yat albeit Sanct Paul to. tit. 3. commandit to flee
from ane Heretic after one or tuo admonitio^s yet the same Apostle
interpreting him self in the 2 Thessalonians all. 3. vissit us not to hold tham for
our enemis yat vill not obey his Epistle bot to reprehend tham as our
brethring* Yea in one other place he is so transported vith affection unto his
brethring after the flesch tho thai ver bot infidells yat for their salvation
he affirmit he culd viss him self ane anathem or cursing from Christ. Romans 9.


To this purpos ane holy man interpreting this passage of Sanct Paul. Let him
yat standit tak head he fall not does exhort us so cheritably and favorably to
interprit the actions of our brethring yat fynding tham fall ve should extend our
ingyne to the uttermost to find out arguments hou to excuse their errors,
alleging yat sum great tentation had surprisit tham and yat if ve had been in
their place ve had fallin more fearfully: for vhilk cause ve should rether search
out matter to thank God yat ve have not been so tempted nor to dispyis him yat
hes fallin into tentation: For treu charity hes no indignation, bot much
commiseration: and tharfor in* the 6. to the Galats is said. My brethring if a
man be surprisit vith a falt you yat be spiritual restor him by the spreit of
mansuetud and tak head yat you your self be not tempted.

Then it is not the part of a peceabill hartit Christian bot of one yat is to
partial and passionat incontinent to object agans vthers yat be not of their
opinion in matters of religion theiss passages of holy scriptur quoted agans
the hair. Deuter. 13. 2 Epist. S. Io. Math. 18. Math. 15. Marc. 7.
Tho it var thy brother child or vyf let not thy Ee spair tham: Salute tham not
for in saluting tham you art maid participant af their evil doing: let tham be
unto the as Etniques and publicans, and cast not the bread of childring unto
dogs. For a particular person or a particular number separating their self from
the hoill body and presuming to apply these passages agans the said universal
body (as I my self once did agans the Catholics Roman) is to be estemit so
doing as iniurius and impertinent as vas Achab imputing unto Elias the trubling
of Israel, or the debauschit vyfe of Putifer and falls eldars accusing Joseph
and Susanna of adultery, or Sedecia the sone of Canaana pusching vyth his
phantastique horns of Irin agans the the inuincibill verity pronu^cit by the
mouth of Micheas.

Because Moses spek it expreslie in the place forsaid agans tha^ yat vold lead
us to serve strange Godds, Sauct Iohne expreslie agans tham yat tech ane
doctrine co^trar to his and Sanct Matheu expreslie agans tha^ yat vill not obey
the church:

Bot Catholics Roman lead you not to serve or follou any other God bot the
God of Moses qui in principio creauit caelum and terram: thai thech you no
other doctrine bot yat of Sanct John, to vit: In principio erat verbum and
verbum erat apud Deum, and Deus erat verbum: that viss you not to disobey the
church bot day and nicht that exhort you to obey her voice. So the said
passages be most foolishly vsit agans Catholics Roman vhilk agknouleg no
other God bot the God of Moses, nor no other doctrine bot yat of S. John, nor
can nor abyid yat any should disobey the church as the said Moy ses, Sanct John
and holy Euangell hes commandit in the places forsaid.

It is treu in dead yat the church having the pouet to bynd and looss, to
collect and cut of, sche may justly vhenas any of her me^bres becum
incorrigibill sned tha^ of as inutill: Bot you or I to vsurp yat pouer above
her it var bot the part of a Mrriam agans Moses and of a Cham going about to
uncover the schame of his father: It becummit us rether to pyik out all
passages yat may persuad us unto Christian compassion and mutual charity,
knouing yat euin verey dogs be permitted to gather of the crommes yat fall from
their masters tabill and yat Christ Jesus him self disdanit not the cumpany of
Phariseis, Publicans and Infidells that he sittit in the heuins and ranit upon
the unjust as veill as on the just, and yat he did once descend from heauin to
cuir the seik and to save the unjust commanding us not only to love our friends
bot euin our foes after his auin exemple vho did pray, pardon and suffer for
his enemis according to yat of Sanct Matheu. Ego autem dico vobis, diligite
inimicos vestros, benefacite his qui oderunt vos and orate pro persequentibus
vos, vt sitis filij patris vestri qui in caelis est, qui Solemn suu^ oriri facit
super iustos and iniustos.

By verteu of theiss co^sideratio^s (veillbelouit) I am still resoluit to love
you housoeuer you mislyik of me, yea suppose you should discry me to the hoill
vorld and viss all men dishant my cumpany as the Ieuis did unto the
Samarita^ns: yet I sall not cease to my pouer lyik the Eua^gelique Samaritan
to poor such oyill and vine as I have in to your vounds seiking aluay your
conversion housoeuer you be deliberat to vork my confusion, and in one vord
except you cut out my tongue and hak of my hands I sall never spair to spek,
vrit and vork by all meanis in season and out of season to reduce you unto the
rycht vay from vhilk you hane so dangerusly strayit causing the ignorants so
vith you to stray and grou opiniastre in their ignorance yat vithout tymlie
repentance you be in danger one day (vhilk I pray God fall not out) to hear
that fearful threatinng of the Euangell: Vobe unto you yat schoot up the
kingdom of heauins ad nether vill your self enter nor suffer tham to enter yat
vold.

Bot to the end yat on the one part I presum not to spek any rhing in this
matter (vhilk tuichis the highest point of all to vit our salvation) vithout
Good ground, and on the other part yat my incredibill compassion upon my dearly
belouit cu^treyme^ (my flesch and blood, more pretieux unto me as the lord
knouit nor becu^mit me to spek) may appeir more by my vork nor vords, I have
presented unto tham a litill exhortation vharby thai may clearlie see hou to
direct their course in this vildirnes or variety of manifold religions vhilk
vithin this 80. years as ane turbulent inundatio^ and speat vatter hes
pitifully ouerrun the vyneyard of the church: aduysing them in these
spiritual incursions and depredations of their saulles inuironit vith so many
contrarius and crafty seducturs to use the self same remeid vhilk ordinarily all
me^ do for avoiding temporal irruptions of their temporal enemis. For vhat
sogeor var he never so hardy and assurit nedit not Principally and specially by
sum special signs to knou the colors of his cumpany and place of the castle
or fort vharunto he should fle^ finding him self reducit unto any necessity,
vharof if he cha^se to be ignorant he may as veill sall upon the troops and
intra^chme^ts of his foes as of his friends, eui^ so undoubtedly to discern the
displyit enseignie, the eminent citadell and propugnacle of the treu church by
her treu colors, situation and signs from the sinagog of Satan and all
Heretical churchis I have vith all Christian love and humility vrittin unto
tham a small treatise not as a seducteur by sueit vords to drau them to my
opinion bot as a seruand of God to reduce them to the rycht vay from vhence by
your direction thai have ignora^tly strayit: Deuter. 4. Marc. 13. Luc 17. Math.
24.
For thai be only seducteurs yat vold drau men to follou strange Godds vissing
us to seik Christ Jesus in the vildirnes and in private corners heir and their
and not vithin the glorius tabernacle of his church situat upon the top of a
montane. Such private monopolls and dangerus distractions alltogidder I abhor
vissing vith Sanct Peter all my cuntreymen to beuar vith such lieing masters as
bringit in sectis of sedition and perdition, and vith Sanct Io. I hartly exhort
tham not to give credit unto eury spreit bot to try veill if thai be of God.
Vhilk trial can not be had bot vithin the ark of the church more nor in the
general deluge any sautie culd be found bot vithin the ark of Noah.

Nether go I about thus pointing out the rycht vay, as your enemy to sau
zizanie vithin your field vhillas you be a sleap, bot as your friend I present
before you vhat seid I have to sau vissing you to turn over and try the same
vhilk if vithout partial or preoccupat iugment it sall pleas you to do, you
sall nether find my doctrine to be zizanie bot yours nor tha^ to be your field
bot the field of other husband men vho have the Just location tharof by
atte^tik euidents boyth of doctrine and lineall descent deryuit from the
Apostles and Apostolic men vho had the only pouer to locat and substitut
vthers in their place: Vheras you of your recent usurpation can produce no
testimony bot your auin tuiching your doctrine, having no testimony or probation
at all for your allegit laufull descent as in the 74. page of this Paraenese
treating of your vocation I have prouin at lenth by peremptory arguments,
adding in this place by the vay this much more nor I have said in the forsaid
page 74. Yat albeit you culd produce (as you can not) sum evident of ancient
possession in the person of any one yat hes heirtofor in all points techit the
self same doctrine yat you nou do, yet you have so morgagit and marrit the
patrimony pretendit grantit unto you by the Apostles your pretendit donators,
by your partial glosses and interpretations using and uttering their vrittes
unto the vorld vith no les confidence nor if you allone (of all yat ever ves
before you, presently is, or yat heirefter sall be) had found out their treu
sens and meaning, and heiruythall you have so long lyin out vnseruit or
retourit (to vit a 1500. year and more) yat as in the former by verteu of your
Proprusio^ so in the other by such manifold Nonentrees you have lost all titill
and clame yat you can justly pretend.

For vhilk cause having on my syid the verity vhilk seikit no cornars, and in
employing my mind to point out unto simpill ons hou the pillar of verity (to
vit the church) should be discernit from all other usurping yat name I am bold
not in the dark vhen you ar a sleap bot in the day licht vhill as you valk to
appell you in all kyndnes and humility not only to ponder my resons vhilk be
bot such as my veaknes can afford, bot also to permit suir access and audience
unto vthers yat be habill to satifie you more nor I can vho for so Good a
subject I dout not may be mouit to cum vhar you vill and to confer vith you
upon all matters co^trouerted in presence of all yat lyik to be present.
Vharunto me think you (yat give out unto the vorld so confidently yat you all
one have the undoubted verity the force vharof your aduersars be notabill to
resist) can not vithout great prejudice of your cause disassent. For if you have
a verity so veill foundit as you pretend hou can you refuse in presence of the
pepill to put the same unto publict trial yat by the licht tharof all
contrarius doctrine may be convicted for darkness and thai confirmit so much the
moir thairin euin as the goldsmyth is after, not before he have tryit his
metal boyth vith his furnace and tuichstone assurit of the fynnes tharof.

Suirly the denial of this Christian conflict must be estemit ane unchristian
tergiuersation and a matter as ludibrius as if a knicht yat durst not amang
other kny^ghts scheu him self in the lists vold still nottheles give him self
out amang ignorants for chief champion at all tilts and tournements. Bot
perhaps you vill say yat you vold glaidly disput and co^fer bot the Acts of
your general assemblees and of Parliament must not be callit in question. as
for the former part of yat subterfuge I do anssr tharu^to tuo maneir of vayis.
First your general assemblees tho thai be general in respect of the realm
vhar you ar yet in respect of oicoumenique assemblees thai be bot as a
particular handful and as Aristot in one place sayis of the number of ten,
quod sint multi in domo pauci in foro, yea in respect of the said oicumenique
assemblees the most general yat you ca^ make is bot in proportion as a flee is
to ane Elephant: yet the decrees of such oicumenique counsalls (as far in
majesty and authority exceeding your Synods as a great parliament does exceid a
poor birla court) have been often times moderat and dispe^sit vith upon Good
considerations: as in yat vhar it vas oicumeniquly defendit of auld after the
counsall of Sanct Paul not to converse, disput or confer vith ane Heretic
after the second admonition yet upon Good respects the rigor of yat sentence
vas mitigat and oppin disputations permitted vith sindry condemnit Heretics
as vith the Donatists, Arrians, Manicheans, Macedonians, etc. and in the
counsall of trent albeit in effect the same defens vas reneuit yet sindry
conferances and Colloques have been since yat time grantet specially yat of
Poissy anno 1561. and yat of lait anno 1600. at Fontanebleau.

Nou if these oicoumenique assemblees (conuocat by such as had laufull pouer by
institution of the Apostles) Vas persuadit upon Good respects to mitigat sum
times the tenor of their Acts in permitting for Christian charity disputation
in quaestions yat thai had decernit to be out of all question: Vhat reason can
you have to stand so precisly upon your points having no Christian realm of
your opinion bot your oune, and no laufull authority to co^uocat counsalls nor
to command the consciencs of any man.

Morouer in denying indifferent Conferance or liberty of conscience you be
contrarius to all other Ministers your felloubrethring on this syid of the sea
specially vithin the realm of France vhar before liberty of conscience vas
grantit unto tham thai did still protest their culd be no Christian charity
nor liberty vhar yat liberty vas refusit vhatsoeuer politic ordonnance vas
maid to the contrar.

And if you can suffer to hear hou Io. knox, Io. Villox, Paul Meffen^, etc.
first began this same doctrine vhilk you profes you shall tharby understand yat
thai socht no thing at the beginning bot a simple liberty of conscience
vithout compulsion or threatening of any person vith temporal penalteis, often
times remembering yat sentence of Tertullian. Odi religionem quae poenis
exigitur. and yat of S. Augustine Religio non est imponenda sed suadenda. and no
vayis pretending such universal ouerthrou of Prelates and Ecclesiastique
persons as thai have sen syne procurit: their petition being principally to
hauc liberty to prech the treuth vissing no man to adher unto tha^ bot such as
thai mycht persuad vith so forsabill resons of holy scriptur as no Catholic
Roman culd anssr unto: in sign and tok in vharof Ion knox him self vas content
in the touboyth of edinburg to disput vith M. Quintin kennedy abbot of
corsragoll and to resaue and send discourses upon matters controuerted unto M.
Ninian Vingzett priest of famus Memory, (euin after the Catholic religion vas
abolissit by Act of Parliament) the said Io. knox still using for exe^pill the
promptitud of Sanct Augustine vho never sparit at eury occasion to vritt disput
and confer vyth the Pelagians, Manicheans, Donatists, Circuncellions and all
other Heretics of his age: and aluay holding to his death yat a knight
refusing the lists in any place vhar he mycht have suir acces and reces re^drit
his querrell suspect and yat a curageux Christian and treu Pastor should be ready
at all times to give a reason of his faith tho it ver vith danger of his lyif
lest the tender conscience of the simpill should be brangillit and maid doutfull
seeing him yield so much unto any Heretic or Infidel as to refuse tham ane
equal and indifferent trial. Last of all in yat it is not defendit amang you
by vrit to anssr and confer vith^ Catholics it is bot a ridiculus excuse to
stand upon verbal Conferance vharby in the space of ten dayis you should more
edify your self and the assista^ts nor you sall ever be habill to do vith your
pen in ten years tho you should blek as much paper as be in all the ten Tomes of
S. Augustine. So my velbelouit if you can be contentit either to render unto us
legem Talionis, or to follou the exempill of transmarin churches your
fellousisters or the exemple of the fondators of your auin church you can not
deny unto us nether a laufull and indifferent Conferance nor a fauorabill
liberty of conscience notuythstanding any acts yat you have maid to the
contrar.

As to the Acts of Parliament maid for establisment of your religion I anssr
tharunto as one vholy submitting my self to the laues and authority of my
Prince specially unto such Laues as be authorized be solemn consent of his
honorabill estats in face of parliament repe^ting vith my heart as the lord
knoueth vhatsoeuer I haif in vord or vork done to the contrary. Yet it can not
be vnknouin to any man yat knoueth any thing in our estat yat men interessit by
acts of parliament this year may vithout offens the nixt year desyir either a
mitigatio^ or abolition tharof specially in matters rinning upon the nature of
forfaltur and restitution as this is vharof I spek. For the ratification of
your Religion (I will not say restitution becauss it vas never in rerum natura
at lest vithin Scotland either to be abolist or restord botvithi^theis 40.
years) is in effect a forfator of the Catholic Roman Religion vhilk
forfaltur may be tak in auay either by grace or be vay of reduction vhensoeuer
it sall pleas God yat the Prince and Estats sall resaue better information and
by yat same meanis all acts pronuncit in your favor may perhaps be cancellat
and declarit null and of no effect: Vharof I should not dout if his mate. (being
so merueluslie lernit and prudent as he is knouin to be) culd be mouit to sit
down and indifferently to hear boyth parteis contending and then lyk ane other
Solomon decern the child (yat is the church of God) not to be vith her yat
carit no thing for the division and destruction tharof bot vith her Y at is
tormented and trubillit to see the suord of separation thretning the undoing of
her tender infant. so did Constantin the great assist Pope Siluester the first
agans the Macedonians and Eunomians: So did Justinian assist Bonifacius 2.
Ioannes 2. Agapetus, Silue^ius and Vigilius. agans the Pelagians and
Donatistes: So did Carolus Magnus (post translatum Imperium ad Germanos) assist
the afflicted church and Roman Popes, Stephanus the 5. Pascalis the first and
Gregor the 4. agans Claudius taurinensis ^conomachus and aga^s the Albanenses,
Bagnole^ses and Concordenses vho all denyit freeuill Purgatory and the verteu
of Baptesme agans original sin quamuis somes peccati per^ Baptismum non
tollatur, dispysing the Sacrament of the altar, Celibat and extrem Unction as
many do nou a day is.

And unto this Christian consideration I dout not his highness, his nobility
and all treu hattit Scottismen sall be the more bent vhenas it sall pleass tham
to remember and reid vhen, be vhom and in vhat form the Christian faith and
religion came first in Scotland, by hou many great Princes of our realm it hes
been ratifeit and finally hou long it hes vithout cha^g or alteration continuit
notuithstanding all Hereseis in other Realms trouchout the most part of Europe,
Afrique and Asia in sum places altering in other places altogidder abolising
all Christian and Apostolic institution.

Our a^nalles testify yat in the year of our lord 203. Vhen, be vhom, and ^n
vhat form the Christian Religion came in to Scotland.
king Donald under the Pontificat of Pope Victor the first of yat name did
resaue the Christian faith and causit all his nobilles and pepill to embrace
the same: Vharof about yat same age Tertullian in his book agans the Ieuis
semit to give sufficient testimony saying yat the very places in great Britanny
vhilk var inaccessibill unto the Romans did agknouleg Christ Jesus. Vharby no
dout he did mean of Scotland seeing the Romans tho thai ouerran all the hoill
Island euin vsque ad grampios montes and vltra (vhilk I tak to have been the
separation betuix the Scottis and pictes) yet their coloneis or conquis did not
apperantly farther extend nor unto ye vall of Septimius Seuerus callit vallum
Seueri vharof the vestiges yet Remane exte^ding the self betuix the firthes of
forth and klyid being near ane hundredth miles from the said grampij montes.
Sanct Chrysostom also in his sermon upon the Pe^tecost follouing the vulgar
opinion (as S. Hierome also did vharby it vas affirmit yat of old our forbears
var Anthropophages) sayis in this Sort. The britons vho did sumtyme eat men's
flesch nou feid their saules vith fasting. and in his Homelievhar he prouis God
to be a man he affirmis yat in Scotland var churches foundit and altars
erected. It tendit to the same purpose vhilk Sanct Hierosme say it of tha^
vritting to Marcella. and Petrus venerabilis in his 8. book 16. Epistle
declaring the origin of diuerss churchis geuit no small praiss to these of
Brita^ny yat var not vithin the valls of Adrian or Seuerus vhilk must neadis be
vnderstud of Scotland for the resons forsaid. and yat vhilk is most remarquable
in this matter is yat notuithstanding all the mutatio^s in religion yat fell
out and afflicted the parts of yat Island subject to the Roman Emprors yet in
Scotland thai kneu never of any mutation tharin from their first reception of
the Christian faith (vhilk vas in the 203. year of God forsaid) unto the year
of God 1559. except so much as vas for celebration of easter vharin the Scotts
bischops folluing too much the Asiatik form vsit by the quatuordecumani and
borrouit from the Ieuis (vho obseruit their passover upon the 14. moon) did a
litill resist the legate of England callit Augustinus till by lettres from Pope
Honorius thai var exhortet no more to follou yat Asiatique consuetud. as
testefeis Beda venerabilis in his 2. book 19. chap. As to the Heresy of the
Arrians vhilk so oppressit the Realm of England it never had acts nor intree
in Scotland, nor yet the Heresy of the Pelagians vhilk vas most dangerus of
all the author tharof being ane Engliss man vhom Sanct Augustine callis a
transmarin Pest and the poet Prosper in his verse de ingratis, termis him
Colubrum Sermon Britannum. For by the provident cair of Pope Celestinus it vas
prouidit yat Sanct Palladius vas send into Scotland to defend tham from yat
damnabill Heresy as testifeis the forsaid Beda in his first book 3. chap. and
Prosper the Poet forsaid living in the same age sayis in his book ad
collatorem, yat under the Pontificat of Pope Celestinus vhillas the holy
bischop Palladius trauellit to hold England (vhilk vas then callit the Roman
I Will) to be Catholic he co^firmit the barbars tharof yat var not subject to
the impyir meaning the Scots in the Christian faith establissing the same also
in the Orcads vhilk of before var infidells: in memory of vhilk bischop
Palladius their is yet a church in the mernes callit padie vhar his relics
vat keapit vith great reverence and respect.

Nether ver our laudabill antecessors contentit only to keap the Catholic
Religion vithin their auin Realm pure and vndefylit as thai had first resauit
the same from the Apostolic Roman seat bot abhorring to hurd up and to
imprison so pretieux a Iouell vithin the precinct of a Realm separated from all
vthers, for yat cause thai did first exte^d their Christian charity upon their
nychbors the auld Brito^s possessing yat same part of the Ila^d vhilk Englis
me^ nou posses as testifeis the said venerabill Beda in his 3. book 3. chap. by
sending unto their king Osualdus the holy Scottis bischop Aedanus. For it can
not be vnknouin unto you yat the auld britons possessing yat part of great
Britanny vhilk nou is callit England thai var subject to the Roman Empyir and
finding yat the said romans be reason of civil varrs vithin their auin bouells
culd not send over legions to defend tham from the incursions of the Scottis at
length thai did vrit (under the Empyir of Theodosius the elder as testefeis
Beda in his 3. book 13. chap.) Unto the co^sul Aetius a dolorus and lamentable
epistle saying. Aetio ter co^suli gemitus Brita^norum. Barbari ad Mare pellunt,
repellit Mare ad Barbaros and inter haec oriuntur duo genera funerum, aut
mergimur aut mactamnr. Nou after this pitiful complant finding the Romans
culd send tha^ no releif then thai did treat vith the Saxons in Germany (vho
ver Idolators) to succor tham: these Saxons send into England a great pouer
vhilk vith time did expel the most part of the said Brito^s calling the hoill
land from their Captain Engistus Angli or Anglo Saxones. So by process of time
vhenas the Anglo-Saxons by meanis of the forsaid Palladius and other holy
Catholic priests var on the vay to be Christians their king forsaid Osualdus
send as sayis Baeda ad maiores natu Scotorum cuius ministerio ge^s quam regebat
Anglorum Dominicae fidei and dona disceret and sacramenta susciperet. Missus
autem est Aedanus summae mansuetudinis and pietatis vir. and paulo post.
Imbuebantur (inquit) a praeceptoribus Scotis paruuli Anglorum and cum matribus
in studiis and obseruatione disciplinae regularis initiati erant.

And not only in England our nychtbour Realm did our venerabill antecessors
plant and propagat the Christian faith as it is this day professit at Rome bot
also in many other foren nations vharof Sanct Mansuetus first bischop of Tullos
is a glorius vitnes, vho^ the auld registers of yat bischoprik affirmis to have
been ane Scottisma^. Sanct Kilianus callit the Apostle of Hyperboll in Germany
is one other vitnes vhom Beda in his Martyrolog testifeis about the 8. of the
Ides of Iulij to have cum out of one of the litill hebrid Isles of Scotland vith
his felouis unto Germany and all alo^gst the Riuier of Menus to have prechit
the Christian faith and to have been crounit vith the Diadem of Martyrdom in
the same place. In memory of vho^ their is yet a verey beautiful abay in the
said city. The third vitnes is Bonifacius first bischop of Maye^ce properly
named vmfredus (vhilk is undoubtedly a Scottis name) this holy bischop did bring
all frise and many other parts of Germany unto the Christian faith: and
Marianus Scotus in his 2. book remembris of the epistle vhilk Pope Gregore the
3. did vrit to the said Vmphredus and hou by that Pope he vas callit
Bonifacius. and Tritemius de scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis testifeis him to have
been of yat nation vhilk lakit not probability in yat the cathedral church of
the Chanonry of ross seamit dedicat to his remembrance and that yet the commun
opinion their is yat he vas born in rosmarky. Bot because he did once lead a
monastique lyif in England going thidder for propagation of the Christian faith
tharfor Englismen hold him to be their cuntreyman. The ferd vitnes is Sanct
Romuald vho suffrit martyrdon in Brabant (as say it Molanus in his abrigment
callit Indiculus Flandriae) and is yet honorit their as ane Apostle and his
relics reverently kepit in the town of Machlin.

The fifth vitnes is S. Colmanus vho vith his felouis passing throuchout all
Germany vas at lenth martyrd for the Christian faith vhose funeral triumph
vith his compagnons forsaid Ioannes Strabius does elegantly in Saphique verse
descryue.

Last Sanct Patricius born besyid glesgo afteruart Patron of Irland and Sanct
Fiacre Patron of Brie (estemit a king of Scotland sone) unto vhose sepultur
besyid Meaux upon the penult of agust yearly be ane incredibill confluence of
deuot peapill vith many vthers mentionat in the marty rologeis of ancie^ts be
most famus vitnes of the zeall of our antecessors in propagating the Christian
Religion as thai first resauit it and as it is this day professit at Rome.
Vhose ardent desyir to lead Monastique lyif in religius houses retired from
secular society and effars is evident by so many fair Monastereis erected by
tham vithin our Realm vhilk nou to the high dishonor of God and infamy of our
nation be all rasit to the ground the monuments of our Princes, nobills and
Parents yea of most holy Martyrs destroy it and their venerabill relics cast
abrod amang the vilany and dounggills of the streatis giving me thar by matter
to murn and lament vith the Prophet saying. quis dabit capiti meo fontes
aquarum, and oculis meis alueos perennes vt sicut turtur viduus and passer
solitarius in tecto possim die nocteque populi mei miserias plangere, and cum
Psalmista gemibundus eiulare dicens, Deus venerunt gentes in hereditatem tuam,
polluerunt Templum Sanctum tuum, posuerunt Jerusalem in pomorum custodiam,
Morticinia seruorum tuorum dederunt escas volatilibus coeli, carnes Sanctorum
tuorum bestiis terrae. Facti sumus opprobrium vicinis nostris, subsannatio and
illusio his qui in circuitu nostro sunt.

And not only did thai erect and found such magnifique Monasters vithin our
Realm bot also in foren nations leaving behind tham (to their auin and their
nations immortal praiss) admirabill exemples of Monastik and Religius lyif
vharby thai procurit many fair Monasteris to be beildit vharof ve have a clear
probation in columbanus vho because he vas born in our hielands boyth Beda and
Marianus callis him Scotum Hibernum or montanum. This columbanus (as sayis the
said authors) causit by his laudabill exemple of retired regular lyif many
Abayis to be erected in France, Germany, Italy: and in Bourgo^gne under
Theodoricus king tharof by his means the famus co^ue^t Luxouin vas foundit in
vhilk var such a number of Religius yat boyth nycht and day and hour be hour
one part succeding unto other thai never ceassit to have sum in their queir
singing Psalms and Hyms to the praise of almychty God, for vhilk cause yat house
vas a long time callit laus perennis. Tharefter the said columbanus in the vay
from Bourgonge to Italy as he did pass the Appe^nin hills he causit beild the
Monastery Boben. Lyk as Sanct Gallus his cuntreima^ and Scoller did found that
celeber Monastry amang the Suisses callit yet Sanct Gall.

To this purpos I culd alleg many more exemples of the piety of out
predecessors in this behalf bot it may suffice for all yat in Germany their be
14. opulent Abayis erected by our nation in vhilk no abbot nor Religius may be
resauit bot of our nation if the tenor of the original fundation var kepit:
yet none of them all is this day possessit by us bot yat of ratisbone vhar the
rycht venerable dominus Ioa^nes albus is abbot. the rest vith all our
priueleges their ve have all lost as folishly and for as licht a cause as Esau
lost his birthricht or Ada^ his Eden.

Heir I may also to the glory of God (of vhom all Good gifts do proceid) and
to the prayis of our forbears ad to the premises yat as our antecessors have
been merueluslie deuot and Religius so have thai been verey lernit. Vharof our
cuntreyma^ and elegant Poet Sedulius under the Empyir of Theodoss the younger
sall serve for one exemple. and Alcuinus Paedagog to Carolus Magnus fundator of
the first publict Scooles yat var in Paris, and the famus Historian Marianus
Scotus, and Ricardus de Sancto Victore Monachus, vhose Epitaph may yet be seen
ingrauit in brasin lettres in the Clostre of the same Abay. Tellus quem genuit
foelici Scotica partu, hunc tegit in gremio Gallica terrasuo, and Io. Duns born
in duns of the Mers callit in the Schools l'Escot or Scotus subtilis, and
Franciscus Maronis so much yet remembrit and respectit in Sorbon for his lernit
commentars upon Petrus Lumbardus (alias master of sentences) and for his
fundamental beginning of the said college togidder virh Io. Mayor the licht of
his age. all these var estemit vith the oddest men of their time for erudition
specially in Theologye boyth positive and scholastique tho ve do lauch at the
homlines of their Latin styill euin as foolish Micholl did lauch at the homly
dansing of her husband David) yet undoubtedly the pith of the spreit of God may
yet be so seen in their spreit and pe^ yat hardly should ve be habill to
understand the diuyn and delicat traittes tharof in caise vevhar so happy as to
humill our self to study their doctrine.

Morouer during this time yat the Catholic Roman Religion did floriss vithin
our poor Realm producing so many holy lernit persons it did also produce boyth
at home and abrod Good Stor of vailliant men and great captans. Vharof the
manifold rencontres and set battalls agans Britons, Englismen, danes and
pichtes be sufficient arguments: togidder vith their incredibill fortitud in
Germany vith Carolus Magnus (vho contracted the first alliance vith our King
Achaius more nor a 800. years ago:) in France vith King Charles the 7. in Italy
vith Charles the 8. and Louys the 12. and in Palestin vith Godefroy de
Bouillion: For vhilk cause sum of them have been erected to the hicghest honor
yat a subject in France can ascend unto to vit sum to be constables, sum to be
Mareschalls of France, sum Viceroys of Neaples. For vhilk fortitud and
fidelity Paulus Aemilius the French Historian speking of us callis us Gallorum
fideles, fortes and inseparabiles amici lyk as ve have yet yat honor to guard
the most Royal persons of the most Christian Kings our Scottis guard nychtlie
keeping the keyis of their house and at all actions Secreit or solemnell tuo of
our Archiers standing by tham as tuo collateral Knichtes: ane honor in dead so
signal and singular as it lakit not great emulation: ane honor acquirit by our
fortitud and fidelity finding our self in many hard encontres (vhill as ve
professit the Catholic Roman Religion) and ane honor almost lost at Amboiss by
our folly follouing the Caluinian Religion. Finally such vas the estimation in
these dayis of the vallure of our laudabill antecessors yat Egesippus in his 5.
book de excidione vrbis Hierosolimitanae does count it for a great honor to the
Romans yat euin the Scotis var afrayit to see their ensenzeis: For these be his
vords. tremit hos Scotia quae terris nihil debet cu^ a toto orb sit diuisa.

All this long and tedius (yet treu and historical) digression vhilk I have
maid in declaring vhen, be vhom and in vhat form the Christian faith and
Religion came into scotland and hou long it did continu vithout alteration,
vhat vas the study and cair of priests and pastors of yat age, vhat vas their
behauior or carriage touard the seat of Rome, and vhat verteus and vallia^t men
our Realm did produce during that time: all this discurs I say is maid to the
effect you may see yat tho you be nou vithin yat realm in possessorio yet the
just possession belongit not unto you bot unto Catholics Roman tho thai be
bot in petitorio. as also yat all the vorld may clearly understand yat in our
humll petitions craving a liberty of conscience and equal trial of our
causes before all yat lyik to be present no thing is socht in the former yat lak
it ancient and attentik authority or yat you can vith Christian charity
refuse if you vill either follou exemple of other churchis professing the same
doctrine vith you or the exe^ple of your first authors vthin yat Realm, or if
you vill be contentit to do as you vold be done to vhilk of moral or civil
courtesy you ca^ not refuse albeit your Christian deuitie did not vrg you
tharunto: and in the other tuiching conferance you can not refuse it (color the
matter as you list) bot you render either your cause suspect, or your self as
men yat diffyid sum vhat in your auin strenth. For vhat can be more reasonable
nor in the same Realm vhar you duel, vhair you have your auin librareis,
consorts, and all other co^moditeis of place persons and pouer more nor
Catholics can have: and syne in presence of all the pepill (vho^ you so deaf
vith the undoubted verity of your doctrine) to triumph upon your aduersars and
bring your said doctrine to be at all time tharefter out of dout? Vhat thing
more equitable nor to grant unto the cause of god vhilk in our auin causes
seldom or never is refusit: to vit, a fauorabill permission to libell and to
intend a process of reduction in the sentence pronuncit agans gods treu religion
(vhilk undoubtedly is his cause) pronuncit I say in a iugme^t vhar the professors
of the said religion var nether summonit nor suffrit to cum: vhilk form of
procedur gave occasion once to a mirry man to say yat in scotland god had not
only lost his lyfrent for lying year and day at the horn: bot also he vas
forfalted and never yet vist vharfor and all because he vas not permitted to
compeir for his intres. Bot I abhor to gest in a matter so deiply rinning upon
our salvation vyth soroufull heart regretting yat in matters of conscience not
only acces and audience should be this vay refusit bot also yat men should be
limited in such high matters vithin the compass of forty dayis and syne not to
have liberty vithin the said space to defend the eqnitie of their cause bot
vithout all disputation to deny and renunce the same and to subscryue and sueir
the contrary. Vhilk form of procedur as it is not vsit in any civil matter var
the same never so mea^ so does it lak all exemple preceding: yea the
inquisition vhilk you so dispyis is not for all yat so partial and sever for
men their have boyth favorable audience and sufficient time to confer, consult
and to conclud. and this laudabill exe^ple me thinhe you should glaidly follou
lest yat men follouing your auin exemple (if at any time heirefter a contrary
religion sall cu^ vithin yat Realm) you feall vith smart the force of your auin
laues as many rigorus persons hes done heirtofor vhose vnhallouit names I will
not recit fering to offend your ears tharuyth vhilk is not my meaning. Vhat
thing more resonabill then to seik nothing yat repugnit either to the lau of god
or deutifull loyalty unto our prince that is to say to seik no thing yat can
be justly interprit to be vithin the compass of heresy or trason. Vhat thing
more just then to cite us before ve be accusit and to hear us before ve be
co^demnit for vho vold proceid vtheruayis agans your self tho it var bot in a
matter of 40. Schilling you should think (and justly) yat you resauit injury. bot
to this hour for all the lauis maid agans the Catholic Roman religion the
professors tharof have nether been cited, hard, nor yet hes had suir acces
albeit yat hes ever been their petition lyk as it is presently under this
protestation yat vho of the tuo parteis sall not keip time and place assignit
sall ever tharefter be estemit tergiuersators and seductors of the pepill. and
heir unto me think you should be mouit if you vill either follou the exempill of
ancients or recent counsalls euin of such as you give out to have be ne most
partial and Sever. For the four first Oicoumenique coursalls of Nice,
Constantinople, Ephesians and Chalcidon kepit this form euin agans the Arrians,
Macedonians, Nestoria^s and Eutycheans: So did these of cartage and mileuetum
in Afrique agans the Donatists and Pelagia^s: So did generally all other
counsalls assembled agans the Manicheans, Luciferians, Angelitis,
Anthropomortis, Apollinarists, agans Cerynthus, Basilides, Carpocrates,
Hermogenes, valens and the rest. This form vas kepit in three several counsalls
agans Berengarius: and last yat counsall vhilk it Plesis you to term the bloody
counsall of Tre^t vas not for all yat so barbarus and inhumane agans your self
bot yat you var laufully cited and save conduits in most ampill form grantit vy
virtue vharof Martin Bucer as atturnay for the hoill did compeir and ves in
diverse sessions hard before any sentence vas pronuncit the said counsall knouing
full veill the iniquity and inualiditie of any process vbi reus indicta causa
iudicatur, that is to say vbi reus neque per contumaciam abest, neque
personaliter aut per attornatum presens est. Vhat supplication can be more
tollerabill nor yat vharin is socht allanerly the same form of says and
religion vhilk all famus doctors have professit, all famus cou^salls have
villit treu Christians to profes? yat same form of religion vhilk our forbears
1400. year ago did first embrace: yat same form of religion vhilk hes been ever
sen syne confirmit be acts of our parlaments, vharin all our forbears of good
memory hes lived and diet till you and your Coryphe Io. knox vithin this 42.
years did persuad the pepill to follou a contrar doctrine vhilk doctrine if it
lead you the rycht vay to salvation then all yat vent before you during the
space of 1400. years forsaid never heiring tharof must be in danger of
damnation. Finally vhat petition should be more gratius or acceptabill then to
insist for the restitution of yat same form of faith and Religion yat did so
bless our la^d and make it to abou^d in all respects far above any singularity
ordinar yat can be comprehendit in a corner so retired from the heat of the
sone and society of other nations. Vhilk blessings by degrees decaying in
mesure as the Catholic faith did their decay vee may infallibilly pronunce
the said blessings to have procedit as effects from the other as ane cause
efficient euin as the flokis of Laban varblessed by the presence of Jacob and
the vedouis cruse by the presence of Elias: For unto tham yat deuly vorschipp
our lord thai be blessed euin unto their dachtubbs as sayit Moses and as sayit
Samuel vho deuly honorit God thai sall be maid honorabill.

Nou agans all this authority, antiquity, continuation and benediction vhat
have you to produce bot the authority antiquity and co^tinuation proceeding
from Io. Calvin vhose doctri^ is such as you sall never be habill to scheu yat
any one man lernit or vnlernit holy or Prophan, Orthodox or Heretic, Faytfull
or infidel hes been in all points of his sentence and opinion: Yea never one
of them all proceeding of that same Cadmaean progeny of Martin Luther (be thai
Lutherans, Semilutherans or Antiluthera^s) yat in all points did hold his
doctrine or did heir of it before he him self set out his instituts.

O Mercifuld God vho vold think yat such vanity and vilfulnes culd be in the
heart of man as vith foolish Roboa^ to renu^ce the cou^sall and cu^panie of all
venerabill ancie^ts for sum feu variabill neotereans. O Bernard, o Gregor, o
Augustine, o Ambrose, o Hierom, o Chrysosto^, o Leo, o Dyonise, o Anaclet, o
Paul, o Cryist Jesus vho did say to Sanct Peter thou art a roque and upon this
roque I sall beild my church. have you desauit your Apostles? Have the Apostles
desauit Apostoliq^ me^ their auditors? Have Apostoliq^ men desauit these holy
Doctors forsaid? and have the said Doctors desauitvs in the chi^g us to follou
the successors of the said Cephas or stone, and of yat fischer of men and first
Apostle: No No: ve can not be desauit: For by experience ve knou hou our
forbears and hoill Island hes been extraordinarly blessed so long as ve var
obedient unto the seat Apostolic: bot as to any benediction follouing upon
this neu doctrine sen it came vithin our Realm I can persaue none bot ane
incredibil sterilitie boyth by sea and land vharof ve nead no other vitnes bot
the hoill aged fischers and fermorars of the Realm, togidder vith the
dimolition of magnifique Monastereis, Abayis, Cathedral and Pariss churchis
vhilk (var the beauty of our land) as if sum Totila, Attila or Tamerlan had
ouerrun tham and the Clergy vho did sustene all necessiteux persons vedouis,
orphalins, beggars: vho vpheld all Hospitals brigges and such publict and pieux
vorks tending to the universal service of the Realm, vho finding their prince
in necessity vas ever habill and villing to supply him for menteyning his
varrs, for tochering his docthers, for resaui^g Embassadars, for going their
self on their auin charges in Ambassadry: The Clergy i say vhilk vas boyth
habill and villing to do all these offices and more, for the releif of Prince
and pepill, their be lottis cast for their coit, and thai be all damnit to die
and Barrabas is let loose.

And in this point such as vold understand the glory and grace. Vhilk our
Clergy had heirtofor let him bot behold the viue Image tharof yet extant in
these tuo most nobill verteus and venerabill Prelates. Ia. Beto^ Archibischop of
Glesgo Ambassador for his Majesty our dread souueran lord, and William
Cheysolm Bischop of weson, vhose incredibill prudence and piety can not be
condinglie extollit by a pen lyk mine so clogged and accabled vith infinite
misereis. Tham ve have from their youth vexit bot culd not vinquiss tham: tham
ve have sold to the Ismaelites yet in our famine ve all find their famileis
oppin and their vndeseruit kyndnes no thing inferior to yat of Joseph and
Ioses. Finally the more ve have fynit tham the more thai have prouit pure Gold
and the more ve have afflicted tham, thai ar becum the more firm and ve the
more febill. For by the glorius vings of their rare vertus thai be so exalted
above the rech of all our malitius machinations yat all our fury is turnit in
froth and foam lyk yat of the suelling seas beating agans adamantin roques. and
as all yat ve have reft from tham is bot put up in a botto^bes bag infinite
plages follouing us lyk the sacrilegius Azotiens for usurping the ark or
heritage of the church: so on the other part the said venerabill Prelates albeit
the one hes not this 40. year and more the other never lifted a denier of is
reuenus out of Scotland: yet their basquet and oyillcruyse hes no more falit
nor yat of the vedou of Sarepte: yea thai baue been and be more hospital and
seruicabill to their King and country nor all yat use any Ecclesiastique
function vithin yat Realm: Vharin yat of Solomon boyth in his Proverbs and
Prechor is verifeit. Benedictio Iusti quasi fluuius inundauit and abundantia
Dei in mercedem illius festinauitquia habitacula Iustorum benedicta sunt.

Finally all cair to propagat the Christian faith ama^g infidells and all
ancient courage by martial deids in laufull varrs to revive and resuscitat the
ancient trophies of our laudabill antecessors be so forgottin yat ve seem
rether to be degenerat nor ingenerat of such parents. For prechors nou adayis
may veill remane in tounes vhar thai be veill treated and vhar christ is already
professit and their go about to make Monopolls, factio^s and schisms amang
Christians: Bot vhilk of tham goit abrod ama^g infidells to make tham Christians
as did holy Columbanus, Bonifacius and the rest forsaid? or as many holy
religius men do this same day to Iappon, to Iaua, to Barbary, to Bressill cuin
amang the cruel canniballes: of vhilk religius I did see in the last year of
Iubile 1600. about a 16. reverent persons Jesuits and Cordeliers embarque for
the same effect at genoa. bot ve ar so far from any such resolution as I vold
vis at god yat ve vold only go bot to the Hielands and bordors of our oune
Realm to gain our auin cuntreymen vho for laik of prechors and ministration of
the Sacraments must vith time becum either infidells or Atheists. Vxores duximus
no^ possumus ire. and on the other part vho goit to hungary aga^s the turk or
respected more the quality of the cause vhar thai go nor the quantity of
their gages?

Bot leuing this dolorus discourse of maledictions procurit by our damnabill
defection from the seat Apostolic I return from vhence I digressit concluding
yat you can not vith reason nether refuse unto us a liberty of conscience nor
ane indifferent conferance if you vill either scheu your self cheritable,
equitable or conformable to other churches your felloubrethring or unto the
authors of your religion vithin yat same realm. Beseching you in the mean time
tak in no ill part yat I have directed this paranese unto my cuntreymen seeing I
do offer the same first in your aune ha^dis to be perusit and anssurit unto
vissing (if so var your plesour) the same mycht rather be by vord nor vrit and
tharuythall in presence of all (if it var possibill) yat you vold persuad to
the contrar, as persons having most entres in this matter. If I have said
prude^tlie you can have no schame still tohold me your friend: if foolishly
vouchaf at lest to count me as your folish friend and for Christian charity in
charitabill maneir disput yea defait my doctrine if you may abstening from all
acerbitie of vords and personal contumelies, Inuestigantes vtrique veritatem
tanqua^ neutri adhuc cognita esset. nihil per contentionem, neque per lucrum,
neque per vanam gloriam operantes, sed in humilitate and charitate inuicem
alter alterum superiorem arbitrantes, neque quae sua sunt singuli considerantes
sed ea quae aliorum. illuminet vos ille qui lux mundi est ne amplius in
tenebris pal. petis, and illuminatos omni foelicitate foueat foecu^detque,
supplico.

Paris the calends of Martij 1602. Your loving and obedient friend. Io.
COLVILLE.

UNTO THE REDAR.
THE difficulty to print any thing in our vulgar tongue on this syid of the sea
nanly in France vhar our langage and pronu^ciation seamit so strange, and vhar
the prentars use seldom these lettres k, y, and double VV, vhilk be so commun
to us sall (I trust good redar) excuse the manifold faltes and incorrectnes of
the orthography.

Bot concerning my oune faltes heir in to much manifested (yet not consisting
in the doctrine yat I defend nor in the matter of this treatise bot in my homly
and inexact treating tharof) I can thar in pretend no sufficient excuse bot by
sinceir confession of my insufficiency to beseech the respect my good affection
not my gros imperfection and to censur the singilnes of my mind as gratiusly as
the myit of the Euangelique vedou vas censurit by our lord and master,
vouchafing at lest to reid me patiently before thou reprehend and to ponder me
veill before you pronunce thy sentence. Last if the multitud of allegations
brocht in for co^firmatio^ of matters disputed vithin this treasis, sall seam
prolixt and tedius: suirly in yat also I must confess a falt, yet such a falt as
I have villingly committed for avoiding a greter. For the treuth is yat the
commendation in many parts of scriptur geuin unto glaid and plentiful geuers
and the exemple of god almychty in Raning down his quailles and manna so
abundantly upon his famissit pepill, and the Euangelique history declaring hou
christ our master vold not feid the multitud euin in a desert vildirnes bot vith
such largnes as their restit aluay certane basquetts of superplus: these
laudabill exe^ples I say maid me purposly to charg the board vyth so many
disches persauing the greatness of the spiritual famine afflicting my
veilbelouit brethring, the rather for that the aduersars daily deaf tham vyth
endless detestation of our doctrine alleging yat ve have no stoir of sound
arguments to confirm the same. For this causs I thocht it culd offend no treu
Christian if I should out of the magasin or storhous of antiquity, experience
and reason produce sum ple^tifull quantity for conforting the indigent and
confounding the arrogant. Bot to conclud if you can not allou of this
consideration I will anssr unto the vith Allexander king of Macedons vho vrit
once in this sort unto his Mingnon Leonidas yat fand falt vyth him for spending
to much frank incens in his sacrifices, saying. (Leonidas) frankincens and
Myrre vee send unto the ple^tie, to the end yat heirefter you be no more a
Niggard unto the godds.

Fairueill. At Paris the calends of Martij 1602. Your humill seruand. Io.
COLVILLE.

CONTENTS OF this book.
THAT the ignorance, arrogance and curiosity of this age is greter nor it had
been in any age heirtofor beginning at the 3. page, section. bot to t end. unto
the 5. page. That the curious of this age vill not conform their opinions unto
maximis of holy Scriptur: bot go about to confirm their said opinions by the
said Maximis. ane arrogance anciently condemnit. page 5. section sinally nou.
That the dum text of Scriptur is no competent Judge in Matters controuerted page
6. section. Agane to decern. A Notable exempill of Theodose (the elder) Empror
hou he did use the Heretiquis of his age page 10. sect. Bot to the end. The
occasion moving the author to vrit this treatise page 12. sect. bot seeing. That
the verity is to be knouin by the church and not the church by the verity
page 13. after I had red. That the sens of Scriptur is not so facill as me^
suppone page 14. sect. Sanct Hierosm. The Scripturs be difficill in tuo
respects page 18. sect. the Scripturs. By knouing the treu church ve sall knou
the verity and treu Pastors and by tham sall be resoluit of all matters
controuerted page 22. sect. theiss difficulteis. That all Heretics heirtofor
have vsurpit the name of the church. page 23. sect. bot in respect. Sound
doctrine and Sincer ministration of the Sacraments be not infallibill marquis of
the treu church page 25. sect. and as to such. Four infallibill Marquis of the
church and the first tharof page 26. Of universality the second mark of the
church page 35. The multitud and visibilitie of the church prouin page 36. For
vhat cause have the nouators invented the subterfuge of inuisibilitie page 43.
sect. Bot hear I pray. That this mark universality properly perteyinit unto
the church Roman and her childring. page 44. sect. Nou to put ane and. Hou the
multitud of the church is to be vnderstud pap. 46. sect. Bot agans. The third
mark of the church, is unity page 48. No unity amang tham yat have abandonit
the Roman church page 51. In the ferd mark of the church is contenit boyth
doctrine and succession Apostolic page 55. That under the doctrine of the
Apostles is also contenit their traditions vnurittin in the same 55. page,
Morouer, etc. It is ane Heresy anciently condemnit in the Arrians to admit no
thing bot the bair text of Scriptur page 59. The use utility and neceslitie of
tradition Ecclesiastique and hou by the same ve knou vhat books of Scriptur be
Canonique vhat Apocryphe, page 61. The nouators be forcit as veill as
orthodoxis be to use traditions page 65. sect, vee see then. Baptism of
cbildring is by tradition page 66. The nouators use the most part of things
vhilk thai condem in Catholics changing only the names and not the nator
tharof. imputi^g also iniustly many things unto the said Catholics vhilk not
the Catholics bot thai use page 69. Tuiching vocation page. 74. That the
Ministers their self in their churchis celebrating their service be forcit to
use tradition page 76. bot in respect. Manifest passages of ancients proving
vnurittin traditions page 78. Anssr unto yat of Sanct Augustine calling the tuo
testaments the tuo Papes out of vhilk ve should sook the milk of holy historeis
page 80. Not only tradition bot also expres Scriptur prouit Catholics
opinions in chief matters co^trouerted. page 82. Of the supremacy of Sanct
Peter page 85. Probation of real presence. page 86. Of Apostolic succession
vithout vhilk in the primityue church all doctrine vas suspect page 97. That the
Pope is not Antecryst nor Rome the synagoge of Satan page 103. Interpretation
of vision vhilk ordinarily is objected agans the Pope and Rome out of the 17. of
the Apocalypse. pap. 108. Anssr unto tham yat alleg the Roman church to have
corrupted the text. of Scriptur. page 114. Sect. Bot all this. Hou and vharfor
the names of transsubsta^tiatio^, Mess, Purgatory etc. have been invented page
115. sect. for all. The Roman church does not discredit the holy Scripturs nor
vsurp authority above tha^. page 117. Anssr unto certane passages quoted agans
the hair concerning the e^king and paring of Scripturs page 121. sect. and as
to. That the vitieux life of church men should not cause us aba^don or renu^ce the
church page 124. That Princes and Pastors housoeuer thai have been in lyif
verteux or vitieux have ever had sum secreit concomitance of the holy spreit
page 130. Vhy God hes suffrit his darrest seruands to fall. ibidem. Vhat is the
ga^est vay to disput vyth the nouators of this age page 133. sect. bot in anss
ring. Vhat seamit the best remeid to pacify all schisms this day perturbing
the church. page 135. sect. Then to conclud. That throuchout all the ce^tureis
fen the Ascension of Christ Jesus Catholics Roman have the Doctors and and
counsalls of the church for their authors vheras their aduersars have no
authors bot such as trouchout all the said ages have been condemnit for
Heretics page 136. sect. Nixt let us. That all controuerseis salling out
tuiching religion sen the dayis of the Apostles have been composed and
consulted upon by authority of the Roman church as only (at lest principally)
having yat pouer page 144. That in theiss dayis if ve had the spreit of
moderation ve should as much honor and respect the bischops of Rome as the
ancient doctors did their ancient predecessors. page 147. The exempill of the
Pop hetis should tech us not to renunce the body of the church for the vices of
the Pastors tharof. page 150. The exempill of the Apostles also should move us
unto the same effect. page 151. Vhy their es ever been such respect had unto
the Roman church, page 155. Vharfor the treu churc his ever to be estemit in
the licht housoeuer sche be obscurit and the Heretical churchis in darkness
housoeuer they seem illustre page 157. beginning at this vord finally I will
not. Certane demands vhilks Catholics Roman may veill ask at the nouators
page 159. Hou to knou the incertenty of our speculatyue hnoulege 173.
THE PARAENESE OR admonition of Io. Coluille (Laitly returnitto the Catholic
Roman religion in vvhilk he was bapttesit and brocht up till he had full 14.
years of Age) vvnto his country men.
OF Academ^^ (...) Philosophe Pla^^ (...) for his deap knoulege and
contemplation in divinity was callit diuine^ above all things did render
thanks unto God that he was born in the dayis of Socrates out of whose mouth
he had resauit so many fair and frutfull instructions: if this most famus
Philosophe florissing in a time full of all Sapience humane did
notvvythstanding glorify him self to have been born in the Olympiad or age of
a Socrates of whom culd be lernit no Science bot humane and moral, the
knoulege vvharof culd bot prefer him in svm Aicademye philosophique: hou much
more am I (being born boyth ignorant and in a time so full of ignorance) oblist
unto the merceis of god who hes prouydit for me, not a Socrates bot a Samuel
to instruct me, not in humane bot in divine science vvharby I am intterit
vvthin the Academy of the holy church, after I have full fo^rty years va^derit
in the vildirnes of my avvin vane opinions vvthout fear or forsycht, Till it
pleasit* his hevinly majesty yat in the year of o^r lord 1599. in the month
of October I should cvm to Paris in as vofull and co^fortles case as the
Israelites were into vvhe^as they fled from Egypt: for as thai had behind them
their Enemis, before them the read Sea, on either syid mo^tans replenisit with
ravenus beasts: So vvheder soever I culd turn my Eyis was no thing for me bot
the fearful Image of death, My Enemis inuading, my friends forsaking me.

And as the said Israelites fand their deliurance in ane Element Most to be
fearit so fand I mine in ane instrument most offendit vith me. who having for
the time the honor to have been Rector of Paris (vvharby he had sufficient
pouer to aueng) yet his piety suppressing all Passio^n maid him to pity and
not to persevv me whenas my kindred and acquentance did stand far of not caring
vvhider I should sink or suim. He was in this desastre my Ariadne Leading me out
of the Labyrinth of many mis^reis: Or rather he was vvnto me as that Angel
vvhilk did comfort Agar sitting in the solitud Leding to Sur, or as a Kind
Samaritan pouring in my festerit voundis vine and oyill, and ane other Philip,
explaning to me passages obscur: vtheruayis I had still with queen candaces
Enuch red without resolution and In vane buseit my self with Sisiphus Rolling
a restles stone of blind zeall without Knolege.

Bot to the end I hyd not the talent committed, nor schoot vvp vvnder a buschell
the candill vhilk he hes lychted, my deuite to god almychty, to my dearly
belouit cnutreymen and instructor forsaid is to make vthers participant of the
benefit resauit: Considdering yat nou a Dayis the snares of Satan be more
subtle and me^nis ignorance arrogance and curiosite more gross, Impudent and
dangerus nor thai have been in any Age heirtosor, the ampill crookit vayis
Leading to perdition being al most innumerable yet all having sum apperance to
be Straicht and treu and all crying and contesting cryist to be hear, christ to
be their, and eury one going about to establiss his doctrine by arguments
dravin out boyth of humane and divine science. In Such doutfulnes and desperate
confusion what courss can simpill* ons follovv? or how shall thai certainly
knov vvhar Christ and his verite is all standing so doubtful and atubiguus.

For if in thus unholy age one should be resoluit to follovv the most holy then
shall sum object yat holiness is a verey incertan^ mark for yat the most holy
were bot sinuars Seeing all flesch be includit under sin and yat their is none
yat does good no not one: vhich assertion or stu^bling blok thai go about to
prove and illustre by exemples follouing, imputing polygamy unto the
patriarchs, vvnto Noah drunkinnes, vvnto Lot incest, To Moses, incredulite,
To king David adultery and homicid: Euin as if me^ should abstene to imitat and
follovv the faithful brigand be reason of his brigandry, or the tears of S.
Peter and of the Magdalene for his denyell and her debauchit Life preceding: or
as if the yeall of S. Paul were to be dispysit because he fand a law in his
members repugning to the law of his spreit and because the evil yat he vold
not yat he did. By the self same reason Noah mycht have refusit to have interit
vithin the ark because in it were includit unclean beasts vith the clean: and
S. Paul to have ioynit him self with the other Apostles because one of them
was a Judas. Agane if one shall resolve to follov antiquite They shall allege
Cain the reprobat to be eldar nor Abel the elect and Esau elder nor Jacob, and
Joseph and Benjamin to be the Youngest of all the tuelf trybes yea the Devil
and sin to be most ancient yet not to be follouit? Euin as if on the other part
their lakit exemples vvhar the Eldest brethering were bestbelouir of god and
most to be follouit of men (as were Sem and Abraham) or as if one should say
god and goodness were not more ancient nor Satan and Sin. Last if one will
protest to follovv famous counsalles and doctores it shall be arroga^tlye
affirmit that Doctores were bot men and Cou^salles bot assemblees of men
subject to errores: As thocht they who never shall have the honor to be
doctores of the church nor pouer to conuocat oicucumenique or general
counsalles were exempt and voyid of all error.

Finally now adayis such is our deplorable blyndnes and boldness that we be
not content to infer or gather our conclusions vpone They that be curious in
this age use Scriptures for sequelles and handmaydes unto their friuolus
opinions: ane arrogance condemnet be all venerable antiquite.
enunciations or antecedentes expreslie set down in Scripture (albeit we brag
much of expres words) bot we will have the scripture a sequel or Servant
to our vnattentik antecedenres. as for exemple. Obey your Princes euin these
that be throvvart or peruerss. and of pastores. do without contradiction vhat
they command. These two precepts be expressly comma^dit in holy scripture yet
we will not study to level by this infallible squair our fond and fallible
opinions vvhilk go about under pretext of conscience and co^munvelth to schak
of the most necessar and salutar yok of all subjection civil and
Ecclesiastique not being content to render our self and our passionat opinions
captyne vvnto their sacred oracles. Bot we be bold an^uch upon our auin
maximis or antecedentes (vvhilk be that Princes and Pastores perverting Justice
and Religion may be disobeyit and degradit) to gather, cite, vrest and throvv
unto our purpos all scriptur either speking directly or indirectly of the one or
other dignite. Inlykmaneir in that affirmatyue, Emphatique and most piththy
proposition Registrat in the sacred protocoll of the holy Eua^gell This is my
body, and in that negatyue proposition (This is not my body bot a mark or ^igne
tharof) our partialite and presu^ptio^ is to mvch manifested, in that ve go
about to falsify the finger of god leading the pe^ of the blessed Evangelists
and to verify the imagination of man, vvhilk in express vords shall never be
found in Evangelist, Prophet nor Apostle. To be schort sic is our damnabill
indutation that we Can admit no principal or fondament of religion bot these
of Protagoras who did allow every one of his disciples to esteem that most
true vvhilk to their opinion did appear most probable: No squair or reull bot
the lesbya^ of lead vvhilk mycht be bovvi^ and applyit to any form or figur.

Agane to decern in questions of Religion co^trouerted we can admit no Judge
bot the dum lettre, That the du^ text of Scriptur be no co^petent Judge in
matters co^trouerted.
vhilk is ane paradox so absurd and vithout exemple preceding as to this hour
by antiquite it can not be verifeit vhar the actor and defender pleading at any
bar or court have been iugit allanerly by vvrittin laws. Morouer seeing it is
of necessite requirit that not only the parteis pleading bot euin the meanest
members of all courts civil or criminal vvnto the bedalles, sergeants,
domsteres and ischeres should have iugment and discretioun in sum mesour albeit
the process were bot of a sous or schilling: what folly is it in the matter of
salvation to admit a Judge vvhithout iugment or sens. Bot let vvs heir considder
the practice that hes b^ine observit Upon this subject heirtofor in all
politic gouernementes fathfull and infidelle. Did they who so much estemit
the laws of the 12. tables amang the Romans, or they vho reducit the hoill
laws in one Cod or volum only admit the said lavvis for competent Iuges? And
Amang the Hebrevvis vvhar the blessed lord god him self was Lavvmaker was
their not Iuges establissit to Judge and discern Upon all co^troverseis that
culd fall out^and albeit it be said in one place ( search the scriptures) that
is no commandment to declyne all other Iuges bot the scriptur, because that
commanding our childring diligently to study the laws we wis them not to
conte^m all other Iuges nor to deny any decisition of lau bot such as thai
their self shall collect of the said lavuis: as also in ane other place of
scriptur it is said ( tell the church.) by which vvordis ane other Judge nor the
scriptur is evidently designit. Heirvvihall it can not be denyit that the
church is to the scriptur as the pilot to the Rodet, the mason to the line The
Magistrate to the laws. for as during the tempest it aualit no thing to have
within the schip stoir of Rodares except thai be gouernit by the hand of the
steirsmam or pilot: And as to beild a house stoir of Lines, squaris, stone and
timber disordoritly heapit vvp heir and their serve for no purpos except the
mason use his art in disposing thar of: And as millions of Codes and digestes,
of acts of covnsall or parliament or vhat soever laues Imperial or municipall
can never decyid a process nor pacify parteis contending except the magistrate
by viue voice decern secundum allegata and probata: Evin so the rodar and
compass, the line and squair of the holy scriptur and laues contenit tharin
except thai have the church to be steirmam, masson and Judge they of their self
shall never pacify parteis contending in faith and religion, more nor the
compass allone can gyid the Schip or the line allone beild the house. And agane
albeit evry one Imbarquit have for sautie of his life a special Intres to see
the sthip vveill gouernit yet it should be boyth presumpteus and perrelus if
contemning the ordinar Pilot and Marinelles evry one should put to his hand to
set the compass, cast the lead, Hold the helm and steir the roddar: and albeit
evry one of the family have special resons to see the house co^modiuslie beild
yet should it be boyth a fectles and confusit work if evry one of the household
should play the Architectour or mason: Euin So in the schip of Crystis church
tosted this day so dangerously to and fro by so many turbulent vyndes and vaues
of herreseis, and in the fabrique of his mystical house if evry one Shall
presum and vsurp the gouuernall and line of the blessed scriptures, in such
rakles confusion can be no beilding up bot breking down, no sautie bot
schipurak.

And vhar it is allegit that by scripture vee must judge of spreittes and
parteis contending upon questions of scripture: yet yat being granted it does
not necessarly follou that the said scriptures be competent iuges: for adhering
to our former similitudes vithout the gou^ernall the schip can not be veill
gouernit, nor vithout the line or squair the house deuly perfyted: yi^ the
steirman is callit the governor and not the gouernall, the masson the beilder
and not the line or squair: and this comparison does hold in all exemples of
the ly^k nature: for behold vhen you count vith comptares not thai bot you be
callit the comptar: vhen vith your money you buy any thing not the money bot
you be the buyar and yet more specially, you can nether hear, smell nor taist
bot by meanis of your cares, nose and tongue, yet you be callit the hearer,
smeller and taister and not thai. Euin so albeit by the most eequall line and
level of the scripture the church does judge betuix orthodox and heretical
opinions, yet Sche not the Scriptur only ar to be estemit lafull Judge: for as
sayit the Apostle sche is the pillar and fondame^t of verity: vho if sche
shall not vith her holy h^d steir ad govern the Christian barque so miserably
distressit vith so many contrarius fluxes and refluxes heretical and
schimaticall vee shall be of necessite oueruhelmit vith the vehementnes of sic
erronius inundations, and if sche shall not apply unto us the just level of
verite in this vofull variety vee must remane no les confusit, indisposit,
disordorit and unapt for the mystical fabrique of the house of god as confusit
materialles of stone and tymmer scatterit abrod hear and their be unfit unto a
material fabrique of the house till thai be collected, placit ad and polisit by
the cunning hands of the skillful masson.

Bot to the end the madness of this age vhilk vill not submit their self unto
such as vithin the church be deuly authorized vith Apostolic succession (lyk
as in ancient ages all controuerseis in faith ver submitted to the doctores and
counsalles possessing the same places) may be evidently vinquisit I will before
I inter into my matter produce only one exemple of the famus Empriour Theodose
the elder so much prasit by S. Augustine, Orosius and the Poet Claudian.
Theodor. Cass. in the Tripartit. History.


This sacred e^prour seeing in his day is the church pitifully vexit by the
hereseis of Eunonius, Nouatius, macedonius and Arrius did call upon Nectarius
bischop of Co^sttia^nople vhar for the time he remanit craving the said
Nectarius opinion vhat course ves to be hold for pacifeing these schisms.
Nectarius (not presuming to much of his lerning as men vithout lerming in these
dayis do) did consult vith Agelius ane other bischop and vith Sisinnius a
lector. Nou this Sisinnius being the od man of his age for erudition and
eloquence gave this aduys saing that so long as the parteis forging and
fostring neu doctrine had liberty to vrit and disput their culd be no hoip of
concord bot rether of greter schisms and factions, affirming the only vay to
pacify all ves to cause matterres controuerted be submitted to the censur of
the church in reforming and reducing all unto and by the voice and authorite
of the fathers vho had been ancie^tly admitted for aute^tik doctors tharof: for
so said he (...) the curiosite of restles branes be brydelit by the self same
mai^stie viche had confundit all heretics from the ascension of Cryist Jesus.
The bishop Nectarius lyiking veill of this advise did inform the Emperor tharof
vissing him call upon the chief heresiarches and ringleadars of the factius and
to ask of them if thai vold stand to the decision of ancient doctors vho did
floris before their neu opinions ver hard of and ver for that cause to be estemit
indifferent iuges in that thai had never seen nor hard any of the parteis
contending, and in case the said nouators should refuse this most reasonable
submission the Emperor ves solicited to hold them manifest co^tradictors and
impugnars of the authorite of the fathers and of the primityue church. To be
schort the schismati^s ver cited and standing up before the Emprour he did ask
of tham vhat opinion thai had of Ecclesiastique doctors namly of such as had
vrittin before these neu questions ver controuerted? Vharunto at the first vith
great modesty thai ausuerit saying thai did esteem the said ancie ntes great
preceptors and pedagogs of the church. Bot the emperor agane dema^ding if thai
vold submit their neu opinions to be censurit by the vrittes of the said
ancie^ts, then thai began to dout, sum refusing, sum granting simpliciter, sum
gra^ting and refusing conditionally: Vharupon amang tham self did aryis such
confusion and clamor, sum affirming, sum denying sum distinguising that by
their insolidite and incertenty the solidire and certenty of the Catholic
church ves manifested and the said Emprour interponing or conioyning his
imperial authorite vith the spiritual did conclud and decern vith Tertullian
traitting this passage of S. Paul flee from ane heretic after he be once or
tuyis admonisit in vhilk traittie the said Tertullian does advise treu
Catholics not to disput vith Heretics by expres text of Scripture bot to
reduce rham to the ancient tradition of the church and doctors tharof and from
the said church and ancients to resaue the treu sens and interpretation of the
scriptur and of all questions co^trouerted vithin the church according to the
laudabill opinion of Origenes vho does affirm that only to be resauit for
undoubted verite vhilk in no point does differ from ancient Ecclesiastique
tradition. Occasi^n moving the author to vrit this small treatise.


Bot Seeing in these latter dayis their be no emprour to practice the counsall
of Sisinnius albeit the curiosite of this time brangilling all the fundamentes
of treu religion had more nead tharof nor ever heirtoforun so much as Simpill
ons be cast into such incertentic that hardly can thai resolve vhidder to
follou antiquite or nouetly, science or ignorance, ordor or disordor, it is
tharfor the deuite of eury one in particular to supply this general defect to
his pouer (be it never so meam) by studeing to edify the ignorants and by
expressing his charitable affection either by vord or vork. For vhilk cause I not
puffed up (as the lord knouit) vith the suelling spreit of curiosi^^, contention
or malice, nor corrupted by lucre or avarice do unto the glory of my gratius
lord god, benefit of my country men and satisfaction of such as either dout of
or detract my conversion simpillie and sensibillie set down my popular opinion
in this behalf declaring hou I my self ves clearit of all these doutes and
brocht by gods grace to knou on vhat syid the verire ves to be found. The
verite is to be knouin by the church and not the church by the verite.


Aftet I had red in the Apostle Timoth. 2. and 3. chap. the church of God to be
callit the fundament or pillar of verite I thocht it necessary to search out
vhar this pillar ves to befound that being assurit tharof I should no more dout
of the verite beildit tharupo^, esteming it a matter presumpteiis, preposterus,
and absurd to think that eury private man must first knou the verite before he
knou the church and by the said verite to discern the treu church from the false: Seeing S. Augustine him self ves not aschamit in expres vordis to confess
that he had never beleuit or knouin the Euangell for Euangell (albeit it be the
undoubted verite) except the authorite of the church had first moved him
tharunto. The holy father doutlesly did consider thou impossibill it ves to
eury one in particular of him self to penetrat and rip up the latent secreittes
of this verite vharin is comprehe^dit such deap and deantie treasors of
visdome, vich gave not only occasion to ancient Doctors of the primityue church
to spend so much time and study in explaning tharof bot euin the Apostles their
self if thai had not been first assisted by the celestial commentares of
Cryists aum viue voice and secondly vith supernatural assistance of his holy
spreit after his most glorius Ascension thai had never been habill to have
comprehendit the deap of that inscrutable profundite for manifestation vharof
the holy spreit ves specially boyth promisit and send unto them. That the sens
of Scriptur is not so facill as many suppon^.


Sanct Hierome in his first book agans the Pelagians does complene of the
Heretics of his age vho to drau the pepill to their opinions ver not aschamit
to affirm that the Scripturs ver easy to be vnderstud of childring, veme^ and
idiotes, to this effect vritting to Paulinus these be his vordes. The only art
to understand the scriptur is that vhilk eury one does vendicat or vsurp euin
to the doting cloone, skolding drab and babilling Sophist: of the Scriptur
(Sayis he) thai all presum and pratill, teching before thai be tacht. August. 2.
boo^ Confess. chap. 25.
of vhilk presumpteus arrogance if vee shall trust S. Augustine, S. Hilar, S.
Epiphan and the said S. Hierome all haereseis have precedit vhenas eury one
interpreting the Scriptur after his auin pleasure persuade him self to have
found out the undoubted verite. Hilar. 2. book of the Trinit. Epiphan. 7. Syn.
Sess. 6. Hieron. 2. chap. to the Calat.
Bot the most venerable fathers did not tak upon them to understand the
scriptur till thai ver first veill instructed by such as had sufficient
understanding tharof. So sant Hierome glorifeis him self to have lernit the
holy Scriptur under Gregor Naziazen and didimns. So Sanct Basilius Sequestring
him self from all secular study and society did schoit him self up in ane
monastery full 13 Years passing his prentisschip in the scriptur and souking
up the treu sens tharof out of the blessed paippes of ancient approved doctors
and not of his auin private imaginations as too many do nou adayis.

Moreover in the auld testament vee read not that all ver doctors and
interpretors of the lau bot a feu did exerse that function: and in the neu
testament vheras Sanct Paul does institut degrees vithin the church aponting
sum to be Doctors, sum Prophets* etc. tharby the Apostle does manifestly
insiuuat the sens of scripture not to be parent to ^ury one. Tertullian also in
his prescripsions. chap. 14. does esteem it for ane evident mark of heretical
churches vhar their is no difference of sex or office nor diflinction maid in
reding holy Scriptur, and vhar (to use the said authors vordes) Catechumens or
in^rants vithin the church think them self perfyit before thai be instructed,
vhar vemen be so bold and inscent that thai dar presum to tech, disput,
contend: vhar he that is to day diacon is to morrou Lector, and to day priest
tomorrou Laique or secular, and vhar Laiques exerce and use the office of
priest and Sacrificateur.

Agane if it be the part of the Phisitia^ and not of the patie^t to try the
sincerite of medicame^tes: if the steuart and not eury household man should oppin
the stoir house and distribut the vittalles for eury one of the family in
particular: if the master and marinelles not eury slummering and seaseik
passinger should sound the deap: direct the course and govern the schip: Hou much
more is the trial of the Metaphysicall Medicin and distribution of the
celestial food of our Saules conteanit in holy Scripturs and government of
the schip of the church proper only unto tham that vorthely have passit their
degrees in that spiritual faculty and be laufully aponted dispensators and
steuarts of that celestial family and finally be masters and marinelles
ministerial vithin the mystical barque of the holy church and not to eury
child, voman or idiot?

Besyid this vee see by dalye experience not only in liberal sciences bot in
arts mechanique hou base soever thai be that me^ have nead to lern diligently
certane years before thai be habill to tech and thai must pass their
prentischip before thai be maid masters, and ve see that thai vho presumes to
do vtheruayis be estemit bot arrogant and impudent: if so be vhy should not the
lyik (if no more) time and study be imployit in Theology before vee presum any
great perfection thairin seeing ^che is the queen and mistres of all other
sciences bot vee as thai say in Latin enter in and defyill vith vn^eschin feet
the pure Sanctuary of her Scripturs euin the first year, month or day that vee
can spell or read any thing in our vulgar ^oung as tho vee n^dit no pilot or
pedagoge* being their into lyik the folisch butterflees vho desyrus of lycht
flee headlong to the candill and so burn their self not k^^uing the
inconvenient ioynit vith the lychtwh^n it is not deuly and respectiuly vsit: So
heady ferss idiots believing the beams of holy scriptor ^an not burn temerar
branes thai flee thairunto vithout fear or forsicht nor considering the
majesty thairof bot foli^^hly trusting their self capable of any thing thai
can curiuslie consait, incontinent thai tak on and t^che before thai ^e
instructed, thai interprit, disput, distingi^s conclud, prech and pen before
thai can veill reid the rudimentes of other inferior sciences much lus att^nit
unto any perfection in this science of sciences and heirin thai do resemble
such as cu^ming to pass a da^gerus sea do hyir a burque and furnis the same
vyth co^pas, todar and all such necessares b^t thinking pilotres and marinelles
to costly and superfl^^s in that thai their self have sum knoulege in that art
having lernit sum generalities tharof as 10 knou the arrhes, points of co^pas,
babord and sterbord, lof and lie: Bot the nicht cu^ming, the sea suelling, the
storm incressing and the licht of moon and stars extinguisit by force
tharof, no dout such temetite can not esca^p vntymus repentance: euin so thai
vho be imbarquit in the veak veschell of their auin fond imaginations presuming
nottheles to saill the sacred seas of holy scriptur vithout perfyit pilotes and
pedagoges can not escaip sum notable schipurak either by dasching their self
upon sum roque of rebellion or by ruuming in sum botomles golf of heretical
sect or schism.

S. Augustine in his first book of Christian doctrine. 6. chap. sp^iking upon
this matter aga^s the foolhardines of sum in his age does say in this sort:
thai be desauit vith manifold obscuriteis and ambiguiteis vho raschly read the
scriptures taking often times one thing for ane other and in ane other place the
said father does affirm the holy spreit not to have vnaduysitly couerit or maid
obscuir the scripture to the end thai should not by too much familiarite or
facilite becum contemptibill. bot Ireneus as most ancient so is he most evident
in this point saying in his 2. book chap. 27. agans Hereseis that the scrpturs
abound in infinite mystereis of divine Sapience and that thai schyne vith
inspekable majesty contening so many variable Dialectes so many obscuyr
phrases, parables, tropes, figures vith so many clauses vhilk at the first seam
contradictorius or repugnant.

The scripturs then be difficill in tuo respects, one in respect of the matter
vharof thai treat, that is to say of the most high mistereis of creation,
Incarnation, Regeneration, Predestinario^ of the Sacrame^tis, Angels, of the
most blessed unite and trinite, vith many other supernatural secreittes. Agane
the styill of the scriptur re^dres it difficill: for not only passages and
clauses tharof vhilk be indead obscuir bot euin such as sea^ verey plane often
times ca^ not be vnderstud vithout assistance of the self same grace vhilk did
deuyis and dyit them as sayit Solomon in the 9 of the book of Sapience. O lord
vho can knou thy Sens or meaning except thou send thy spreit from above:

Morouer no man can deny bot that aue meruelus iugme^t and experience is
requirit to knou vhat places be literally vhat figuratiuly to be interprit.
Heiruythall the ambiguus phrases of Scriptur does render the same difficill: as
vhen vee reid in S. Io. 8. Thou vho art thou? 1 the beginning vho does spek
unto you* and in Matheu the 11. he kneu her not till sche brocht to bed. and to
the Corinth. 1. chap. 15. vhat shall thai do that be baptesit for the dead or
for dead. and to the Ephesians. 3. that the manifold visdome of God may appear by
the church unto Princes and potestates in places or persons above etc. and in
the first of Peter the 3. In the vhilk cu^ming unto the spreittes imprisonnit
vho beleuit not attending the pouar of God in the dayis of Noah. Siclyk
imperfyit phrases producis great difficulte as that in the 5. to the Romans. as
by one man sin unto all men so by the Justice of one justification of life unto
all men: vhar in that hoill period or clause their is no verb copulatyue to
absolve the sentence* and the same difficulte does aryis of phrases spokan
after the Hebreu f^sson as in the 118 Psalm. my Saull (...) ever in my hands.
and in the Euangell. vho vold save his Saull let him lose it. Siclyk be sum
phrases Ironique or spokin in derision as in Genese 3. Lo. Adam as one of
(...). knouing Good and bad. Their lak it not also most exquisit and quik
antiphrases or spechis having a contratius sens as in Job 1. vhar it is said
that he sacrificed daily for his childring lest thai should bliss God, and in
ane other place the said Job speking to God. I have not sinnit yet my Ee
remanit in bitterness And yet agane unto God. thou knoueth that I have done no
thing vickitly.

Bot of sentences at the first face seaming co^tradictorius the Gretest
difficulte of all does arys as in Exodus 20. I am the lord God strong and ^alous
visiting the iniquit^is of the fathers upon the childring unto the third and
four^ generation: vharunto that of Ezech 8. apperit directly contrar vhar it is
said. the sone shall not bear the iniquity of the father. And in the lords
prayer vee pray the lord not to lead us in tentation: Yet Sanct lames sayit
that God tempted no man. and Sanct Paul to the Romans. 3. vee belief (sayis ho)
that man is iustifeit by faith vithout the vorkes of the lau. contraryvayis
Sanct. Ia. chap. 2. sayit. you see then that man is Instifeit by vorkes and not
of faith oniy: yea Sanct Paul in this matter seamit to be contrarius unto him
self saying 2. Corinthians. 3. chap. all faith vithout charity to be no thing.
seeing charity is a vork commandit by the la^ Item Exodus ^0, Honor thy father
and mother, etc. and Matthew. 13. Call no man in this earth father. and in the
same Decaloge. Sanctify the Saboth, and in the 12. of Matthew. the Preistes
vithin the tempill did violat the Saboth not committing any crime. Item a
litill you sall see me and a litill you sall nos see me. Item in Job. in my
flesch I am assurit to see God my Redemptor. and in 1. Corinthians. 15. flesch can
not inherit the kingdom of God. Item in the 26. of the Pruuerb. Ansuer not a
fooll according to his folly: and in that same place ausuer a fooll according
to his folly. Item John 10. the father is greter nor I, and John. 4. the father
and I be one. Item Io. 11 the vord ves maid flesch and Malach, 3. I am God and
am not cha^git. Ite^ Marc. 15. vee read that thai vho hang on the cross vyth
Cryist did blasphe^ him: yet in the 2^. of Luc. it is said that only one of
tham did blasphe^ him. I^e^ in one place, my flesch is verey food, and in ane
other: flesch profited no thing. Item in the epistle to the Hebreues it is said
yat vithout eff^^sion of blood is no remission of fins: Matt. 9. 2. Luc. 5. 20.
Luc. 7. 27. Io. 20. 23.
yet in the Eva^gell vee reid that Cryist boyth did remit and gave pouer to his
Apostles to remit sins vhar their ves no effusion of blood.

These phrases ambiguues, figuratyue, Ironique, antiphrastique and at the first
seaming co^trarius gave no small matter of studeis unto famus doctors
preceding, uhose tedius trauelles and incredible labors scheu evidently yat
thai have been too stupid and vane in taking such endless panes upon matters so
plane orelles vee too arrogant esteming difficulteis so facill: for explaning
vharof none be more busy to vritt paraphrases, annotations, commentares and
commun places nor thai yat make the ignorant pepill belief the scriptur to be so
plane and none persuad more the necessity of prechors nor thai do: vhilk
suirlie ver all superfluus if the sens tharof ver so evident and patent as thai
imagine. And moreover if it ver so Sanct Peter ver much to be blamit vhenas he
does say yat in th'Epistles of Sanct Paul sindry things be difficill to be
vnderstud vhilk the vnlernit and inco^sta^t pervert as other scriptures to
their auin perdition. and not only S. Peter bot sindry other disciples merit
just reprehension vho in the 6. of John did say. This is ane hard spech vho can
hear him.

These difficulteis so dangerus unto the vnlernit and inconstant (as Sayit
Sanct Peter in the place forsaid) maid me diligently to search out vhar the treu
orthodox Catholic, By Knouing the treu church vee shall knou the verite ad
treu Pastors and by them be resoluit of all doutes of conscience.
Apostolic church should be that by her I mycht vithout danger knou yat vihilk
adhering only to my private opinion I culd not vithout ^earfull danger presum to
knou: to vit to knou the verity (vha^ of sche is the pillar and fundament) the
laufull Pastores, treusens of the verite and of all questions this day
co^^rouerted. for if it be treu (as it can not be vith reason denyit) that of
the primityue church and Doctores tharof vee have resauit the cataloge of the
canons or bookis of authentik Scriptur (vhilk be the undoubted verite) by vhat
reason can vee refuse to resaue the treu sens and interpretation of the said
bookis and of all questions rising tharupon of the laufull, lineall and
undoubted successors of the said church rendering unto them the lyik honor,
respect and credit vhilk our laudable forbeares ever from the dayis of king
Donald (vho regnit a 1400 years ago and resauit the Christian faith as it is
this day professit at Rome by means of Pope Victor the fyf^eint bischop from
Sanct Peter) did give unto ancient churches preceding: vharunto if vee should
vith Christian obedience bou out stubborn hearts vee should clearly understand
all these ceremoneis vsit in the Roman church in the service of God vihilk do
seam unto many (as thai did once to my self) so ridiculus Idolatrus and absurd
to be nottheles most decent, necessary and salutar ornaments, full of
consolation, Good exemple and prouocation^ unto humilite and holiness, and such
as be (as one of the ancients did say) benefices unto men malefices unto the
devil and Sacrifices unto God.

Bot in respect all Heretics heirtofor have That all Heretics heirtofor
have vsurpit the name of the church.
boyth arrogated unto them self the treu sens of scriptur and name of the treu
church it shall be necessary for avoiding of prolixite to make mention only of
such marks as be peculiar and propre only to the treu church omitting such as
be commun boyth to the treu and falls. Ireneus in his dayis did much complene in
his S. book agans Valentinus upon the impudentnes of Heretics vho bragging of
the treusens of Scriptur vnineffected vyth gloses and traditions of men did
also brag that vith them ves the treu church and treu successors of the
Apostles: and the lyik impudence does Lactantius regret of the Heretics in
his dayis vho (sayis he) did more confide^tly use the name of Christians and
treu church nor the Christians their self and before Lactantius Sant Cyprian in
his* book of diuyn institutions. does say of Nou^tian that as apes not being
men did notuythstanding con^refait the gestor of men so Nou^tian not being of
the church ves not aschamit ^o vsurp the name tha^of blaspheming the treu
church and calling her heretical and Hilarious in his book to Iouinianus does
inlyk maneir lament yat the Synagog of the antecryst should vendicat the name and
pouer of crystes church. Sanct Augustine in his Book to Constantin August does
object the self same impudence agans the Donatistes, and Sant Bernard in his 66
sermon upon the Ca^ticle does declare yat in his age versum calling their self
Gnostiques and Apostoliques vho (as thai allegit) had only reuelit unto them
the treu sens of Scriptur after the same had been hid from the knouleg of ages
preceding: and theiss Gnostiques albeit thai vold specially be callit
Apostoliques yet thai did Scorn and mok all other evidence of Apostolic
succession except of their doctrine lyk unto sum of yat same humeur in this
deplorable age, vhose preposterus opinion in this bealf I remit to be refuted
Heirefter in the article of Apostolic succssion.

Then to the end these falsely vsurpit titilles desaue not the ignorant causing
them tak the vyfe of Putefer for Susanna and Samaria for Jerusalem, I will
produce four peculiar marks of the treu church vhilk the most simpill soull in
the vorld may easaly see only to apertene to the church of Rome and her
adherentes and not to any other church impugning her.

And as to such as vold have sound doctrine and sincer ministration of the
Sacraments to be infallibill marquis of the treu church, Sound doctrine and
sincer ministration of the sacraments be not insallibill marquis of the treu
church.
such men be pitifully abusit: for these be not the propre marquis of the
church quarto modo as say the Logicians seeing all Heretics yat have been
heirtofor have chalengit as much or more that prerogative as did the undoubted
orthodox church. Yea this day every Heretical sect does bitterly contend one
agans one other to have only the honor of these tuo marks. Tharfor vee must
find sum other marks more certane and special to the end vee may evidently
see vhilk church this day contending upon this point should be preferrit unto the
rest. Vhence then sall vee extract the said infallibill marquis? not of the
brane of any party contending: for lyik as to the making of of a perfyit circle
vee must have a firm and immouable center: so to ^ind out these marquis deuly
as aperteyneth to the end no party contending have just cause of exception thai
must be deriuit from such equal and clear fundaments as all contendantes sall
agree unto. For this cause vee sall extract them partly out of the Symbol
vhilk generally all Christians this day use collected (as Sanct Augustine does
affirm) by the Apostles thameself: Four infallible marquis of the treu church.
Partly of these Symboles vhilk ves gatherit by ancients in the most famus
counsalles of Nice and Constantinople more nor a 1300. years ago. In the Symbol
of the Apostles the church is callit holy and Catholic, in the other tuo sche
is callit one and Apostolic. Vharupon I do gather four marquis so proper and
peculiar to the treu church yat churches Heretical can not vithout manifest
impudence arrogat the same as thai do the other tuo of sound doctrine and sincer
ministration of the sacraments.

Then the first mark is to be holy: The first mark of the treu church is
holiness.
vhilk is not to be vnderstud yat all being vithin the church be holy and just:
because yat the church vhilk in the Grec is callit Ecclesia hes her name from
vocation or calling vharby it is certane yat their must be as veill unholy as
holy vithin her, considdering yat many be callit and feu elected to holiness and
justice. For this cause in Scriptures the treu church is designit under the
name of a grange or barn in vhilk be boyth corn and caf: Sche is callit a field
in vhilk the poppill and tares grou up vyth the Good grane: Sche is callit a
nett vihilk resauit both Good and bad fisch: A vyneyard in vhilk be both sour
and sueit grapes, frutfull and vnfructfull vynes: A flok in vhilk be boyth
goattes and Scheip, Rouch and rent, scabbit and hoill: To ane house vhatin be
Veschelles of gold and Silver, of tree and earth, sum to honor and sum to
dishonor, and to the ten virgins of vlhilk as many ver foolisch as vyise.
Tharfor in the treu church so long as sche is milita^t heir in the earth the bad
be mixit vyth the Good seeing it is only the church triumphant in the heaum
vhar all the members be Good lyk as all the infernal menzee be lewd. The^ the
treu church is not callit holy in respect their be none in her bot holy ons bot
in respect none can in effect be holy housoeuer thai have outuart appearance of
holiness except thai be co^prehendit vythin her. Euin as a great army is callit
brave, puissant and rich, not because eury one of the army in particular have
these qualiteis bot because the better part and most vorthy personis tharof be
such: Euin so the treu church from the better part not from the greter is
callit holy. Vharunto is agreeable yat of Sanct Matheu 13. vhar the chunch is
callit the kingdom of heauin not yat all vithin her be heritores of yat
kingdom bot because none can inherit heauin except he be first comprehendit
vyrhin the church.

And vhat as it is said of the church in the ca^tique of Solomon you art (my
darlin) altogidder beautiful and their is no spoit in the, yat is meant
properly of the church triumpha^t vhilk in the same chaptor is said to be
crouned by her spouse: Bot if vyth S. Gregore vee sall apply these vordes to
the church militant then the church sayis the said holy doctor may be callit
fair and spotles because the elect members tharof by inherent grace be pure
before God and be not defylit by the society of the reprobat, S. Grego. 18.
Eccles. dogmat.
and albeit no just nor holy man be faltles before God yet he ce^ssit not to be
holy because by his vouis and vill he does Supple the defect and febilnes of his
force and faculty observing a daily Cleannes (as Sayit the said holy father)
vhenas by his tears he does daily vesch avay and confess his smaller sins and
does abstene from the greter. Greg. upon the 4. of the Cantiq.


Nether is it impertinent to call her sanctaid est sanguine Christi tincta
vhilk is to say sprinkillit vyth the blood of Cryist because vyth his pretius
blood he hes vaschit auay her sins and hes so loved her yat he hes geuin him
self for her, Apocal. 1. Ephesians 5. Hebreu. 9.
yat sche mycht be sanctifeit and purgit by his blood from the vorkes of death.
and for this cause Sanct Augustine upon the 85 Psalm. dot affirm yat all the
faithful be callit sanctes.

Their be also many other resons vhy the church should be callit holy, as for yat
sche does institut not prescryue no reull in doctrine or manners vhilk is
unholy: by the one forbidding all infidelity and by the other all iniquity,
having also vithin her ane holy Sacerdoce or priest head vhilk never hes been
altogidder depryuit of sum secreit assistance of the holy spr^it (as heirefter
in the auin place sall be moir planly delectarit) in so much as tho sche seam
bot as a barn or stak vharin does appear no thing outvardly bot caf and stra:
Yet being threschit, schakin and riddillit before the vynd of treu trial their
sall alvay be found in her a heap of Good corn vhilk no vynd of vanite nor
tempest of tribulation can scatter or blau avay. And albeit as sayit the
prophet it does appear yat Satan hes schorn the field of the church and
ve^dagit the vynes tharof and yat God does bot glane after him and only gather
sum feu grapes: yet is not his number so small bot yat he boyth hes had
throuchout all ages of all kind persons and in all places sufficient stoir of
holy ons vythin his church designing no other limite or marches to his
inheritance bot from the sone setting to the rising tharof. and this
inheritance by the ancients is pertinently comparit to gold or silver vhilk in
the mines is not found all pure and perfyit bot couerit and mixit vith many
filthy materialles, yet the myneres and meltares do not for all yat vilany
dispyis the defylit lignot bot does put up the same esteming it a metal most
rare and pretieuex Naming the hoill mine or pit tharof not after the name of
the huge montans of other contemptible matterialles covering or compassing her
bot a mine of gold.

Bot omitting all these significations of holiness vhilk all properly do
apertene to the Catholiq^ Roman church I adher principally unto yat
signification vhilk bringit vith it such specialite as can not be applyit to
any other Christian church bot to yat of Rome vhilk is yat amang the Latins by
these vordes (sanctum esse, to be holy) is vnderstud as much as to say to be
firm and stabill, difficill to be inuadit or violat at lest vhilk nether should
be inuadit or violat. So the civil lau does call the rampartes and
fortications of a strong city, the Tribuns, tresors and tempills tharof holy
things because none may, at lest none should molest or incommod theme. Euin so no
thing being more august magnifique or venerable before God and amang men no
thing more firm and stabill nor the church of God, of Good reason sche hes ever
had the titill and addition of holiness, for vhat can be more firm and stabill
nor yat vhilk is dedicat by and to Cryist from vhom by force no thing can be
abstracted yat his father had geuin unto him She is beild upon such a roque as
nether rane nor vynd incressing can dimoliss nor the ports of hell preuaill,
Io. 17. Matthew. 7. Marc. 16. 2. Corint. 2.
her fundation being so solid (as sayit the Apostle) yat one other fundation
can no man lay then yat vhilk is already layid to vit Jesus Cryist. Resting upon
this fondation their nether is, ves nor sall be pouer or policy yat can defait
her. for as sayit S. Io. Chrysostom in the Homily of his expulsion. Tom. 5. sche
is more durable nor the earth and as durable as the heuin, because her roottes be
fessinnit in boyith heir her members militant and above her members triumphant.
Morouer that of Sanct Math. 28 vhar our blessed savior does say yat he sall be
vyth his Apostles to the vordles end: these vordis of necessite must be
relative unto their successors and to the hoill church succeding as veill as
unto the said Apostles seeing thai culd not live till the vorld ver e^dit: By
these vordes I say The church is not only declarit to have ane undoubted holiness
boyth in doctryn and life (housoeuer sche be traducit or sklanderit) and that
because Christ Jesus be verteu of his holy spreit is vyth her to the consommatio^
of the vorld, bot also her firmitie and permanentes is expreslie confirmit in
yat no term is set unto her bot the latter end of all ages. The church then is
ye land Vhilk the lord hes ordenit to lest for ever, vharof the prophet does
say. Esaias. 60.
thou hes foundit her upon her stabilite and sche sall not faill vorld vythout
end: and sche is the kingdom vharof it is vrittin. Her kingdom fall command
eury vhare. of vhilk the prophet so often cryit. The pepill and Kingdom yat sall
not serve the sall periss.

Vharupon I gather for conclusion of this article. That church vhilk nether
foren enemis nor falls brethring culd never to this day altogidder defait
remaning terrible lyk ane army veill renged in battall: Cantiq. 6. Psalm. ^8.
That curch vhilk may say vyth the Psalmist: hou often from my youth have they
inuadit bot culd not vinquis me. That church as sayit Justinius Martyr in the
collogue agans Triphonius: Vhilk as the vine the more you sned her the more
sche is frutfull: That church as said Hilarious in his book de Trinitate, vhilk
triumphet the more sche be tred upon: That church vhilk can not sink more nor
the palm and abydit the furnace lyk the fine gold, ever florissing housoueuer
sche be forcit is to be estemit holy in this proper signification of holiness
contening firmite and perpetuite. Bot ama^g all churches that this day strive
for the prerogatyue tharof only the Roman church may produce attentik
testimoneis of this firmite agans all fortons ever since the time yat the
Apostle Sanct Paul vritt his Epistle vntho them vhilk nou is near a 1600.
year. During vhilk time nether infidel Paganes by their fearful torments,
Egesip. 3. book 3. chap. Arnob. 2. book agans the gentiles. Eusebius. 5 book hist.
chap. 16. Athanas. 1. Ruffiinus, Euagrius.
nor Tyrans by their Barbarus persecutions, nor leuis by their obstinat
opposition, nor schismatiques by their factius separation, nor Heretics by
their pernitius co^tradictio^ and inuectio^ euld never be habill to extinguis
the lycht of this Romani lamp nether by their slicht nor micht: vheras other
sects and monopolles going about to supplant her and all Herescis lifting up
their horns aganes her for the most part have perissit before their doctrine ves
veill planted: and if any of them have sum feu ages endured: the patience of
God almychty in yat behalf and his longanimitie hes ever recompensit their
obstinat induratio vyth the more fearful punitions often times to the Eyis of
the vorld vharof vee have the notable exemples of Simon Magus to the terror of
the beholders by evil spreittes most violently lifted up in the air and
tharefter throuin down all rent and dismembered: of Manicheus flain quik by the
king of Persians: of Mo^tanus vho patt violent hands in him self: of Arrius
vhose bouelles brast out at his fundame^t to the extreme horror of the
assistants and of Nestorius vho ves eatin up vyth vermin. In sum: all Hereseis
and Heriarches yat have impuguit the Roman church be such as sayit Sanct Paul
as ca^ not long induir bot Sche (as Sayis one of the ancientesis the beauty of
the firmament vhilk schynit perpetually: 2. Timoth. 3.
and her Enemis be bot cometes conceauit of terrestrial vapores vhose flam
ceassit hou sone their gros aliment beginnit to faill. Sche is one indeficient
flood vhilk being continually nurissit by the living springes of the holy
spreit can not dry up: thai bot brooks or burns vhilk do ceas hou sone the
storm or tempest is ouerblouin. To this purpos Sanct Augustine u^itting upon
these vordes of the 97. Psalm: Thai sall turn to nooht as does rusching
vatter^s, sayet. Be not astenied to see the small brooks ryis and rummill for
a vhyill for that is bot a sp^it vhilk rouschit avay and can not lest: Many
Hereseis (sayis he) have rored and run mychtely bot thai be nou as running
vatteres past and gone and in such sort dryit up as if ancientes had not maid
mention of their names hardly had vee knouyn yat ever any such perfons had
been, this much Sanct Augustine. Contraryvyis it is certane yat the church
Catholic Roman hes continuit ever glorius as veill in persequution as in
prosperity sen the dayis of th Apostles unto this hour professing and
observing that same faith and form of divine service vhilk this day is
obseruit: vhilk albeit the enemis tharof can not villingly grant yet the most
impudent of tham all must be forcit to confess yat the matteres most reprehendit
by them vithin the said Roman church, ves brocht in and begu^ near a 1200
year ago, vhilk is a longer time nor ca^ be prouin yat any Heretical church
hes indurit. Heiruythall it is to be considderit yat vhen Martin Luther maid
defection except in the church of Rome and her adherentes ves no religion in
the vorld bot Paganism, Judaism, Mahometism and the dregs of Nestorianism in
Grecia bot no man can be so effronted as to say yat the church of Cryist ves
amang any of theiss sects: and tharfor of necessite it must follou yat sche
ves either at Rome or no vhar. And suirly as this marque of holiness signifieng
ane evident perpetuity is a marque most infallible so does it infallibilly
discern betuix the orthodox and Heretical church for since Theobutes and Simon
Magus first Heretics unto Martin Luther sum 200 Hereseis hes ruschit and
replenissit from bank to bra lyk inundatio^s of speit vatters, vharof sum have
been mentenit by most michty patrons as by Emprors, kings and cunning me^ vho
vrit and publist innumerabill books in such sort as humane raison vold never
have thocht yat such doctrine culd have been suppressit: yet by the admirabill
providence of God thai be so extinguisit yat their rested tharof no memory at
all as is before said: Act. 5.
lyk as no dout sall cum to pass upon all hereseis modern vho lyik to yat vhilk
Gamaliel doctor of the lau did say of Theudas and Judas of Galite Schismatiques
vho sedusing much pepill to follou tham ver destroyit and their pepill
scatterit. So thai vho this day follou the lyik schismatic humor housoeue^
thai run and rore, thai bot abu^e their self if thai attend any better firmitie
or fin nor other of the lyik humor have had heirtofor. Vharupon to be schort I
collect and conclud yat holiness in all the significations tharof namly in the
last (vhilk is most proper) is only proper and peculiar to the Catholic
church Roman and to her adherentes and to no other yat hes abandonit her.

The second marque of the church is to be Catholic or universal. The second
marque of the church is vniuersalite.
the vhilk Sanct Augustine interpreting in his 131. Sermon does say yat to be
Catholic is to be deffundit throuch the hoill vorld and not to be
comprehendit in sum feu corners as Schismat^que churchis be. And this
universality vee find to be threefold to vitt of places, times and persons. To
prove vniuersalite of places the Psalm. sayit: their sound ves hard throuch all
the earth and their vordes unto the end of the vorld. and in Sanct Marc last
chap. The Apostles be comma^dit to go and tech th'Euangell throuch the hoill
vorld.

The universality of time is no les evident in yat by attentik historieis the
church may be prouin to have visibilly continuit from Adam unto this hour
insomuch as her beginning ves at the beginning and her diuturnite sall be so
long as the vorld sall induir for God hes foundit her to lest eternally saying
in the 28. of Math. I sall be vyth you to the vorlds end and in the 2^. of Luc.
This generation (meaning of the church) sall not pass till all things be endit.

And yat the church does comprehend all kind of persons of vh^tsoeuer estat,
condition, age, sex or nation thai be of is verifeit by Sanct Paul. Romans 10.
Saingy at in her is not any difference betuix ^eu and gentill, circumsition and
prepuce, ^arbar and grec, bound and free, masle and femelle, bot Christ is all
in all, the lord of all, plentiful unto all yat call upon him: for vhoseuer
callit upon his name sall be save. And agane: you hes redemit us vyth thy blood
forth of all nations, trybes, tounges and peapill and hes maid of us a Kingdom
unto God. and sanct Peter Act. Act. 9.
9. of a treuth (sayis he) I do persaue yat God is not ane excepter of persons
bot yat throuchout all nations vho seruit him and does justly by accepted
vythout exception.

The^ if the treu church be dispersit trouchout all places continuing from all
ages and compo^d of all kind of persons, The multitud and visibilitie of the
church prouin.
nations, estats etc. It seamit a glory laking Good ground to ostend or brag of
neunes or feunes. For so did the Dona^^stes, agans vhom Sanct Augustine sayis
yat thai robbit Christ Jesus of his dignity seeing it is vrittin: in the
multitud of pepill consislit the dignite of a Prince and in feunes tharof he is
dishonorit: Seeing also Christ hes had and ever sall have his heritage from end
to end of the vorld: in such sort as vho vold abstract from him the honor of
yat multitud acquirit in the multitud of his merceis thai bot abstract their
self from the infinite multitud of his inheritance, vhilk being comparit to the
sand of the sea he can not content him self vith a sma^l handful of such as
have chosin to their self singular opinions repugning to the general consent
of all attentique antiquity (as heirefter in the auin place sall be goduilling
declarit.) Vho vyth the Psalmist do all agree yat copiosa est apud eum redemptio
(yat vyth Christ their is a copius abundant or larg redemption.

Eunomius the heretic desyrit his auditors nether to respect multitud nor
antiquite: bot Basilius the great in his first book aga^s the said
Eunomiusestemit him vnhorty to be hard much les to be ansuerit unto: the said
father affirming it ane matter most absurd to yield alyk reverence, respect and
credeit to ane ha^dfull of rebellius, recent, busy branes and to ane venerable
multitud of ancient obedient and reverend persons defendars of the Christian
faith agans infidelity and living and deing in Christian obedience unto Christ
Jesus and unto such as he hes aponted his Vicarres and Vicegerents vythin his
church.

And under this generality is comprehendit the subaltern marque of
visibilitie. A mark indeed housoeuer it be impugnit yet veill establissep by
many passages of holy Scripture. For in Math 18. command is geuin to hear the
church and to complene unto the church. Vhilk commandments seeing thai ver
geuin unto Christians to induire for all ages, thai do necessarly prove a
perpetual visibilitie of the church, unto vhom vee should in vane spek or
co^plene if sche ver not subject unto our senses. It is treu yat vee spek, pray
and complene unto God vnseing his invisible majesty because he his a spreit
inunsible. Bot to Imagine the church (vhilk is ane assemblee of bodies and not
of spreittes) yat vee can spek and co^plene unto her as unto a thing invisible
it is ane absurdite neding no ansuer and ane Heresy neading much hellebor.
Sui^ly the Royal Prophet in his 18. Psalm ves of ane other opinion speking of
the church and saying yat God had placed her in the sone yat sche mycht be
manifest. and Sanct Math. 5. callis her a city beildir upon the top of ane
mo^tane vhilk montane Esayias and Micheas forspak, Esaias. 2.
saying. Miche. 4.
Yat in the latter dayis the montaue of the house of the lord (meaning of the
church at and after the first cumming of Christ) sa^l be preparit upon the top
of the mo^ta^s and sall be exalted above all other hills, and all nations sall
resort and much pepill go unto her: and this is the hill vhilk king
Nabochodosar did see cut out of the quarry vythout hands and from a litill
stone to grou unto ane huge montane and to have visibilly filled the hoill
vo^ld: Dan. 2.
in vhilk montane after the interpretation of Daniel the lord of heauin (after
he had brusit all other kingdoms) rasit up a kingdom for him self to endure
for ever vhilk sell not be dissipat nor geuin to any other peapill. Bem. 6.
sermon. upon the Ca^tiq.
Sanct Bernard citing this place agans the Heretics of his time mentening the
self same absurdity of inuisibilitie does say. Go too say it he. be you so mad
as to belief the stone of the church cutted out of the montane vythout hands
and maid a great montane to be smudderit up in your caves and corners? You ar
(sayis he) desauit, and tharfor let no Christian fall from this montane: Bot if
sedusars shall say unto Christians (as once the devil said unto Christ) if you
be the sone of God fall down: (Vhat soever passages of holy Scriptur thai can
alleg follouing the fraud full exemple of the devil) let it not enter in the
heart of a Good Catholiq^ to consent more nor Christ did unto such imposturs, or
desauers. and if one sall fay: Lo Christ is hear, Cryist is their: Cryist him
self admonisis us not to give credit. and if thai sall allege yat he is in the
desert or in the secreit corners of the house, go not out sayis Christ nether
follou tham: and the reason is because the head natural is not bot conioynit
vyth the natural body nor Christ the head mystical of the church Bot vith and
in the same church and no vay in or vith them yat establiss unto their self
particular sects and sotieteis repugning to the universal body of the
Catholic church: from vhilk vhosoeuer does separat him self he is not to be
estemit Catholic bot either Heretic or at lest Schismatique because he does
chose to him self singular opinions contrar the uniform, ancient, and laudable
consent of the universal body of the church.

Bot to make this matter yet a littill more plane I do insist in maneir
follouing, saying: yat in so much as all the parts of this militant church be
visible and in so much as in the church vee must have faith proceeding of
hearing (as sayis the Apostle) vee must have preching of the vord and prechors,
ministration of Sacraments, collection and distribution of alms, places to
convene, etc. suirky to say yat all these circumstances (for the most part so
necessary as vhar thai be not their can be no church) be invisible ver too
absurd and impudent: and if thai be not invisible, the church must neads be
visisible.

As to yat vhilk is allegit of Elias complening yat he allone of all the church
did remane: 3. King 19.
the feabilnes of yat argument can not be bot clear to the simpillest Saull in
the vorld yat vill vythout partiality read yat text, vharin it is manifestly
said yat God had reseruit a 7000. vho had not bouit hair knee unto baal: Vhilk
nvmber culd not be inuisibill at lest one unto one other housoeuer thai ver
separat from publict society by the tyranny of yat time, except vee should
presuppose yat thai ver all blind. Agane it is certane yat the Prophet Making
yat complant ves in Samaria vhar by meanis of bloody Achab and Iesabell the
church had no oppin exercise of religion at yat time and so his complant ves
bot for the church at Samaria not for the hoill church Iudaique seeing yat evin
at the self time their ves a florissing church at Jerusalem under Good king
Iosaphat as is manifest by the same History. Bot geving and not gra^ting yat
the church had been vnuisibill to Eliah it does not tharupo^ necessarly follou
yat sche ves altogidder inuisibill: seeing the Prophets did not see all things
bot only such as pleasit our lord reueill unto them: 4. Kings 4. chap.
for Eliseus vho had the spreit of Elias doubillit upon him ves not aschamit to
say and this ves hid from me.

Item it is a verey poor argument to say the church hes been or is unseen:
ergo sche is vnuisibill or may not be seen. For their be many things vee see
not vhilk notvythstanding may veill be seen. as for exemple. Ve se not the
money Schot up in a box nor the child in the mothers vomb yet thai be things
verrey visibill vhen impedinents be remo^ it.

And vhat thai say yat the accident vhilk aualit or takit place in one membre
or part of the hoill takket place or at lest may tak place and fall upon the
hoill members. Bot the accident of inuisibitie hes fallin upon sum parts of
the church as upon yat of Samaria. Ergo. Vharunto I ansuer first yat in
arguments a posse ad esse the consequent avalit not nixt the proposition not
being simpliciter treu is to be simpliciter denyit. for experience techit the
contrar often times in parts of one nator as veill as in parts of different
natour. For exemple of parts of different nateur be the body and Saull vhilk
Ioynit togidder make the hoill man: Yet the accident of death fallit in the one
and not in the other. and in parts of one nature lo the eyis and ears as
other orga^s of our senses be of one corporal nature: Yet blyndnes vhilk
fallit to the eyis can no more fall unto the ears nor deafnes can fall unto
the eyis. Bot if I should grant the proposition to be treu yet the assumption ver
manyfestly falls: for it shall never be prouin yat either the church at Samaria
or any other part of the Catholiq^ church hes been so inuisibill bot yat thai
have been seen one to anevther secreitty being secretty schoot up as thai did
publikly having publik liberty. and vhar thai yet go about to iuggill saying
yat the treu church consistid in the elect, and vee nether seeing nor knouing
vho be the elect that for the treu church ca^ not be seen. Euin as if vee ver
valking amidds a great court of Ducs, Marquises, erlles, Barons and Knights,
and should Imagine vee did not see any of them because vee kneu not vhilk of tham
their king loved or hated: ver not this a vyise argument to prove that court to
be invisible. Suirly in this friuolus and fond assertion I have such compassion
upon my former partialite in alleging this poor argument yat I knou not nou
vhidder to be Hiraclit or Dimocrit yat is to say vhidder I should lauch or lament
the same: for granting unto me the benefit of this fond distinction the^ sall
no thing be visibill unto me nether in church nor markat, my freindes my foes,
my parents, my Prince, yea the authors of this chimer by the self same gyges
ring should be invisible to their invisible flok. and morouer if it be treu yat
logicya^s say, yat things contrarius have contrarius raisons or considerations
then should it follou yat as the elect is invisible because vee knou not vho be
elect: So the reprobat vhom vee knou to be reprobat must be visible. and so
consequenily the devil and such reprobat foull spreittes should be more visible
nor men.

Bot if no vth^r thing can move the defendars of this phantastik reuerie of
inuisibilitie (repugning so much to sens, raison and scriptur) to quy^^ and
renu^ce the same: at lest me think thai should be disgusted tharof for yat it
does alluterly tak auay their auin church and all obedience tharunto. For if it
be treu yat the tren church is compond of the elect vhilk be inuisibill because
none see or Knou vho be elect: Then thai their self not knouing vhidder thai be
elect or not if any man sall agknoleg or obey them he bot abusit him self to
knou or obey yat vhilk nether he yat is vythout no^ thai yat be vythin knouit
certainly to be the treu church: Vharin I can compare tham to no thing so much
as unto the folish Atheniens reprehendit by Sanct Paul for yat thai erected ane
altar to the vnknouin God: Euin so thai vold have us to agnouleg ama^g them a
treu church vhenas thai their self do say yat the treu church is inuisibill and
vnknouin because no man knouit vho be the elect.

Bot hear I pray the indifferent redar consider vharfor this subterfuge of
inuisibilitie producing so many absurditheis ves invented. Vhilk ves for yat
the lait enemis of the Roman church finding yat thai culd not scheu vh^r their
church ves before Marin Lutherat lest before Io. Hus, letome de Prage and Vik
lef, that-for as one deap drauit on ane other and as the haching of a serpents
^gge can bot produce ane vthet of the same kind: So to excuse the defect of
this most necessary and requisite retour of eu^dent succession from the Apostles
dayis thai have, fleing Scylla fallin into Ca^bdis as all selflykares and
louats of their auin private actions and opinions have done heirtofor. So Cain
to cover his murder, disdanfully askit at God if he ves the kepar of his
brother: so the unnatural brether of Joseph vent about to color his vick it
ve^dition unto the Ismaelites by a schamles he alleging unto their venerabill
father yat the youth ves deuorit in the vildernes tea^ing His coit and tramping
it in the blood of a goat. So our great grand father to qualify his original
inobedience ves not aschamit to imput the falt to him yat vas faltles saying to
God. The voman vhilk you gave me for my help did persuad me.

Nou to put ane end unto this second mark of ^niuersalitie let us indifferently
co^sidder vithout ^ead ot favor to vhat church this day professing Christian
faith may the same be most Justly attributed Is their I pray you any of them
all except the church Catholic Roman yat can exhibit attentik testimoneis
thar of vythout intermission ever sen the Apostles dayis? vhilk of ^hame all
impugning her hes been and is presently dispersit trouchout all nations of the
vorld as sche hos been and presently is vee see yat all abandoning her be lyik
unto creuling serpents vho use not to creep far from their cauerns. and if vee
should grant yat Heresy ver allvhar as the verity is alluhar, yet as sayit
Sanct Augustine the verity is so alluhar yat novhar shall be fund in her any
difference vheras Hereseis scarce can be fund one lyik ane other in tuo
cu^treyis, collegis or co^uentio^s For this cause the said S. Aug co^parit
hereseis unto serments or sueddings of the vine vhilk ly still inutilly inthe
place vhar thai be sned of, and the treu church he co^parit to the root and
stok vhilk still extending her branches bringit forth in deu season grapes in
abundance Eu^^ so the Catholic church Roman hes extendit her beautiful
branches from the sone rising to the setting tharof: Ama^gs the Turcks,
Persians, Tartars, Pagans: For sche is not comprehendit vithin Italy, France,
Spane, Almany, Polony, Syrie, Armeny, Ethiop, Egypt, and in vrher places vhai
of vee scars knou the names bot euin in the neu fund vorld (specially vhar the
Potent king Catholic does regne:) on the Orient Thatof all the Indes (vhilk
ver once subject to the Kings of Portugal nou unto Spane) observe the form of
the curch Catholic Roman: upon the Occident the Ameriques: Touard the north,
Iappon: Touard the south Bresill. and not only in these neu fund lands bot
euin in such nations as have abiurit all Roman obedience their be many yealus
Catholic Romans the number tharof incressing daily, as in England, Scotland,
Denmark, and Holla^d. For vhik Cause vythout impudent pertinacitie it can not be
denyit bot yat this second marque of universality of persons, times and places
is allanerly proper unto the Catolique church Roman and her adherentes and to
no sect impugning her.

Bot aga^s this mark of vniuersaliti their be yet tuo ordinar objections: by
the one is said yat it ca^ be no certane mark of the treu church vhilk hes the
name of a litill troop, flok or handful in respect of the aduersars tharof,
lyik as the vay leading to life is said to be strait and narrou and feu to enter
tharby and the contrar larg and ampill and many to pass yat vay. Item yat their
be many callit feu elect, as alsovee be forbiddin to follou the multitud vhilk
for the most part is inclynit rather to vice nor to verteu. Heiru^to I aussr.
Yat their be not only one bot many larg vayis leading to perdition and great
multituds yat go thidder (seeing perdition is boyth in thingis forbiddin and
permitted in the former simpliciter in the other vhenas things lanfull be
abusit) vheras their be bot one vay to life so strait and difficill as feu can
enter tharby: it is treu also yat multitud is not aluay to be follouit since
the most part is nor alvay seen to be the best part: yet the scriptur does call
the church the multitud of yame yat believe not in respect of infidelles vhilk
belief not al, vho hes ever in number excedit the faithful as much or more as
the ten trybes did exceid the tuo, or the body of Gedeo^s ost the handful of
300. vhilk lay not down on their vombe to leap the vatter, bot in respect of
heretics, vhose number nor petpetuite never ves comparabill vyth yat of the
treu church, vhilk tho sche be in respect of all other trees (vhilk be infinite
in number) only lyk that one tree of life vhilk ves in Eden yet in respect of
the rottin branches yat have fallin from her sche is a great deall more
plentiful and larg nor thai all: For (as is heirtofor said, thai fallingly
still and consum, bot sche does yearly bud and bring out neu bourgeons in place
of the vi^hered, florissing lyk a frutfull palm planted by the riuier syid. For
this causs ves said to Abraham (father of the faithful) yat his seed (meaning
of the faithful or church) should be as innumerable as the strars of heauin or
sand of the sea. and in the 7. of the Apoc. the Evangelist did see of all the
tribes of Israel or of the Hebreu church aue hundredth forty four thousund
co^prehe^ding under yat finit number a number infinite, and tharefter a great
multitud of all nations, trybes, peapill and toungs vhilk culd not be nummerit
all cled in vhyit garments and carcing palm branches in their hands,
signifie^g heirby the church universal under grace.

By the other objection thai alleg yat in saying Catholic or universal
Roman is includit a contrariety in respect Rome is bot a particular place. I
ausuer. yat their is no more contrariety nor incongruitie in saying Catholic
Roman nor in saying Catholic Apostolic. For if the vniuersalite of all
persons may be pertine^tly limited under the compass of tuelf particular
persons: Vhat absurdite to comprehend the universality of places under the
name of one principal place seeing boyth holy and profane vrittars have
vythout offens vsit yat phrase of speking, the one calling the universal
impyre the Impyir Roman, the other (namly S. Paul in the first to the Romans)
calling the universal faith annuncit throuch the h^^ll vorld to be the Roman
faith. Then if the universal Christian faith by so famus ane author as Sanct
Paul may be callit the universal Roman faith vhat falt is to call the
universal faithful or church universal, Unity the 3. mark of the church.
the universal church Roman?

The third mark of the treu church is unity: vharby scho is discernit from all
exco^municats yat be cut of from her unity and from all schisms and sects yat
have disunited yair self from her uniform society: Vhilk sects being evry one
disco^formable to one other the treu church remanit all vhar one and conform to
her self. Vh^r of the bryidgrome sayit in the 6. of the canticke: My dove is
one, sche is one unto her mother. and this unity ves also signifeit by that
seamles coit of Christ mention at in the 19. of Sanct Iovhilk had no pach nor
piece and vharupon vndeuyding the same the Soldats did cast loittes for
fulfilling the prophesy. lyk as the Mosaicall or do^nance commanding bot one
lamb to be eating for the pasouer in evry family ves a figur boyth of Christ
Jesus the only Immacular lamb and of the unity of his church in vhilk he vold
have no division agreeable to yat of th Apostle 4. to the Ephesians. saying: one
body, one spreit as you ar callit in one hoip of your vocation tharby meaning
yat as many members make bot one body, and as all these me^bres be gydit vyth
one spreit: so all Christian me^brea make bot one Christian church and should be
contentit to be gydit vyth one spreit yat thai may say, think and accord in
one, and vyth one mouth and heart, in one form of faith and religion (housoeuer
thai differ in habits) vorschip and adote one threefold unity and onefold
trinity. Vhatupo^ I do collect. That yat church vhilk is lyik the land of of
one langage mentionat in the xj. of Genese, in vhilk one Cryist, and one reull
of Religion is obseruit and vhat their is bot one heart and one kind of exterior
form amangs the hoill multitud of the beleuars (I gather I say) yat only to be
the treu church Catholic.

Bot amangs all churches Christian contending for the said prerogative only
fall this conformable unite be found in the Catholic church Roman: vhilk
being compo^d of so many particular churches so largly spread throuch the vorld
and amangs so many nations or different mynds and manners: vit in her god is not
only adorit in one sort euin to the meanestrites and ceremoneis thar of bo^
almost evry vhar in one tongue or langage thai pray and prais God: in so much as
ane infidel cumming from the fardest part of vorld and seeing evry vhar this
constant conformity he sall incontinent understand the said Roman church to
have this undoubted unity.

And morouer if at any time different opinions in ceremony or substance
interuene amang the me^bres of this church, The authors thar of captiuating
their auin iugment after the reull of the Apostle do ever give obedience vnro
the sacred oracles, cannons and decrees of general or provincial counsalles
pronuncit upon matters controuerd. Vhilk vyth my Eyis I did see in the year of
Iubilee 1600. at vhilk time sum of the most lernit and Reverend I esuites and
Iacobins disagreeing upon the prescience of God did send their deputes veill
instructed unto Rome submitting their self and all their opinions to
Ecclesiastique censur: and follouing the laudabill exemple mentionat in the 5.
of the Acts vheras the primityue church presented their temporal tresors before
the feit of Sanct Peter (vho in the 10. of Matheus Euangill is callit the first
of the Apostles) euin so thai laying their spiritual thresors at the feat of
Clement the 8. Sanct Peter's holy and most Clement successor did humill them
self and obte^per unto his sentence returning home veill accordit and content
lyk as in the year immediately follouing the controversy yat ves betuix sum
ingliss Iesnites and Priests (not for any matter of faith bot for chosing ont
of persons most capable to be send in England for reestahlessing their of the
Catholic Roman religion) ves by consent of boyth parteis remitted to his
holiness determination.

Bot this uniform unity and Christian obedience sall not be found amangs any
sect this day vendicating the name of the treu church. No unite amang tham yat
have aba^donit the Roman church
For thai disassenting one from ane other boyth in substantial and ceremonial
points vill, not submit them self one to ane other conte^ning the iugment of
any bot of their auin fautors and follouars, vhar by vithin their auin bouelles
thai be more vexit and vinquisit then thai be by the Catholics. Vhilk Sa^ct
Ambrose and Epiphanius prouis to have chausit unto the Arrians, Eunomians,
Macedonians and Marciones. Lyk as vee may see the self same contrariety in our
age. Behold Martin Luther hes most satirikly scharpit his pen agans the
Anabaptists, Zuinglius, Carolostadius ad Aecolympadius: and thai vho vill be
callit no Lutherians bot protestants vrit bitterly agans Luthers doctrine: Agane
Ioachimus Vestphalus, Hessutins, Castalio* Casanouius, Molinaeus, Morellus vex
Io. Calvin most my chtely, and the same Castalio, Brentius, Smedelinus and
Sindry vthers Inuad Theodor de Beza. In some being deuydit in insinit sects
thai so vrangill and viric their self yat they can give no greter argument unto
the vorld of their erronius doctrine nor by this unchristian altercation, vhilk
is snch yat hardly sall you find any one of these sects altogidder co^form to
the self at the lest vhilk does not usually change sum one opinion or other
according to the circumstance of time ioynit vith sum neu curious conceptio^s
interuening. For vhilk cause it is reported yat Georg Duc of Sax should have said
yat he kneu full vedl vhat his nychboris of Vhittenberg did trust yat year bot
vhat thai should belief the nixt year no man culd knou because thai ver so subject
in that be half to mutabilitie. And of this deplorabill division vee have most
manifest exe^ples vithin our i will of great Britanny vhar betuix the Englis and
Scotts Protestants their be no littill disputation of the supremacy of the
church of the authority of bis^hops, of habitts and holy dayis: yea in either
of the said kingdoms the Protestants disagrees amang their self: as in England
the Prelates and puritans, and in scotland euin the ministres amang them selfs
have had much to do first for abolition nixt for restitutio^ of bischops: yea
in Geneue (their lydian stone) the Ministres lak not sum intestin canker of
co^tradiction seeing Mousieur de Perot the second Ministre of that town dois
hold firm and fast agans Theodor Beza yat the bischops of Rome have greter
prerogatyue nor any other, and yat the bischops of Geneue vho ver natural
lords of yat town ver most imustly expellit. For this cause this day it is cum
to pas vhilk Hilarious in his age did complene upon as of a matter most
misetable saing yat their be as many faiyths as their be defferent desyrs as
many doctrins as manners, as many occasions of blasphemy as their be curious
hedes. Bot their querelles be the quietness of the church: for vhen as thai
strive one agans ane other thai bot confirm the faith Catholic Roman. and it
fallit unto them as unto vandring pilgrims vho straying once from the hie vay
(because thai did scorn to have any gyid in a paith appering so easy to hold)
and seking according to their particullar phantaseis sum one sum ane other
crookit by vay thai err vnpersauing their error till by sum notable
inconuenie^t thai be forcit to considder the same: euin so the nouators of this
age slyding out of the Catholic streit of holy church and refusing her to be
their g^id tyning once the string vay of treu religion eury one according to
his auin curiosity does find out sum od and extrauagant by vay being only
fessinnit by the tailles lyk Sa^sons foxes and careing their vythall burning
fyir brandes thai run desperately to burn and destroy the ryip corns of the
Catholic church Roman according togidder in nothing almost bot agans her
euin as Pilot and Herod did agans Christ Jesus: for lyk the forsaid foxes their
heads or opinions be set into sindry arthes vhilk Sanct Augustine interpretis
to be one evident mark of heresy, and as Rupertus sayit thai eat up their auin
tounges vhen as eury one of tham does impung his fellouis and condiscipills
opinion yea oftin his auin Masters, as Melanchon did Luthers, Zuinzius
Melanchons, Calvin Zuinglius, Seruet Caluins. So thai being contradictorius one
to ane other thai be all destitut of the charecter or mark of unity.

Thai sall the^ do veill and vyslie both for their reputation temporal and
Salvation eternell tymuslie to leave these tumultuus vatters of contraction,
these obstinat alters of opposition and this confusit Babell of discord and
disunion remembering yat obedience is the best victim yat ve can osfer and unite
vyth tham unto vhom ve au obedience a most evident argument yat vee be united
unto him yat is the author of unity and concord, vhilk in one of the most
excellent Canticles of degrees the Psalmist co^parit unto sueit ointment
distilling from the head of Aaron (hie priest) upon his beard and bordors of
his garment, and to the deu falling from the hill hermon down into the valleyis
of Sion, saing morouer yat our lord hes comma^dit his blessing to abyid in this
unite for ever. O then that the beard and garments (that is to say Potestats,
Princes and pepill of this age) vold susfer this blessed Balm and divine Deu of
unity slyid down upon them from the Ministerial head and hill of the church
and yat thai should vyth as great kyndnes resaue as he vold kyndly and clemently
(follouing his name and natural) Ministre the same unto them as one seiking
the conversion of all and confusion of none. O yat thai vold patiently lyk the
Lost scheip induir to be bound and brocht home from their vandring in the
vildernes of their partial opinions unto the glorius society of the nynetie
nine yat never strayit: or rather yat thai should be so happy as to return not
bound nor compellit bot of freuill as did the forlorn fone to the end the fatt
calf of reconciliation, (...) the banquer of benediction and Musical
instruments of absolution micht be prepared and presented unto them to their
particular salvation and general loy of the hoill family of the church yat
vyth one voice vee micht all glorify the celestial falher because thai ver
once lost and nou be found. Otheruayis to spek indifferently if thai sall
continu disunited vythout and vithin as thai be it sall be hard for them to
prove before indifferent Iuges yat thai be so much as treu members much les
meriting to have the honor and dignity of the hoill body of the church vhilk
can no more be vithout unity nor fyir vythout heat and vatter vith out
humidite. The 4. mark of the church is to be Apostolic.


By the fourt mark the church is callit Apostolic vharby is not meanit yat
the Patriarchs and Prophets be excludit, seeing the church did not begin at the
Apoles bot at Adam being foundit upon the doctrine boyth of Prophes and
Apostles: For vhat the Apostles prechit to have cum yat the Prophets did
Prophecy should cum.

Morouer that church only should be estemit Apostolic in vhilk ve find not only
their doctrine bot also a laufull continual succession of preisthood or
bischops ever from the dayis of the Apostles to our age. And agane the doctrine
of the Apostles does consist boyth in their traditions and vrittings vho
undoubtedly did propone and use many rites, ceremoneis and forms for planting,
vattring and confirming the church and consciences of men vhilk nohuar vee find
vrittin. 2. epist. 2. chapter
For vhilk cause Paul vritting to the Thessal. exhorter them saying. Stand and
hold the traditions yat you have lernit of me either by my sermon or by my
Epistle. by vhilk vordes he declarit euide^rly yat hevold his vordes should have
as great credit as his vrittis: Yea appera^tly more in so much as he does name
tham before the other: vhilk consideration seamit to be veill groundit in so far
as Sanct Hierosm in one epistle ad Paulinum speaking upon this subject sayit
yat their is much more pith in vords nor in vrit: for prove vharof he does
alleg yat of Aeschynes vho being in the Rhodes a banist man did hear the pepill
read yat inuectyue orason vhilk Demosthenes did vrit agans him: at the hering
vh^r of vhenas he did persaue them merueluslie to prais the art and cloquence
of the said Demosthenes, then Aeschynes after sighing a lytill did say unto
them: My friends vhat if you had hard the beast him self pronu^cing these
verds? Meaning thairby yat his viue voyice had geuin^th me much more matter of
admiration then thai c^ld have by reading of his vorkes. And agane by Sanct
Paul 1 Corint. 11. it aperit yat by vord he did institut the form hou the
supper of the lard should be administrat saying* Epistr 118. cap. 6.
the rest (meaning of the said supper) I sall dispose at my cumming. Vharupon
Sanct Augustine vritting to lanuarius takes occasion to say yat the same form
vsit in his dayis in ministration of this blessed sacrament (vhilk differit no
thing from yat vhilk this day is obseruit in the Roman church) ves by vord
institut by S. Paul to remane for ever as a pattern inviolable* and yet in ane
other place the said Apostle. I commend you my brethring yat in all things you
keap my precepts as I have left tham by tradition. and last to timothe, 2.
epist. chap. 2. vhat you have hard of me before many vitnes yat report to the
faithful vho be habill to tech vthers. of vhilk vords it is most clear (as
ancient Irenee long ago hes collected) yat the primityue church ves instructed
in many points of religion and rites by the Apostles vhilk thai never did
vritt, bot gave them by verbal tradition to their successors by vhom from
hand to hand thai have been knouin and should be continuit so long as the church
Apostolic can lest.

For this cause vhosoeuer vold profes him self to belief a Catholic
Apostolic church he must not only be leif and resaue vhat the Apostolic
church hes beleffit and resauit of their vritts bot also vhat sche beleuis and
resauis of their traditions vnurittin by tha^. It is ane Heresy anciently
condemnit in the Arria^s to admit no thing in the church bot the bair text. of
scriptur.
vtheruayis vee sall be bra^gillit and maid incertane in the chief points of
our faith. Nether did the ancient Heretics (as the Arrians and sindry vthers)
differ more in any point from treu Catholics nor in this yat thai vold resaue
no Ecclesiastique tradition housocuer it ves authorized vyth antiquite bot
grou^dit tha^ self scrupulusly only upon the text of Scriptur. Vheras Good
Catholics knouing boyth traditions and vrittes to have procedit from one
fontane of the holy spreit and to have been both brocht unto us equally by one
canall and conuoy of the holy church thai reverently vyth the Thessoliens
observe boyth the one and other and observing merit the prais Forsaid geuin by
the holy Apostle unto them: vhilk prais ve reid not in any place of holy
scriptur to have been geuin to any yat did contem these verbal traditions.
Sanct Hilar. in his book to co^stan. August. Vhenas one said to him yat he vold
have no nev thing Said or estemit for attentik yat ves not vrittin in the text
of scriptur, replyit saying. My friend say rether thou vilt have no neu Medecin
agans neu poison, no neu punition agans neu insurrection, no neu consultations
agans neu treasons, no neu varrs aga^s neu ennemis. and Athanasius speking of
this purpos, vhenas out of Theognostus, Dionysius Allexandrinus and Origines he
had prouin agans the Arrians the sone to be of one essence vyth the father*
Behold (sayis he) vee have verifeit our opinion or sentence by uniform consent
and tradition of the fathers from hand to hand delyuerit from predecessors to
successors: Bot you Disciples of Cayphas vhorn can xou exhibit to be authors of
your opinions bot your self.

And this gave occasion to Theodoretus in his first book. 8. chap. to say yat
the Arrians ver co^uict by not vrittin vordes Christianly understood. For
vhenas the said Arrians did reject the vord consubsta^tiall because it ves not
to be found in Scripture, then Athanasius and the bischops Catholics
assisting did refut that heresy by testimoneis of the fathers vho had resauit
the same vord consubstantiall by Apostolic tradition. The use and necessity
of traditions is declarit.
Vee knou also yat Eluidius the heretic by passages of Scripturs did impung
the immaculat virginity of the blessed Virgin Marie lyk as he Donatists did
the Baptism of infants: Bot S. Hierome did refut the one and S. Augustine the
other by Ecclesiastique tradition.

And of this Apostolic Ecclesiastique tradition undoubtedly such is the
authority yat not only is it unto the self bot euin unto the hoill scriptur as
a tuichstonc: By tradition of the church is knouin vhat books be canonique vhat
Apocryphe.
for as the fine gold can not be discernit from the false bot by the said stone:
No more should vee have knouin vhat scriptur ver atentik or vnattentik if thai
had not been tuichit vyth the lydian stone of the church: be reason yat in the
Scriptur the self vee find not in expres vords any catalog tharof, for vhilk
cause, vee must of necessity seik the same elsuhar and seiknig it elsuhar ve
sall never find certe^ty except vee yield unto Ecclesiastique tradition: for
vhenas you say yat the undoubted asseurance of all matters pertening to faith
and salvation is contenit expressie in holy scripturs and I agane not sinding
in hoy scripturs this catologe distinguising books canonique from apocryph you
perrell to much the authority of these canonical books. O bot you vill say
(as I my self sum time did most impertinently) that by the pouer of the self
same spreit you kno^ his styill in these yat be atte^tik and yat you thatby
have incorporat a greter certe^ty nor the authority of man can give unto you.
if so be you arrogat unto your self allone and to your spreit Imaginatyue
(after the maneir of th Anabaptists) yat vhilk you refuse to give to the hoill
church as tho never one of the church had been illuminat vyth yat spreit before
you, or as tho in their approbations thai ver bot men approving by no greter
varrand nor humane, and yat you in your approbatio^s be more nor man and so
possessit vyth the holy spreit as if you culd not be desauit in yat vhilk you
resaue for asseurance. And thus puffed up by the belliss of your private
presumpteus Imaginatio^s you vold have your science to be our lantern and
lodstar, pronuncing all vthers yat be not of your opinion to be bot ignorant
obstinat persons altogidder depryuit of the lycht of the holy spreit: albeit it
can not be deneyit bot yat ancient Doctors and counsals of vhom vee have
resauit the cataloge of holy scripturs have been by many degrees more illuminat
nor you vyth the same spreit, vhar of their piety, antiquity and doctrine
ioynit vith the verteu of so many miracles so far exceeding any perfection yat
can be persauit in you be vitnessis admitting no exception: Vheras you of your
speculatyue inspiration have no other testimony bot your ouin, vhilk is boyth
suspect and partial. Be contentit then to submit your variable apprehensions
unto their venerable authority and your rakles temeritie unto their reverent
traditions considdering vyth your self yat your private certenty is manifestly
detected to be full of publict incertenty in yat all sects impugning the
Apostolic church Roman does arrogat the self same peculiar prerogatyue of
the holy spreit as you do. Vharin I pray vith my heart our gratins lord God to
pardon you seeing you vatt not vhat you do. 4. Kings 6.
For lyk the king of Syrias soldarts vho vent to dothaim the house of Eliseus to
have surprised him being prevented vyth blyndnes thai strayit to Samaria ama^g
their enemis: So you intending to inuaid the house and head ministerial of
Crystes church you bot go blyndfold to your auin perdition, and perseuering in
this perrinacitie in taking upon you by your secreit illumination to knou the
styill and method of the holy spreit in discerning scripturs you fall vnuars in
the damnabill errors of ancient Heretics of vhom sum vold have all matters in
faith and religion prouin by expres vords of scriptur as the Arrians and
Donatists (of vhom in their auin place.) Vthers vold admit no books of Scriptur
to be attentik bot such as seruit most to confirm their errors. For this cause
Carpocrates and Manichaeus did condem the hoill auld Testament: Cordon and
Cerynthus all the Euangelles except yat of Lucas: lyk as the Seueria^s rejected
the Acts of the Apostles: the Ebionites all the Epistles of Sanct Paul, and
the Alogians said yat the Apocalypse ves bot ane figment of cerynthus. So their
ves never one of the Canonical books culd escaip the allseing Eyis of these
lunatiques vho rejecting ancient tradition did beild up unto their self a
Babell of their auin Imaginatiue illumination. Bot the visdome of God hes
prouydit a remede aga^s such busy branes in spyring the successors of his
Apostles the ancient Pastors and Doctors of his church to leif unto us in
Register a just cataloge tharof to the end yat any question arysing tharupon
vee may have recours to the protocoll and not to particular instruments of
parteis contending: vhilk cataloge vee reid insert amang the acts of the
counsall of Cartage vhar S. Augustine ves present a 1200. years ago, and in the
Epistle vhilk holy Innoce^tius vrit unto Exuperius. chap. 6. lyk as the famus
counsall of florence a 150. ago did allou the same by commun consent of all the
Grec, latin, and Armenian legates assembled tharunto and last of all the celebre
counsall of trent hes boyth repeted and ratifeit the same cataloge.

For this cause vee admit the Canonique scripturs affirming tham undoubtedly to
be such albeit the cataloge tharof be not expressie mentionat in holy scriptur,
August. 7. tom. agans crescentius 1. book. 13. cha.
be reason yat by laudabill consuetud ever since the dayis of the Apostles,
their successors from hand to hand have by tradition resauit and reputed tham
to be such: Vhillk did move Sanct Augustine to affirm yat ancient tradition should
determine and defyne vnvrittin vereteis and apoint the canon of the scriptur.
August. 4. tom. of consent of the Euange. 1. book 1. chap.
Lyk as in ane other place the said holy father sayit yat the Euangells
publisit under the names of Sanct Thomas and Eartholome Apostles and of
Nicodemus Disciple by verteu of the same tradition be rejected, and these of
Marc and Luc be resauit albeit thai ver nether Apostles nor Disciples bot did
only vritt upon report and relation of vthers.

Vee see then vat in most principal heads of Religion vee be forcit to adher
unto such traditions as in scriptur vee have no particular mention tharof. and
heirin for satisfation of simpill ons I will be yet a littill more special:
Behold no scriptur does say yat three persons make one Godhead, yea the name of
person (at lest applyit unto God) is not to be fond in any place of scriptur
not yet the name of the blessit trinity, nottheles vee say that be three
persons and a trinity, not because the scriptur so sayit bot (as sayit Sanct
Augustine) because the scriptur does not gane sayit and because ve have so
resauit them from the Apostles and that successors. lyk as Dionysius Areop.
4. chap. of his Hierarchy and origenes in his 5. book 1. cha. testifies the
baptism of childring to be traditiue and not of the text of scriptur vhilk
scriptur seamit to exclud such as have not the actual use of faith as much or
more from baptism as from the Cene as apperit by the vords of Sanct Philip to
the enuch in the 8. of the acts saying if you belief no thing can stay the to
be baptesit and by that of the Euangell vho beleuit and is baptesit sall be
save: by vhilk and many other passages of Scriptur actual faith or belief
seamit to be so necessary in baptism yat it sold alvay precead the same: Bot
the nouators of this age disdaning to resaue this custom by tradition thai
alleg childring neu borne to be faithful throuing sum passages of scriptur
impude^tly and vnaply to that effect as vhar it is said by our master in the
Eua^gell suffer littill childring to cum unto me: euin as if to cum unto Christ
and to be baptesit by him ver all on thing or as if he did baptis all that he
fuffred to cum unto him vharas ve reid not in scriptur yat euir he baptesir any
person. in this same sort thai throu also yat of the first. Corinth. 7. chap.
Yat the seed of the faithful be holy tharfor say thai childring vhilk be the
seed of the faithful must neads be faithful. ane inco^gruus and absurd
co^clusio^: for all things yat be holy be not faithful mor nor all that belief
be holy: lo the devil beleuit sayis S. Iam. 2. cha. and yet he is not holy:
and vee reid in the scriptur that te^pills, altars, oriso^s yea kissing sum
time be callit holy yet such things can have no faith and morouer to say (as
sum do) yat the sead of faithful men be actually faithful is as extrauagant
as to say yat the sead or childring of lernit men be actually lernit men hou
sone thai be borne vheras the one and other have bot the aptitude or
disposition to the one and other qualitle. and last if Childring be actually
faithful vhy ar thai not as veill admittit to their Caene as unto their
baptism. As to their subterfuge co^paring baptism to Circomcitio^ it is yet
most feolisch of all for if thai vill astrict me to the ordinar time of
Circumcition thai must be also astricted to the Sex yat ves Circumcidit to vit
the mas^es allanerny and so thai should baptis no femelle childring. Thus the
nouators to escaip the necessity of tradition they bot mask their former
error vith ane other more intolerable and ridiculus, ascryuing to infants yat
vhilk their age and the ordinance of God almychty does not permit unto tham (at
lest ordiinarly): euin as to hy^d the obscurity of their church vhar of no
testimony can be found before the year of our lord 1520. their lyik the subtle
sepia truble the clear fontans of the holy scriptur vith their ugly ink of
inuisibilitie to the end no man should persaue them being inuoluit vithin these
sophistical labyrinths.

These and many other incongruiteus thai fall into vho vill not yield unto
Apostolic tradition bot in prejudice tharof vold vrest and thrau the sens of
scriptur otheruayis nor the nature thar of and uniform consent of ancients vill
permit. Bot heir I return to the matter.

The belief (vhilk Sanct Augustine in his 10. tom. Sermon 115. de temp. affirmit
to have been maid by the Apostles self) and unto the analogy and proportion
vhar of all other scriptur should be leuellit and interpreted: yet nether in the
Acts of the Apostles nor in no other place of scriptur can ve read yat Symbol
or belief as it is collected and confessit in Christian churchis.

To be schort novhar sall it be scheuit in the text of scriptur vhar vee be
co^mandit to chang the sabbath day (vhilk ves satterday) in the sunday
follouing, bot vee have in the Decalog a precept directly commanding the said
Saboth to be obseruit and the other sax dayis be designit for our labor.
Novhar sall vee find the supper of the lord callit a Sacrament: Novhar any
commandment to resaue the said supper fasting bot rether if vee should follou
the exe^pill of our blessed master to resaue it after supper. Yea sumthings be
expreslie forbiddin by the text of Scriptur vhilk notvythsta^ding vee may
vithout offens use as to cat of blood and things suffocat vhilk in the first
counsall of the holy Apostles ves expreslie defendit and forbiddin. and all
these co^suetuds and rites partly not vrittin partly forbiddin by tradition vee
be bold to observe because the church hitherto hes obseruit the same ever since
the dayis of the Apostles vhose traditions if you vold more particularly see
you may reid Origenes in his 5. homel. upon Numeri. Tertull. de corona militis.
Athanas in his book of diverse questions. Basil. in his book of the holyghost.
chap. 28. and 29. Sanct Hierom aga^s the Luciferians: Aug. 2. book cap. 7. of
the Baptism of childring.
Bot Sanct Augustine most of all does planly say yat their be many things vhilk
nether ca^ be found in the vorks of the Apostles nor in the counsels of their
successors vhilk notvythstanding being obseruit by the hoill church ar to be
estemit as recommendit unto us by the said Apostles. The contenars of
traditions do not vithsta^ding use many both neu and auld.


Bot heir I ca^ not meruell aneuch at their partialite vho so much impung
traditions seeing thai their self follou many auld traditions vith the
Catholiqus and yat vhilk is more intollerabill disdaning sumtyme to follou
traditions recommendit unto us by ancient authority thai vill follou thai auin
traditions laking all authority approbation or commendation bot their auin, as
by their Psalm books prentet at Geneue is manifest, in vhilk be comprehendit
their neu forms of prayer, preching, fasting, Sacraments, buryall,
excommunication, absolution, visitation of the seek, election of ministres
elders and decons, punition of offendars and discipline of their church. all
vhilk forms be invented by their self can not be red nether in holy scriptur,
nor ancients. The enemis of the Roman church use many consuetuds tharof
changing only the names and not the nathor.


And yet thai be so inconsederat as to object for execrabill in vthers the self
same things vhilk thai think tollerabill in their self. Yea more nor yat thai
use and vsurp a great many of things vhilk thai condem in the Catholics
cha^ging only the names tharof and not the nature. as for exemple thai vill have
no bischop bot superintendents: no Cathedral chaptors, bot Presbytereis: no
priests bot eldars: no Dioces bot Provinces: no senzeis bot Synodall
assemblees: no Archebischop or Mitropolytan bot moderators: no Officialls bot
Commissars.

No handfasting bot contracting: No dene rural bot visiteur: no cursing bot
excommunication: no aggreging or reaggreging bot first second and third
admonition. no forcing of men's conscience bot confiscation of Goods,
imprisonment and banisment of such as vill not conform their conscience to
their appetit: thai vill not have Catholics to re^use disputation to any man
in matters of faith and religion tho the same be ratifeit by acts of general
counsalls and Imperial edicts, bot vhar thai have authority it must be
treason and heresy to dout or to dema^d disputation in matters of their faith
and religion ratifeit only by their general as^emblees and acts of parliament.

Thai vill have no altar vharupo^ to celebrat the blessed memorial of the death
and passion of our blessed savior bot a tabill: No faith to eat and drink
really his blessed body and blood heir on earth under the spece or form of bread
and vine as he did test in his latter vill, bot a faith to eat and drink the
same really in the heauins contrary to his vill and testament, as if he had not
force aneuch to fulfill his promis heir on the earth except by force of their
faith asce^ding up to heauin his infirmity ver assisted: thai vill not grant
Good vorks to mereit, and yet thai exhort all men to Good vorks and confess yat
at the latter day our lord and Master sall cum and render to eury one according
as he hes done, Good or bad: thai vill not have glorifeit Sancts in heauin to
pray for tham, bot men lyik their self their fellou members and brethring yat
be not yet glorifeit vith the garland of immortality thai vill have to pray
for tham. and speking of the dead thai vill not have us to say vhom God
assolzie or absolve, bot the lord be vyth them (a desyr full of dout and
directly agans their auin doctrine vhilk condemnit all prayer for the dead:)
Thai vill not call the blessed Eucharist of the Catholic church a sacrifice
bot their communion must be callit a sacred or holy action: thai vill not
suffer Catholics yat can not read to use beaddes for remembrance of vhat
prayers thai have said vhat rested to be said, bot in their church such as ca^
reid be suffreit to have strings or marks in their books to the end thai may
begin vhar thai left and so go on till the Psalms or prayers aponted for yat
tym be endit: Thai can not auay to see a Crucifix yet thai command to hear hou
Christ Jesus our blessed master ves Crucifeit, as tho our eyis gave not quikker
impressions unto our heart nor our ears can do according to yat of the Poet.
Segnius irritant animos dimissa per aures, quam quae sunt oculis subiecta
fidelibus, and quae ipse sibi tradit spectator. or as tho it ver idolatry to
see yat vhilk Sanct Augustine desyrit so much to have seen to vit his master and
redemer in the flesch: vhilk loyfull aspect since vee can not in this
corruptible tabernacle enjoy vee should be glaid day lie to see at lest in
portrait hou he suffrit, yat by the ministry boyth of eyis and ears our frosin
hearts may be infla^mit to love yat inspeakble love yat so villingly did loss
his life for our saik: and heirin I belief I may vithout offe^s affirm yat the
most part of the youth vithin the realm of Scotlad nether knouit vhat is a
Crucifix or vhat it is to be crufeit and all because thai never did see the
pourtrait or representatio^ tharof. Thai vill have no holy dayis bot the saboth
yet none must vork upon veek dayis aponted by tham to their preching (at lest
during their service) Thai vill have no fasting on friday as did the ancients,
bot thai allou to fast on sunday vhilk the ancients did condem:

Thai can not auay vith the fast of lent vhilk all Christians, should observe (as
sayit one of the ancients) because it vas institut in imitation to our pouer of
the fast of forty dayis vhilk our blessed master indurit in the vildirnes and
ves prefigurat by yat of Moses and Elias rejecting the same because vee be not
habill to fast forty dayis as he did, euin as if vee should not imitat his love,
patience, obedience, humility and chastetie vith other his most laudabill
exemples (vhilk he him self gave unto us to imitat saying I give unto you my
exemple) because ve can no more attein to his perfection in tham nor in his
fasting: bot in place of this Christian imitation thai vill institur fasting
upon their auin fond imagination minassing the contemnars tharof vith all
punition temporal and spiritual.

Thai vill admit no interdictions after the Catholic Roman fasson, bot such
as Remane obstinat contradictors unto tham is debarrit from their prayers and
sacraments. Thai vill not have general counsalls to merit the name of the
church, yet in the Acts of their general asse^blees thai vsurp yat quality
saying the church hes decernit etc. Thai disdane the vords of binding and
lousing in the Roman church, yet thai profes to exco^municat and absolve: Thai
scorn to heir that the Catholic church can not err in matters of faith or
that simple men should belief as sche beleuit, yet the most ignorant amang them
must grant and sueir their articles of faith to be vythout all error and thai
must be beleuit vhidder men understand tham or not.

Thai vill not have Catholics to find falt vyth profane persons violently
intrusing their self in functions, faculteis and possessions Ecclesiastique
Roman: Bot if any man amang tham be he never so qualifeit sall inter in to
play the minister and to lift up their stipends vithout admission preceding,
incontinent he is declarit a seducteur, a Shismatique, a sacrilegius person, a
volf inuading the flok, a vyld boar vasting the vinzard of Christ Jesus and a
theif yat hes entered by the vindo and not by the door.

Thai despyis all acerbitie of vords yet the pops holiness must be callit the
Antechrist, Rome the Synagog of Satan, the Roman Clergy successors to Judas
and all Catholic Romans obstinat Idolators. Thai abhor all cruelty yet strait
commandments most be publesit prohibiting logein, meat or drink to be geuin
unto their contradictors* thus using in the premises and in many other points
the self same things vhilk in Catholics thai condem I meruell not a litill of
their inconsideration and of men's simplicity vhilk is so miserably abusit bot
most of all is to be merueillit hou thai can vythout schame object so
freque^tly the contumely of cruelty aga^s Catholics perseuing the said
Catholics so bitterly as thai do vyth imprisonment, proscription,
confiscation of their Goodds (Yea vyth famine, Tuiching vocation.
if the clemency of our gratius souerane and compassion of the pepill did not
impesch their fury) su^rly for my auin part I beseech God yat men should on the
one and other syid go about to establis Religion by no severity bot vyth all
sueitnes specially thai vho laking laufull vocation can have no laufull
authority to punis vthers.

For their be bot tuo sorts of vocation or calling and nether of them can
these nouators justly acclam, seeing the ordinar vocation must be from tham yat
have the ordinary pouer, to vit from such as can exhibit evident testimoneis
boyth of doctrine and descent or succession Apostolic: and this kind of
ordinar calling thai lak except thai vold say yat Io. Viclef, Io. Hus, Hierome
of Prag, and Martin Luther their predecessors had the same because for the most
part thai ver professit priests and graduat Doctors vharby thai had pouer to
institut vthers as thai their self ver ordinarily institut. Bot thai must
understand yat as the defection of their said predecessors in preching and
defending damnable doctrine repugnant to the obedience and dignity of their
institutars togidder vyth the sentence of degradation justly pronuncit agans
tham did sufficie^tlie degrad and depryue tham of all ordinar degree or
function vhilk of before thai had obtenit: euin so their successors succeding in
their vice and co^tumatiusly perseuering tharin be comprehendit under the self
same censur of degradation. For as a deputy contrauening the tenor of the
patent of his deputation scheuit him self ipso facto vnuorthy of such credit
Euin so subaltern deputations maid by the said deputye los their force and
effect vhenas the person subaltern or mediat persisted in the vice of the
immediate deputy. and agane if it be treu (as it is indead) yat superiors
having pouer to bynd or erect have also pouer to looss and deiect specially
vhen the party erected unto any dignity does dispyis or Invade the dignity
of the erecter: suirly their predecessors have forfalted any preferme^t thai
have had of the church of Rome lyk as thai their self have done by their
opiniastre obstination agans the said seat Apostolic as also by their
voluntar and vick it abnegation contenit in the confession of their faith
prented and put up amang the acts of parlame^t vharby thai detest abjure and
renonce as things damnable and idolatrus all benefit office and charg proceeding
from the authority of the church Romano, by vhilk oppositio^ and renuntiation
forsaid thai manifestly depryue their self of all ordinar vocation if thai or
their predecessors hes had any. As for extraordinar vocation thai have as
litill reason to vsurp it seeing yat kind of calling hes ever been accumpaneit
vyth such extraordinar gifts as gave sufficient authority and credit to their
calling, as vith irreprehensibill holiness of lyif loynit vyth extraordinar
miracles: Bot their life rendering no extraordinar licht nether of extraordinar
holiness nor miracles thai have no reason to vsurp the honor of extraordinar
calling. I am not igno rant vhat subterfuge thai use in this point alleging
thai tech no neu doctrine craving neu operation of miracles seeing thai tech only
the doctrine already confirmit sufficiently by the miracles of Christ Jesus and
his Apostles. vharunto I anssr yat albeit it ver treu yat thai did tech only
the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles vncorrupting the same vyth their auin
gloses and neu interpretations repugning to the ancient interpretatio^s of the
fathers yea often times to the text of scriptur. yet in so much as thai Impu^g
the Pastors vhilk only have the evidence of Apostolic ordinar succession, of
necessity thai must fortify and confirm their extraordinar opposition vith
sum extraordinar miracle. Euin as the prophets did vho albeit thai techit no
lau bot yat of Moses confirmit long before vith glorius miracles Yet in respect
thai did reprehend the ordinary Doctors of the lau and such as sat in the seat
of Moses thai did qualify their most inst thretnings and reprehensions by
miracles meriting great credit and authority.

Bot in respect this matter of vocation does merit a several discourse I delay
the same to sum other place more propre and convenient returning unto my
purposs and affirming that the ministres their self in most things vhilk thai
use in their church thai follou either old or neu tradition or at lest
interpretation vhilk be not expreslie contenit in holy scriptur: For as is a
for said in their baptism the baptesing of childring and in their communion to
resaue it fasting and not after supper is by tradition, in the decalog the
chang of the saboth day is also by tradition, lyk as the vords of parents and
adultery must resaue interpretation: yea morouer vee should not knou the blessed
volum of holy scriptur to be such if by tradition it had not cum to onr
knoulege nether is it a Paradox to say yat the books of prayers pennit and
prented in Geneue be no more in expres vords in scriptur contenit nor the Roman
matin books be. Vharunto thai aussr indirectly vhenas thai say all yat be
contenit in their books either to be scriptur or at lest nor repugning tharunto:
because thai astrict Catholics to expres vords and thai as preuilegit person
must be licentiat so thai may scheu the matter or fundame^t of their forms to
be includit any vay vithin Scripturs: Bot thai must understand that the matter
and fundament of vords differ as much from expres vords as the fondation of a
house and a finissit house or as the matter and sorm vhilk be so different in
nature as that a naughty form rendrit a Good matter to be naughty: behold the
most delicat fruitts resauing once the filthy form of putrefaction or the best
venison yat can be vissed converted once in vernim becum bot contemtibill
notuythstanding their former fynnes: or to spek more conveniently to this
matter: behald the purity of these passages of holy scriptur vharupon Arrius,
Donatus, Eluidius and other Heretics did found their errors ver bot vitiat
and defylit by the heretical forms yat thai ver partially throuin unto resauing
co^trar their nator by the filthiness of the said forms sum infection as clear
fonta^s infected by repair of filthy beastis or pre tieux stones staned by sum
contrarius accident be not preseruit by their singularity from such
inconuenients vhen thai chanse to fall. and suirlie thai be guilty of this
partial preuarication or collusion vhosoeuer does cite, apply, throu, or
interprit holy scriptur not according to the mind and tradition of the most
ancient, most holy and most le^it fathers bot according to the mind and plesuir
of sum private modern persons vho to advance their auin private credit go about
to make the holiness and doctrine of the said fathers to be suspect and odius.

Bot to th^end I may once absolve this fectio^ of traditions I only add th^iss
menifest passages follouing. Manifest passages of ancie^ts proving traditions
vnurittin. Of Ignatius Eusebius. Story Eccles. 3. book 3. chap.
first of Sanct Ignatius Bischop of Antioch ane author of the same age vith the
Apostles vho in tho year of our lord 38 going to be martyred did exhort all
churches by vhilk he ve^^^ to diminis no thing of Apostolic tradition vhilk
he vissit tham for the more security to put in vrit. Nixt of Tertullian ane
author of the first age after the Ascension saying in his book of fasting yat
the solennell institutions ver e^kkit to the faith either by scriptur or by
tradition of the eldars.

Thridly of Eusebius bischop of Cesaree in Palestina ane author of the second
age after the Ascension saying in his books of Euangelique demonstration Eusebius.
1. book 9. chap. demonstra. Euangel.
yat the Apostles applying their doctrine to the ears of many hes consignit or
left their said doctrine partly by vritt partly vythout vrit as a certane lau or
custum vnurittin. Ferdly Sanct Basil bischop of Cesaree in Cappadocia a 1230.
years ago in his book of the holy spreit chap. 27. saying. of the doctrine yat
is obseruit vithin the church sum tharof vee have by vritt in instruction, sum
by secreit tradition of the Apostles, yet boyth the one and other have alyik
force in Religion, nether is their any hou ly^rill so ever he be exercised in
the laues of the church yat can deny the same. Fyftly of Sanct Epiphanius
bischop of Salamin in Cypre a 1220. years ago saying in his book aga^s
Heretics, in this sort. Vee be forcit to use traditions for all things can
not be drauin out of scriptur, and for this causs the holy Apostles have left
us sum things by tradition, sum things by vrit. Saxtly of Sa^ct Chrysostom
archibischop of Constantinople about a 1200. Years ago vritting upon the same
text of Sanct Paul, 2. to the Thessal^. chap. (vhat the Apostle commandis tham
to observe his traditions resauit either by vord or vrit.) the holy father sayit
thus. it apperit (Sayis he) of this text yat the Apostles have not left us all
by vrit bot yat thai have recommendit many things vnurittin: tharfor ve think
the tradition of the church is vorthy to be beleuit: It is a tradition, inquyir
no farther. Last of all S. Augustine bischop of hippo in Afrique in the same age
vritting agans the Donatists in this sort. The Apostles to co^fes the treuth
(says he) hes vrittim no thing of this matter bot it is to be beleuit yat this
custom hes takin his beginning from their tradition, as their be many things
vhilk the church universal observe vhilk notuithstanding of Good reason is to
be thocht comma^dit by the Apostles albeit thai be not vrittin. Vhy Sanct
Augustine callit the tuo testame^ts tuo pap^^.


These be testimoneis so manifest as it ver superfluus to produce any more: yet
I knou thai vill alleg to the contrar the self same S. Augustine in his 3.
traittie upon the epistles of Sa^ct John saying yat the tuo testaments be the
tuo Papes of the church out of the vhilk vee should sook the milk of holy
historeis: vharby thai vold conclud yat the said father vold seclud all
tradition yat ves not comprehendit vithin the said testaments.

Bot the aussr heirunto is easy to such as vill read the place forsaid vharin
the holy father makit distinction betuix the milk and solid meat contenit in
the tuo testaments, by milk meaning Christ in his humility, by solyd meat
meaning Christ as he his equal unto the father, affirming that the sacred
historeis of his humanity and divinity ar to be soukit out of the papes of
the tuo testaments the one for milk the other for solid meat: vilk vee also
confess to be treu: Bot to infer heirupon yat Sanct Augustine by these vords dois
condem all vnurittin traditions ver not only to condem him self vyth all the
venerable fathers preceding him bot also to condem the said tuo infallibill
testaments or pretieus papes out of the vhilk vee may souk (if ve be not
sensles) the milk of Apostolic and Ecclesiastique vnutittin tradition by the
Apostle saying in one place. 1. Timoth. 3. chap. yat the church is the pillar
and fondament of verity (vharby all her tradition and ordonnances vrittin and
vnurittin be confirmit to be autentik:) and by the same Apostle in ane other
place 2. Thessalo. 1. chap. commanding them to keip his traditions vhatsoeuer
vrittin or vnurittin as is aforsaid. morouer these traditions have seruit for
chief veapins vharvyth the holy ancients have voundit all Heretics to this
hour For Ancient Ireneus vsit the same agans the Heretic Valentinus:
Tertullian agans Marcion: Origenes agans Celsus: the counsall of Nice agans
Arrius: Basilius agans Eunomius and Amphilochius: Sanct Hierom agans
Vigilantius, Iouinianus and Luciferianus: Cyrillus Allexandrin agans Nestorius:
Proclus bischop of Constantinople vritting to the Armenians: Theodoretus in his
Polymorph agans the Heretiqus of his time: Sanct Augustine agans the Donatists,
and Julian: Leo, Gelasius and John bischops of Rome agans Eutyches: the Saxt
Synod vsit this tuo eggit veapin agans the Monothelites: the seuint Synod agans
the Iconomachs: Beda the venerable vsit the same vritting of the variety of
the course of the Moon: Peter of Cluny did the lyik agans the Henricians and
Petrobrusians: Sanct Bernard agans Peter Habailardus: Euthemius agans the
Heretics of his time: Finally all holy vrittars unto these dayis have vsit
the same for most pithye and peremptory arguments agans all hereseis and
Heretics.

Bot I do not so insist in defending the necessity and authority of
Apostolic and Ecclesiastique tradition as if the hoill glob of the
Apostolic church Roman should succumb if thai ver denyit: Not only tradition
bot also expres scriptur prouit Catholics opinion in chief controuerseis.
because expres scriptur does confirm their doctrine in points most co^trouerted,
vhilk I prove by these feu testimoneis follouing. vhen in the belief it is said
by degrees yat Christ our blessed master ves crucifeit, dead, bureit and
therefter des cendit to the hell, tharin the faith of the Catholics is Prouin
to be orthodox or autentik vho deny his desce^ding either to have been before or
in bot after his death. Agane vhen it is said indefinitly in the same belief: I
belief the communion of sancts: does it not prove the Sancts milita^t and
triumphant to have a mutual communion? bot vhat communion can vee mortal
militants have vyth these immortal glorifeit triumphants bot vhen by our
reverent voues ad prayers ve supply tha^ to interceid for us throuch his
merits and passion vharby thai be already glorifeit knouing yat thai understand
our estat in yat it is mentinat in the fyftent of Luc yat thai reioyis at the
conversion of sianars: and on the other part vhenas the said members triumphant
do commemorat or offer up our orisons and alms deadis as ve reid partly in
the rent of the acts in the history of Cornelius, partly in the 8. of the
Apocalypse that thai have done. Vhen it is said in the 2. of Machab. 12. chap.
(Vhilk book Sanct Augustine does numer amang the Canonical) prayers for the
dead to beholy and helthfull, vho can deny bot such prayers be necessar? vhe^
vee reid Sanct la. 5. Yat the priest should be callit unto the seik to auoynt
yame in the name of the lord and to pray for tham, does not this text command
unction to be conioynit vith prayers in the last article of lyif vhen our
seiknes is such as can not be curit? Vhen vee reid in the.5. to the Ephesians.
Matrimony to be a great sacrament, vhy should vee co^dem tham yat this day affirm
the same? vhen ve read. 1. Corinthians. 7. chap. Yat he does veill yat Ioynit his
virgin in matrimony, bot yat he does better vho ioynit her not and vhen vee
reid 2. of Timoth. 5. If young vidoues yat ^e consecrat unto offices of the
church sall Marye thai incur damnation violating their former vou^ls it not
evident yat our mother the holy church hes drauin out the doctrine of celibat or
auouit virginity out of the pure fonta^s of holy scriptur, Vhen vee reid.
Peter. 5. many things to be in the Epistles of Sanct Paul difficill to be
understand: and in Io. the 6. Many Disciples to have said to Cryist, vhenas he
himself did spek, Thus is a hard spech vho can heir him? Yea sum Disciples to
have left him for the hardness of his spech and the verey Apostles them self to
have said in one place, spek unto us planlie and not in parables. in respect of
these spechis vhat Heresy is it to say yat the sens of scriptur is sum tymis
difficill? vhe^ vee reid Philip. 2. Yat God sall render to eury one according
to his vark is: and 1. Corinthians. 9. Evry one sall resaue his proper reuard
according to his labor, and Matthew. 16. Since vee be commandit to vork our auin
salvation and Math. 25. vhen it is faid Yat at the latter day it sall be
rendrit to evry one according to his charity and alms deades to the indigent:
does it not follou yat Good vorks be meritorius? vhe^ it is said. Yat the sin
agans the holy spreit sall never be forgeuin in this vorld nor in the vorld to
cum and in the 1. Epistle of Io. 5. chaptor. Yat their is a sin unto death vhilk
should not be prayit for and agane, Yat their be sum sins not unto death: is it
not manifestly prouin sum sins to be mortal, sum venial, and sum heir in this
lyif sum after this life forgeuin? Vhen in Io. 3. it is said except vee be
regenerat by vatter and the holy spreit vee can not inter in the kingdom of
heauin, is not tharby declarit the necessite of baptism unto salvation? vhen
vee read in the 8 of the Acts, Yat the Apostles layid their handis upon them
yat ver already baptesit, is not tharby the imposition of hands vsit in the
Roman church under the name of confirmation most evidently establissit? Vhenas
as vee reid to the Thessalloniscen. chapit. forsaid the Apostle to command tham
to observe the traditions lernit of him either by his sermon or vords and agane
in the 1. Corint. 11. yat agans the conte^tieux he does object only co^suetud
or custum saying vee have not such custom nor the church of God. Be not the.
authority of vnurittin traditions tharby evidently confirmit? vhar to Timothe
the church is callit the pillar and fundament of verity, and, in the 18. of
Matt. Vho disdanit to hear her let him be to the as ane ethnik or Publican does
not these passages vrg to belief as the church beleuit and to be assurit sche
can not err? Vheras in the 4. of Genes. God sayit unto Cain vhy art you angry
and vharfor does you cast dou^ thy visage: if you do veill sall you not resaue
it, and if you do evil is not sin or punition at thy port: bot thy appetit
sall be under the and you sall reull over it. and in the 15. of Ecclesiasticus
(vhilk book albeit Io. Calvin affirm to be doutfull yet seeing in the 3.
counsall of Cartage 47. canon it is rek kinnit amang the canoniques as the
Epistles of james and lud vhilk ver also once douted upon and yat Sa^ct
Augustine in his book of grace and freeuil chap. 2. does use this same passage
to prove freeuill I produce the same for autentik scriptur) Jesus the sone of
Syrach in the said book saying in this sort. God at the beginning did constitut
man and left him, in the hands of his auin counsall: He gave unto him
commandeme^rs and precepts saying if you vilt keip tham thai sall conserve the
he hes set before the fyir and vatter to vhilk of the tuo you vilt put out thy
hand: before man is Lyif and death, Good and bad, vhat plesit him sall be geuin
him Vheras in the 30. of Deutero^. Moses sayit to the pepill I call the heauin
and earth to vitnes yat I have set before your Eyis lyif and death, cursing and
blessing choose tharfor life yat you and your sead may live. Vheras to the same
purpose. 1. Corinthians. 7. chap. it is said. vho being firm vyth him self does in
his heart conclud not of necessity bot having pouer upon his auin vill, etc.
Does not these clear passages prove the doctrine of freeuill to be orthodox and
atte^tik? Matthew. 16.
Vheras ve read yat Christ our master first reuelit unto Sanct Peter Yat he ves
Christ the sone of the leuing God the other Apostles esteming him bot either
Elias for his yeall unto the observation of the lau, or Hieremias be reason of
his holiness, Io. Last.
or Io. Baptist because he prechit the doctrine of baptism as John did, or sum
prophet because he propheceit of things to cum. Io. 13.
Vheras specially pouer ves geuin to him to bynd and lousse and promis of the
keyis of the kingdom of heauin: Io. Last.
Vheras For him only Christ payit tribu^, Io. 6.
him only he causit valk on the vatters, him only he did reco^med to confirm
the faith of his brethring, of him allone he tuik plesour so often to demand if
he louit him, to him allone he said thryis fead my scheip, unto vhom allone
cha^ging his name he gave one of his most famus names calling him Cephas: unto
vhom of all the Apostles he apperit first after his glorius Resurrection and
before his death to him allone did fortell the same and the maneir of his death,
Finally vheras in expres vords in the 10. of Math. Euangill he is callit the
first of all the Apostles: is not the supremacy of S. Peter by these passages
and by many vthers (vhilk God villing in a traittie a part I sall sum day
collect) most clearly confirmit. Vheras in the first to the Romans the Apostle
does so extol their faith yat he sparit not to call the faith universal or
Catholic prechit thruch the hoill vorld to be their fayt: Vhat Heresy or
offens is it this day to call the universal church of the faithful under the
venerable name of the Roman church vhilk nou professit no other form of faith
nor yat vhilk the Roman church did profes vhenas the said Apostle did commend
them.

To be schort vheras in expres vords it is said: Ane evident probation of real
presence.
this is my body and agane except you eat the flesch of the sone of man and
drink his blood you sall not obtene eternell life. and agane my flesch is verey
meat and my blood verey drink does not these expres testimoneis most clerly
prove the eating and drinking and real presence of Crysts body? and vheras in
this real manducation the gros apprehensions of the Capharnaits is reprehendit
by these mystical and deap spechis of our blessed savior saying: it is the
spirit yat quink kinnit: the flesch profitet no thing: and agane, my vords be
spreit and life, bot their be sum of you yat belief not: by these vords (I say)
is not the disdanfull derision of such as falsely imput Cyclopique
Anthropophagie or eating of men's flesch unto Catholics manyfestly elidit and
couicted? for these scoffing mokars grossly imagening (as did the Capharnaites)
the natural and carnal body of Christ so to be eatin naturally and carnally
yat his flesch is torn and his bones brokin after such sort as Poettes did fayn
the gea^t Polyphemus and as ve knou the barbarus Bresilians to eat men and
vemen, and tharuithall lyik unto natural Philesophors distrusting all doctrine
vhilk agreit not vith natural sens or raison thai be pitifully desauit either
ignorantly or arrogantly preferring (contrar the doctrine of Christ) sens unto
faith and flesch unto the spreit. For if I should say vyth these Sacramentars yat
by my faith I ascend up unto heauin and tharby am conioynit vith Christ and so
does eat his flesch and drink his blood: in doing all this vhat have I done
repugning to natural raison seeing the verey infidel Philosophors confess the
heauins to be the habitation of the gods and yat by our vouis and eruist
affection ve be conioynit vyth tham and no otheruayis: Bot on the other part if
vith the Catholics Roman I sall say yat I do eat a bread descending from
heauin prefigurat by the Hebreuis Manna, the food of angels geuin by God unto
men, a graip consauit in the vynetree of a virginal vomb, having no pressoir
bot a potence or cross, no veshall bot a blessed natural body, no canall bot
his sacred syid hands and feit, no fum bot the force of the holy spreit to make
me dronk vyth yat cellestiall nectar: A flesch prefigurat by the immolation of
Isaak and eating of the paschall lamb. and ane Innocent calf killed for me and
us all prodigal childring, and in one vord if I sall vyth Catholics affirm
the bread to be changit in the flesch of Christ and the vine in his blood, the
philosophors sall lauch, sens and natural raison sall raige and repung:
tharfor in this manducation of Catholics vee have nead of faith and spreit,
in the other manducation of the sacrame^tars (Cheiflie these yat follou Io.
Calvin, it suffesis to follou the gross opinion of sens and flesch. vee read
yat the Disciples of Pythygoras had such respect and reverence unto their
master yat it vas sufficient probation amang tham in all their disputations to
say. ipse dixit (he hes said it and vho douted thar of (housoeuer their auin
opinions ver contrarius) ver expellit out of his paedagogy: bot thai in these
dayis vho vill only be callit the Disciples of Christ vill not admit his sacred
oracles as he hes said and pronuncit, bot as plesit them to interprit and
ce^sure tham not by the pith of the spreit bot by the pouer of their impuir
sens by vhilk if thai vill permit me to mesur the rest of the mistereis of holy
scriptur then sall I branggill all the fondaments of our faith. For behold I
find a co^ception and incarnation of a man vythout the seid of man, a voman
after her birth to remane virgin, a natural body to ascend, to valk upon the
element of vatter to Inter really vithin a houss all ports and passages vharby
to inter being schoot up, I find to be schort all things to have been maid of
no thing: vold not the Capharnaites, carnal sens and Aristot vyth his carnal
curiosite anssr (as it is reported he once did reading the books of Mos ses)
much is said, no thing prouin: for corporal things must descend not ascend,
sink and not valk upon the vatters much les enter throuch doors vy^nout
persing or breking thar of: that men be generit by men, that to be mother and
mayid at one time is as impossible as to be child and man at one time and
finally yat of no thing no things ca^ be producit. Bot heiru^to the
sacrame^tars ausuer (and verey Christia^ly) yat the author of nature (vho may
vork vhatsoeuer his vill is and yat villit no thing bot vhilk is Good) hes
vrocht supernaturally in the premises, and yat he spak only and pronuncit and
all ves perfyted. Then if in the admirable creation of all vorldly things, in
the vonderfull redemption of mankind, in the glorius operation of all miracles
contenit vithin the compass of holy Scriptur vee do confound all sens and
raison humane only by the vord of God assuring, tresting and hoping contrar our
auin asseurance, trest or hoip only because he hes so said and pronuncit: vhy
should vee in the blessed sacrament of the supper of our lord dour or deny any
corporal or bodily substance to be their except the bread and vine vhilk vee
see vith our eyis considdering he hes sole^mtly said in presence of a doson of
vythnesses agans vhom can be no exception ( this is body.) o bot you say, this
is a hard spech to affirm yat the body of Christ can be under the form of bread
vine. I ansuer so ves it a hard spech to the Capharnaites and many vthers yat
vhilk Christ spak of regeneration, and of this kind of manducation: and so is it
a hard spech to all infidells to hear of the creation, salvation, illumination,
resurrection and immortality of man. humane raison can not attene heirunto.
bot rendering our raison captyue unto his vords vho is above us and our raison
as author tharof ve sall not presum to dour or deny any thing yat he hes said.
can a litill pot comprehend the hoill vatters yat be in the vorld or the small
center of the earth the hoill circumferance of the same? no more can humane
raison comprehend the deap divinity of this high mystery. Moses culd bot see
the hinder parts of footsteps or rether a small gla^se of the glory of God
passing by: Exodus 33. 3.
Elyas couerit his face vith his mantill trembling to heir the Kings 21.
tempest of vhirlvynds earth quaiks and fyir preceding the soft and sueit air
vharin the voice of God vas: Solomon for all his humane visdome fand him self
so blindit behalding the visdome of God yat astoniet he did say. qui scrutator
est diuinitatis confundetur ab ea (vho vold search out divinity meaning by
humane raison sall be co^fundit vith the force tharof). and Sanct Paul vho ves
rauisit once to the third heuin did find notuyth standing in the vorks and
vords of God (vho is longsuffering and suddane vithout co^tradictio^) Ialuse
and patie^t vithout passion, merciful and just vithout partiality or
preuarication, vnhabill to do evil vithout impote^tnes or privation, infinitely
great vythout dimension, eury vhar vythout circumscription and all in all
vythout confusion) the said holy Apostle I say did find in the vords and vorks
of God such inscrutable profundite exceeding the schallounes of his natural
sens yat strikin vyth admiration in the 11. to the Roma. he dois say: o the
profund riches of the visdome of God: o hou incomprensible be his iugments and
his vayis impossible to be found out (meaning. by flesch and blood) Bot Inuane
I do hear alleg the exe^ples of Prophets and Apostles vho ver bot men seeing
the verey Angels vho be as clearseing celestial eagles uncovering their
faces dar not behold the blasing beams of his beautiful aspect much les
presum to censur his vords and vorks by the quikes of their Angelical
intelligence: yet vee blind oulles and molds vho have only bot the deprauit
dregs of yat ridiculus reason vhilk our grandfather did gain losing his
original innocence, ve I say be bold to level vyth the lunatique line of our
curiosity a largnes vhilk hes no term or limit, admitting no thing (Vhen vee
list to lyik our auin opinions) to be treu vhilk the narou pot of our prudence
and the small center of our Eye is not abill to comprehend. Bot vee should
remember vhat our lord and master did say for such incredulity unto Sanct
Thomas of India. Thoma, Thoma, because you hes seen you dois belief, bot
blessed be thai that have not seen and yet belief. Then the Catholics Roman
be blessed far above these Eeunderstanders, because yat re^dring their carnal
consaitts unto the pouer of the spreit thai belief vithout disput or dout as
did S. Thomas of Aquin in of one his heuinly hyms vhilk in Latin I have set
down because vnlossing the natural grace it can not for my opinion be
translated in our vulgar poesy namly by me yat never ves a poet, and syne the
quality of my distressit estat admitting no Lasar to amuse my self upon the
quantity of syllabes vhilk exercise as sayis boethius in his mourning book de
consolatione Philosophiae be more sit for comedeis nor calamiteis.

In supremae nocte Coenae, recumbens cum sratribus, obseruata lege plene cibis
in legalibus, cibum turbae duodenae, se dat suis manibus. Verbum caro panem
verum verbo carnem efficit, fitque sanguis Christi merum, and si sensus deficit
ad firmandum cor sinceru^, sola fides sufficit. and in ane vter place.

Dogma datur Christianis, quod in'carnem tra^sit panis and vinum in sanguinem:
quod non capis quod non vides, animosa firmat fides, praeter rerum ordinem: Sub
diuersis speciebus, signis tantum and non rebus, latent res eximiae, caro
cibus, sanguis potus, manet tame^ Christus totus, sub viraque specie. A sumente
no^ cancisus, non confractus, no^ diuisus, integer accipitur: Sumit vnus sumunt
mill, quantum isti tantum ille, nec sumptus consumitur. Sumunt boni sumnnt
mali, sort tamen inaequali, vitae velinteritus: Mors est malis, vita bonis,
vide paris sumptionis, quam sit dispar exitus. Fracto demum Sacramento, ne
vacilles sed memento tantum esse sub fragmento, quantum toto tegitur, nulla rei
fit scissura, panis tantum fit fractura, qua nec status nec statura, signati
minuitur. Tantum ergo Sacramentum veneremur cernui, and antiquum documentu^
nouo cedat vitui, prastet fides supplementum, sensuum defectui.

As to yat vhilk is allegit out of the first Corinth. 11. chap. Vhar the body
of our lord is callit bread: Vharupon if thai vill infer yat their can be no
thing their bot bread my I not as veill infer yat their can be no thing their
bot the body of our lord seeing our lord him self did call the bread his body.
This mycht be ane sufficient ansuer to ane argument so insufficient bot yet I will be more special in declaring vharfor the body of our lord is callit bread
by the Apostle. First because Christ him self and his blessed body is in many
places of scriptur so namit: as in Jeremy 11. vhar it is said let us put the
tree to his bread: Vhar by the tree the cross and by the bread Christ or his
blessed body vas praefigurat according to the opinion of all the ancients: and
in the Euangell Christ is callit the bread vhilk desce^dit from heauin. Bot in
the tabill of out lord I remember not to have red the body of Christ to have
been callit absolutely bread bot ever vith sum adiction, either demo^stratiue,
relatyue, or explicatiue: as in the passage of Sanct Paul forsaid vhen it is
said: Vho eated of this bread, and agane, the bread vhilk vee brek, and in the.
6. of Iohne. the bread vhilk I sall give you is my flesch. and as all the
ancients does affirm the holy spreit vsit to Ioyn these adiections yat vee may
understand tharby yat he spekit not of commun bread bot of sum mystical bread
or mystery comprehe^dit under the form of bread. Secondly the Apostle calling
the body bread he so spekit because the liniaments and form of bread and not of
the body be seen, euin as he callit the blood nether blood nor vine bot a coop
because the contening coop is more patent to our Eyis nor the contents tharof:
thridly in the scriptur often times things be namit after their exterior form: So
the brasin serpent vas callit a serpent so the Angels var callit men appering
in the form of man. Last of all it is a co^mun custum in scriptur to retene or
keap the old name in things changit from one form or nature to ane other:
Numer. 21. Genes. 18. and 19.
so vine is callit in the Euangill a graip or berry, so the devil is yet
callit Lucifer, so man is callit clay, so the rod of Moses ves callit a rod
vhen it vas no rod bot a serpent: and this I find also confirmit by ane other
auld him ascryuit to Sanct Ambrose vhar it is said. Paulum profers tu doce^tem,
panis nomen imponentem, corpori dominico: Moysen ego referentem virgae nomen in
serpentem, pari modo replico. Mos est frequens Scripturarum, rerum vt
praeteritarum voces dent praesentihus: Homo humus nominatur, vinum vna
appellatur, demon Lucifer vocatur, sat haec sanis mentibus.

Last vheras in the place for said The Apostle does pronunce such as eat and
drink vnvorthely to be gilty not of bread or vine bot of the body and blood of
Cryist Jesus, thatby he does manifestly point out unto us no commun bread bot
the body of Christ to be eatin in this blessed Sacrament.

Then to conclud this section if you shall say vith the Capharnaits, this is
ane hard speeh, I will ansuet vyth Christ yat flesch heirin profetit no thing
yat is to say yat carnal raison can no more comprehend this nor sche can
comprehend a creation of all things of no thing, a conception and generation
vythout carnal copulatio^ preceding, a corporal ascension vithout violence,
or a resurrection of body and bones converted in dust and asches. if you sall
say vith Sanct Thomas yat you can not belief except you see, I sall yet
ansuer vyth our blessed savior yat thai be blessed yat belief and have not
seen. and if you salt (as did the Virgin Marie) astoniet exclame saying hou can
this be seeing I knou not a man? as if you should say yat you can see no
natural appearance or likliehoid yat the bread should be converted in ane real
body: I ansuer vith the Angel yat it behouit the holy spreit to surprise or
posses the and the pouer of the most high to ouerschaddou the, otheruayis you
sall no les dout of thy creation, salvation and resurrection nor of the real
presence. Morouer you should not misknou yat faith hes no praiss or merit vhar
humane raison may prove the same, and yat modest Christians in matters of faith
should content their self yat thai be such vndemanding vhy or hou thai be such
lyk as S. Paul being rauissit unto the heauins kneu he sau Cryist bot vhidder
he did see him corporally or not corporally he nether kneu nor inquirit.

Bot returning to the matre I hoip I have by arguments preceding clearly
scheuit the doctrine of Catholics in chief heads of Religion controuerted to
be insallibilly confirmit, by expres text of scriptur lyik as heirtofor by
evident probation I have confirmit the same by evident testimoneis of ancient
fathers. For vhilk cause seeing expres text of scriptur and authority of
Doctors notvithstanding the distance of time and places vhar and vhen thai did
vrit, to vit Tertullian and Sanct Augustine in Afrique: Hilarious in France:
Ambrosius, Leon, Gregotius in Italy: Io. Chrysostom. in Thrace: Theophylact in
Mysia: Io. Ephtaim, Io. Damasen and Sanct Ierom in Syria: Basilius in
Cappadocia: Origenes, Cyrill and Athanasius in Egypt: seeing the four principal
Oicumenique counsalls, to vit of Nice vharin did assist 150 bischops: of Ephese
vharin did assist 200. bischops: of chalcidon vharin did assist 630. bischops:
Seeing I say boyth scripturs, fathers and counsalles do spek, vrit and conclud
in questions this day controuerted as the Roman church presently does, sche
must be undoubtedly the treu church Catholic. and vho vold have a clearer
demonstration of her present consent in doctrine vyth yat of the primityue
church let him read the book callit the Augustian confession vhilk (being
collected out of all Sanct Augustins Tomes) evidently prouit yat same form of
faith and Religion vhilk nou the aduersars of the Roman church so biterly does
impung to have been vsit in the said doctors day is a 1200. years ago or more.
Of Apostolic succession vithout the vhilk in the primytiue church all doctrine
vas suspect.


Nou lest the abondance of this subject force me more and more to digress I
begin to spek as I have promisit of Apostolic succession yat is to say of the
laufull lineall succession of pastors from the Apostles dayis unto this present
age: vhilk lineall succession vhar it is not conioynit vith the doctrine of the
Apostles their can be no church Apostolic. Bot the enemis of the Roman
church laking this marque do reject it as a thing not necessar as did the
Arrians and Donatists vho dispysing all doctrine yat culd not be co^firmit by
expres text of scriptur thai culd not abyid to hear any man spek either of
traditions or of laufull succession of bischops. Bot this marque of succession
vee should the more villingly Lib. 4. ca. 63.
resaue for yat their is not almost one of the holy fathers vho has not estemit
it ama^g the most principal marquis of the church. First Irenaeus vho ves nixt
the Apostles dayis did agknouleg the same saying. the treu knouleg (or mark of
the church) is treu doctrine and the ancient stat or dignity of the church
observed throuch all the vorld by succession of bischops co^tinuit unto our
time. Lib. 4. ca. 43.
and agane the same Irenaeus comma^dit to obey only such bischops as have their
succession evidently descending from the Apostles, Tertull. in the
praescriptions. agans Heretics.
vho vith the grace of verity (or treu doctrine) have resauit the certane
succession of Episcopat: all others vharsoeuer thai be establisset he holder
for suspect. And Tertullian not long after him speking aga^s the Heretics of
his time. I vold (sayis he) thai should scheu me by vhat authority have thai cum
to licht (or to authority) let tha^ produce the originalls of their churches:
let them scheu the ordor (or lineall descent) of their bischops by succession
descending from the beginning in such sort as their first bischop can exhibit
sum Apostle or Apostolic person (yat is to say placit and perseuering vith
the Apostles) to be his author and predecessor, Origin. in the proem of his I,
book callit penarchon.
as the church of smyrna can exhibit Polycarp placit by S. John and the church
of Rome Clement placit by S. Peter. this much Tertullia^. and Origenes almost
in the same age vith Tertullia^ sayit in this sort. In respect (sayit he) their
be many yat belief thai think as Crystians should think and yet sum of tham hold
opinions different from former bischops: in such difference let the Eccle
siastique preching Ioynit vyth ordinar succession prescryuit by the Apostles
and continuit to our age be aluay obseruit, For yat is only to be estemit
undoubted verity vhilk in no thing disagreit vyth Apostolic tradition. Sanct
Cyprian having respect unto this laufull and lineall succession does affirm the
church to be vhar Pope Cornelius vas not vith Nouatius vho culd produce no
evident of Apostolic succession. Sanct Hierom vritting to Pope Damasus does
for this same cause highly extol the laudabill succession of the Bischops of
Rome saying. I spek vith the successor of Sanct Peter and vith the disciple of
the cross, and follouing none bot Christ by communion or consent I associat my
self vith your beatitud yat is to say vith the chair of Sanct Peter. Upon yat
roque I knou the church to be beil dit: vhosoeuer out of yat house does eat his
paschall lam is prophan, and vho beis not found in yat ark during the deluge
fall periss. and a littill after. I knou not (sayit he) vitalis, I despyis
Miletus, I count not much of Paulinus (vho have no laufull succession Ioynit
vith their doctrine) bot vho gath^rit not vyth Damasus he scatterit, for he yat
is not of Christ is ane an ti^ryst. Sanct Augustine in many places does agkouleg
this note of succession in expres vordis pronu^cing such to be out of the
church as separating their self from their ordinary successiue bischop do either
establis their self or any other to be Prelates, Pastors or bischops. and
vritting agains the epistle of Manicheus 4. chap. these be his vordes. Many
things hold me most justly vithin the bosom of the church, the consent of
pepill and nations the authorite begun vith miracles, nurissit vith hoip,
augmented by charity, confirmit by antiquity and successiue preisthood
continuing unto this present bischop of Rome from Sa^ct Peter the Apostle unto
vhom our lord after his resurrection recommendit his scheip to be fed. and
agane unto the Donatistis Numer (sayis he) our priests from Sanct Peter and
considder in yat succession of fathers vho hes succedit unto other. In the
beginning of his 7. Tom. epist. 16 agans the Donat.
Yat seat is the roque vhilk the proud ports of hell can not preuaill upon etc.
and morouer in his epistle to Generosus he does number all the bischops of Rome
from S. Peter unto Anastasius then Pope. Optat. 2. book Agans the Donatists.
as Optatus in yat same age did inlykmaneir vritting agans Parmenianus in this
sort saying that the Episcopal seat ves first geuin to Sanct Peter (to peter
sayis he) the head or chief of the Apostles and tharfor ves callit Cephas being
head, as thai be callit schis matiques vho go about to erect ane other chair
aganis this capital chair. tharfor (sayis he) in yat singular chair (vhilk is
the first or principal) peter first satt unto vhom linus did succeid (albeit
Clement vas nomina^ before Linus) and so numering all the Roman Popes from
Linus unto Syricius vho then occupyit the place at lenth he brusted out in
these spechis. Scheu (sayis he) the origin of your church, you vho vsurp the
name of the holy church. and ancient Irenaeus did use the lyik enumeratio^ of
Roman bischops, vhilk enumeratio^ Eusebius did register in his 1. book 6.
chap. of the Ecclesiastique History.

Then seeing these holy ancient and let nit Doctors, Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Cyprian, Hierom, Angustin, Optatus etc. be uniform defendars of this
Apostolic succession I am bold to comprehend the same under this epithet or
mark of Apostolic vhatsoeuer the enemis of the Roman church object to the
contrary. demanding of them vith Tertullian and Optatus by vhat authority,
thai do vsurp any authority, vissing tham to exhibit the origin of their
churchis, to expone the ordor or lineall descent of their bischops, to name
vhilk Apostle or Aposto lique person hes been their first predecessor from vhom
their preisthood or Episcopat hes successiuly and incessantly continuit unto
their self. bot thai be not habill to scheu any such service or retour and
tharfor thai must be estemir violent possessoris meriting to be eiected for
their Laules intrusion.

It ver too tedius particularly to repeat all parteis and passages vhilk prove
the church to be evidently knouin by this Apostolic succession ever esteming
the same succession as necessarlie to be co^iunit vith treu doctrine as the
print or arms of a Prince be unto his money or as subscriptions and sealis be
unto attentik euidents.

If so be: then removing all partiality let us a littil perpend and considder
vhilk church this day contending to merit the name of the treu church may
exhibit clear testimoneis of Apostolic succession ioynit vith their doctrine
except only the church Roman, vhilk by a continual course or continuation of
236. bischops lineally succeding one to ane other from Sanct Peter unto this
present most Clement Clement the. 8. ca^ qualify her beginning, progres and
present estat by testimoneis extractit out of the atthentik protocolls of famus
historians and Doctors. and if none bot sche ca^ produce such evident arguments
and indenyabill instruments, suirly thai be too effronted and schamles that
deny her to be Apostolic lyk as sche is already prouin to be holy, Catholic
and uniform and tharfor the undoubted treu church militant. For this cause
separating our self from her, impugning, moking or douting of her authority ve
becum parttakers and subject unto the punitions of him yat vncouerit and it
ridit his fathers scha^, of tham yat did resist unto Moses, of tham yat
scornit to inter vithin the ark and of such as in the desert douting of Gods
promisis ver never permitted to intre vithin the land of promissio^, and to be
schort albeit it nether becummit me nor vill I pronu^ce any hard sentence agans
tha^ yat be separated in maneir forsaid villingly or vnuillingly from the
glorius society of this church, because I do agknouleg the merceis of God not
only to be hid from us as is his Justice bot also his merceis to be so infinite
as thai exceid all his vorks: Yet the ancients hes not sparit to compair such
persons to a canall or stra^d cut of from his fontane, to ane brench sned of
his tree, to a member cut of his body and to these yat ver vithout the ark
during the deluge unto vhom as their ves no sautie so does the said Doctors
much dout of the salvation of the other pronuncing yat in heauin thai sall not
have God to be their father vho in the earth does disdane to admit the treu
church to be their mother. That the pope is not the Anticryst nor Rome the
synagog of Satan.


Bot heir I must saill a sea of innumerabill co^tum elies the eenemis of the
Roman church all crying and contesting yat her bischop is antechryst and sche
the synagog of Satan. Vharunto I will ausuer vith greter modesty nor the
saltnes of such skandalus imputations does merit intending by Goodis grace to
prove yat as the infallibill marquis desingning the treu church be only proper
to the Roman church and her adhere^ts, so the propre marquis in Scriptur
desingning the Antichrist and Synagog of Satan can not vithout manifest
impudence and partiality be attribut unto her and her holy bischop. in
treating vharof I will alleg no friuoll or ambiguus places vhilk eury party at
their plesor does throu as a nose of vax, as yat of the Apocalypse speaking of
the number of the best (vhilk as it is applyit to the vord (...) euin so the
name of Martinus Luterus vrittin in Hebreu lettres grouit to the same number of
666.) and such other Prophetique and profound passages ill under stand to the
perdition of the peruertars. I will allanerly produce three or four places vhilk
boyth spek most clearly and vhilk the aduersaris use most ordinarily in this
matter.

The first place is in the Epist. to the Thessal. chap. 2. vhar it is said. Yat
the Antecryst sall be the man of sin, the sone of perdition and sall extol
himself above all yat is callit God or yat is vorschippit, in so much as he
sall sut in the tempill of God ostenting himself as if he ver God. The second
passage is in 1. of Io. 2. chap. vhar it is said: Vho is a liar bot he yat
denyit Jesus to be Christ or the anointed, and this is the Antecryst. The third
passage is out of the xi. of Daniel vhar the Prophet sayit speking of the
Antecryst. Yat he sall not agknouleg the God of his fathers and yat he sall
contem all goddis or godhead because he sall exalt him self above all. Upon
vhilk passages all the ancie^ts do agree yat the said Antecryst sall proclam him
self to be the Messiah and yat he sall go about to tread under foot all
Christian doctrine that is to say preching of the vord, ministration of the
Sacraments, yea the hoill scriptur.

Nou let us try if any of these monstruus marquis may be justly applyit unto
the church Roman and Pastors tharof, vho have not only been chief propugnators
of Christ and his scripturs from his ascension unto this hour, bot also of popes
or Roman bischops more nor a thretty have sealled vith their heart blood the
love and loyalty thai did bear unto Christ Jesus our blessed savior. Agane in
the year of one lord 327. vho did conuocat the famus counfall of Nice for
condemning the heresy of Arrius affirming yat Christ Jesus ves not
co^substantiall vyth God the father? Vas it not Pope Siluester? vho did
co^uocat in the year of our lord 383. the counsall of Constantinople to repres
the Heresy of Macedomus, denying the divinity and godhead of the holy spreit,
vas it not Pope Damasus? Vho did conuocat the counsall of Ephesus in the year
436. aga^s Nestorius affirming their var tuo persons in Christ, vas it not Pope
Celestinus? vho did co^uo cat the cou^sall of Chalcedo^ in the year 454. aga^s
Eutyches alleging yat our blessed savior after his incarnation had only our
humane nature, vas it not Pope Leo the first? vho did co^firm vyth thait
Apostolic authority all other co^salles assembled for extinguising of
Hereseis as in Cartage and Mileuetum agans the Pelagiens denying the necessity
of the grace of God for assisting us in fulfilling his commandments, and in
many other places agans the Donatists, Manicheans, Luciferians, Angelites,
Anthropomorphites, Apollinarists, aga^s Cerynthus, Basilid, Carpocrates,
Hermogenes, Valens and the rest unto this day? Var not all these Hereseis and
Heretics suppressit by the Popes and pouer of the church Lomane? for none bot
thai had vith a laufull authoritic ane ernist yeall and competent pouer
conioynit to resist so many mychty Emprors and subtle Schismatiques. if so be
he must be a strange Antecryst yat hes so stoutly defendit the doctrine of Christ
(yea sum time vith effusion of his auin blood) and sche must be a strange
Synanage of Satan yat can not suffer persons or spreittis Satanicall or
Heretical remane vithin her sanctuary.

Let tham ausuer heirunto vith consideration and not vith contention vith
mondestie and no malice: may thai Justly say yat the Popes by past or the
present Pope (if he be tho cht more intollerabill nor the former) that he hes
exalted him self above all yat is callit God or yat is adorit as God? Seeing he
does humill him self as the meanest serua^d of God to vesch, to veep, to kiss
the feet of verey miserable persons (vharunto I vas a seeing vitnes in the last
year of Iubilee 1600.) ministering also unto them all necessars for food and
raiment as thai had been his domestiques or proper childring: in so much as the
almess vhilk his holiness did every day bestou upon pilgrims and poor o^s vas a
matter incredibill: for in Trinity hospital at Rome (besyid a great many of
other houses and hospitalles vhilk var all replenissit) I did see more
thonsands logit all at one time tharin nor can be veill truster by tham yat
knou not the place. This vas all the ambition yat indifferent beholdars culd
persaue in him to vit to be a faithful dispensator and distributar of Sanct
Peter's patrimony spiritual and temporal vhilk is in effect to be seruand of
seruands yat is to say yat possessing all he possessit nothing, and being
gretest and highest of all he noruythstanding rendrit him self to be the
humillest and meanest of all: in the former follouing the aduyis of the Apostle
in the last the counsall of Christ Jesus.

Agane hes his predecessors or he denyit Jesus to be the anointed? The
marterised blood of sum Popes past and the holy life of him yat is present, yea
heuin and earth vith all such as setting partiality apart vill behold his
laudabill actions be so many vitnessis to the contrary evidently declaring yat
as his said predecessors sparit nether life nor liuelod to make Jesus be knouin
the anointed: So he follouing their footsteps does spair no cost nor panes
agans all Heretics and infidelles to the end yat thai may boyth deuly
understand. Christ to have been crucifeit for tham and to lern for his saik
agane to ^rucifie all their concupiscence contradictions and curiositeis.

Can any man be so impudent as to say yat either thai or he have co^temnit the
God of their fathers seeing yat boyth in and out of season thai have persuadit
and he presently does pray, persuad and importun not to transgres the limits
or marks of Christian Religion institut by God and observed by our fathers. His
increbibill cair throuch all Christendom to reduce all Heretics to this
Christian consideration, his diligence to unit all Christian Catholic Princes
(as he hes of lait united the most Christian and Catholic kings) his
extraordinar and sumpteus charges to preserve Christian dominions (namly in
pannony and other places from the violence of the Turk the Archiinfidell and
capital conte^ner of God) togidder vith his almess deadis daily bestouit for
goddis causs upon more nor ten thonsand indigents, his irreptehensibill lyif
and Good exempill in all his actions boyth publict and private specially vhenas
he celebrated or assisted unto diuyn service his humiliatio^ thairin being
accu^paneit vyth such burning at deur, contusions and tears as veill expres the
supernatural fontane and furnace of the holy sprcit (co^parit unto fyir and
vatter) to posses his heart: otheruayis hou culd it be by natural operation yat
at one time such co^trarius effectis of floods and flam^ should glans and gousch
our by the canalls and conduit of his ardent and allbe grou^tin eyis: all these
arguments prove yat he is no contemner of God, and yat he can not be callit
Antechrist bot by sum antithes nor the church of Rome the synagoge of Satan bot
either by sum Ironie, Of the hoor of Babylon.
arrogance or ignorance.

The fourt passage is extracted out of the 17. Apocal. Vhar Sanct Io. descryuit
the seat of the Antechrist in this sort, saying. I did see a voma^ sits upon a
beast of cocoin or cramsin color having seuin heads and ten horns replenissit
vith names of blasphemy, and in the forhead tharof vas vrittin a mystery, gre^
Babylon, mother of fornications and abhominatio^s of the earth, and I did see
the voman dro^k vith the blood of Saints. and a littill after. The seuin heads
be seuin montans upon vhilk the voman does (...) and at the end of the same
chaptor, the voman vhom you did see is the great city vhik regnit ahoue all the
kings of the earth, By this passage vhenas I had not so much as remouit one
stone of the Roman church more nor rabsake did of the church of lerusalem for
all his railling, I did nothuithstanding once think yat lyk ane other Iosue
agans Ierico by the only sound of this sentence I had maid her bastions and
buluerks equal unto the ground, lyk as all enemis of the said Roman church
co^tinu still in the self same ignorance and induration: for thai alleg fast
and firm yat all this prophecy ves forspokin of Rome vhilk having seuin hills
hes also had the empyir above all other kings, yoa above the hoill vorld: as
also yat sche is dronk vyth the blood of Saints as of the Valdenses,
Albigenses, Hussits, Viklefits, Lutherians, etc. that sche is the mother of
many abominations be reason of the multitud of sins reigning in her: That in
other places of scriptur sche is callit Babylon as in the first epist. of Sanct
Peter last chap. Vhilk is confirmit by authority of the fathers. first by
Tertullia^ in his book aga^s the Ieuis and. 3. book agans Marcion. Saying yat
Babylon mentionat in Sanct Io. is the figur of Rome. Nixt by Sanct Ierom
vritting upon the 47. chap. of Isayas and in his 2. book aga^s Iouinian about
the latter end tharof, and in his epistle to Marcellin vhar he callit Rome the
porpre or skarlat hoor. Thridly by Sanct Augustine in his 18. book of the city
of God chap. Oros. lib. 2.
22. Vhar he callit her ane other Babybylon. and Last of all by Orosius vho by
many arguments goes about to persuad yat schei agreit vyth Babylon in many
respects. For vhilk causes her adu^tsars conclud her to be the seat of the
Anticryst and her bischop to be the only antecryst. Matthew. 10.


Vharunto I ansuer yat the forsaid passages of holy scriptur and ancie^ts prove
no moir the Pope and church Roman to be Anticryst and the Antichrists seat nor
yat of th'Euangell vhar it is said I came not to bring peace bot the suo^d does
prove Cryist to be the author of discord and not of concord. For thai vho
comprehendit Rome under the name of Babylon thai did tak Rome for the City and
empire of Rome not for the church Roman, and yat Rome vhilk in their opinion
vas Babylon, the purpurit harlot and the great city dyit in the blood of the
Saints, vas Rome Ethnique not Rome Christian, the empyir of Rome and not the
Roman church. to be schort yat Rome vhilk is designit under the name of the
hoor of Babylon is not Linus, Cletus Clemens and their faithful successors,
bot Nero, Domitius, Dioclesian: Yat is to say not Rome suffering patie^t,
Apostolic: bot Rome persequutor, infidel Antiapostolique.

In this sort Tertullia^ in the forsaid place does expone him self saying:
Babylon is a figure of the city of Rome not of the church Roman. I do
notuythstanding confess the city of Rome to have surpassed boyth Babylon of
Egypt and Chaldae a for pryid and persequution of the servants of God: for as
the Chaldaean and Aegyptia^ kings did afflict the Hebreu church, so did the
Roman emprors much more persequut the poor Christian church: For by their
means boyth Christ him self and Peter and Paul the principalls of the Apostles
vith many Roman bischops and ane infinite multitud of other constant Christians
var martyred partly at Rome partly at Jerusalem partly at other places subject
to their dominions. and for this cause Sanct Hierom after he had callit Rome a
Babylon and purpurd hoor etc. For the multitud of sins vhilk regnit in hit (as
usually thai do in all great citeis) he addit notuythstanding these vords,
Hierom epistle to Marcellin chap., ann in his 2. book agans Iouinian.
saying their is in her ane holy church, a treu profession of Christ and the
trophies or enseinges of many blessed Martyrs and morouer by this confession of
Christ (sayis he) the blasphemy or mystery vrittin in the forhead of that
city, is effaced and veapt auay. For these be his vords in yat same place
speking to Rome. Unto the I will spek o potent city commendit by the voice of
the Apostle vhilk by confession of Christ hes veapt auay the blasphemy vrittin
in thy forhead.

Rome then in respect of her Ethnique Empyir and persecurion of Crystians mycht
veill have been callit Babylon bot in respect of the Christian church yat ever
hes been in her sen the dayis of the Apostles sche nether vas callit nor vas
Babylon. Morouer (if vee sall either give credit to historeis or Doctors of the
prim iue church) it is certane yat vhen Nero tyrannised in Rome Sanct Peter
dogmatiset their unto yat church vhilk in the last chap. of the first epistle
of S. Peter is callit the elect church vhilk is in Babilo^ and yat after S.
Peter their var many holy Roman bischops martyrised their by infidel c^prors
boyth the one and other remaning at one time vithin the said city. Yea after
the emprors tharof becam Christians sche did ceass any more in any respect to
be Babilonique, and vas callit Apostolic if vee may trust antiquity.

Vharfor vhenas Sanct Augustine and Orosius does compare her unto Babylon all
yat is in respect of ethnique infidel emprors not in respect of the Christian,
faytfull pastors and trou church. and this phrase of spech as it had been of
auld so is it in this age vsit. For as the propheseis yat var agans Jerusalem
being yet Iebusaean an Cananae an vas not meant of Ierusolein Haebroean or
Iudaean, nor the threttinnings pronu^cit agans Ioram, Achab, Zedechia directed
aga^s Josias, Iosaphat and Ezechia. So iu these dayis the acerbitie vhilk many
protestant ministers use agans sindry Citeis, nations, and peapill is not meant
of their auin felloubrethring remaning in such citeis and nations bot of their
aduersars as for exemple. Vhen thai call paris a den of idolatry and a goufre
of all vice, August. upon 61. Psalm. and of the City of God 20. book. 9. chap.
commentars upon the Apoc. put out under the name of Sanct Ambrose and ane vtber
co^mentar ama^g the vorks of S. Augustine.
tharin that only comprehend Catholics Roman and not their auin conf^erie
duelling in Paris: Vhen at Paul's thai call london a Laque of Licherie and at
Sanct Geles, Edinbnrg a ^oucherie, a Bordell and brybing house: by these vords
thai mean no thing les nor of their auin churchis in london and Edinburg,
designing only thatby vhoormongers, homicids and corrupt Iuges duelling in the
one and other place.

Bot I remember sum time to have reda more probabill interpretation of this
passage of S. John. collected our of Sa^ct Augustine and Sanct Ambrose vho do
not interprit these s^uin montans for these seuin moreriall hills of Rome (in
vhilk this day nether the Pope not the Roman peapill does duel bot in yat
place vhilk ves callit campus Martius) Not the purpurd harlot and coecin beast,
nor Babylon and the seuin heads and great city for Rome or any one particular
Empire or city, or society of vick it men yat hes molested the church of God
son the Ascension of Christ: bor thai tak the same in ane other sens more
agreing vith the text, esteming the said seuin heads and seuin montans etc. to
be seuin diverse kingdoms vhilk hes persequuted the church of God boyth before
and after the incarnation of Christ: yat is to say the Egyptiens in Moses
dayis: the Canan^ans after Iosue vas dead: the Babylonia^s under
Nabuchodonosor: the Persians under Datius and Cyrus: the Grecs under Allexander
and his successors namly by Antiochus Epiphanes: and these be five kingdoms yat
ve^it the Hebreu church. the Saxt vas the Roman Empyit and the seuint sall be
the great Antecryst vhilk destroying the said Roman Empyir sall go about also
to destroy the church of Christ. and these be the seuin he ads or hills of
vhillk (as the same Sanct Io. does say) five var past and gone before his dayis
that is to say the empyits preceding the Roman vhilk did tormen^ the Hebreu
church. and one nou is (sayt S Iohne) yat is to say the Roman Empyi^ vhilk in
S John's dayis did domin, and the othor or the last (sayi^ he) is not yet eum
and cu^ming it behouit him to lest bot a schort space, and this is the
Antecryst, vhilk fall not be the hoill beast, or hills, or heads bot one or the
last of the said hills, heads or Kings. Vharby it is evident yat the Roman
Empire must be endit and gone befot the Antecryst begin and yat the said
Antecryst sall bot lest a a schort time if vee vill credit this same text of
Sanct Io. allegit: Thessal. 2. 2.
Bot the Roman Empyr yet does lest in the house of Austrisch and the Popes have
continuit nou neir by 2600. year: tharfor thai can not be vyth reason estemit
the Antecryst nor Rome the Synagoge of Satan: It apperit rather yat the
Antecryst sall sit in Jerusalem nor in Rome if vee sall either belief Sanct Paul
or the said Sa^ct Io. the one saying yat he sall sit in the tempill of God, the
other in the 11. of the Apocalyp. saying yat the beast or Antecryst. Sall kill
the tuo vitnessis in the great city vhilk is spiritually callit Sodom and Egypt
vhar their lord vas crucifeit: vhilk must appera^t ly be meanit of Jerusalem
vhar the tempill of God vas and vhar Christ vas crucifeit and not in Rome.

Bot all this can not content the contentius vho still insist saying yat albeit
the Roman church hes resisted unto Heretics and maid much in scheu of the
text of scriptur, yet thai have so corrupted the sens tharof, infected the
sacraments and forged such errors as sche is altogidder intollerabill. Vharunto
I ansuer vith interrogation demanding if the scripturs have been puirly
interprit vithout Heresy or infection or the Sacraments deuly administrat at
any time a 1300. year ago? if thai sall grant (as thai must neads orells condem
many vhose scho lachets thai be not vorthy to looss) the^ do I as the treuth is
affirm yat boyth the doctrine and decent ordor Ecclesiastique vsit in the
primityue antiquity forsaid Yea at yat same time vhen the Christian faith vas
first planted in Scotland (vhilk vas about a 1400. year ago) is vsit presently
and obseruit in the Roman church. For probation tharof nedit no more bot to
reid the confessio^s Augustinian prented in places vnsuspect and fathfully
collected out of S. Augustine vho slotissit about a 1200. years ago: vith the
Hierarchy and Apostolic institutio^s of Dionis. the Areopagit and of Clemens
Romanus vho var auditors of the Apostles.

For all this, the insatiabill vill not yet be satifeit still replying yat the
names of transsubstantiatio^, purgatory, mess etc. var not hard of a long time
after the Asce^sion of Christ Jesus. I ansueir Yat no more ver the sacred names
of trinity and consubstantiall vsit or hard of till more nor a 300. years
after the Asce^sion: and the reason is for yat neu errors producing neu erronius
vords to obscuir or corrupt the verity gave occasion to the ancients for
illustration of the said verity to inue^t and use neu religius names in
matters corrupted. Euin as if a fine pretieux stone should be douted upon and
brocht in question amangs unskillful lapidars, and as if the auner the more to
scheu the bonte and beauty tharof should polise and inchass it in pure gold and
tharefter call it not a pretieux stone bot a bage, a button or targat according
to the neu form resauit the stone aluay remaning in the auin nature
notuithstanding this neu nomination procurit by the ignorance of the lapider
not by any craft or malice of the auner. Euin so the ancients partly to obuiat
Heretics, partly to instruct ignora^ts have found out many necessary vords
for edification of the church ( lyk unto the forsaid) never perverting the
nature or substance of things signifeit tharby. Ceremoneis be bot things
indifferent yet the most part of Roman* ceremoneis be authorized by laudabill
antiquity.


Agane thai can not auay vith coppes, cornerd cappes, mitres, surplices etc.
esteming all these to be recent and ridiculus: bot thai forget yat round
bonnetts, syid gounes and larg breikks, mules and skarpins ver not in use in
The Apostles dayis (vho ve^t for the most part bairfoottit and bairleggit)
nether sall vee find in scriptur or Ecclesiastique History the names of
companation brocht in by Martin Luther, of imputation brocht in by to Io.
Calvin, of Protestants inverted in Germany and of commissionars, moderators,
modifiers vith many more invented amags our self. and the treuth is yat
apparel and ceremoneis be bot things indifferent and mutable and such as merit
not of necessity to be authorized by antiquity: yet the most part of Roman
ceremoneis sall be foond in Sanct Denise and Sanct Clement vho var auditors of
the Apostles as is afor said. Morouer I have obseruit in Protestant churchis
the self same liberty in changing of rites and rayments at the plesor of their
minister and consistory. For in sum places thai baptis before, in sum places
after sermon: Sum resaue their communion kneling, sum passing, sum fitting and
in sum places the vemen stand and the men sit only at their table: in sum
places men be commandit to communicate in their best, in other places in their
verst apparel and In sum places be vsit (for marquis to inter to their table)
billzetts of sta^pit paper or kardes, others thinking such marks of kards
sumvhat prophan vill have none bot of lead. heirby may the indifferent readar
considder if the Roman church authorized vyth so many evident arguments of
ancient possession and precedence be much to blame in using neu names rites and
ceremoneis in the policy of their church seeing neu intrants laking all laufull
authority ancient or modern presum daily to form and reform neu vords, rites
and ceremoneis after their auin appetit. The Roman church does not vsurp any
pouer above the scriptur.


Morouer vhar thai say yat the Roman church does go about to discredit the
authority of scripturs usurping pouer above tham as things imperfyit and
insufficient, calling tham a divinity of ink ane nose of vox a reull of lead
etc. to the end thai may bring in their traditions repugning to scripturs.
Tharunto I anssr yat if it be usurpation of any authority above them or
contemning of tham to agknouleg not only the hoill body tharof bot euin eury
period or clause tharof to be most puir perfyit and sufficient in the self
abeit yat in respect of our grosnes, imperfection and insufficiency their nedit
many things to make our dulnes comprehend tham (as the treu interpratatio^
tharof, ministration of the sacrements by persons meit for yat function vith
many ceremoneis and supplements for celebration of divine service and support
of our insufficiency): Vhilk suplements the nouators their self be forcit to
use vith no les confidence not as if all their forms var expreslie contenit
vithin the compass of holy scriptur: if this I say be to discredit the scripturs
the said nouators be socij criminis yea more criminal nor Catholics vho have
the primityue church for their author in any tradition thai use the said
nouators having no authority bot their auin. Bot to make this matter evident by
exemples. Can you deny bot yat thy Prince and his authority Royal in the
self is sufficient aneuch to govern his realan? Yet you see yat the same
Royal authority must distill as from a fontane by several ca^nalles
throchout all places and persons having nead tharof, as by his bailleis,
steuartis, Sch^iffees Commissars, Courts and sessions: vharby his dignity
Royal is no thing diminissit by such as think these subaltern co^plements
neadfull for the service of his realm. Bot to hold us at matters of the same
nator vith that vharof ve treat. Behold the passion of Christ Jesus is
sufficient in the self to save va, yet before the same can be applyit unto us
many other accessory matters and Christian exercises be necessar (as faith,
hoyp, charity, prayers, penitence, and holy lyif etc.) and in one vord. is any
thing more sufficient nor he yat is all sufficient? yet yat supreme sufficiency
disdanit not bot hes determinit subaltern cooperators to concur vyth him boyth
in actions natural and spiritual, begetting us by our parents, nurissing us
by natural food, defending us by Magistrates, instructing us by his holy vord
and prechors tharof, finally he ordorit all things on earth yat kepit any
ordinar course by the ministry of sum other things yat be not of his essence:
Yet the using of these ministerial cooperators (taking aluay their original
pouer from him) does not argue or convict his majesty of any insufficiencye:
Euin so all imperfection or insufficiency yat is or can be objected unto the
scripturs is bot in respect of us: For thai be in their self as a sufficient
quantity of fine and sufficient seed and ve be as ane field yat long hes Lyin
vnlaborit unfit and insufficient either to resaue the said seid or to bring out
any fruit tharby except We be pleuit, harrouit heggit or hirdit and vattred
from above. So if at any time the said scripturs vhilk in the self be as
inflexibill and firm as a vall of brass and more significatiue nor hu^^ne sens
can comprehend, if notuystanding tharof thai be callit a divinity of ink, a
reull of lead a nose of vax all yat is in respect of such as vrest, throu and
pervert them to their auin perdition as sayit Sanct Peter in one place, Pet. 2
epist. 3. chap. Pet. 2. epist. II. chap.
delyting in yat vhilk the said Apostle in ane other place hes expreslie
defendit to vit in private interpretations of propheseis or scripturs, of vhilk
persons their hes ever been Good stoir throuchout all ages sen the ascension
specially sen Martin Luther of vhom hes procedit more more nor a 60. of schisms
all throuing the said scripturs to their auin private sens as if thai had been
bor a reull of lead, a nose of vax or a divinity of paper and ink and not a
doctrine descending from above. in this sens S. Paul sayis yat albeit the treu
sens of scriptur does quikkin yet the letter tharof does Kill. in this sens he
not only callis him self the savor of death unto sum albeit he vas the savor of
life unto Vthers bot also he callis Christ Jesus the only corner stone to be a
stumbling stone unto the reprobat.

Last of all vharas the said Nouators reiects as Apocryphe sindry books and
fragme^ts of holy scriptur vhilk the primitive church hes resauit for
canonical (to vitt the books, of Tobias, Judith, Esther, the Visdome of
Solomon, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, the song of the 3. childring, the Historeis of
Susanna bell and the Dragon vith tuo books of the Machabees follouing tharin
the exempill of ebio^ and his fellouis vho as sayis Tertullia^ in his
prescriptio^s tho thai ever appeall to scripturs yet vhen scriptur is cited
agans tham thai either deny tham to be atte^tik orells thai expone tham after
their auin fantasy.) all vhilk books ve find rekkinnit for canonical in
sindry counsalls na^ly in the 3. counsall of Carthage vhar Sanct Augustine vas
present. For probation vharof let his cataloge be red vhilk ve find in his 2.
book 8. chap. de Doctrina Christiana and yat vhilk he vrittit in particular of
the prophecy of Baruch in his 17. book 33. chap. de Ciuitate Dei.

Nou let any indifferent person luge betuix Catholics and Protestants vhilk
of the tuo does most discredit the scripturs, vhidder thai yat follouing their
auin private opinions agans the opinions of the primitive church vill curt of
such books of scriptur as spek aga^s their errors and vill have all other
scriptur (vhilk plesis tham to admit) to be interpretit after their fantasy:
or thai vho hes captiuat and renu^cit their auin opinions grounding their self
upon the pillar of verity observing after ^he counsall of the Apostle 2.
Thessall. 2. chap. all traditions resauit either by vord or vrit from the
Apostles and their undoubted successors vho vith the chartor of their doctrine
can also produ^e atte^tik sealls of lineall descent from the said Apostles.

And as to these passages so impertinently allegit by sum speking of this
matter, albeit such friuolus allegations merit no anssr as proceeding from men
yat rether have in post run over nor red the said passages or at lest believe
yat other men have not red them at all: Yet I will in one or tuo vords for the
benifit of sumpill ons anssr tharunto. Their first passage is out of the 4. of
Deuteron. Vhar it said by Moses you sall nether eik nor pair to the vord yat I
spek, etc the second is in the Euangell of Sanct Io. vhar it is said. Joan. 20.
these things be vrittin yat you may have eternell life in his name. the third
is in Sanct Paul 1. Corinthians, 4. chap. Vhar the Apostle sayis, let no man belief
above yat vhilk. is vrittin, and the last is in the last chaptor of the
Apocalypse. Vhar the Evangelist Io. sayir vho eikkit unto this, God sall eik
unto him the plages vrittin in this book, and vho diminissis from the vords of
the Prophesy of this book. God sall diminiss his portion out of the book of
life and holy city. as to the first passage if no thing should be eikkit nor no
thing diminissit unto yat vhilk Moses hes spokin in his Pentateuch then as all
the sacrifices and ceremonial lau must yet be kepit so all books of the
Prophets and all the rest of the auld and neu testament must be cut auay and
abolisit. to yat of Sanct John's Euangell. Upon these vords, these things be
vrittin yat you may belief and have salvation: to conclud heir upon yat no
thing more neadit unto salvation then that vhilk is vrittin in the said
Euangell: by yat vyiss argument you sall cut of all the rest of the auld and
neu testament in vhik be many things vrittin yat is not to be red in the
Euangell of S. Io. To yat of Sanct Paul saying. let no man belief above yat
vhilk is vrittin, I anssr yat believing vnurittin traditions I belief no thing
above yat vhilk by vrit I am commandit to do yea and vthers before me have been
commendit for doing the same. behold in 1. Corint 11. chap. the same Apostle
commendis the said Corinthians yat thai kepit his traditions and agane in the
2. to the Thessalonicen. 2. chap. ve be commandit to stand and keap the
traditions vhilk he had geuin either by his sermon or epistle, vhilk is to say
by vord or vritt, vnurittin or vrittin and for the malediction contenit in the
Apocal. Upon the augmentars and diminissars of the vords of the prophecy of
yat book let any equal man Judge vho meritis most the said malediction vhidder
thai yat presum not at all to interprit the same contenting their self in yat
point (as many holy and lernit men have done) rather in ane reverent ignorance
nor in ane arrogant science, or if thai interprit or apply any part tharof thai
aluay conform their interpretations unto the ancients of the primityue church:
or thai vho vith the Gnostiques and Anabaptists presuming to much of private
inspirations tak in hand to expone the mistere^s of yat profond revelation as
ordinarily and confidenlie as if no matter var tharin contenit bot such as var
altogidder clear and Historical: Vhilk temeritie can not be vithout dangerus
distorsion and alteration of the sens of the said Evangelist and tharfor can
not be denyit to be ane evident and impudent eikking and paring vhenas thai be
not afrayit to make scornful mytologeis of these sacred mistereis finding the
Pope and Roman Prelatts in many passages tharof as partially and Iniustly as
Achab did imput the trubilling of Israe^ll unto Elias and Sedecia the sone of
Chanaana the spreit of falls Prophetie unto Micheas.

Bot of all exclamations the sorest is agans the vitieux life of the Roman
Clergy or church men: The viti^ux life of church men should not make us aba^do^
the church
Vharin (as Basilius Magnus in his 69. Epistle does co^plene) vho vas most apt
to blaspheme vas estemit the best prechor: Euin so is it in this miserabill
age: For the enemis of the Roman church not knouing by vhat raison thai may
confound her doctrine and dignity agans all raison thai do invent and object
infinite criminations agans the person of the Doctors of the said church. Vhilk
kind of unjust crimination S. Augustine also complenit to have been in his age
the authors tharof going about by such partial imputations and rhetorical
motions to excitat and inflam the minds of the ignorants vhilk be ever
inclynit to avarice and ^nuy, and intending by this means no thing bot private
commodity and preferment th^i pretend notuithstanding boyth republict and
religion, vhilk be the tuo falls pretexts yat all factius persons have vsit
heirtofor. So did Theobutes, Simon Magus, Valentin, Marcion, Arrius, and the
rest abandon and impung the virgin church incorrupted at yat time vith falls
doctrine as sayit Eusebius in his 4. book of his Ecclesiast. Histo. all becauss
thai var debarrit from the profit and preferrement vhilk thai expected vithin
the said church. and heirof vee have a most manifest exe^ple in Martin Luther
(of vho^ northeles I sall be loath to alleg any thing yat can not be qualifeit
by. Io. Sleydan his friend and fauteur.) For vhat cause I pray you did the said
Martin Make defection from the Roman church? bot for yat the publication of
pardons or Indulgence callit of the croissad (and so namit because the Prechors
tharof ver astricted to bear a cross upon their upper garment) var granted in
germany to Friar Io. Tetzed Iacobin and not to the said Martin nor to anv of
his confrery of Augustine Heremitts vho of a long time before var prouydit to
publiss such Pardons. In the mean time he kneu full veill yat this Indulgence
ves promulgat by Pope Leo the 10 For fiinssing the statly church of Sa^ct
Peter, and for gathering sum tresor to resist Solomon vho at yat time by
Hu^gary had Enterit to far vithin Christiendom: notuythstanding vharof the said
Martin preferring the private utility of his particular society to the
general utility of all Christiandome, of a mo^k he became a malitius Enemy
and of ane Hermit ane Heretic preching aga^s the prodigality and pryid (tho
vith greter pryid) of Prelaltus eury vhar crying and contesting yat it ves more
lust and necessary to resist the Pope nor the infidel pagan.

Bot granting unto these men yat Popes and Prelatts often have declinit and
daily declyne from the tenor of thait vocation polluting their self vyth
infinite vices, For the vice of officiars offices should not be bispysit.
is it tharfor resonabill yat the seat Catholic vyth the faith and undoubted
Christian doctrine vhilk thai tech and causis be techit should be contemnit and
cast auay? seeing a holy life tho it be a great ornament to sound doctrine yet it
is not the principal cause quhy vee should follou or flee the doctor. For it is
most pertinently demandit by Terullian in his prescriptio^s speking of this
purpos, should vee (sayis he) approve persons by their faith or the faith by
persons? that is to say yat so long as the Pope, Pastors or Prelates do tech
treu faith and cause it to be techit vithin their iurisdictio^s (lyk as thai do
if the Symboll of the Apostles be the treu faith) vhat does it belong or
apertene unto me vhat lyif thai lead? Agane vhat am I yat I should luge ane
vthers seruand fitting in the chair of Sanct Peter, seeing he fallit or standit
unto his lord and is only to render count unto him of his life and sunction. For
vhen vee sall compeir before the tribunal seat of God it sall not be askit at us
hou our chief Pontif or Pastor hes leaued, bot vee must give a rekkinning of
our auin life not of his, and vee must suffer in our auin persons according as
vee have done (as sayit the Apostle) thar for the ho^ll flok much les one tuo
or sum feu particular s^heip should not presum to ce^sur and put ordor unto their
Pastor vho is apo^ted to ordor and govern tham: nether should thai think yat it
can much impesch their health housoeuer he live prouyding he conuoy and keip
tham in holsum pastures.

Bot vhat nead I by similitudes to explane this matter seeing Christ him self hes
expressit his auin vill in this behalf saying in the 23. of Sanct Math. the
Scrybes and Phariseis sit in the seat of Moses: do as thai bid not as thai
do. For thai say and do not. Vhilk is to be vnderstud yat thai command Good out
of the chair off Moses, bot do evil out of the chair of malice, thai say yat
vhilk is of God bot do yat vhilk is of their self. then the obedience deu unto
the Good office is not to be rejected for the ill officiers nor the unity of
the flok to be dissoluit for the dissolut life of the Pastor. For as sayit S.
Augustine aga^s the lettres of Petilia^. first book 2. chap. respect of persons
and not of places is the mother of all errors: in vhilk place the said S Aug.
does affirm yat the faith may be frutfully prechit euin of perfides yat is to
say of dissoyall trators. Vee read also yat our lord vouch^fit once to spek by
ane ass: Numeri 22.
Vhat the^ can empesch his Majesty to spek su^ time by men subject unto
beastly lubriciteis? Vee knou yat the spreit of our lord does breath and brust
out vhar and in vhat sort he vill, sumtyms contrar the mind and intention of
tham that hes resauit the same. Lo Balaam being corrupted and hired to curss
the peapill of God vent forduart to have done so: bot contrar his deliberation
hou sone he did see the pepill of God he vas forcit to bless tham. king Saul
vent out of set purposs to have killit David, 1. Kings 19.
bot cumming to Nayothramatha (vhar David vith other Prophets did sing and
Prophesy) the spreit of God did so ouerreull him yat he did enter in amang tham
and removing all vrath and vindication did strip of his clothis singing and
propheseing all nakit vith the rest of yat sanctefeit society. Vho knouit not
the vickitnes of the priests in the dayis of Herod, yet thai being inquirit
vhar Christ should be born thai ceassit not for all their vickitnes to ausuer euin
prophetically yat he should be born in Bethle e^ of Judah. Vho culd be more cursit
nor Cayphas? (For obtening his Pontificat iniustly he did use and exerce the
same more iniustly) yet vhen as he said yat it vas expedient yat one should die
for the pepill to the end the hoill nation should not periss, he spak not yat of
him self (as sayis S. Io.) bot being the hie priest sor yat year he did
Prophesy. Io. 11.


Sanct Hierom exponing yat place of the 10 of S. Math. Vho resauis a Prophet
under the name of a Prophet sall resaue the reuard of ane Prophet, and vritting
also upon these vords: Vho resauis you resauis me. The faithful (sayis he)
mycht have heirby takin occasion to think yat thai var co^ma^dit to resaue
Judas the trator or any falls Prophet cumming under the name of a Prophet: bot
(sayis he) Christ be vay of preoccupation does ansuer heiru^to vhenas he sayis
yat the name of ane Prophet and not the person of a Prophet should be resauit and
yat the resauers be vorthy of reuard albeit thai be for their persons vnuorthy
yat be resauit.

Then Christ vill not have the persons of Pastors to be respected bot their
names: vhilk is to say yat he vill not have us too solist or curious upon the
lyif, merit or manners of him vhois ministry God vsit in government of his
church, vhidder he be Judas or Peter: bot yat vee should be content to knou yat
he does sit in the laufull chair laufully, yat he is ane Apostle, yat he is
Christ Jesus Vicelegat, a priest or bischop ordorly auoynted out of vhose mouth
vee be commandit to heir the vord of God. tharfor tho he be Judas so long as he
is ane Apostle and exercesit the legation of Christ our master let it not move
the to contempt and co^tradictio^ tho he be a theif bot do as he co^ma^dit not
as he doit not having respect ( as sayit) S. Aug.) unto him bot unto his lord
vhois legatio^ he bearit, 2 Book agans the epist. of parmen. ij. chap.
for vho resaui^ him not resauit not Christ, in so far as it vas generally said
to Judas, Peter and Iohne and to all the rest of the Apostles vho rejected you
rejected me, bot if it be yat Peter and Iohne sall use the same legatio^ you
should study boyth to obey their vords and to imitat their vorks, this much Sanct
Augustine. To be schort tho our Pastors be lyik the carpentars yat beildit the
ark of noah vorking by the vill and apontment of God the vork of our salvation
neglecting their auin: tho thai be lyik the candill yat clearit us consuming
the self: tho thai be as Mercurs o^ signs set up in vilsum vayis to direct us
in the rycht pathe thai their self still remaning vithin the desolat deserts
vhar thai be fixit, vee should not dispyis the Good benefits of God offrit by
them for their lewd behauior, No more nor Noah dispysit the ark
notuythstanding the vnclea^ beasts yat var thairin logit vith him, nor Christ
Jesus the society of sinuars and Publicans. Var it not a foolisch thing in a
patie^t to contem his potion because the Apotacary is subject to seiknes? and
var it not a great simplicity to think yat the beams of the sone can be
defylit tho thai schyne in vilanus and filthy places: as foolisch is it for the
vices of men to aba^don the church vhilk is the pillar of all verity, or to
think yat the verteu of the vord and sacraments can be diminissit by the
impuritie of the priest. For this cause in the dayis of Sanct Augustine the
Donatists and in the dayis of Sanct Bernard sum calling tham self Apostliquis
var boyth pronuncit Heretics because thai denyit the Apostolic church to be
any vhar bot vhar their vas a life comparable vyth yat of the Apostles mesuring
aluay the utility of the vord and Sacraments by the verteu and dignity of the
ministres tharof.

By this discourse it is evident yat the vocation and not the life of Pastors is
to be respected, Yat laufull Princes and Pastors hes ever had a secret conco^^^
^ance of (...) ^ol^spreit howsoever that ver in life v^rteusor vitius.
and yat a laufull unction or vocation hes ever concomitance of the holy ghost
in vhatsoeuer persons preferrit to be chief Princes or Pastors, as by the
exemples of Balaam. Saul, Cayphas and others euin debausch^r and reprobat
Princes and Pastors heirtofor rehersit is manifest.

Yea it is also to be considderit yat it is not vithout great reason vhy God hes
suffrit his darrest seruands and elect vasschels vhom he fand euin to be me^
agreing vith his auin heart (as vas king David) to fall most dangerusly, to the
end ve should not give unto men the praiss and honor vhilk is deu to their office
lyk as undoubtedly ve vold do if the sincerity of me^ var in all points equal
unto the dignity of their office. For this canss albeit Sanct Peter vas verey
veak in his faith and theruith all most vnuorthely denyit his lord and master,
yet yat did not impesch our lord after his resurrection to commit his flok unto
him saying Peter fead my scheip: nether did the damnabill treson of Judas cause
the rest of the Apostles to abhor his place bot mouit tham the moir to plant
ane other tharin. by vhilk tuo exemples ve be clearlye admonisit to hold such
for laufull Pastors as this day sit in the fear of the said Apostles and yat
be laufully authorized vitth their doctrine and lineall descent vhatsoeuer
personal imperfection thai have so long as thai posses the said place: as also
the said Pastors falling to be displassit (as vas Judas) yet for all yat the
dignity of the place should not be disdanit bot aluay reuerensit and the said
place rendrit un to sum other more Idoneus, in So Much as vho vold go about to
bring in any other form in lyk cases they imitat not Christ Jesus and his
Apostles bot the turbulent ten trybes vho for the folly of a Yonug Prince did
schaik of all oblisit obedience choosing a seditius Jeroboam for their souerane
lord and erecting in Dan and Bethell conflatill calves contrar the tempill of
Jerusalem: Vheras thai be bound to bear vith the imperfectio^s of their Pastors
(cheiflie of such as be corrigibill as vas S. Peter) and if any of the said
Pastors cum to be displassit for high offenses (as vas Judas) then should the
consistory of Apostolic successors elect sum other unto the vacant place euin
as the said Apostles did institut Matthias: ve not going about at our auin hand
to abrogat the dignity for the defaltes of the Doctor more nor ve vold viss
the ministerial estat to be abolissit for the capital crimes yat many
Ministres have committed: Vhilk crimes as thai should not (in our opinion) preing
nether the place nor persons of other ministers yat be innocent: no More should
the allegit offenses of liberius, Marcellin, Syluester the 2. John. the 22. (in
caiss all var treu yat is objected agans tham) animat us aga^s Innocent Popes
and Prelates and their Apostolic function.

Bot to adher unto our purpos tuiching Pastors I will upon this subject for
avoiding prolixitie only alleg one exemple vrittin in ancient Annals of
vigilius 61. Pope in number. This Vigilius interit to his Pontificat by
unlawful meanis, for by instigation of Augusta the Emprisse he procurit the
banisment and eiection of, S. Siluerius (afteruart marterised for the Christian
faith) the said Augusta being highly offendit vith the said Silucrius because he
vold not restore her friend Authemius to his Episcopat of Constantinopill from
vhilk he vas Justly eiected (as one me^teyning the Heresy of Eutyches) by
Agapetus predecessor unto the said holy Siluerius. Nou Vigilius to obtene the
Pontificat did promiss unto the said Augusta to reestabliss her said friend and
by this meanis he is maid Pope and holy Siluerius cast out. Bot the said
Vigilius vas not so sone installit and set down in the chair of Sanct Peter
vhen their chansit unto him ane accident boyth admirable and laudable. For as
king Saul going out fulfillit vith the spreit of malice and of deliberat mind
to have killit David vas not uithstanding surprised by the spreit of mansuetud
far by his expectation: so Pope Vigilius Intring in to his suprem dignity of
set purpos to have fulfillit his unlawful promis vas possessit vith the holy
spreit by verteu vharof (as Sanct Paul going to be a persequutar vas turnit in
a Pastor) he chusit rather all reproach, ignominy and punition nor to bloit the
Pontifical place of his glorius antecessors by fulfilling a filthy iniquity
promisit allanerlie upon avarice and ambition. So after he had most Christianly
and constantly indurit imprisomment famine and many other torments by means of
the said Augusta he did vith great patience confess yat most justly he had merit
such torments and more for his iniust dealing agaus holy Siluerius. So this
Vigilius at his first entree vas not vnlyik Cayphas: yet the secre^t blessing
of God still acc^mpaneing the place and function vhilk he did posses preseruit
him from acco^plissing his peruersit promis.

Bot in anssring this vay to eury particular matter yat the curious and captius
tak exception aga^s or to refut point by point eury head co^tenit in the
negatyue confession of faith vsit vith in scot land (vhilk in effect is no
thing bot a denial of the faith and form yat vas vsit in the church ever till
the dayis of Martin Luther or rather of Io. Calvin) it is nether my meaning nor
vold I viss yat any man should so deall vyth tham for if ve sall go and disput
upon all ceremoneis from the holy vatter unto the hie altar ve sall bot
vr^agill one vith ane other vithout edification, that for to knou if all rites
and customs vithin the Roman church be laufull or not me think no belter mean
is nor ever to reduce the aduersars to yat point yat they may be content to try
if sche be the laufull and treu church or not, for in trying only yat one point
(vhilk may be done vith as litill or les pane not to try the meanest of all the
rest) as on the one part tharby you may in gros justly declyn and detest all
her ceremonies trying her not to be the treu church: so on the other part being
found to be the treu church (as undoubtedly sche is) then you must be estemit
too to arrogant and impudent dispysing her ordonna^ces housoeuer thai seam
contrarius to your private sens. For exempill vharof Behold if a seditieus
fellou sall start un in Scotland and find falt vith many things authorized by
the kings laues: as such a one should be justly estemit seditius so he he var no
les simpill yat vold aussr unto him any other vay bot yat such laues proceeding
from a Prince having a laufull pouer vith incomparabill prudence should not be
put in question reducing the party aluay to yat point if he had reason to
impung the Princes authority. For in particular to disqut vith such a mad
headit fellou upon the particular resons moving the Prince in his taxations,
donations, reuocations, forfaltors, restitutions, pardons and punitions, etc.
var a matter boyth endless and such as none bot the Prince him self culd veill
render reason for: seeing the hearts of Princes be only detected and directed unto
and by God. Agane I find a lord in possession of a fair seigneurie, I inter
vithin the same, I mark all his palices and plantations, his tryne and tenants.
I find sum of his houses to my co^sait so ill situat so ill proportionat, his
family and fermes so out of ordor yat I must not only reprehend bot I must
also put to my hand at my auin hand and reform, and not only reform bot posses
my self vithin the said lordschip because I ca^ reuil it better nor the heritor
tharof having no patience first to try if the said lord be just proprietar or
not. Euin so vhen ve sall indifferently ponder the procedur and actions of
tham yat be most greuit vith the Roman church ve sall find tham no more
formal nor better foundit and tharfor thai must aluay be forcit to cum to the
fundamental question to try if the church Catholic Roman be the treu church
vhilk being tryit to be such (as no dout it is) then her ordo^nances should be
vithout co^tradiction obeyit and the repreheusions, reformations, possessions
of her aduersars estemit bot sa money iniust imputations, deformations and
violent vsurpatio^s, and finially all incorrigibilly refusing to hear her voice
should be according to yat in the 18. of Sanct Math. reputed for Ethniques and
Publicans.

Then to conclud this section supponing yat all var treu vhilk thai object
agans the Roman church vhat remeid I pray you var most convenient and
Christian to reduce all these turbule^t tempests afflicting the church unto a
quietness according to the uniform ancient estat yat sche vas once into, to the
glory of God and universal quietness of the said church. Suirly after I had
much meditat upon this matter vith such indiffere^cy as my meannes culd aford I
culd find no middis more agreeable or aequall to all parteis contending then
these yat foullou.

First as is aforsaid yat distinguising betuix the name and persons of Pastors
vee respect not so much the vice as the office, Vhat seamit the best remead to
pacify all schisms perturbing the church.
the Doctors as the dignity, the person as the place: Vhilk if vee should do vee
should never aba^do^ or leif the seat of Rome vhilk hes so evident arguments of
Apostolic succession, albeit all var treu yat is objected agans her. Vharunto
Sanct August, in expres vords did exhort the curious and contentius of his age
in his 2. book. 5. chap. agans the lettres of Petil. Saying: Vhat hes the chair
of the Roman church done unto the in vhilk chair Peter once did sit and nou
sittit Anastasius? and immediately tharefter. Vhy callis you the Apostolical
chair the chair of pestilence? if it be because men sitting tharupon spek the
lau of God and do it not, did our lord Jesus Christ for the Phariseis of vhom
he sayit (thai say and do not) do any injury unto their chair? no bot he
reprehendit tha^ re^dring aluay deu honor unto their chair) saying in this
sort: thai sit on the chair of Moses, vhat thai say do, bot do not as thai
do, for thai say and do not. If you should follou this exempill Sayis the holy
father then should you not for me^ vhom you defame, blasphem the Apostolic
chair vith vhilk you vill not communicate.

Nixt let us vithout partiality considder trouchout all the 1600. centureis or
aages son the n^riuitie of Christ Jesus vhat most famus consalls and Doctors
have been in eury aage and let us search out decisions of matters controuerted
in traditions or interpretations of scriptur from them resauing as it ver
licht at such as did live in aages narrest Christ Jesus and his Apostles vho var
the licht of the vorld: for (as sayit Sanct Augustine in his 2. Book agans
Julian the Pelagian and in the epilog tharof) these blasing stars and illustre
lamps of the church ar to be estemit vnsuspect Iuges in yat thai never kneu any
of the parteis contending and so thai be undoubtedly voyid of all fead or favor
and irrepresensibill for any suspicion of partiality. Then if I can evidently
prove by Ecclesiastique annalles and ancient Doctors yat in every age (yat is
to say eury hundredth year) sen the nativity of Christ our master the principal
Doctors and counsalls have been of the self same opinion in matters this day
controuerted yat the Catholics Roman be of presently, and yat thai vho have
abandonnit or renuncit the said Roman church of Vhatsoeuer sect thai be sall
never be-habill to produce any one counsall or Doctor no not any one man of
Good lyif and lerning trou^hout all ages preceding yat in all points of doctrine
hes said as thai nou say: For before Io. Huss vas never one in all points of his
opinion: before Luther none absolutely a Lutheran: Before Hessusius, Mela^chton
and interimmists vas never one altogidder vbiquitar or semilutheran as Bischop
Lindamus callis tham, and before Zuinglius, Aecolampadius and Io. Calvin vas
never one in all respects Aecolampadian, Zuinglian, or Caluinist: and morouer
if I can prove the modern nouators to have no other authors and exempills of
their erronius opinionsibot such as have been trouchout all ages condemnit
Hereretiques, it must be a matter indeniabill yat Catholiqus Roman be better
foundit nor the said nouators. For probation heirof.

Vee find in the first age the first vrittars vz. the Evangelists and Apostles,
to confirm the chief point controuerted to vit of the real presence. as by
Sa^ct Luc 22. Sanct Marc 14. saying this is my body. and by Sa^ct Io 6. saying
except you eat the flesch of the sone of man and drink his blood you sall not
have lyif and by Sanct Paul 1. Cor. 11. saying in expres vordes yat they vho
eat of this bread and drink of this coop vnuortely thai be gilty not of bread
or vine bot of the body and blood of Cryist Jesus: Vharby is most evidently
signifeit a drinking and eatig not of the material elements bot of the
mystical aliment of Chrysts body and blood.

^yk as other vrittars of the same age hes left us ^e Liturgy or hoill service
of the mess, vith the self same ceremoneis and traditions yat the Roman church
does this day use confirming also unto us the consecration and dedication of
tempills, voluntar poverty, voues of chastity, aponting of certane time for
fasting and penitence, the use of the cross and sign tharof, martyrdom to be
of Great merit vith the primacy of Sanct Peter. All vhilk doctrine partly in
Ignatius Linus, Polycarpus, Philo Iudaeus, partly in Clemens Romanus and in
Dyonisius Areopagita auditors of the said Apostles is extant and evident. and
in this goldin age feu Hereseis being yet spru^g up and the Apostles being more
ttublit vith Ieuis and infidels nor vith Heretics ve reid of no counsall bot
of yat original counsall haldin at Jerusalem vharin the Judaism vas co^demnit:
Yet in the same counsall vho vill indifferently considder it he sall persaue
the same form of counsall this day obseruit in the Roman church toggider vith
the primacy of Sanct Peter manifestly confirmit in yat the said S. Peter as
Chancellor and President of yat synod did first ryis up and brek the matter unto
the rest schauing hou God had chosin or thocht Good yat by his mouth the
Gentiles should hear and belief the Euangell. And Albeit (as fayit Egesippus) the
church at yat time vas as one indefylit virgin yet their did ryis up in the
flour of her virginisit desbauchit men going about to deflor her: and these var
the first Heretics to vit Theobutes, Simon Magus, Menander, allexander
aerarius and Hymeneus, vhose first heresy vas a defectio^ or a schismatic
separation from the Apostles: and unto such schismatic thai must neadis be
successors vho in this age separat tham self from the society of yat church
vhilk allone of all other can produce attentik evident of Apostolic
succession.

In the second age ch^if Ecclesiastique vrittars var Justinius Martyr, Irenaeus,
Egesippus, Tertullianus, Victor Papa, Aquila Po^ticus, Dyonisius Corinthius:
and these douted no thing of freeuill, of transsubstantiation, prayers for the
dead, purgatory, the crism and other ceremoneis of baptism, difference of
meatts, of lent and of the sacrifice of the mess Lyik as the five celebre
covnsalls of yat age assemblit agans the tessaresdecades or quatuordecima^s and
other Heretics did confirm the same doctrine preceding, euin as the Roman
church dois this day. bot her enemis, the Trinitars, Anaptists, etc. denying
yat Christ is Deus de Deo and ex substantia Patris sed de Patre and Scorning yat
part of the Symboll of Athanasius calling it a battalogy or a superfluus idill
repetition vhar it is said Deus de Deo lumen de lumine, Deus verus de Deo vero,
so doing thai have lernit yat lesson at the scooll of Valentinus, and the
Caluinists taking upon tha^ special knouleg and revelation of the verity h^d
from ages preceding tham thai follou Basilides and Carpocrates, and disputing
by Philosophique and natural reason in matters of faith as they do in the
matter of tra^ssubantiatio^ thai be successors to Marcion and Heracleus and to
their colleges co^demnit Heretics in the said second age.

In the third age or hundredth year partly the 13. celebre counsalls partly the
famus vrittars as Clemens All exandrinus, Speking of Origenes and Tert^ll. I
rekkin tha^ ama^g famus vritars so far as that consent vith other doctors not
vher as thai follou their ou^n pr^uat opinions.
Origenes, Gregorius Neocesarie^sis, Tryphon, Dyonisius and Eusebius
Alexandrinus, Cyrillus Antiochenus. Atnobius the Master of Lactantius. These
heir and their descryue the mess to be a sacrifice and to contene the treu body
of Christ, baptism to confer grace repeting the unction and ceremoneis rharof:
tha^ affirm Purgatory, tha^ call confirmation and matrimony Sacraments, thai
allou the primacy of Sanct Peter, Images, lent, freeuill, difference of meatts,
merit of Good vorks, prayer to Sancts and Apostolic indulgence, euin as the
Roman church this day doit: bot the Nouathors of this age pretending a
particular inspiratio^ of the holy spreit repugning to the church they Imitat
the Nouatians vho vanly oste^ting their self of ancimaginar puritiever callit
cathari euin as su^ this day be callit purita^s. In displacing ordinary prelates
and Pastors out of their places and usurping the same by violence that follou
Paulus Samosetanus vho by the mycht of queen Zenobaea did expel Demetrus
laufull bischop of Antioch and did intruss him self tharin: In bragging yat yat
the treu church is vyth tham and not vhar the evident Apostolic succession is
seen to be tha^ be lyik unto the Donausts vho gesting at Apostolic succession
did alleg the treu church only to be vith tham in Afrique: In denying freeuill
and all pouer to do any thing tharby, as if ve ver sto^s and stoks and no
living men, and gloring in peculiar illuminations and pretending ane assurance
of a licht and leading of the holy spreit more nor any church had be for tham
thai becum Manichea^s vho defending the self same opinions ver convict of
damnabill Heresy.

Of the fourt age the counsalls and notabill vritars to vit Sanct Ambros,
Athanasius, Lacta^tius, Epiphanius, Damasus, Gregorius Nazianzenus, Basilius,
Eusebius Cesarie^sis, Hieronymus, Hilarious, Palladius and Optatus: all these
heir and their do yet more clearly co^firm the points preceding as the Roman
church nou doit: bot the nouators dissenting from her and dispossessing her of
her digniteis thai becum lyk the Myletians in Egypt vho scorning to follou the
church planted their by The Apostle Sanct Marc vold neads intruse their self
vithout all laufull vocation) and lyik unto lucius yat thrust him self in the
chair of Alexandria obiecting many ska^dalus imputations agans the ordinary
Pastor of yat place, euin as did all the Arrians of yat age. Finally thai becum
lyk Eunomius vith his sect callit anomi (Vhilk is to say laules) in yat thai
contem ancient ordinary calling pretending a justification by faith only and a
peculiar knouleg of God and of his verity more nor any other of a long time
hes had or presently hes: and in dispysing Ecclesiastique ceremoneis and
ornaments in veschels, vestiments and suchlyik commendabill decoration of diuyn
service thai becu^ vnuars lyk Julian, Heron, Felix, Elpidius and other Aposlats
of yat age.

In the fyst age the 32. famus counsalls tharof and notable vrittars to vit
Theodoritus, Orosius, Gelasius, Prosper, Socrates, Sozomenus, Sedulius.
Hilarilius Arelatensis, Petrus Chrysologus bot specially S. Augustine and
Chrysostom be most strong propugnators of all traditions this day vsit in the
Roman church, and the enemis tharof conforting and sustening Schismatiques be
lyk the opulent Lucilla of Aphrique vho by her substance bair out the schism of
Donatus: thai resemble the Pelagiens of yat age and the Peterbrusians and
Henricians of ages follouing vho denyit baptism to confer any grace specially
unto childring laking faith: Thai follou Faustus and Xenaias vith such
Eutycheans contemning beautiful temples, altars, incens, lycht torches and
church ornaments. Finally they be co^form to the enthysiastes vho affirmit thai
ver so ininfla^mit and fulfillit vyth the holly spreit as only their
interpretations and decisions in Religion vas to be embracit and no other.

In the Saxt age the 41 famus counsalls tharof vyth the holy vrittars to vit,
Fulge^tius, Symmachus Po^tifex, Euodius, Gregorius Magnus Euagrius, Victor
Vticensis, Nicephorus in express vords defend all yat is condemnit so partially
in the Roman church: and the said counsalls and Doctors condemning the
Enthousiasm of the Eutycheans, Manicheans, Montanistis, Monothelites and
agnoits vith sindry vthers do in effect condem the revelations and se creit
inspiration yat men separating tham self from the church presum this day to
have. In the seuint age and all vthers succeding unto this age all cou^salls
and Doctors of the church in eury one of tham thai do so particulary debat the
sentence of the church Roman and defait the contrary vat her enemis think
them all partial and suspect, and if at any time they cite or alleg passages
out of the said Doctors and counsalls for co^firming their errors it is not to
be thocht strange. For so thai do cite passages of holy scriptur as all
Heretics have done from the beginning bot their citations be either manq^e and
mutilat or^lls throuin and vitiat. and vho vold exem if heirin I have treuly
allegit the names and authorite of Doctors and counsalls let him reid these
goldin centureis of the most Illustre Cardinal Baronnius the orname^t of this
age, or if perhaps these seam to tedius let him peruse that of Genebrardus
callit notae Chronicae, or if all these be suspect be reason the authors tharof
be Catholic Roman, I am content to be censurit by their auin centuries
cailit centurriae Magdeburge^ses euin theiss yat be prented at Hedelberg or
Basle.

Bot if nether the distinction betuix person and places, nor the authority of
counsalls and Doctors can content us let us yet be content vith experience the
scoollmaster of foolles: by vhilk experience vee sall find yat all
controuerseis vhilk hes from the Apostles dayis fallin out tuiching Religion
have been decydit by the authorite of the Roman church. For in the second age
the question of the celebration of easter vas defynit by Pope Victor. In the
third age the detestable Heresy of Nouatus vas condemnit by authority of Pope
Cornelius. In the fonrt age Pope Syluester did condemn Arrius and in yat same
age Pope Damasus condemnit the Macedonia^s In the 5. and. 6. age vho bot the
Roman bischops did extinguis the Hereseis of Nestorians, Eutychaeans,
Pelagians and Sindry others, and unto these dayis from the Apostles no other
church hes presumit to conuocat any Oicumenique counsall for citing, examing or
conde^ning any Heresy or Heretic: if so be vby should ve so obstinatly oppone
our self unto such laudabill consuetud confirmit by all Ecclesiastique
historians and Doctors boyth Grec and Latin. specially in yat the Roman
Emprors have remittit all controuerseis in religion to the determination of the
Roman church: Vharin if any man sall dout let him reid Eusebius. 7. book chap. 26.
Gratian the Empror in his Epistle to the bischop of Aquileia in Italy, Theodos:
the younger in his epistle to the Synod of Ephesians. Athanasius in his Epistle to
tham yat leadit a solitar lyif Basilius in his 31. Epistle. Tertullian in his
book of prescriptions. Sanct Ambrose 32. Epistle, Sanct Ierosm in his Epistle
to Damasus Sanct Augustine agans ^resconius Donatist chap. 33. Bot Ireneus as
most ancient so spekit he most evidently of this matter in his 3. book 3. chap.
saying. Vee convict and condem all such as for lak of understanding, for
curiosite, for malice, for vane gloir or greid gather or conioyn their self
aga^s the gretest and most ancient church constitut at Rome knouin unto eury
man to have been soundit by the tuo most glorius Apostles Peter and Paul: For
unto her be reason of her principal pouer it is necessar yat all other church
should conuene or obey and S. Cyprian in his first book. 3. chap. vritting unto
Pope Cornelius sayit in this sort. Suirly Hereseis and schisms have not
procedit elsuhar bot for yat men did not obey the priest of God and for yat ve
vill not admit vithin the church of God a Priest or Sacrificator to be Judge as
Crystis vicegerent or Lieutenant, unto vhom if ve should as ve be commandit yield
and obtemper no man should move or attemp any matter agans the college of Priests
or Prelates.

Bot Inuane do I allege the exe^ples and authoriteis of Catholic Orthodox in
this matter (seeing their hes been none of tha^ Sen the Apostles dayis yat hes
not referrit matters in religion controuerted unto the determination of the
Roman church:) because not only thai bot euin the verey Heretics have so done
if ve sall trest credibill historeis. For vee reid yat Eusebius bischop of
Constantinople tho he vas ane Arrian he did notuythsta^ding send to Julius
bischop of Rome requiring the said Julius to be Judge betuix him and Athanasius:
and not only the said Eusebius bot also the hoill Synod of Arrian bischops
assemblit vyth him at Anthioche desyrit their Acts and decrees to be ratifeit
by the said Pope Julius. Sanct Cyprian also makir mention yat Fortunatus ane
bischop establissit by Heretics and Basilides ane Heretic did
boythnotuithstanding appell unto the seat of Rome, and Peter habailardus for
all his heresy did the same in the dayis of Sanct Bernard: Sanct Augustine also
in his 2. book of original sin chap. 7. does affirm yat the Archi Heretic
Celestius durst not disobey the lettres or citatio^s of Pope Innocentius. and
Berengarius archidean of Angiers did submit him self to Pope Victor the 2. and
unto Stephanus the 9. and so did Martin Luther once unto Pope Leo the 10. Unto
vhom the said Luther did submissiuly vrit these vords. Most blessed Pope Leo, I
do offer myself prostrar before thy feat vith all yat I am and have: quicken or
kill: call or reuok: approve or disapproue as plesit you: I sall hencefurth
agknouleg thy voice to be the voice of Christ presiding and speking in the
albeit this humiliation of the said Martin Lested no Longer nor that of
celestius forsaid.

Bot heir if you sall say ^at the ancients as veill heretics as Orthodox had
Good reason to re^dre such honor and preferme^t (as holiness and verteu did veill
deserve) unto the ancient bischops of ROme preceding the fourt age bot
tharefter the bis chops succeding only to the dignity and not to the doctrine,
to the place and not to the precede^t piety, their ca^ be no reso^ to
agknouleg them as their predecessors did veill mereit to be agknou legit.
Heirunto I anssr yat the same doctrine is yet techit in the Roman church yat
vas techit in the primityue church if ve vouchaf to call the articles of faith
and tuo Testaments the self same doctrine. Vharin tho thai sea^ to us (yat be
bot a feu members) to pervert the said doctrine by eiking or pari^g, or
interpreting the same sinister ly, or yat their manners be dissolut and
damnabill, vhat reason have ve being bot a feu to condem the hoill the cause yet
depending and the question yet vndecydit? Should vee dispyis our Prince at all
times vhen vee think yat he either denyis, delayis, or peruertys Justice? or
should vee aba^do^ our Pastors hou sone their doctrine and lyif apperit unto us
reprehensibill? suirlie if this be permittit boyth piety and policy may tak
their leif. Such inutill animositie should be aluay auoydit and such curious
branes should be vsit and gouernit lyk febricita^ts: For as thai yat have the
ague vhenas their heart is brint Up vyth the extraordinar flam of the feure and
their branes oppressed by the v^hementnes thairof, their taist and all their
senses lossit incontinent their rycht operation all meat and Medicin seaming
unto tham bittir and disagreable housoeuer thai be sueit or salutar of their
auin nature: For vhilk cause the guard or kepars of such febricitants does
minister unto them not after the Idill consait of the seik persons bot after
the prudent aduys of the Physician: Euin so heady hoit felouis having their
heart and harnes inflammit vyth the fyir either of vanegloir, malice, curiosity,
avarice, (yea sum time having boyth heart and head oppressed vyth no other
diseasse bot vith mere folly and ignorance) thai ca^ think, spek, nor pronunce
no thing bot Idill inuectyue vords full of the flams of contumely and sklander:
Bot hou sone this burning ague of heresy fall leif them and yat their malice
sall be turnit in the modesty of the ancient fathers then sall thai begin to
think and spek of the Pope and Prelates of this age euin as the said ancie^ts
did of other Pops heirtofor: yat is to say vhenas thai sall be inspyrit vyth
the Good spreit yat did govern S. August. S. Bernard, S. Hiero^ vho did so much
honor Anastasius, Honorius and Damasus: then sall thai not be aschamit to
render the lyk honor to his holiness yat sitter this day in the same place (for
piety and Justice comparabill if not preferabill to any of his predecessors:)
Bot so long as their Eyis be obscurit vyth Schismatic blyndnes no marvel
tho thai nether see the lycht nor the Schyning lamps of God: For vhar the Ee is
vickit all the body is dark. In one thing notvithstanding boyth the Pope and
Prelates may reioys yat in suffering such reprochis thai suffer vyth the
Apostles vheras their aduersars sall find no exempill of their insolent
inuectio^s bot in lannes and Iambres yat did blasphem Moses: in festus vho
allegit Sanct Paul to be mad: in these yat said the Apostles ver dronk vith neu
vynes and in these yat disdanfully callit Christ Jesus a carpe^tar and a
carpentars some.

Thridly if the laudabill practique and co^suetud of the church ratifeit by
atte^tik testimoneis of Historia^s, Doctors, Emprors, ca^ not move us to a
mediocritie nor to use ane remeid approuit by so famus vitnes. Let us yet
patiently considder vhat the holy Prophets of God did in the lyik caiss vhenas
thai persauit the impiety and insole^ce of the Hebreu priests boyth in doctrine
and manners. did the said prophreits dispyise the holy preisthoid for the
vnholines of the priests or the Mosaicall dignity and offices divine for the
detestabill vices of the Doctors? did thai abandon the tempill of God for the
ungodliness of men aponted to govern the same? did thai intruse their self in
the possessions and places of the preistes? did thai seditiusly drau the
ignorant peapill in sects, schisms, monopols and factio^s erecting a Samaria
agans a Jerusalem and alter aga^s alter? No No: thai did Prophesy vithin the
tempill affixing their Propheseis upon the ports tharof: thai var contentit to
live poorly and frugally upon their auin not brigging or ambitiusly aspyring to
the places and possessions of the parteis vhom thai reprehendit: yea thai
abhorrit so much all factions as thai chusit rather vithin the tempill amang
the priests and Princes of Iudaea to suffer all torments nor amang the
schimaticall and factius vithout the tempill to live at their pleasure delyuerit
of all danger. Vhilk constant patience and exemplar moderation vee reid to have
been in Amos vho vas killed by Amasias hie priest: in Easaia vho vas sauin in
tuo by Manasse king of Judah: in Ieremia vho by the Iudaique peapill vas stonit
to death: in Ezechiell vho in Babylon amang the Ieuis vas murtherit: in Michaeas
vho by Ioram in Iudaea vas throuin headlong over ane precipice and in Zacharia
vho vas murtherit besyd the altar vithin the tempill.

Last of all if vee vill nether follou the exe^ple of the Prophets nor no
laudabill consuetud preceding let us at lest marque veill that allegorical
navigations of the Apostles being imbarquit vith Christ Jesus at that time vhe^
the storm and tempest did so tossed and torment their bark and it may be perhaps
yat their beauior in yat material navigations in a material barque may
mollify our stif hartis and move us to lern by them hou to behave our selfs
in this mystical navigations vithin the mystical barque of the church. The
said Apostles being imbarquit in Maneir forsaid seeing the fearful image of
death in the extraordinar tempest thai var ouertakin vith extraordinar fear: Yet
so long as their apperitvnto tham any hoip of sautie thai kepit silence and
vold not presum to auaik their lord and master much les to tak on and trubill
him or the ordinary Pilolts or Marinells: bot finding at lenth the schip all
most sittin doum and sonk then thai came to auaik him not disdanfully bot
deutifullie, not rigoruslie bot reuere^tlie saying Lord or Master save us, vee
peris. Vho vold be callit follouars of the Apostles hou can thai refuse to
follou their exemple in this navigations. ar thai inbarquit vithin the schip of
the church? find thai her tosted to and fro by impetuus vaues and vynds of
vices boyth in doctrine and manners? see thai her ready to peris by rigor of the
said tempest and Christ Jesus a sleap in his Vicars or Vicegerents vho suelling
in sensualiteis and lying dead dronk vith all delicatnes can not auaik call,
cry and pull as you list: In such disastre or danger thai should not tak on and
truble the hoill estat of the church: thai should not vith veapins and by maneir
of vindication go and steir up persons imbarquit vyth tham by civil varris and
schisms attempting to discredit and degraid the said vicepilotts: bot in all
humility follouing the forsaid exemple thai should rin unto Christ the chief
pilot and steirsman for his saik respecting such as he hes respected and
honorit vith his Lieutenantry and unto him yat hes no les pouer vithin the
mystical bark of the church nor he had in the material forsaid thai should vith
all respect and reverence pour out their complants saying lord save us vee
peris: Aua^k lord in these unto vhom you have committed your deputation in
governing the distressit bark of your church: Let the sueit found of your breath
blau auay from their slummering eyis this deadly Lasines to the end that thai
being once valkinnit they may command the vynds and vauis of all concupiscence,
sklander and ill exemple boyth in their self and vthers to ceass vhat by after
so desperate dangers men seeing a desyrit tranquillity may marvel, and magnify
God and say: Vho is this unto vhose ministerial members boyth vynd and sea
does obey. Suitly for my mean opinion this var the only mean to quiet the
church: for experience may tech us yat all other turbullent courses vhilk
factius men daily use by vritting, declaming and inuading one ane other by
slycht and mycht be bot so many bellisses making this fyir of discord burn the
more furins^ie.

Be co^te^tit the^ my dearty belouit kins foll^ and cu^trey men vith the
Prophets and Apostles to Remane vithin the te^pill and barque of the church
notuythstanding any naughtines yat can be in priests or pilotts, Lest yat
separati^g our self yarfra as did Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, Simon Magus,
Theobutus, Allexander the copper smyth and Hymenaeus vyth sindry vthers you
boyth merit and incur the infamy and unhappy end vhilk fell unto tham.

And heir the laudabill exemple of Constantin the great sall not be impertinent
to be reme^brit: unto vhom vhenas sum mutinars did present infamus libelles
agans their ordinary bischops he not only causit burn the said sklanderus
libelles bot also ansuerit in this sort to the presentars saying yat in
spiritual things he vas to obey his Pastors and not to be obeyit and yat he
thocht it so vnseaming in him or in any of the flok to spy out curiusly the
lyif of their Pastor as if he should chanse to see any of tham commit any foull
off ens yat he vold cover the same vyth his Clok lest the eyis of vthers should
be offendit tharuith.

Vold God yat this Christian modesty of Co^stantin the Great var this day
obseruit: vold to God at lest yat Innocents allone should presum to throu the
first stone agans malefactors* if so var undoubtedly such as be most prompt to
pique and spek agans vhers should abstene from their ordinary inuectio^s knouing
first their self not to be altogidder irreprehensibill and syne yat in the
church yair had ever been chaf vyth the corn, dregs vyth the vine and much
refuse and ofskourings about mettels yat be most fine. Vas their not in the
family of Abraham ane Ismael? in the family of Isaac ane Esau? in the family
of David ane Absolon? vith Moses Miriam and vith Elizee ane Gehazi? Vas not
one of the tuelf Apostles a Judas? and vhen their vas bot eight persons in the
church vas not one of tham a Cham? and vhen sche had bot four childring vas not
one of tham a Cain? and consisting bot of tuo persons in Paradis, did not the
one tempt the other to incredulity and disobedience? Vhat Marvel then if
amangs 236. Popes and amang millios of Prelattes and professed religius men
their be found a Judas, a Cain, a Cham, a Ismael etc. For vhose preuarication
or peruersitnes if vee should abandon the Roman church, vhy should vee not by the
lyik reason abando^ and abjure the churchis impugning her in vhilk their be
also for all their small number a great deall of tairres, goats, scabbit scheip
and debauschit childring vhilk daily for licht faltes be fynit and forcit to
sit on the stuill of repentance, and for greter crimes be censurit by their
spiritual suord of excommunication yea sumtyme vyth the temporal suord of the
Judge criminal. bot heir I both pity and spair tham by myself of all men most
fragill knouing humane fragilitie, vissing nottheles yat fering to be Iugit
after the counsall of the Euangell ve should not raschly Judge and yat vee should
first tak the beam out of our auin Ee before vee persaue a moit in our nychtbors
understanding yat thai be most ready to raill and reprehe^d vho be most
reprehensibill: Vharof vee have manifest exemples in Achab agans Eliah, in the false Iuges aga^s Susanna, in Sedechia the sone of Chanaana aga^s Micheas and in
the vyf of Putiphar agans Joseph.

Bot to the end this Paraenese exceid not the number of sum feu scheittes of
paper (as I did determine) for conclusion I submit my self to the indifferent
readar to considder vhat grounds I have had to render, or rether vhat grounds
heir be set down to persuad him to render and captiuat his auin private sens
unto the obedience of the Catholic, Apostolic church Roman not because sche
is Roman bot because of all Christian churchis conte^ding for the glorius name
of the treu church sche allome may vyth Good reason gloir in the treu marquis
tharof as heirtofor I believe be sufficiently prouin. And yet to be callit
Roman is no small preferment seeing yat epithet allone does contene boyth
universality, antiquity, unity and puriti^ Apostolic. For in yat the
Apostle vritting to the Romans does extol tham saying their faith vas
annunciat or prechit throuchout the hoill vorld he does first by these vords
signify the antiquity and origin of their church to have been in his dayis a
1602 Years ago: nixt by these vords the vniuersal^re tharof is manifested in
yat he sayit their faith vas preschit eury vhar: Last is descryuit the unity
tharof and purity Apostolic in yat by a certane emphase or exaltation he
vouchafit to call the universal faith to be their faith. For this cause sayis
S. Augustine in his 162. epistle yat is vas not vithout Good reason vhy such
prerogative lies ever been geuin to the roman church more nor to any other
laking the dignity of the chief Apostolic chair. For sayis he the churchis
planted by all other Apostles have maid defection, only this Rome holy and
Apostolic, mother and nource unto all other churchis by supernatural grace
of God did never declyn from the purity Apostolic nor defyill her self vyth
Heretical nouelteis bot did constantly observe the self same roull vhilk sche
at the beginning resauit of the tuo principal Apostles Peter and Paull. Lo
(sayis he) the church of Jerusalem var Sanct James, the church of Achaia vhar
Sanct Andro, the church of Asie vhar Sanct Iohne, the church of Persis vhar
Sanct Iud brother to James, the church of India vhar Sanct Thomas, the church
of Aethiopia vhar Sanct Matheu, the church of Phrygia vhar Sanct Philip the
church of Grecia vhar Sanct Paul did prech, have all declynit: only the Roman
church is yat church (as also sayit Sanct Cyprian. lib. 1. 3. Epictle) vhilk
never maid defection and in vhilk no perfidie nor infidelity culd have place:
vharunto agreit veill yat of Sanct Hierom saying in this sort. be assurit
(sayis he) the Roman church being so highly commendit by the Apostle S. Paul
can resaue no neu illusions albeit ane Angel should annunce the same: For vhat
sche hes found sche hes follouit, vhat sche learnit sches hes taught, vhat sche
hes resauit from her fathers sche hes faythfullie renprit unto her childring.

O Ancient City! o City so much commendit by the voice of the Apostle and by
commun elogies of all Apostolic me^! o City throuch thy force sumty me lady
over all other Citeis and Seignoureis, nou throuch thy faith far surmonting the
praise yat any man's pen can give unto the! should I be aschamit (I the ofscurings
of my futhers house, the horror of my auld acqnentance, the vofull husband and
father of ane hartbrokin vyf and family: Finally the ludibry or lauching stok
of fortoun) should I (I say) so vnuorthy a vorm be aschamit to intre vithin the
Azil of thy blessed sanctuary? Should I disdane to lik up the crommes yat fallit
from thy tabill (I anc forlorn child, a publican, a harlott yat hes not had the
honor to inter vythin thy vyneyard before the aleui^t hour) No No I will not be
aschamit bot I will go and labor tho I have often and obstinatly refusit lyk him
mentionat in the 21. of Math. Euangell: I will no more vressill agans the Good
Angel of God seeing my loyin is already out of ioyint. I will no more presum
vith Cham to uncover the schame of my father: I will not hyid my self any more
vith Adam from the voice of the lord, I will not any more vith Jonas flee unto
tharsis from his presence. Finally I will not any more seik Christ in corners
bot in his church situat upon the top of a montane knauing yat as he is the
corner stone of all verity so sche is the pillar of the same verity vhilk
louit the lycht and can not abyid to be schoot up in corners seeing such only
hait the lycht as by doing ill fear to have the verity pronuncit. So the treu
church vharsoeuer sche be, is estemit not only to be in the lycht bot to be as
a clear lantern giving lycht to vthers because sche never ferit trial bot the
more sche be exemd the more sche is eminent: vheras heretical churchis be
aluay in darkness housoeuer thai sea^ galland or glorius because thai dar not
abyid lycht and trial of the treuth. Inioying this lycht I had rether be a
doorkeaper vithin her courts nor to reign vythin the tabernacle of her enemis.

Tharfor I will nou return unto my fathers house to eat of his falt calf
lamenting vyth my heart yat I have so long and so vnthriftely vaisted my fathers
substance in ane uncouth land vhar I culd find no food bot suaddes: I will nou
licht my candill, sueip my house and seik the penny that I have sleuthfully lost
to the end yat finding the same agane I may reioiss vyth my friends and
nychbors. Yea I sall be glaid to sell all yat I have to enjoy this pretieux
stone and inestimable field vharin lyit hid the tresor of my salvation.
Follouing her I can not Err or go astray and if I sall err I sall not at lest
err follouing my auin voice or the voice of any stranger bot I sall err vith
the most lernit, most holy, most ancient fathers, vyth the Patriarks Prophets,
and Apostles yea vith Christ Jesus him self vho is voyid of all error.

Then (My dearlybeleuit) be not aschamit vith me rather tymussie nor to lait to
chang these your altars of contradiction vith this ark of benediction and your
insolid partiality for this solid pillar of verity: ^or you knou not at vhat
vach the bryid grom^ sall cum, Nor vhen you sall be inuyted to the vedding, nor
vhen the theif sall inuad your cottage of clay vhilk you so pett and pamper:
You have then (and vee all have) great nead not only to vach and vard bot to be
veill armit vith the spiritual armure of this church mentionat in Sanct Paull:
vee had nead in time to licht our lamps at her lycht and to entreat her as our
dear mother for a vedding garment: lest being surprised and vnprouydit vee be
either hold or put out at the dreadful cu^ming of the great bryidgrome vhenas
heuin and earth sall be mouet and the vorld Iugit vith fyir.

O my dearly belouit if you vold deuly considder the danger you stand into in
Cossing the clear fontans of this holy church for trubled pittes of your auin
private Imaginations vhilk nether can hold nor keip sueit vatter. vharin lyk
Ada^ you Loss Ede^ for ane apill: Lyik Esau you Loss your birthrycht for a meas
of pottage and in one vord you loss Lycht for darkness and the pillar of verity
for a puddill of vanity. O if you vold vyth patience and reason ansuer and
declair unto me vharfor you have so vnkyndlie separated your self from a
society so much extollit by the Apostle and all venerable a^tiquitie: yea such
a society as euide^tlye is markit vith all the signs of the treu church. In
doing vharof do you not persaue hou you condem as infidells and teprobats all
yat hes precedit you, sib and fremd, friend and fo, lernit and vnlernit, holy
and profane Good and bad: For if your faith and profession be Good and the
only vay to salvation: then all yat before your age be dead must be in danger of
damnation because thai deit in a contrary profession.

Agane if I should let it pas yat you had just cause to abandon the Roman church,
yet vold I at lest understand of the vharfor you art mouit rather to follou
more one of the sects abandoning her nor ane other? in respect all sects
impugning her be thai Lutherans, Semilutherans, Antilutherans, thai all pretend
equal assurance of the holy spreit and produce varrands out of the vord of God
eury one of tham contesting yat sche is the treu church. Heirunto if thou sall
say yat thou lyikit best sum one or other of the sects descending from
Bernardus Rotmannus father of the Anabaptists vhilk be in number 13. or yat
thou lyikit more sum fraternity of the Homologistes or Protestants descending
from Melanchton vhilk be in number 32. or yat thy mind be most of all upon sum
society of the Sacramentars descending from Carolostadius, Zuinglius and Io.
Calvin vhilk be in number 8. all of one surce or sead to vit of Martin Luther,
and all vnknouin to the vorld bot so much as thai have been seen sen the year
of our lord 1517. if I say thou vill alleg and affirm yat thou hes chosin sum
one or other of these sects as yat vhilk in thy opinion or iugment seamit unto
the most agreeable and consonant unto the verity: then mark I pray the thy
dangerus presumption in establissing thy priu at opinion to be the reull of thy
faith, usurping unto thy self vhilk you vill not give nether unto Doctor,
cou^sall, nor hoill church because in thy opinion they may all err and as if you
culdst not err at all and this follouing thy private fantasy vithout
resipiscence, you fallis in the damnabill error of ancient heretics.

Bot if I should grant unto the yat it is lesum to follou in matters of faith
such as se amit to the most consonant unto the verity: yet let me once demand
if you can produce unto me any one man of all ages preceding yat in all
points did follou and affirm yat sam form of verity vhilk thou dois affirm and
follou? Heir thou must have recours only unto thy coryphe or author of thy sect
for before him such nouelteis all in one person var not hard of. if so be, vhat
arrogance, vhat ignorance, vhat impude^ce to quyit and condem the universal
ancient doctrine of the hoill body of the church ever sen the ascension of our
lord and master unto this day for a particular recent doctrine of sum feu
infected members tharof start up allanerly sen the defection of Martin Luther:
Dare you affirm yat so many Chaste Virgins preceding the, so many constant
confessors, so many famus Doctors, so many glorius Martyrs vho have by their
incredibill holiness, vo^derfull miracles, and precieus blood planted, vatt erit
and propagat the church of God, dare you (I say) affirm tham all to have been
bot ignorant idolators having no greter reason for the bot because you and the
author of thy sect vndersta^dit better the sens of scriptur nor ever any of
tham did: as if thy spreit (vhilk you imaginis to be the spreit of God and
tharfor vill not submit it to any man's spreit preceding the) var to be
preferrit unto our spreit vho diffyding in our auin Knouleg knouit vith Fear
after the counsall of the Apostle and does captiuat our spreitts and opinion
unto such ancients as vndoutely had the spreit of God in more abondan ce nor
thou can be thocht to have it till by thy vorks thou sall declair the lyik
pouer of the spreit to be in the yat vas in tham. O Christian Socrates vhois
chief knouleg vas to knou no thing! o Ethnique Christians vho pretend to knou
all things mote nor any present or preceding them. Ve knou notuithstanding yat
our foliss predecessor serching only to knou more nor did apertene unto him vas
depryuit of his original innocence and knouleg: vee knou yat seditiuse mariam
bragging to much yat sche had knouleg and the spreit of God as much as Moses
had her body vas strik in vith leprocy to make her understand yat such mad
apprehensio^s of knouleg var bot leproseis of the mind. Ve knou yat one of the
ancie^ts hes said yat knouleg vith sobriety is suir knouleg: Ve knou yat in
one place of scriptur it is said knou or understand vith fear, and in ane other
vho presumit to much of his knouleg knouit no thing at all, and in the third
yat their is better hoip of a verey fooll nor of one yat estemit him self to
knou much.

Vold thou then knou the incertenty of thy speculatyue knouleg, thou must go a
litill out from it. For as thai yat valk in a mist do not see it so veill as
thai yat stand upon a hill vyid from it: So fares it in discerning of our oune
knouleg vhose property is to bli^d tha^ that trust to much tharin, vharby thai
can not see the misery of their auin estat: For this lofty opinion of knouleg
euin as a Raven first of all pikit out the poor scheips eyis to the end sche
may not see the vay to escaip his tyra^nie: So it bereuit the of thy spiritual
sicht in such sort as you can not rychtly iuge^ betuix vanity and verity: It
bindit the in sueit bonds, rokkit the in a creddill of curiosity making the
sleap in cairles security: Matthew. 4.
it settit the upon the pinnacle of ambition scheuing unto the many digniteis
and making the tkink you art capable of vhatsoeuer thy heart can consait. it
presented unto the many fair and pretieux Clothes bot in no case may thou look
vithin the pieces or carry tha^ to be discernit vyth the licht: it had 400 falls
Prophets to flatter the as Achab had and to keap the from the hearing of
Micheas cou^sall (yat is from the church vhilk vold tell the the treuth) it had
a 1000. 3. King 22.
cunning fischars to give the fair bait bot all furnisit vith da^gerus hooks.
Apoc. 17.
It hes infinite stru^pets to offer the drink in gold in cooppes bot all
replenissit vith deadly poison. it lakit not at all occasions sum alluring
Iaell to tempt the vith the milk of a glorius mind, Iudic. 4.
bot all have hammers and nailles in their hands to murder the vhen you fallit
a sleep: it had in eury corner a flattring Ioab and falls Judas to kiss, to
kill and to betray the.

Finally it hes all arguments and allurments to cause the glorify thy self and
contem vthers: vold you then perfyitlie see thy auin infirmity in this behalf.
Then ascend up into sum montane vhar you may behald the foggy mist vhilk hes
replenissit these corners and dens vharin you hes so long duelt. Bot you vill
ask unto vhat montane I viss the to ascend: not unto the mo^tane of thy auin
imagination vharin Satan Goes about to make the bou unto him, vhilk in effect
you does vhenas thou extollit thy self to much: bot I viss the ascend unto the
montane vhar Christ is transfigurat or transsubstantiar yat is to say to the
montane of the church Catholic Apostolic Roman set upon the top of a
montane vhar you hes Moses and Helias, Peter, James and Iohne in their laufull
successors to talk and confer vith the: co^ferring vith tham thou salt lern
knouleg of laulines not of loftines, of submission not of presumption, of
confirmitie not of any faction or contradiction.

O yat you vold vith vnfenzit heart indelaitly ascend this montane and make all
the Sancts of heauin reioyfit at thy happy conversion! Luc. 15.
o yat you vold not grief the spreit of God offering unto the this fair
occasion! o that you vold lyik ane other Sanct Augustine or ane other Sanct Paul
change schism and sects for the society and felouschip vharin all thy most
nobill Princes of most vorthy memory, all thy dear antecessors, finally all men
and vemen of thy nation young and auld poor and rich did live and die from the
year of our lord 203. unto the year 1559. O yat you vold set forduart in this
course and say vyth yat old champion of Christ Jesus Sanct Hierosm: if my
father stood veping on his knees before me and my mother hanging on my nek
behind me, and all my brethring, sisters, childring and kinsfolk houling round
about to retene or hinder me from this happy resolution, I should fling of my
mother to the ground, dispyise all my kindred, rin over my father and tread him
under my feet tharby to run unto Christ vhen he callit on me. Beuar, beuat my
dearly belouit to give Christ Jesus occasion to say unto you as once he said
unto Jerusalem. Jerusalem Jerusalem hou often vold I have collected thy childring
as the he^ does her chickins under her vings bot you vold not, tharfor thy house
sall be left desolat. Beuar lyk the hoggish Gerasens to prefer your suyne yat
is to say your sluggish and lasie opinions unto Christ Jesus and his treu
church: beuar to excuse your self lyik theiss mentionat in the 14. of Luc.
saying you have bocht a ferm and yok of oxin or mareit a vyf as if any erdly
respect should serve for excuse being thus so freindly and effectually Inuyted.
So for conclusion I beseech vith vnfenzit heart the lord of lords in vhose hands
be the hearts of all men yat theiss my Homlie Indeuores may be red vith pity
and compassion in respect of my veaknes, resauir vith gratfulnes in respect of
my gooduill, and yat thai may produce effects agreeable unto the sincerity and
singilnes of my mind to the glory of God almychty and your eternal salvation.
Amen.

Soli Deo honor and gloria.
NOs subsignati diligenter legimus hunc tractatum lingua Scotica conscriptum
nuncupatum, a Paraenese or admonition of M. John. Coluille, etc. Et nihil in eo
reperimus Catholicae fidei aut bonis moribus contrarium: imo multa quae
vtilitatem non vulgarem, afferre poterunt legentibus. 2. Augusti. 1601.

Ita testor G. Bishope, Doctor Sorbonicus.

Et ego Ioa^nes Boseuile Bacchalaureus Parisiensis facultatis Theologicae.

Et ego Ioannes Fraserius Sacrae Theologiae Bacchalaureus.

Iacobus Cheyneius Ecclesiae Cathedralis Tornacen. Canonicus and
Paenitentiarius.

ERRATA.
Page 2. forty, for forty. page 5. scuh, for such. lerming, for lerning. page
10. chunch, for church. page 27. nooght, for nocht. page 33. ostend, for
ostent. page 36. all, for at all. page 46. ont, for out. page 50. chausit, for
chansit. page 51. ad, for and ibidem: such, for such ibidem. thain, for thai.
page 67. unto the note in the margin. page 69. eik theiss vords. (imputing also
iniustly many things, vhilk in effect thai not the Catholics do use. scotlad,
for scotlhand. page 71. this is body, for this is my body. page 90. in the last
line of the 96. p. for 250. 318. and after the vord bischops ad. of
constantinopill vharin did assist 150. bischops).


