THE DIFFERENCES OF THE AGES OF MAN'S Life: Together with the Original causes,
Progress, and End thereof.

Written by the learned HENRY CVFFE, sometime Fellow of Merton College in
Oxford.

Ann. Dom. 1600.

(...)

LONDON, Printed by Arnold Hatfield for Martin Clearke. 1607.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE and Noble Lord, ROBERT Lord Willughby, Beak, and
Eresby, in earth the ground, and in heaven the accomplishment of all true
happiness.
My very good Lord,
I Do (not unlike unto bank-rupt-debters) pay what I owe with another man's
purse. For which, notwithstanding I could plead prescription from beyond the
memory of man, and deduce presidents for excuse above the low flats of
necessity: The greatest do it; why not the meanest? For the actions of
superiors be rules of action unto inferiors, and virum magnum sequi est pene
sapere, as the world goes: yet this I dare profess unto your Honor, the
payment is in good and lawful money, as good as any that goes current with
Merchants; and if the trial be true, by touch or test, far beyond the
alloy of ordinary mintage. A coyner it had, whom Fame has reported (for my
self did never, de facie, know him) as skillful a Master in this trade, as
our shoppes have brought forth any. Who though he verified that ancient
byword, that (...) are (...), yet has he washed off from the walls of
Lycoeum, that black aspersion of Petronius; Ego arbitror adolescentulos in
scholis stultissimos fieri, quia nihil eorum quae in vsu habemus, aut audiunt,
aut vident. The work carries both parts of perfection: to Delight, and give
Profit. To Delight the affection with pleasing variety, and indow the mind
with excellent forms: which like the two handmaids of Queen Hester, should
sustain every passage of learning, though it come not to the presence of
royal Ahashuerosh. To Profit, by the matter discussed and cleared, which is,
in part, the knowledge of our selves, that which the Poet said, Came from
Heaven, a good means to effectuate that, which the Prophet desired; Teach me O
Lord to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto wisdom. To please in
profit, which it self is Content; and also in the manner wherein it is carried
very perspicuous, and in good method, for which cause I have not added any
marginall directions, to stand, as Mercuries statues, in highways of old,
pointing the finger unto consequents. It came unto my hands, vt e naufragio
tabula, and I return it to your Lordship as Lord of the soil whereon it was
cast. For unto your Honor I owe my self, both in respect of private service,
as also of that right-woorthy house, into which by marriage your Honor is
inserted, whereto I stand obliged in my best endeavors. You have it whole and
entire, as it came unto my hands, without any purloining or imbeazeling, a
sincere transcript from the first original, which I am informed was his own; I
durst not adventure, though happily I could, to add any thing at all unto
that table, in which Apelles pensill had been. Thus craving the continuance of
your Honorable respect, and acceptance of my tendered duty by proxey, until my
own means do enable my sufficiency, (which hitherto has been nipped in
the budde by the frosts of the night, or withered in the blade for want of
moisture) I thrice humbly take my leave, and rest your Honors

in all services, R. M.

The Preface.
THe learned Heraclite no less elegant than enigmaticall, among other his
quaint speeches, has this saying of special remembrance and observation: That
the greedy metal mongers, in their too eager search for the measured worlds
wealth, after long toil and trouble, find paruum in magno, a little pure
substance in a great deal of unprofitable earth. Contrarily it fares in the
inquisition and pursuit of learning, where we often find with a little
abstractiue speculation, magnum in paruo, much matter in few words, every short
golden sentence and particle thereof containing incredible store of most pure
substance. For as the cunning Cosmographers, draw the whole compass of the
wide World, into the narrow precincts of a small Map; so have our learned
Artists contracted the inconceivable amplitude of the Liberal Sciences, into
volumes of small quantity. But as gold, the purest of all metals, howsoever
couched in a little compass, is many times beaten out into a marvelous
amplitude; so the short Aphorisms of Philosophy, in the circuit of a small
period, comprehend substance sufficient to fill whole volumes. Which truth is
confirmed, or rather manifested by the present matter we entreat of, whereby,
as Pythagoras finding the print of Hercules his foot gessed thereby at the
proportion of his whole body; so we by the view of this so little and neglected
a piece of Philosophy, may gather what we are to think of the whole body
(that I may so speak) of learning. Which I observe the rather, because I see
many shallow headed artificers oftentimes condemn us of folly, that spend our
whole Life in the study of good Letters, and yet, (such is our gross conceit)
we never come to the requisite perfection of Knowledge. As if our Arts were
like the mechanical sciences of base Prentises, that may be thoroughly learned
in the compass of seven years. It was well said of one, Ars longa, vita
breuis, we have a great task, and a short time. I have read of some who in the
compass of three years have sailed about the world, but I never yet heard of
any who in the whole course of his life, how laboriously so ever passed over,
was able to compass the whole circle of Sciences. And therefore Theophrastes a
learned Philosopher lying on his death bed, accused Nature of unkindness or
rather want of discretion, that so inconsiderately does bestow the inestimable
benefit of long life upon brute beasts and sensible creatures, that can
neither acknowledge so high a favor, nor by their length of days benefit
themselves and others; but man that might in time restore decayed nature by
perfecting the imperfect arts, has his enduring but as a moment: implying
that the whole course of a man's life, was not time sufficient to work
perfection in. And therefore, well said Sigismunde the Emperor to a Doctor of
Law, whom for an excellent Stratagem against the enemy he had knighted not long
before, when at an assembly of his Peers and Counselors, the Doctor doubted
to whether company he might with greatest credit join himself, Is it
doubtful, said the Emperor, whether learning or military experience is more
honorable? I can in one day make a thousand good soldiers; but I am not able
in a thousand years to make one tolerable Doctor. So that it is no marvel
though Socrates, after his long time of life, yet on his death bed confessed he
had many things to learn. And me thinks these nimble witted tradesmen, do
not so much magnify their own quick conceit, as publish the facility of
their sciences. For as Apelles said well unto a Painter that bragged of his
speedy workmanship, when showing his picture he said, This I drew even now:
Surely, said Apelles, though thou had said nothing, yet should I easily have
guessed by the workmanship that it was done in haste. So may we well say to
these quicke-witted mechanical tradesmen, a man that has but a little insight
into their trade may well think their crafts are soon learned: and I rather
marvel, (as Apelles said) that they learned no more in the same quantity and
length of time. But it fares with their gross fantasy as it does with our
eie-sight in an unequal distance from the object: for as being far off we
conceive of the unmeasurable greatness of the most huge hills to be but as a
point: so the infinite excellencies of the heavenly Arts being too far
removed from their gross, or rather narrow capacity, come into their conceit
as things of less moment: which if their dim or rather weak eye sight were
able to behold in their divine nature, they would soon confess their
surpassing excellency, and exceeeding difficulty. But to leave them to their
pleasing opinions, and to come to our purpose, which is, in brief to handle
the differences of the Ages of Man's life, as also the causes thereof, together
with the incident qualities to every of them, which being in some sort
available to the knowledge of our selves, the highest point of knowledge which
can be attained unto, by the judgment of the wise Apollo, as also either
altogether omitted or very slightly handled by others, I hope my small pains
and less ability shall be accepted in good worth and accounted of, rather
according to the good intent of the author, than the worthiness of the work.
In which hope of acceptance for my good endeavors, and favorable pardon of my
manifold errors, I come without any longer Preface to the substance of the
Treatise.

THE DIFFERENCES of the Ages of man's Life: Together with the original causes,
progress, and end thereof.
Epitome of the whole world, Lord of the creatures, in regard of that perfect
analogy and resemblance between him and the great worlds frame, is not
unfitly by the Learned, both Divines and Philosophers, termed, The Lesser
world: for there is nothing in the vaste compass of this universal
circumference, whose likeness and lively representation we have not summarily
comprised in man, as in a most perfect compendium and abridgement. For as the
first-moued-sphere carries with its motion, the subject inferior circles; so
the servile vnderfaculties, as the sensual desire and appetite, are by nature
subdued to the dominion and guidance of the more principal and mistris-power
of the soul, which we call reason. And as in the midst of heaven there is
situated the Sun that enlightneth all things with his rays, and cherishes
the world, and the things therein contained with his life-keeping heat: so the
heart of man, the fountain of life and heat, has assigned to it by nature,
the middle part of our body for his habitation, from whence proceeds life and
heat, unto all the parts of the body, (as it were unto rivers) whereby they be
preserved and enabled to perform their natural and proper functions. But not
to be infinite in prosecuting the particulars of this well known comparison,
as in other things we see a perfect proportion, so also, beside the analogy we
may observe a mutual coexistence. For as the world at the beginning was
created for man, so with man it shall also be abolished: for it is an
undeniable principle in Philosophy, that God and Nature, or rather the God of
Nature neither effectually works, nor permissiuely suffers any thing, but
unto some good end. For being infinitely wise, nay wisdom it self, how can
we imagine so high a point of folly, resident in his Godhead, as to allow of
vanities, things so hateful, and so abhorring from all mediocrity of wisdom?
Wherefore man having a determinate date of endurance which he cannot pass,
the world also, which is only for man's use and service, must of necessity have
an end of being. Now because there is (as we said) a mutual coexistence of the
world and man, as the world is not but for man, so neither is man, but in and
by the world. For as in Navigations, those that are in the ship, have rest and
motion with the moving and cessation of the ship, so we that are tossed in the
rough sea of this world, in our voyage unto heaven our safest haven, when our
vessel of carriage once perishes, we also perish together. For as Aristotle
said truly, that whatsoever has being, has of necessity being in some place;
so from thence arises this necessary illation, that when there is once left no
place to be in, then shall there remain no longer being. So that intending to
show this truth as very pertinent to our purpose, viz. that man has an
appointed time of being, which he cannot pass, the Question of the worlds
eternity is fitly incident, especially, seeing, as is aforesaid, the world is
for man's sake, and man by means of the world.

question, for his satisfaction and resolution in that behalf, let him
consider, how necessarily upon the variation of our temperature (whence the
distinction of ages proceeds) a final destructition, by an vnperceiueable
lingering decay of purity in our substance, does depend. For as in the violent
motion of things natural, we see it comes to pass, that the virtue or power
of moving, imprinted by the unnatural mouer, by little and little decaying, at
length by continuance of moving, or rather by the resistance of the bodies
about it, is clean extinguished: So in the natural proceeding toward the
enemy and end of nature, death the preserving means of life (either by the
toilesomenesse of their neuer-ceasing operation, or by the corruption and
mixture of impure moisture, infecbled and disabled to the sufficient
performance of their functions, more and more every day) at length of force
yields to the oppressing violence of their resisting adversaries, not able any
longer to maintain their conquering action, so that the discussing of this
contronersie is very homogeneous to the series of this treatise. For till there
be granted an end of man's life, the mutation of the temperature by decay of
nature may well be doubted of, forasmuch as a successiuc impairing always
imports a final dissolution.

world, whether as it had a beginning, so it shall have an end, or rather
whether it ever had beginning, or shall have an end of being. Dionysius in his
book de Diuinis nominibus, distinguishes things that are, according to the
difference of their indurance; the distinction is after this sort. The whole
number of things, how many and diverse soever, may be summarily comprised under
these three several heads. There are some things, or rather there is one thing
Eternal, which neither had beginning nor shall have end, and such is God
alone, who only being immutable, subject to none, no not the least alteration,
is therefore only from everlasting to everlasting, for that cause termed in
holy writ, the Ancient of days: amongst the old Egyptians resembled to a
decrepit-old-man, and pourtraied like a youth in the prime of his flourishing
years: by that first Image signifying his long continuance from before, by the
second, his liveliness and immunity from all manerdefect and alteration by
cancred corrupting time. For as his power is infinite, extended not only to
all things in the world, but even unto things which are not: as first he made
all things of nothing, as his greatness is unmeasurable, not limited or
bounded by any place or compass, and therefore said to have his centrum
vbique, from which the essence of al things is drawn, as lines, and where they
end and are all conjoined, and his circumference no where: finally, as all his
attributes are infinite, and immeasurable, so is his continuance altogether
boundless. Wherefore not to enter at all into this inextricable Labyrinth of
Gods infinite continuance, let us proceed unto the next part of the
distinction. Beside God, who is only Eternal, there are other things in a
middle degree, termed by the modern Philosophers, Euiternall, having
beginning from God, the fountain of being, yet without end, either of
annihilation, or corruption; such are all spiritual creatures, Angels, and the
Souls of men. Where notwithstanding there is a doubt to be answered: For in
the whole History of the Creation recorded by Moses, we find no mention of
the making of Angels, nor any word of them till the narration of the Woman's
treacherous seduction by the devil in the serpent, so that either they were not
created, and so were from everlasting, or else, Moses his Chronicle is in this
point defective. But we may well answer, that they had a beginning, seeing
that eternity is Gods peculiar attribute, and the same, though inclusiuely,
expressed by Moses in his book of beginnings: for by Heaven is signified, not
only the body of heaven, but the things also therein contained. Now of the
indirect, and inclusiue mention made of these admirable creatures, there may
this reason be given: The men of those times being very superstitious, and
given unto Idolatry, (for the Egyptians even at that time worshipped the Sun,
and the hosts of heaven) Moses fearing to give new occasion to their false
will worship, of purpose refrained from express mentioning of their names, or
natures in his history. For if these bodily visible creatures, wrung from them
such divine worship, the Angels, by how much more excellent their nature is,
would have so much the more added new fuel to their begun fire of
superstition. Secondly, lest the detractory Nature of corrupted man, should
have ascribed some part of the glory of the worlds creation to those heavenly
creatures, the wise penman of this excellent story, of purpose concealed what
he knew either of their Creation or Nature: so that Moses his history is in
this regard not defective, howsoever giving no express notion of the creation
of Angels. Neither are the Angels, though most excellent creatures, void of
beginning, there being but one thing, which one made all things, of it self,
eternal. The third degree is of those things that had both beginning with
time, and shall have their end in time; such are all bodily creatures as well
simple as mixed, although touching the celestial bodies there be some doubt.

world, the question is, to which of these three kinds, it may and ought to be
referred. And I find three several opinions. The first is of them that make
the world eternal, wanting beginning, and incapeable of end. The second of
them that grant both beginning and end of being. There is a third sect that
parts these two opinions, affirming, that it had a beginning and shall have no
end. But lest we stick in the words, let us in one word or two, set down the
sense and meaning of the Question: and because that crror is the child of
confusion, distinguish the things doubtful, lest through the equivocation of
the words, by mistaking, we come unto a contrary sense. By the world therefore,
sometime is meant the whole compass of things that are, as well spiritual as
bodily, extended in this sense even unto God himself. Secondly it is taken for
all things, only God excepted, even the whole work of the Creation, excluding
no creature how excellent soever, no not the Angels. Thirdly it signifies
only the circuit of bodily Creatures, whether you interpret bodily things to
be such as have bodies as parts of them, or such as, though in regard of
composition have no bodies, yet have their being only in creatures bodily, as
those things which we call Accidents. For the first acception it concerns not
our purpose. For Nature it self excludes God from all kind of beginning, and
it is a principle both in reason, and in religion that God is from everlasting.
In the second sense we may take it, comprehending all things both spiritual
and bodily: for even the Angels as is before said, had their beginning by
creation: but we rather hold our selves unto the last signification, as being
most usually meant by those that handle this controversy. And this also
according to its threefold consideration, has three several acceptions? For
first it is taken for that Idaea and type preconceiued of the Maker God, by
which he was ruled and directed in the building thereof. And this is termed by
Plato, the Ideal or exemplary world, as it were the copy which God followed in
the creation: whereby if he understand Gods decree to create, we may without
error entertain it; otherwise it is somewhat harsh: for we are not to imagine
that God needs any long premeditate or foreconceiued type of his works, as
our finite artificers do, but as his wisdom, and power is infinite, so does
he, in an unutterable manner at the same moment, devise the manner and
perform the work, and yet, not rashly, but most wisely, and with great
deliberation. For as he said in another sense, so may I say in this case, One
day with God, is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day; length
of time adding nothing to his ability and wisdom, nor fewness of days, any
way detracting from the perfection of his workmanship. Secondly it is taken
for the university of things contained within the compass and cope of heaven
and earth, now really and actually subsisting; and this is called of Plato, the
world real, as having an actual and external being in Nature, not only in
conceit and intention. Thirdly man is called the lesser world, in regard of
that perfect analogy and similitude, betwixt him and this greater world,
wherein there is nothing whose likeness and resemblance may not be seen in
man: and this you may call the Analogicall world. Now by the world in our
question, we principally understand, the frame of all things in heaven and in
earth: less principally Man, as being but a part thereof. As for the other
term, namely Eternal, that also has two acceptions; for things are said to
be Eternal two ways: First improperly, that which never shall have end, more
fitly called Euiternall or Immortal. Properly that is said to be Eternal
which neither had beginning, nor shall have end, nor as Boethius adds, any
succession. Now Eternal, we take in the more proper and latter sense. So that
the Question may thus more plainly be expressed, Whether the heaven and earth,
with the bodily Creatures therein contained, had a beginning, or shall have an
end of being.

a part ante, as the schoolmen speak, that is, its being from everlasting,
is not so directly pertinent unto our purpose, we will with all possible
brevity run over the special reasons, and foundations thereof, the rather
because the authors and maintainers thereof from the want of beginning, infer
the vncapablenesse of an end. Now the chief Patron and desender of this
opinion in regard of authority, though not of time, was Aristotle, who, as I
take it, rather affecting singularity, than for any soundness of the matter
or strength of argument, tanght it in his Lycoeum. For the Philosophers which
lived before him, with general consent agreed in the contrary opinion:
Trismegistus, who with his learning watered the then barren country of Greece,
as Diodorus Siculus witnesses in his first book of Antiquities, Musaeus,
Orpheus, Linus, Epicharmus, Hesiodus, and Homer, amongst the Poets; Zoroastes,
Anaxagoras, Melissus, Empedocles, Pherecides, Philolaus, Democritus, and Plato,
as Philo Indaeus Laertius Diogenes, Sulcitius Seuerus, Alexander
Aphrodisiensis, Plutarch, and Tully witness, which also his books entitled
Timaeus, and Critias, together with those De Republica do testify. Only
Aristotle in a self-conceit of singularity, howsoever elsewhere honoring
antiquity, rather likes in this case a new broched opinion of his own,
contrary to so many foregoing Philosophers: and therefore Hierophantes, a
devout, though idolatrous Priest, condemned him of arrogancy, and selfeloue,
not only because, contrary to the common received opinion of his country,
continued so many ages vngainsaied, he denied the plurality of Gods, but
also, and much more for that he stuck not to teach, that the world was from
everlasting, which all Greece confessed to have had beginning in time.

Democritus, the archpatron of fortune, who will have the World Eternal, and
withal chanceable: But Eternity and Chance, being (as the learned Sir Philip
observed) things insufferable together; If Chanceable, then not Eternal.
Again, what is more absurd then to think the World was made by the vntended,
and casual concourse of indivisible substances? for whence came these
substances? If you say they came from Everlasting, and so were Eternal, can
you conceive such chanceable effects to proceed from so certain and necessary
causes? Nay rather, if you will needs maintane the infinitenes of these
diminitiue bodies, grant they had beginning from that Infinite One that glued
the Infinite parts of your Infinite. All, together, by his unmeasurable Power
and Wisdom. For can we imagine such a perfect Order and Stabilitie to consist
in these disioined substances? Order and Constancy are children only of
Wisdom: and sooner may we prove Darkness to proceed from the Sun, than
Constancy and Order from inconstant chance, constant in nothing but in
Inconstancy. Finally, we must either exclude Gods Wisdom and provident care
of the World made, or else Fortune from making of the World: (for the World is
Gods possession, only by right of creation) unless we imagine a deed of gift
passed by Fortune at her death: or Fortune the true Owner, (if the true Maker)
disinherited, and by violence driven out of her dominion by God as an Usurper.
But God having nothing to plead for his title unto his kingdom, but the right
of creation, if that plea be improoued, God cannot any longer call the World
his own, and therefore without cruelty may cast off all care of this his
supposed offspring. For it is only Gods Fatherhood that binds him unto his
Providence.

Fortune, let us now come unto Nature, deified especially by Strato a
Naturalist: who fearing to ouersway God with the weight of this burden, either
in the making, or governing of the World, has granted hm a Remedy, or Otium
as they term it, thinking it more reason that God should have an exemption
from trouble, than Gods priests, who for his sake be dispensed withal. But let
us see, what this Nature may be, so highly by Strato magnified. There is a
particular Nature, and there is a general or universal Nature. The particular
is that which in every several single substance, ministers Essence to the
whole compound: and withal, is author of such action, and motion, as is
agreeable to the subject wherein it is, as the Nature of fire, causes the
fires ascension, the Nature of earth, the earths going downward: and in regard
of this Nature, we say it is Natural to the fire to ascend, to the earth to
descend, the bodies having in them, cuen of themselves, by their inherent form
a promptness, and inclination unto these motions. Now if by the conspiring of
these many and manifold Natures, this All, we now speak of, were made, as if
the Elements, and Ethereall parts should in their townhouse set down the
bounds of every ones office; then consider what follows, that there must
needs have been, a wisdom ouerruling power, which made them concur: for their
natures being so diverse and contrary, would rather have wrought each others
destruction, than so friendly have co^sorted, to make up so inexpressible an
harmony. For, to grant knowledge unto them whereby to moderate the extremity of
their natural fury, or intendment of such agreement, were to enter into a
bottomless pit of absurdities, seeing that knowledge always presupposes
roason, and reason sense; both which are never found, either jointly, or in
part, in bodily senseless creatures. Now touching the Vninersall Nature,
which some will have to be nothing, but an influent virtue, helping and
furthering the actions of every particular natural body, others, an Universal
ouerruling, and as it were, an Ideall Nature subsisting. For as the particular
nature of every particular body, causes and mainetaineth the particular
actions of the body wherein it is; so this general Nature is the author and
maintainer of all actions and bodies: to which, the single several bodies are
in subjection, by their obedience acknowledging a kind of superiority, in that
nature which we call universal. And in the respect of this nature, the fire is
said, in some cases, to go downward, by nature, as to hinder the
discontinuitie of things in the world, and so, that emptines which nature so
much abhors. Now, if by this universal nature, they understand a nature of
wisdom, and goodness, and pronidence, which with knowledge performs its
actions, and so of purpose, and deliberately has knit togethet these so many
points to such an excellent unity, this Nature we reject not, but retain, as
that God and Maker of all things, that by his infinite irresistible power bath
conioined the disagreeing parts of this visible world, and of things contrary
made a perfect harmony, permitting in their nature a mutual resistance; yet
so, as they hinder not their friendly copulation in the worlds composition. In
sum, touching Nature and Fortune, they are thus only (says Scaliger) to be
interpreted: that Nature signifies Gods ordinary power; and thus, things
extraordinary may be called unnatural: Fortune his unrevealed will, and thus
may we call things chanceable that are beside expectation or beyond reason.

Epicure, who (as Tully says) derived his opinion from Democritus, we will in
one word answer his reason, recorded by Tully in his second book de Natura
Deorum, and so come unto Aristotle, and his Scholar the Atheist. The Epicures
reason is briefly thus propounded by way of interrogation: What eyes (says he
in his scoffing impudency) had Plato, to behold the framing of this so great a
work? Or what tools, and fellow-workemen had God to make the World withal?
The answer is, that Plato his eye, was the eye of reason, gathering by
necessary consequence, both the being of the Deity, as also confusedly
apprehending the infiniteness of God his power and wisdom shinig in the
world, as in a most clear glass reflecting, in some sort, the Image of Gods
invisible Nature, upon the eyes of all the beholders. Touching absence of
instruments and fellow-workemen, whereby the Epicure would infer the
impossibility to create in God, we are not to think, that God, infinite in
power, is tied to the help of secundary isntrumental causes, they being but
supplies of defects, and helps of wants, in the otherwise insufficient agents:
and therefore not requisite, to the eternal infiniteness of Gods ability. Nay
we may add further, which is Gods privilege, God of nothing, is powerful
enough to make all things, much more without instruments. Now a possibility of
creating in God, may thus briefly be shown: according to the manner of being of
every thing, so also is the order of working; but Gods being and beginning
depends upon nothing but himself: why then should it be thought impossible,
that Gods action is not tied unto any matter? And indeed, the reason (as far as
I can perceive) why other things require a subject whereon to work, is only
the impotency of the Agents, but God All-sufficient, and powerful, who can out
of the rocks bring water, out of darkness light, can also (as he has done)
make all things of nothing. An other reason may be this, taken from the
difference of the principal efficients, God, Nature, Art. Art, always
presupposes a thing really and perfectly subsisting: Nature only a matter
with a power to be God, (a far more powerful Agent then either Art or
Nature) is able, of that which is nothing at all, to make a thing of actual
and real subsistence. For, if Nature can of a thing in the lowest degree of
being, and next to a not being, make a thing actually subsisting, God
All-sufficient, and infinite in power, can of nothing create any thing in what
degree of being soever.

Aristotle his Philosophy he has drawn this subtle Interrogatorie, which
he propounds with so unsavory scorn: If the world were not from
Everlasting, but made by the God you talk of, I would know of you, where he
lived before the time that he made the world; how he busied himself all the
time before? for it is an absurdity, even among us, to say, he was idle: as
also what he did, if he did not make it from everlasting? Touching the place of
his being, and the manner of his work, I may not unfitly answer, as a learned
Father of the Primitive Church did unto the same demand; He was in a wood
providing fuel for that fire, which should in heltorment such curious priers
into matters beyond their reach. But for his location, I may thus more fitly
answer: that God is tied to no place, being in all places to fill them with his
goodness, in no place to be circumscribed by the circumference. Touching his
action we answer, that howsoever the external work, (the after-fruit of his
external working) had no external sensible being, yet was he not unoccupied,
his very decreeing being an action, and that also having relation unto the
creatures, which should afterward have being. The Hebrews (who many times do
but trifle in matters of weight) give unto this frivolous question, as
frivolous an answer, saying, that God to keep himself unoccupied, spent that
time in trifling experiments, now making a world on this fashion, now on that,
then by and by dissoluing his loose and displeasing work; at length by many
trials, to have light upon this world, and this fashion, which for his
conceived liking, he established. But these learned Rabbis, meant a more
serious matter then their words bear show of: and that was, that God did not
rashly; nor without great deliberation make the world on this fashion rather
than any other, and that he saw he might have made it many other ways, and
sooner, and more worlds, but would not: alluding, as I take it, to Gods
counsell-taking, at the dedecree, touching the time and manner of the worlds
creation, which was the sum of our first given answer. But more soundly and to
the purpose we answer, that the actions of the Deity are of two sorts, immanent
and internal: or external and transeunt: the immanent actions, are those
which be in the Deity from one person unto another, as to love together, and
such like: the transeunt actions are those, that pass from the Godhead to some
external object: they may both be thus illustrated. As in the element of fire
there is a faculty of heating and enlightening, whence proceeds heat and
light unto the external near bodies, and beside this faculty there is also
in it a natural power to go upward, which when it comes into act, is
received in no other subject but the fire it self: so that, if fire could by
abstractiue imagination be conceived of, as wanting these two transeunt
operations, yet could we not justly say it had no action, forasmuch as it might
move upward, which is an immanent and inward action. So, and much more so,
though we grant that there was no external work of the Godhead, until the
making of the world, yet can there be no necessary illation of idleness,
seeing it might have, (as indeed it had) actions immanent included in the
circle of the Trinity: Again, thus reason these blasphemous Atheists against
the truth: If for man's sake God made the world, and all things therein, how
comes it to pass, that there are in the world so many noisome creatures, as
vipers and such like, which procure rather our annoiance, than serve any way
for our use and benefit? For to say they are chanceable, or of a voluntary and
self procreation, is (in our Philosophy) absurd, especially, seeing we extend
Gods power, and providence unto very flies, and such like creatures. But we
may answer, first that there is nothing so cumbersome, which is not some way
serviceable. Or, if now disobedient, yet not so created, but, for man's
rebellion against God, permitted or rather directed to arm themselves against
him, for whose use and help they were created: like unto that sword, which
Hector gave Ajax, which so long as he used against men his enemies, served for
his help and defense; but after that he began to use it, or rather to abuse
it, to the hurt of hurtlesse beasts, it turned into his own bowels. For until
the transgression Adam lived as Lord of the creatures, having the now most
dangerous and pernicious creatures under him in subjection. For the devil,
that subtle seducer, was not so simple a sot, as to make choice of the serpent
to beguile him with inticements, if he had known, or but suspected any resident
fear in man of the serpent, by some foregoing remembered mischief; for that
had been rather to terrify him from all attention, then any way to allure him
to follow his counsel. So that, all things which now are unto corrupted man
most cumbersome, as punishments of his disloialty, were by creation ordained
for his furtherance. Nor need they wonder, that Gods power and knowledge should
stretch it self unto flies and such diminutiue creatures, as they term them:
nay it is far more insensible, that the estate of flies should be unknown
unto him, for that were to bound the infiniteness of his knowledge.

Aristotle his school he sucked his noisome error, yet went far beyond
Aristotle in impiety: For Aristotle (at least in words) confested Gods being,
an infinitnes, which also he went about to prove and confirm by reason,
whereas these godless Heretics do not only deny both in their works, and by
consequence of words, but even shamelesly with direct speeches, not only his
omnipotency, but even his very being: let us therefore come to Aristotle and
his less profane followers. The Peripatetickes principal and most subtle
argument, which also they urge with greatest vehemence, is briefly this; say
they, either the world was from everlasting, or else made anew, proceeding from
not being, unto this being which now it has. But it was not made a new; for
then, either it proceeded from a power and fitness which it had to be unto
this actual being, or else it was made of nothing. If before it was actually
subsisting, it had a being potentiall from everlasting (seeing things that are
potentially, though in the basest degree of being, yet are not merely nothing)
it follows, that it always was (at least potentially) and so eternal. If we
say that it was made of nothing, that is (in their Philosophy) an absurd
impossibility. For it is with them a principle not questionable, That every
making presupposes a subject. Now if we object, that the necessary presence
of a real subject depends only upon the Makers infirmity, and imperfection:
they answer, that the disability of doing impossibilities is not defect or
imbecility. To which said argument of theirs (as they would have it) there may
be a double answer given. For first, we affirm that the world proceeded,
from not being to being. To the proposition of their prosyllogisme we answer by
denial thereof, and reject their distinction as sophistical, putting
contrariety (the greatest opposition) betwixt things, not only agreeing, but
even all one. For there is a potentiall being, incident to things that are not
at all, and therefore do the Schoolmen distinguish of the potentiall being
after this manner: A thing (say they) may be said to have a potentiall being
two ways: first, that is said to be potentially which is not yet, either in
whole, or in part subsisting in nature, which having no real, or actual cause
of being, may notwithstanding afterward have a true cause of its essence and
existence. So that it is not any thing, in, or of it self, but is vertually
contained within the ability of some thing, that may afterward bring it unto a
true and real being. As for example, there is a potentiall being of more worlds
then one, inasmuch as God by his irresistable, vndecaied power is able, as well
to make more worlds, as he was to create this one world which we behold and
inhabit: yet, who will say, that there are more worlds then one, either
totally or partially, really and truly now being in nature? Indeed it is a
thing within the compass of Gods omnipotency, to bring in a multiplicitie of
worlds, and therefore we may not untruly say, that this multiplicitie of
worlds has a being potentiall. So likewise, who will deny, that a man sound
and without maime or lack of his limbs, that never set foot over his
threshold, has power (with supposition of health and strength) to travel over
the whole circuit of the country; yet is it absurd to say, that this journey
of his, is any way in nature, either wholly or in part. Secondly, that may
justly and is more properly said; to be potentially, that having an actual and
real subsisting, even separate from it efficient cause, wherein it was before
vertually contained, yet lacks somewhat, which by nature it is capable of. As
for instance hereof, a child altogether unlettered, may justly be said to be
potentially disposed toward the receipt of learning, inasmuch as it has a
reasonable soul, which is always accompanied with a capacity of learning. To
apply this distinction unto our purpose, we say that to be potentially in the
first degree, is indeed to be nothing; because this potentiall being is a mere
not being: and so was the world from everlasting, having such an ability and
capablenesse (that I may so speak) of being, forasmuch as God by his
omnipotency was from everlasting powerful enough to create the world, as in
time he did actually make the same. Now for that other kind of potentiall
being, incident unto things only that have received an actual being from
their causes, it was in that rude Chaos created by God, the first day of the
begunmaking of the world, and was afterward perfected in the work of
distinction (as the Schoolmen call it) when God out of that confusion, or
rather upon that rude lump, brought this admirable variety and difference of
creatures, for the ornament of the world: for that the world was in this sort
potentially only at the creation of the first matter, which was in the time by
Moses mentioned. Secondly we answer, that it is not impossible for God of
nothing to make things really and truly subsisting, as we before proved. To
their Axiom or principle, which they call Undeniable, we answer, that there is
a twofolde faction or making: One natural, incident to creatures, commonly
called Generation; the other supernatural, the privilege of God himself,
which we term Creation. Now every making which is a Generation, requires a
really-being subject, because it is either a motion or mutation, which
supposes a matter wherein it is received: but the making of Creation, is always
without any matter subject, being desined to be, A making something of nothing:
But these adversaries admit of no such duplicity of making, holding it a mere
impossibility, for any Agent in this sort to create: Thus therefore somewhat
otherwise we answer: There be two sorts of Agents or Efficients, the one
Universal, the other Particular or Partial. They differ thus: That the
Efficient universal is cause of the whole being and essence of it effect,
making both matter and form: and this action of this Agent, is not Motion or
Mutation, but a bare Emanation. The Particular Agent is not cause of the whole
essence of that it makes, seeing it always requires the preexistence of the
matter, and the action thereof is truly called Motion or Mutation. So then, it
is impossible for a partial or half efficient (as you may term him) to work
or make a thing of nothing; but for an universal, it is not only possible,
but even easy. And is it not (think you, to answer every point of their
reason) an infirmity in the maker, not to be able to make a thing without
matter? for why is the existence of the matter necessary, but because the
efficient can do nothing: and does not this import a defect of the workmans
ability? No, say the adversaries, for it is no imperfection to be unable to
do things impossible: but we deny that this is impossible unto any, but unto
particular agents natural; as for God to whom nothing is impossible (but to
deny himself) as he is the whole and sole cause of being, so is he able, even
from a not being, to bring things to the highest and most excellent degree of
being. Secondly, say they, unless we grant an euer-being of motion, we must
needs admit either of a proceeding in infinitum, or else of this senseless
contradiction, that before the first motion there was a motion more ancient;
two maine absurdities, the one in reason, the other in nature. For the
progress in infinitum, they think it is thus proved; for before the motion,
whereby the first moved body was made, there was of necessity requisite some
potentiall being thing, because that motion is only incident unto things of a
potentiall existence. If that be granted, then they infer, that there was
some motion whereby this subject had it being, and so in infinitum. But to stop
their long journey, we may hinder this infinite proceeding by granting a
creation. It is true indeed that there must needs be a thing capable of
motion before there can be any moving: for in every motion there is a thing
moving, and a thing moved; but there is no necessity that this mooueable
should have its being by motion; for it was made by creation, which was no
motion, but a simple and bare emanation: For there is a twofold mediate
action, whereby a cause is said to work, according to which duplicitie of
action, they hane thus distinguished of causes efficient. There is, say the
Schoolmen, a double efficient or working cause, one called Efficiens per
transmutationem, that is, such a cause, whose operation is always joined with
some change in the thing working, according as is the resistance, either of the
body between it, and the patient, or of the thing whereon he works, which
does more or less withstand his impression. The other is, Efficiens per
emanationem, as when without any repugnancy of any patient or labor of the
agent, the effect or work does voluntarily and freely arise from the action of
the working cause: as the shadow from the body: such is God, whose irresistable
power by his bare word of command, even of nothing made this admirable work of
the world, as the shadow and obscure representation of his wisdom and
omnipotency: not changed in his nature, there being nothing by Reaction to
imprint any thing in the impassionable Godhead. And this is the full and
sufficient answer to the second argument. Thirdly they reason thus: There is an
eternal mouer, therefore there has been an eternal motion and a thing moved,
in as much as these relatiues cannot be but together in nature. For answer
whereto we must remember, that there is an absolute, both consideration, and
being of God. Absolute I say and out of relation, otherwise Gods being should
be only in relation. It is true indeed that relatiues are always together in
nature beginning to be, and finishing their being, in one and the same moment.
For instance, a father is not a father until he have a son, nor is he a
father longer than he has a son. And yet for all that those things which are
Relatiues, may have being, one before another, though not as Relatiues, yet as
things really subsisting in nature. For example, who can deny that Adam was in
nature, before either conception or birth of his bloody son Cain? yet was he
not a father until God had blessed him with that after-cursed-ofspring. And
who sees not, that the Carpenter had being in Nature before he builds the
house, although he be no actual builder till the house be in making? So God
that was from everlasting before all times, had his being without motion,
though not as a mouer, yet as a thing really and perfectly existing: but when
in fullness of time (according to the free determined purpose of his will) he
began the frame of the world, then also began he to be a Relative, a builder in
respect of this goodly house and palace, the world; a Father, that is, the
Beginning of being unto the child of the creation, the image of his
greatness; and indeed, in these and such kind of controversies, we must
warily use these terms of relation, especially in regard of the creatures,
lest we bind God only unto a relative being, and so make his existence
dependent on the creatures.

Their fourth argument is in substance this: If God so long before had being,
without being a Creator, there was doubtless some defect in the foregoing
time, the supply whereof in the moment of creation moved him to make the world
rather at that time than any other. For there is no new action but presupposes
some new incitement, which moved the Agent to undertake the work, more then
before; but there could be nothing at this time more than before, that could
move God the principal and perfectest workman, to take in hand this
busienesse and work rather now, than before; for then how could he be the
primary and principal cause? But this in short may be the answer; Indeed there
was all this time an impediment, forasmuch as God would not actually create,
until the time foreappointed in his secret purpose was accomplished. Nay, but
say the adversaries, God until this time was indifferent to create, or not to
create, therefore there was in the instant of the creation some thing that
restrained this his indifferency. But we may answer, That there was no such
indifferency, (as they talk of,) God having from all eternity, purposely
determined at this time to begin the work of the creation. So that unto the
forementioned demand of the Atheist, why God deferred the creating of the
world until this moment of time, we may answer, that of the choice of this
time, rather then any other, for this his work, there can no other reason be
given, but his most freewill, that in his decree of creation restrained, and
bound it self to this time, rather than unto any other. Now if they shall
reply, that we are not to imagine Gods will unreasonable, and therefore no
doubt there was some reason that moved him to this limitation of his will: we
may answer, That we do not deny but God had some reason (though not without
himself) of this his prorogation. Nay we may without offense, go so far, as
to give some reason of this dilation, in general: That God would not from
everlasting create the world, to show the independency of his existence in
regard of the creatures: as also, to give us understand, that not for any hope
of benefit, which should proceed to him from the creatures, he undertook this
work: but rather (as it is the property of goodness to communicate it self)
out of the ouerflowing fountain of his indefectiue goodness, to derive some
commodity unto us his creatures: for he that could so long be without us,
might without any inconueniency unto himself, for ever have continued in that
state of loneliness. So that, of the deferring of the creation, in general,
there may be a reason given; but why he began at this time rather than at any
other, either before or after, there is no other reason, but his own
free will, known unto us. But here arises a doubt, whether God could have
begun sooner, or put off longer this work of creation. The answer is, that he
could by his potential and absolute power; he could not by his actual and
conditional. For Gods power has a twofold consideration, the one absolute,
without regard of any his decrees whatsoever, whereby he is able to do all,
even those things, that he will not; the other conditional, joined with the
consideration and respect of his will, whereby he is able to do all things
which he will, and only those things which he will. God therefore, respected
without his decree, was able, sooner or later to create the world; but if we
consider him together with his purpose, he could not either have prevented, or
deferred this his intended work of the creation: Nor do we hereby rob God
of his freedom, or bind him to any part of the contradiction, but if he be
bound, sure he has bound himself, having this law only prescibed him, that
he deny not himself, that is indeed to take away his Godhead. But if God
would not from everlasting make the world, how is he not changed in his will?
The answer is, that God would from everlasting make the world, but he would not
make the world from everlasting; that is in plainer terms: God had from
everlasting a will and purpose to create the world, but it never was his will,
that the world should have a coeternall being with himself; so that Gods will
is still the same altogether unaltered. But they farther urge this argument,
demanding how God by an everlasting and old action of his will, could in time
create the world anew, remaining himself unchangeable. To which we may answer,
that a continued action of his will, how ancient soever, executing only that
which he before intended, may well stand without admission of alteration: as
for example, If the purpose of my will to day, be to journey toward London the
next week, which also according unto purpose I perform; will any man say my
will is changed? In like sort, God from everlasting decreeing to create the
world at such a time, if at the time purposed this his decree be put in
execution, is not thereby changed. Nay rather he is thereby to be thought more
unchangeable, for as much as he performs that which before he did determine.
Why but, say they, God is not freed from alteration, because that of a
Non-creator, he was made a Creator. The answer is, That God was not hereby
changed, albeit there was indeed some change (though improperly so called) when
as the world proceeded from not being unto being: for the succession of a
being, after a not being, imports some alteration, though not in the author of
the new being, but rather in the thing that received that being; we shall make
it plain by this supposition. Let us imagine a vault or other close place, so
fenced from the Sun beams that no light, not the least glimmering can
pierceit, which afterward by digging or some such means, may have passage made
thorough it, for the Suns access; would we say that the Sun were by this
means altered, because it inlightneth a place which before was full of
darkness? Even so, and much more so, God the fountain of Light, (whose Spirit
moving upon the waters, whereas before there was darkness upon the face of
the deep, enlightened that darkness, distinguishing those things which before
were confusedly mixed, or rather bringing them from nothing, to this their
perfection) is not at all altered, but still remains the same, ever
unchangeable. And indeed, if every new work of God should make him changeable,
how should he not be often changed, creating daily the souls of now living
men? For to say they have being before their ioining unto the body, is plainly
heretical, and Origin was in that behalf accused of a very gross error. Nor
is it likely, nor yet indeed possible, they should come by traduction or
propagation from our parents. For our souls being as the Angels are Spiritual
substances, are as far from that ability of procreation, as the Angels are,
those supernatural celestial creatures: and there is the like reason for
both. The Angels by reason of their spiritualitie, are void and incapable of
procreation, men's souls also being no less spiritual than the Angels, are
also unfit for procreation: therefore one soul begets not another, much less
comes it of a corporal seed, it self being spiritual. It remains therefore
that they are then anew created by God, and so coupled unto their bodies.
Neither is God for this cause changed, seeing, as is aforesaid, he does now
only put in execution, that which before he had in intention; and therefore
(to conclude this whole argument, with that saying of Hugo de Sancto Victore)
Gods will was eternal, and the work of his will was temporary; for always
even from Eternity, he had a will to create the world; yet never was he
purposed to make the world from everlasting, but his purpose and will was to
make that in time which he purposed before time to make in time. Therefore by
his ever being goodness he for ever purposed: by his eternal wisdom he
always disposed that, which by his everlasting power he once composed. Fifthly,
they reason from the Eternity of time, in this sort. Time is Eternal,
therefore there is also an Eternal motion; for Time is the measure of moving.
Now the antecedent is thus proved: That which has been always, and shall be
for ever, is Eternal; but such is the condition of time: for you can design
us no moment or instant before which, Time was not, and after which, Time shall
not remain. For, as Aristotle says, every now, or instant of time is the end
of time past, and beginning of time to come: as in a right line, every middle
point is the end of the forepart of the line, and the beginning of the part
following. To which we may answer by rejecting this their description of time,
for, (as Scaliger has well observed) motion is rather the measure of time; and
thence it is (as I take it) that Plato called the Sun and Stars times
Instruments, and as it were the Jacobs staff of time; because by their motion
and dircumuolution we measure the indurance of the world. And therefore also
(as I conceive of it) the Poets called Saturn, that is Time, Heavens Son,
because that from their circular moving, came the distinction of Days, and
Months, and Years. And to say the truth, there is a more general, and true
definition of times then this of Aristotle; and it is this: The past, present
and future indurance of things: Which also the authors of this description
distinguish into it kinds. There is (say they) a time perpetual, or eternal,
Gods own peculiar attribute, who alone indureth from generation to generation;
and there is an indurance or Time momentary, incident unto the creatures. In
this sense therefore it is no absurdity to say, there was a time when
Aristotle's time was not: for he makes time of the same age with the heavens
motion, so that, until the heavens began to be moved, Aristotle's time was
not: yet was there time before the heavens creation, that is a long space of
indurance, in which God alone had being: But because time is indeed proper unto
the creatures, being as (other bodily and spiritual creatures) in scripture
said to be made by God, let us follow Aristotle in his own Definition, and to
his objection out of his Schoole-interpreters we may fetch this answer: That
every Now, and instant of time is not both beginning of time to come and end of
time past: for there is a threefold instant or Now. The first is instans, or
Nunc initiatiuum, an instant only of beginning. The second they term, Nunc
continuatiuum, a continuing instant, and that is both beginning in respect of
time following, and end in regard of time past. There is a third instant or
moment, and that they call Nunc finiens, or terminatiuum, and that is such an
instant, as only is an end of time foregoing: They may all be thus
illustrated, as in a straight line, the first prick or point is only the
beginning of the line, the last point only the end of the same, the rest in the
middle are both, the end of that part of the line which was before drawn, and
the beginning of the hinder part. So in time, we may point out an instant that
is only beginning, another that is only an end, a third that is both a
beginning and end. Aristotle his authority therefore can truly be understood
only of the continuing and coupling instant. But against this distinguishing
answer, Aristotle has this exception: If there be any such instant, as is only
a beginning in respect of time ^llowing, and no end of that time which went
before, then before this instant there was no time. What then? Therefore there
was an Ante without time, which is absurd. For Ante and Post, before and after,
are differences of time: As for example: When we say, Philip lived before
Alexander, this word before, signifies a difference in time, betwixt Philip and
Alexander his sons being. But who sees not more subtilty than soundness in
this reply of Aristotle; for we will in like sort thus reason against him. In
his Physics he has this Position, Extra coelum nullus est locus: Beyond
heaven there is no place; therefore, there is some extra, in which is no place.
For extra and intra, without and within, are differences of place; as for
example: when we say he is without doors, our meaning is, that he is in some
place without the house. Now if we should thus reason against Aristotle: There
is out of heaven a room or place to be in; for extra without, is a difference
of place, things being said to be without only in regard of place. But
Aristotle says extra coelum, therefore there is without the inward hollow
compass of heaven an external outroome: would he not straight (and that
justly) reprove our sophistry? for Aristotle his meaning in that place is,
that all things whatsoever are contained within the inside of the body of
heaven: and it is as if he had said, there is no place, but within the inside
of the ouercast circle of heaven. In like sort, when we say that before this
first moment of the heavens motion, there was no time; our meaning is, that all
real time had beginning with the heavens moving. Real time, I say; for there
is time only imaginary, improperly called time, as being rather a part of
eternity, and of that indurance and long continuance, which we conceive to
have been in God before the creation of the world. And thus shall we read
the words, Before, and After, used among the ancient Writers both Christian and
Profane: for so did Ovid use it in the beginning of his Metamorphosis; Ante
mare and terras, and quod tegit omnia coelum: Before that heaven and earth was
made. So in the Scripture: Before the foundations of the world were laid, thou
art God from everlasting, world without end. Where it signifies no true and
really subsisting time, for this time began only with the motions of the
heavens, as Aristotle himself witnesses. In brief therefore, to shut up this
argument and this whole controversy: The first instant and moment of time
real (before mentioned) was both a beginning and end; a beginning of time
real, and an end of time imaginary: nor is it any absurdity to say, that time
imaginary was before true and really subsisting time.

brevity pass over those reasons which serve to improve this error: and they
are only two, which we will but propound, avoiding ouer-tedious long discourse;
and so go on to the other part of the question. First then, from our own
experience we reason thus: It is a truth confirmed by the trial of all times,
that the quantities of men's bodies have a perceiuable impairing, as also the
length and continuance of their lives: so that, if in that infinite space of
foregoing time men had had being (as without question, the world was never void
of men, the principal and most noble member thereof) through continual and
incessant decay, their bodies had been brought to as little a quantity as
they are capable of, if not clean consumed: but we see their quantity is not
yet come unto the lowest; therefore had they not being from everlasting.
Secondly and more specially, had this world been from everlasting, infinite
also had been the propagation of man; and so we should bring into the world
an actual infiniteness, as absurd in Nature as Parologismes be in Logic:
for in this infinite space and generation there had been an infinite number of
men's souls, which being by Nature incapable of mortality, we can not say,
that as one was created another was destroyed, and so should there be an
infiniteness in regard of number, actually subsisting in Nature. And thus
hoping that small power will serve to confound an adversary already overcome,
we pass to the other part of the Question, purposing as much brevity as its
difficulty and obscurity will bear.

The Question is touching the worlds immortality, whether, as it had a
beginning of being, so it shall also have an end. Aristotle when he first
heard of their opinion, who appointed an end unto the world, scoffingly burst
out into these words: I was once afraid that my house, either by force of
tempest, or by injury of time, or lastly by some defect in the workeman-ship,
should have suddenly overwhelmed me, but now I have great cause to fear my
own and my houses ruin, because of those that in words go about to pull
down the world. But for the plainer and more speedy proceeding in the
controversy, let us in one word set down the true meaning of the question.
There is a twofold end, the one of corruption; the other of annihilation: the
end of corruption, I call that whereby a thing is changed from being to a not
being, not simply as if it ceased altogether to be in nature, but because it
loses that being which before it had; as for example, when wood by force of
fire is turned into ashes, we may not untruly say, there is a corruption of
the wood, forasmuch as it cease to be wood, and is become ashes; yet can we
not say, here is any annihilation, for we see there is a substance remaining,
but the matter which before was under the form of wood, has now put on the
form of ashes, and so of wood corrupted are ashes generated, according to that
worn axiom of Aristotle, That the corruption of one thing is the generation
of an other. The end of annihilation is, when a thing so loses its present
being, that no part thereof, neither matter nor yet form abides any longer in
nature; but as it first was made of nothing, so is it again turned into
nothing. The question then (as I take it) must be thus understood, that the
world shall have an end, though not of annihilation, yet of corruption; that is
in other terms, though it shall not utterly be abolished and turned unto
nothing, (for the matter thereof shall still remain) yet shall it be changed
into another estate and condition. The first part of the assertion is proved
by the authority of the learned. For Plato witnesses in his Timaeus; so says
Bochus and Methodius, and Damascene in his second book viz. of Orthodoxal
faith: testified also by the wise Solomon, Eccles. 3. I have learned (says the
Preacher) that all the works of the Lord endure for ever. that is, as I
interpret it, though not without corruption, yet without annihilation. Now
whether they have this state of corruption by nature or no, there is a great
question: but we may probably answer, that of themselves and their natural
disposition infused by God, they have no natural inclination, or desire of
corruption, much less of annihilation, forasmuch as every thing has a
natural love of its being, and an innated hatred of all things that be
enemies unto the same, testified by that natural Sympathy and Antipathie
which may be observed in things destitute of reason: for so we see in
experience the lamb which never had experience of the woolues cruelty, even
at the first sight does tremble and fly for fear. Nay, in creatures of a
lower degree then these, termed by Aristotle, Plant-animals, we may observe,
the like antipathie. Scaliger reports of a tree, growing in the Province
which he calls Pudefatamea, that at a man's near approaching, for modesty,
draws in his farre-spreadding boughs, at his departure spreeds it self
again, for that cause termed by the inhabitants, the shame-fast-tree. But we
may more probably attribute this it contraction, to a natural divining (as it
were) and fore-feeling that it has of some harm, whereof it is in danger, as
may be proportionably gathered by the like behavior in other things of the
same kind. For so Aristotle writes of the Spongies that (when a man puts
forth his hand to displace them, as also before a tempest) shrink up together
on a heap, a if they meant to shift for themselves, either by flight, or else
by uniting their dispersed forces, for the stronger resistance: which are
evident proofs of that natural ingrafted desire in all things to preserve
there being. For whereas the first matter is said to desire corruption, for
that as not contented with the form it presently enioieth, it desires an
other, whereupon follows the expulsion of the former before inherent: the
answer it, that in this laboring to procure an other form, then that it had:
it intends not corruption, but rather perfection, not disliking the form
incumbent, seeing it desires both; but as Esopsdogge, snatching greedily at
the shadow which he thought had been a substance, meant not to lose that which
he had fast hold of in his teeth. So the first matter greedily carried to the
desire of many forms wherein indeed consists its perfection, loses that
which before it had: for as much as by a law of Nature, Two forms of diverse,
not subordinate, kinds, are at the same time insufferable together. So then it
desires perfection, but in steed thereof accidentally gains corruption and
expulsion of the preexistent form. Nothing therefore simply desires it own
corruption, but so as it may tend to it further perfection, and consummation,
much less its utter abolition. For as much as it is far better to be in the
vilest and most base degree of being, then not to be at all. Therefore the
annihilation of the world shall not be of it self, nor yet by any means
internal. Nor can it proceed from any external natural agent, no not that
universal fore mentioned nature is able to bring it unto nothing: For as nature
cannot make some thing of nothing, so neither is she of power sufficient to
bring a thing from being, to an utter not being at all, having a limited and
finit power. To which purpose a learned friar said excellently well. That, the
first maker of all things in respect of its being and not being, is subject
only unto Gods will, permitted to the rule of Natural agents only in regard
of transmutation. For a Natural agent may induce or expel a form either
substantial or accidental. But how far soever man's Power or Nature is carried
in fury, laboring by might and maine toward an utter ruinating, and
destruction of things, yet shall it never attain unto Annihilation. They may
indeed by tyrannous inflicting of death, make that which is near the matter of
a man, the matter of a carcass, they may also with fire, burn the dead corpse,
but though a thousand thousand woods should be spent in burning of one poor
carcass, yet were they never able utterly to annihilate and bring it unto
nothing. So that Nature is too weak to cause Annihilation. But yet say the
scrupulous adversaries, God who by his infinite and supernatural power was
able of nothing to make the world, is by the same his boundles power able at
his pleasure to return it to nothing. It is true indeed and out of question,
that God by his absolute vndecaied power, is sufficient as well to distroy the
world as he was at the beginning, to make it: by his absolute power (I say)
considered without regard of his will, but if we respect his power, restrained
by his will: that is regard what he will and has decreed to do if by his word
we may learn his will, we may truly answer, that God himself cannot
annihilate the word, because he can do nothing that implies contradiction, or
that any way imports mutability, whereby of God he should be made no God. Nor
do we heerby take away his omnipotency, nay rather we establish his power, it
being a chief point of infirmity and weakness, to be capable of change, and
able to deny it self: but God has decreed not to annihilate the world,
therefore he cannot now turn it unto nothing, how then (may some man say)
shall it have an end, for if neither of it self it incline, nor can be by any
means natural enforced to Annihilation, no nor God himself can turn it into
nothing, what end shall it have? The answer is, that as man has his end by
death, whereas, notwithstand his soul is immortal, his body is only changed
into its first matter, not turned into nothing: so the world though incapeable
of annihilation, as has been proved, yet has in it an end inevitable, when
it shall be changed from the present corrupt estate into a far more excellent
and heavenly condition of indurance and immortality. But here arises a doubt,
moved by those scoffers that Peter prophesied should come in the last days,
which demand, Where is the promise of his coming: For since the father fell
on sleep, all things have continued alike from the beginning of the creation.
Where by the way, let us observe that they make the time of Christ's coming,
and the end of the world, things of one and the same signification, so that as
many testimonies of scripture, as warrant the certainty of Christ's coming,
serve also to prove the worlds end and dissolution. To their reason we may
answer with Peter, that the worlds long and hither to unchanged continuance, is
no sure proof of impossibility to be destroyed. For God that by his bare word
could of nothing make the world, can now also with as great facrlity alter the
state of the same. But their supposition is most untrue, for the world has not
from the beginning continued in the same state vnaltred, the whole earth being
in Noah's flood overwhelmed with waters. But to this they may answer, that it
was no general or universal destruction, being extended only to the living
creatures, and they also in part preserved in Noah's arc. It is true indeed,
that this was only a particular or partial destruction, the heavens remaining
altogether untouched, the other elements also incorrupted. But yet this shows
a change in the worlds estate which they seemed to deny. Touching the general
distinction of all things, Peter after answers; to which place we will refer
them: But that wherein the difficulty of the whole controversy consists is
the immutable estate of the heavenly bodies wherein has been observed by
experience of all ages, a constancy almost admirable: when in this sublunary
region of elementish bodies, there has been as great variety, and almost a
circular alteration. And indeed, were the heavens capable of corruption, how
could the sphere of the Moon, situated so near the fire have continued so
long unconsumed. Let us therefore a little examine how the cause stands: with
the heavens in the matter of corruption.

There are two different opinions of them that make the heavens incorruptible,
some to deliver them from corruption, have made them void of all matter, others
allot them a matter, but in a distinct kind from that of the sublunary bodies,
all agreeing, that they be incorruptible. The chief of the first sect, is
Auerroes, a learned Turk, who expostulating the matter with us, demands by
what means we came to know the matter of the heavens? For the only means to
prove the existence of matter in any thing, is, as he calls it, Substantial
transmutation; or more plainly, the succession of forms. But in heaven there
has been no such succession, no nor any alteration of qualities, therefore
the heavens are immateriall. But we may answer, first that the being of matter
in any thing is known as well by accidentary, or local, as by substantial
transmutation. But the heavens have a local Motion, or Mutation, at least in
their parts, therefore they consist of matter. Secondly we answer thus, that
although the heavens have all this while lasted without change in their
substance, yet seeing they are capable of future transmutation, we may thence
conclude the presence of matter in them. For who would say that there is in a
sucking child no reasonable soul because he sees in him no actual use of
reason, or present conceit of learning, we know that his potentiall disposition
and sitnesse to conceive, is testimony sufficient of that soul which is in
him. Their second argument is this, all things consisting of a corporal
matter, are withal corruptible for the ability of receiving the yet absent
forms being a property inseparable from the matter, which also is accompanied
with a longing desire to supply its defects, there must needs be granted an
expulsion of the incumbent form for induction of a new successor, wherein is
corruption; or else this, The matters inclination and ingrafted desire, as it
were, must be always frustrate, which folly, the most wise God of Nature
detesteth: therefore there is in the heavens no such matter as we talk of. To
which argument, they that make the matter of the celestial bodies different
from that of the sublunary creatures, frame this answer: Indeed (say they)
whatsoever is compounded of such a matter as this is, of the sublunary
creatures, is subject unto corruption; but the heavens have a matter of a
different and far more excellent state than these under elements, and that is
the sum and foundation of Aristotle his opinion and reason touching the heavens
incorruptible condition. But we that make one matter of both, may thus somewhat
probably answer: That though such a matter is always accompanied with a
capablenesse of corruption, yet may it by some superior ouerruling power be
preserved from all actual cotruption. And so stands the case with the
heavens, which never had been able of themselves so long to have continued
without alteration, but by the help of some higher power; not as the
Peripateticks and Platonicks fondly imagine the Angels or Intelligences (which
Alcinous calls Lesser gods) but by the sovereign appointment of God, who to
moderate and stay the too frequent and ouerhastie alteration of the under
bodies, has allotted the heavens this regularity and uniformity of motion.
But here they will demand a reason, what has so fulfilled the matters desire
of interchangeable succession of forms, that it remains contented with that
form which it presently inioyeth. The answer is: That either the excellency
of the form present causes this contentment, or else Gods appointment
ouerswayeth its desire. How then? Are we Patrons or rather Authors of violence
in those excellent agreeing bodies? Nay rather, by the limitation of the
matters unstayed indifferency, we do more establish that their excellent
harmony. For as in a city situate on the confines of two disagreeing
kingdoms, of it self inclining to neither side, but indifferent for
entertainment of either conquering adversary, if after valourous conquest
performed by one party, it yields it self to the vanquishers dominion, and
by the provident industrious care of the new superuisor, be fortified against
the violent irruption of the forevanquished adversaries; by this new restraint
of its old indifferency suffers no violence, but rather is confirmed in a
quiet and peaceable condition within it self: so the matter of the celestial
bodies, howsoever naturally indifferent to entertain any form, if by the
conquering action of some prevailing Agent it be possessed of so excellent and
powerful a form, as admits of no outward new impression in this limitation of
its equal instable for disposition, is not any way violenced, but rather
fitter for the intended harmony of the celestial bodies. And that may serve
for a sufficient reason of the hitherto-incorrupted condition of the celestial
bodies. Now touching their future estate, we shall after dispute, if first we
have their fourth argument for disproofe of the matter, as also the substance
of their opinion. Auerroes therefore says, that heaven is a form of a
selfe-subsistence; immaterial, dimensional, locally mooueable, participating
light and other accidents; wherein (me thinks) is a plain contradiction: for
to omit the disquisition, whether any form can consist without matter, what is
more absurd then to imagine quantity really separate from the matter,
quantity having its basis and foundation in the matter, and only limitation
from the form? farther, whatsoever is capable of real division, has this
capabilitie (that I may so term it) from the matter: Real division, I say,
for the Mathematicians proportionably to their mental abstraction or
separation of quantity, have also a mental division, but whatsoever has
quantity, is capable of such a division, therefore also it has a matter. Over
and beside all this, whatsoever is perceiueable by sense, has a matter; for
the form of nothing can be perceived by sense, but is understood and conceived
by its operation in the matter: but the heaven is sensible, therefore also
material. To this add Auerroes his own testimony, set down in his Comment
upon Aristotle his seventh book of Metaphysics, wherein himself confesses,
that accidents are inseparable companions of the first Matter; but the heaven
(by his own authority in the first alleged place) has in it light and other
accidents inherent, how then is it altogether void of matter? Other arguments
taken from the inherencie of qualities peculiarly incident unto things
material, for breuities sake I omit, hastening to the second Patrons of the
heavens immortality, that do acknowledge a composition of a matter and a
form in the celestial bodies, but will have it a different and a distinct
kind from the elementish matter of the under bodies.

Plato and some of his followers in this error, interpret it, as if when we
say, the heavens consist of elementary matter, we meant that they are so
compounded of the elements, as are mixed bodies here below: whereupon some of
the more ancient sectaries in this kind, as Heraclitus and Pythagoras thought
that it was made of fire: Thales and Anaximenes, of earth; Empedocles, of a
medley of air and fire; Plato himself, of the four elements, or (as Proclus
records his opinion) of the quintessence of them: whose refutation we omit,
as impertinent unto our purpose: for our meaning is not that the elements are
the matter whereof the heavens be made, but thus we understand it, that the
matter of the Ethereall and Elementish bodies is of the same kind; the whole
first matter being divided into these principal parts, as into halfes, the one
half united unto the forms celestial, the other half coupled unto the
forms of the elements: and so (as I conceive) is that place in the beginning
of Genesis to be understood, where it is said, that In the beginning God
created the Heaven and the Earth, that is, the matter whereof heaven and the
elements were afterward made, signified unto us by the name of those waters
whereupon the spirit of God was moved: and me thinks the argument is very
sound, which is commonly alleged by our partakers: for as in other kinds of
causes, there is one, first and principal whereunto all the rest are reduced,
so also in this kind of the Matter, there being the like reason of al. But if
we distinguish the Matter of the heavens from that of the elements, we can not
come to one first Matter of al things; therefore there is the same Matter both
of the celestial and inferior bodies, to which we may add that thredbare
argument of the Philosophers, Wit hout necessity we must not imagine a
plurality in Nature, forasmuch as Nature abhors vanity: but there is no
necessity of the matters plurality; for the maine ground of this distinction
(for ought that I can see) is, lest they should be forced to grant a power in
the heavens tending to corruption, which (as is before said) has no necessary
illation, forasmuch as the excellency of the form present, restrains the
wandering indifferent desire of the matter, resisting the violent impression of
foreign qualities that should breed rebellion of the subject creatures, against
their commander the heavens. But touching their reasons, (in my poor opinion)
they are very insufficient: for first thus they dispute: The forms of the
sublunary bodies may be separated from their matter, but the heavens form is
inseperable: when in my judgment they prove rather a distinction of forms,
than any diuerfity of the matter. Or if they thence prove a diversity of
matter, because the forms incident, are of greater and less excellency, one
in respect of an other, we may as well say, that the body of a man is of
distinct matter from that of the other more base creatures, because his form is
so passing excellent. Or if they restrain their comparison only to the power
of separation, that because the matter of the heavens is joined inseparably to
the form, when contrariwise the elementish matter has often separation,
therefore there is not the same matter of both: we answer, that the same
matter in kind, may so inseparably be united to its form, as that it can
never be seioyned: not that we deny a power of future separation of the heavens
matter from the present form, but that this may be a sufficient reason of
their hitherto inseparable union. A second argument is that of Aristotle, says
he, whatsoever things participate the same matter, are capable of mutable
transmutation, but the heavens can never be changed into the inferior bodies,
for so much as the elements are altogether passiuely disposed for receipt of the
heavens action, without any reaction upon the heavens, therefore there is not
the same matter of both. To which we answer, that the proposition or first
sentence must be understood of a potentiall transmutation, and that with this
exception; unless the matters imperfection be perfected by the forms inherent
excellency, or resistance be made of some superior form, to turn away the
violence of the oppugning agent. We say that the form now being in the
heavens, is of so powerful and unconquerable a nature, as that no natural
contrary agent is able to compasie any the least new impression. Thirdly thus
they reason: Were the heavens of the same matter with the bodies of the
elements, then in like fort should they (at least by nature) be corruptible;
but the corruption is altogether abhorrent from the heavens nature. To which
assumption Damascen answers by a flat denial, for even the heavens in his
Philosophy are naturally subject to corruption. To which accords that of
Plato in his Timaeus, that attributes the heavens incorruptiblenes to a
superior more powerful cause. For so he brings in the maker of the world
speaking unto the celestial bodies; By nature you are dissoluble, but through
my will preserved from dissolution. Nor shall the destintes of death prevail
over you, to destroy you, because my will is a bond of more power to keep you
from corruption, than that wherewith at your first making you were holden
together. And thus have we hastily run over the difficult question of the
heavens matter. Touching the certainty and means of their dissolution we will
briefly speak by and by, after the resolution of the other ar-arguments for
the non-dissolution of the world.

Simon Magus, as it is recorded lib. 3. Recog. Beati Petri. cap. 3. (if the
records be true) thus replied upon the learned Apostle for the worlds
immortality: If God be infinitely and only good, and the world also good, how
shall God in the end destroy the world? If he destroy that which is good, how
shall himself continue good? If he pull it down because it is evil, how
shall he then be free from evil, that made it evil? To which we answer with
S. Peter in the same place: That the world in its first original state was
good, yet so as it was foreordeined to dissolution: nor do we thereby detract
from Gods goodness; for the heavens (the most excellent part of the world)
being not made for themselves, but for some end after to be revealed; how good
soever, yet were to be dissolved, that that for which they were ordained might
appear: which also Peter thus familiarlie shows; Who sees not how cunningly
an egshell is framed, yet for manifestation of the end of its making, it must
be broken of necessity. So must the present estate of the world, of
necessity, be destroyed, that the more excellent condition of the kingdom of
heaven may be made manifest: at which time also this degenerated evil state of
corruption shall be done away, that a more glorious estate of incorruption may
be restored. So then, that the world shall have an end, I take it, it is
manifest; and that, not an end of annihilation, but of corruption: which indeed
shall be a way unto its perfection. Now concerning the times and seasons of the
worlds dissolution, we will not take upon us curiously to determine, seeing
God, the beginning and end of all things, has left the time unrevealed unto
us. Touching the means and manner of the dissolution, the Stoics glanced at it
a far off, being of opinion, that the world should by fire be dissolved. For
thinking the stars and the skies fire, to have a wasting action upon the
inferior elements, their nourishing moisture by little and little decaying,
when neither the earth can have refection by the water, nor the air
procreation after its absolute consumption, there shall-remaine nothing but
fire to consume both the heavens and the earth, of which afterward a new world
should be made: whose opinion is very consonant unto that of Peter, save only
that they thought this destruction should come of a natural necessity, for
Peter also taugnt, it should be by fire, wherewith God (withdrawing his hand of
preservation) should consume this world, and of the ashes hereof create a new;
yet so, as neither the seat of the blessed souls in heaven, nor the dungeon of
the damned in hell should be destroyed; that neither the iotes of the Saints,
nor the torments of the wicked should be interrupted. As for the firmament and
the other inferior spheres, together with the elements, they shall be endued
with another and that a far more excellent cnodition, putting off these
accidents and affections of corruption fit for the continual generation and
corruption of the natural bodies, and receiving other qualities, agreeable to
the incorruptible estate of the world to come; so that their substance shall be
all one, howsoever they alter their qualities. As in the resurrection men's
bodies shall be of the same substance, but of a different disposition. For
this corruption must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality. So that as Saint Paul said, our imperfect knowledge which we have
in this life, shall in the after-world be abolished, because then we shall have
a morefull and perfect knowledge of God and his Christ. So may we well say this
world shall be destroyed, because it shall lose this present estate of
imperfection and put on a more glorious condition fit for the world to come.
And so, as I take it, are those places of scripture to be understood, where
niention is made of the worlds perishing, that is, the present estate of this
world shall be abolished, and the same substance endued with a more glorious
condition. To which accords that of David, Psa. 102. They shall perish, but
thou shall endure, they shall all wax old as does a garment; as a vesture shall
thou change them and they shall be changed: plainly signifying, that the
perishing of the creatures shall be only an alteration, which God shall bring
upon them.

liuelesse bodies being ended, to what purpose should the heavens moving longer
endure? Which may also semblably be answered touching the action and passion of
the elements, as also for the being of things compounded of their mixture, as
plants and sensible creatures, being things ordained only for man's help, and
sustenance, who in that blessed state of immortality without the least defect
shall need no such supply of his wants; which quiet and restfull estate of
these vnder-bodies, is not, as some have fondly imagined, to be attributed
only unto the quiet rest of the heavens; for when at the prayers of Joshua the
Sun stood still, and with it the rest of the celestial bodies, (unless we
imagine the whole course of them to have been perverted) yet ceased not the
natural actions of things below, for even at that time did Joshua fight? But
the true cause of their rest from motion is the will of the first cause,
without whose adiuuant-fellow-working, the secundary causes are quite disabled
to perform their functions. From hence therefore, namely from the certainety
of the worlds dissolution we thus reason for our maine position. For if the
world incapable of eternity, have a limited time of endurance which it cannot
pass, then has man also his continuance bounded, at least within compass of
the worlds lasting. For location being a thing inseparable from existence, the
world, man's habitation, and mansion house being dissolved, man the principal
inhabitant, must have aioynt and fellow dissolution. But for the more
through-handling of this undoubted truth, our purpose is more particularly to
treat thereof; therefore to leave this far fetched, though not impertinent
reason, taken from the worlds inevitable destruction, we will come to a nearer
and more proper disquisition, holding our selves within the compass of man's
own nature.

Paracelsus by name, who had such confidence in the absolute perfection of his
skill, that he doubted not to profess himself able by Physic to preserve a
man in so perfect a temperature, that he should never die by sickness: but his
own hasty leaving of his life, was confutation sufficient, of his either
false ostentation, or extreme madness. For himself either not able, which
bewraied his unskillful impotencie, or else unwilling, which showed his wilful
folly, ere he came to the prime of his age, before he was thirty years old
ended his days, learning at length by his own experience, that art can never
overcome the necessity of nature; nor man's cunning prevent or preuert the
decrees of the destinies. But to the matter in hand, the question is, whether
man by nature is subject unto death, the end of nature? To which we answer,
that man's nature has a double consideration; first in the incorrupt stare and
purity of creation; secondly in the degenerated condition of corruption, which
although it were altogether unknown unto the Gentilish Philosophers, yet is
its consideration in part Philosophical, and therefore not wholly to be
omitted. Now in the first consideration of nature, we answer negatiuely,
forasmuch as undefiled nature was incapable of the souls separation from the
body, between which there was so absolute and perfect an harmony and consent,
that as the vnderfaculties of the soul, were in subjection to the reasonable
and most principal part thereof, without the least jar and disagreement; so
fared it in the body, though compounded of the contrary natures of the four
elements, yet so well tempered by proportion, that there could be no observance
of the least discord. But after that man's pride set abroch by the devils
suggestion, ventred to taste of the forbidden fruit for desire of knowledge;
the light of reason being the life of the soul, ouercast by the unavoidable
clouds of ignorance, there grew a disagreement and quarrel among the subject
inferior parts of the soul, from whence followed the war of the elements in
the body, never to be ended till the field were lost by blood: and therefore
excellent was the speech of the Friar Ferus; The diseases of the body came
from sin the souls sickness, the death of the body from the death of the
soul; and who dares say, the dealing is unequal, that he should incur the
death of the body, who wilfully rejected the life of the soul? or who marueils
that the devil by Gods sufferance tormenteth the body with diseases, that
gave the devil a place of dwelling in his soul? so that the death of the
body being the separation of the soul from the body, was a punishment
inflicted for man's wilful sequestration of himself from God; and it is a good
collection more then coniecturall, that the body had never been subject to
the corruption of destruction, had not the soul been tainted with the
corruption of defiling. Man therefore in his primarie state of creation, was
not naturally subject unto death, but in the defiled condition of corrupted
nature, death is become inevitable; and therefore Thales Milesius, one of the
seven wise men, was wont to say, that there was no difference between a man's
life and his death, being both things agreeable unto nature; and thence
proceeded their resolute contempt of death, because they thought it was
inevitable: whereupon the Epicure himself considering the ineuitablenesse of
deaths coming, was (as Maximus witnesses) wont to say; that against other
things we must find some defense and remedy, only death was irresistable:
our body (the vndefenced city of our soul) being all insufficient to
withstand the violent assaults of death. But to leave the infinite testimonies
of the learned, grounded upon so long experience, let us deal with reasons
more artificial, and show this truth first in particular, that every man has
his endurance dated which he cannot pass; afterward go unto the species, to
declare it also in the whole kind.

The principal and maine reason is taken from his composition; for man
consisting of a matter and a form, as do also the other bodily living
creatures, though the spiritual substance of his soul be immortal, yet his
body being made of the first matter, whose inseparable companion is a desire of
change, there must of necessity follow dissolution; for God and nature
(according to our presupposition) doing nothing in vain, this insatiable
appetite of receiving new forms, shall not finally remain wholly frustrate:
if therefore we grant an induction of a new form, we must withal grant an
expulsion of that that before was inherent, for as much as two forms of diverse
kinds are insufferable together in the same subject, whereupon does follow the
corruption of the whole compound: But if we shall make a more diligent and
narrow inquiry into the causes of this dissolution, we may find plenty of
reasons ministered to confirm this truth. Now the first cause natural of
natural death, is contrariety in the compound; for all corruption
presupposing alteration, which is only betwixt, and by means of contrary
qualities, contrariety of the inherent qualities, (being the only cause of
alteration) is also cause of the compounds corruption, which is farther
manifested by exprience, for so we see things wherein is least disagreement, to
be of longest continuance; and the immateriall substance of the creatures
spiritual, void of all contrariety, incapable also of corruption; so that
the inherence of contrariety is one special cause of the compounds
dissolution. Man therefore whose body consists of the euer-iarring elements,
Fare, Air, Water, Earth, has also an irresistable home bred cause of
dissolution. Furthermore, the consent of al Philosophers, and reason it self
has set down this truth as undeniable, that man's life and the chief
maintenance thereof, consists principally, if not wholly, in the due and just
proportionable temperature of the four first qualities, Heat, Cold, Dryness,
Moisture, and till their disproportion, there is no danger of death, or any
growing sickness: whereupon Auerroes has this definition of sickness; That
it is nothing else, but the unnatural disproportion of those four qualities,
whereby the part whereinto the same is incident, is disabled to perform its
natural functions. whereout arises this collection as necessary, being
almost all one with those things foresaid, viz. that the disproportion of the
four first qualities, and their swaruing from their just temperature, is cause
of their subjects dissolution: but in every man we see a declining from his
engrafted natural complexion, which also increases more and more according as
his ages are altered, therefore man's dissolution cannot be avoided: where (by
the way) we must not let pass the saying of the Philosopher; that man's life
consists in heat, which also is thereby proved, because in the presence
thereof, if it be not excessive, we see a kind of claritie and vigor as it
were newly infused, at its departure, the wonted or rather far greater
recourse of languor. But we are not so to understand that saying of the
Philosophet, as if heat were the sole and only cause of life; for even by
Aristotle his own witness, the temper of the four first qualities, is the
truest and most proper continent cause of life: but the meaning is, that our
natural heat is the chief instrument of the soul to exercise the vital
functions, as nutrition, augmentation, and such like, yet so tempred, that it
exceed not the proportionable measure of our natural moisture, the food and
nourishment of our heat. And hence is that of Ficinus, that our life, as light,
consists in heat, whose food and maintenance is of an aerie and fat
moisture, not unlike unto oil, whose immoderate excess and impuritie or
defect, are all wasters of our vital heat; so that there was as great
necessity of moisture as of heat in the performance of our natutall vital
functions, whence came the necessity of nourishment: for our congenerate heat
having a consuming action upon our moisture, the resistance: thereof being
altogether unable to withstand the heats assaulting action, Nature, that like a
kind mother is never wanting to the necessities of her of spring, has
bestowed on our soul a faculty, whereby to restore our decayed moisture,
through the assimilation of the nourishment applied unto the wasted substance.
Now the especial means of this decay, as is aforesaid, is our heats
assaulting action, whereby the soul continually engenders of our humiditie,
new spirits, for maintenance of the vital and sensual actions, which being
wasted by their neuer-ceasing operation (as nothing is able long to continue
without interchangable rest) have of necessity a supply from our humiditie,
and our moisture also equally decayed, has the like supply made by nourishment
which we receive, lest there should follow a sudden destruction: hence
therefore, that is from the necessity of continual nourishment, we infer a
decay of natural moisture, for otherwise whereunto is nutrition directed?

a total and perfect corruption of their integrity. Now if by the restoratiue
faculty of the soul there could be supply made of as pure moisture as that
which was lost, the creature might (for any thing in nature) be preferued alive
for ever. And therefore Ficinus beside the just proportion of moisture unto the
heat, requires also purity and incorruption in the moisture, for as every
moisture is not a preserver of the light of a lamp, but though oil maintains
the flame, yet water does quench it: so is it in the case of our life which
principally consists in heat, for the watrish humidity does clean extinguish
it. And thence it is that old men when they are nearest unto their end abound
with a watrish humor, yet are they said to be cold and dry, as wanting indeed
that moisture which is the fittest for their heat to feed upon.

Natural, the other Violent: Natural death is where our native moisture is by
means of our haturall heat (continually working upon it) consumed and
dispatched, whence follows a lingering, languishing and pining of our natural
heat as wanting what to feed upon; contrary to the subtle opinion of the
fault-finding Julius Scaliger, that thought our natural heat to be weakened,
and in the end clean consumed only by want of interchangeable rest, and
ceasing from its operation. For as we see fire not wasted by much use, but
lingringly extinguished by decay and want of fit fuel for to feed upon; so
our homebred natural heat not tired with ouer-working, but languishing with
the decay of fit food, is at length together with our moisture its natural
provided food, clean consumed. To which may be added that saying of Fernelius
to this purpose, that though Aesculapius himself, the God of Physic had the
guiding of the most temperate complexioned man that can be imagined, and that
from his birth, to keep him from all outward annoiances whatsoever, yet has
he in himself an homebred enemy by little and little to spoil him of his
life. Unnatural and violent death, is when our natural heat either with too
much cold, or excessive external heat, or with an immoderate measure of
moisture is extinguished. According to which two kinds of death, the learned
Schoolmen have devised a double term of our life: There is, say they, A
term of nature, and there is, A term beside nature. The natural term, is
that utmost time, that a man by his complexion can reach unto, whch is farther
off or nerer according to the differences of men's temperatures. The term or
limit beside nature is when man's life either comes short of that length which
by his complexion he may attain unto, or is protracted and prolonged beyond
the course of nature, and that they call the end or term of Gods prescience,
and fore-appointment in his vnreaueled will, which a man can neither prevent,
nor yet prolong: and this has for the most part place in violent death; and
was therefore also propounded by those devout Schoolmen, lest men should not
think they depended only upon chance, or fell out without Gods especial
counsel and disposing. For so we see in daily experience, many men in the
prime of their years and strength of their age, either by riot, or famine,
pestilence or sword, suddenly cut off, and we are many times moved with pity
in that behalf, bewailing their estate that in our judgments might have lived
a great deal longer: as indeed they might, if we respect what they were
capable of by their complexion; but in regard of Gods decree and purpose it was
impossible for them to pass that moment and point of time: for Gods prescience
can never be deceived. And this, to avoid tediousness, may briefly serve for
the certainetie of the end of particular men.

specie (in which regard only he is said to be a part of the world) we may
pass over unto it by way of Prolepsis, or preoccupation. For it may be
objected, that though there is a limited endurance of particular and single
men, yet there may be a perpetual preservation of the species, or kind: and
therefore God has bestowed on man a faculty of procreation to propagate his
kind; that though every man must (of a natural necessity) die, yet might he
leave an other of his own kind behind him, that so there might be a
continual and everlasting succession. To which we answer, that if they grant a
corruption in the particular, they must withal grant it in the species. For
the species being a thing existent only in imagination, not having any real
being, but as we conceive of it in the particulars, it is a necessary
illation, that from the corruption of all the particulars, we may conclude the
like of the general. But to show it more plainly, by a demonstratiue
proceeding, we may observe the like course of decay in the species as there is
in the indiuiduum. For as nutrition is to the particular, so is generation to
the species, in the case of their continuance and preservation: wherefore as by
the nourishment we take for restitution of our natural moisture, there being
supplied not so pure humidity as was lost, the particulars decaying by little
and little, are at last clean consumed: so by procreation, the maintenace of
our species, the purity of our complexion being by degrees and by time
diminished, at length there follows, even of necessity, an absolute
corruption. Now (as I conceive of it) the decay comes thus, for the
particulars, whose function this generation is, being by continual mixture of
outward nourishment corrupted, the seed, the matter and means of propagation
cannot but be tainted with like corruption. And that is the chief reason
amongst other less principal, that men in this age of the world are of less
continuance than they were in former time. From all which we thus conclude; if
the natural vigor of the species, be by little and little continually
weakened, there must of necessity in the end follow a full and perfect
corruption. For (as Aristotle said of the division of any thing finite, that by
often detraction, though but of a little quantity, the whole becomes at
length incapable of division) so by continual wasting of the virtue of the
kind, there follows at length even of necessity, a total and inevitable
extinguishing.

Noah's time, we read of some that lived, six, seven, eight, nine hundred
years; as Adam, Noah, Methusalem, and others. After the flood, he that lived
longest, recorded in holy history, exceeded not the age of a hundred and
twenty years: some few years after, in David's time, it fell to seventy
years, or if there were any overplus, it was mingled with labor and sorrow,
more worthy the name of death than life. So that we may hence conclude, that it
is impossible for mankind to last for ever, having inwardly in his nature
sufficient and vnpreuentable causes of dissolution.

Having thus euidenced the truth of our two positions, that there is a set time
of endurance unto every man and unto all mankind, and learning by experience,
the natural and true mother of knowledge, that among the particulars so me
have a longer, some a shorter time of continuance, and that even by nature; it
remains that with all possible breuity and perspicuity, we set down the
causes natural of this natural difference, which we can no otherwise do,
than by propounding the received causes of the length and shortness of man's
life, and according as they are more or less in any man, so judge of their
effects. Aristotle (in his preface to this treatise) premiseth a word or two
touching the diverse consideration of this difference according to the diversity
of that subject unto which they are incident. For in these terms, of length,
and shortness of life, we may compare either things of the same kind, as man
with man, or things of diverse kinds, as reasonable creatures with liuelesse and
sensible things; for there are some unreasonable creatures longer lived then
man, for so Hesiodus reports of the Crow, that he lives out nine men's lives
(measuring every (...) to be 100 years) the Heart, by the same aut^ors
witness, thrice as many: the Raven trebleth the Hearts endurance: and thence
was that plaint of dying Theophrastus, and complaint of natures inequality and
as it were blindfolded disposition of her benefits, especially in this kind,
that to Hearts and Crows so thanklesly had given so long time of continuance,
which was denied unto man, that could and would have better employed that
benefit. Which complaint was personally renewed and aggrauated by Bewaldus, an
old Grammarian, for the sticks not in the person of some captious Atheist to
expostulate the matter with God, why our life (in these times) is so curtalled,
that for the many hundreds of years which in the first age of the world men
lived, we have our stint and limits within the compass of little more than
half an hundred? But Josephus in his first book of Antiquties, gives these
reasons, and first of all the wholesome goodness of their nourishment, and the
outward compassing elements which they inhabited. For their corrupted nature
was not greedily carried with desire of their corruptions increase as headlongly
and on the sudden to engulfe it self into all extremity, but by degrees and
lingringly, as upon constraint by little and little descends from that top
and perfection of corruption. And as every thing was nearest unto that
beginning, so was it cleerest and less tainted with corruption. We therefore in
the last age and exteremity of the world, are in a more extreme degree of
corruption by reason of that frequent alteration in the elements when every
mutation adds somewhat to the begun impurity. A second reason was Gods will
and bountifulnes, the benefit whereof was not bounded in that small compass
and limit of time, but extended also unto us and to our posterity. For God
therefore granted them a longer continuance, for revealing of many hidden
mysteries, especially in Astrology; for the course of many of the celestial
bodies could never have been learned, no not so much as in any mediocrity, had
not God given some of them at least six hundred years to live in, in which
time, the great year as they call it, is fulfilled and perfected. To which we
may add the fewness of the earths inhabitants in the beginning of the world,
God preventing the dispeopling of the new world, and providing for its store
and replenishing. And yet (if we believe Anacroon, I know not how credible a
witness being a Poet) within these few ages last past, Arganthonius king of
the Tartessians, lived an hundred and fifty years; Cinyras of Cyprus, an
hundred and sixty years; Eginus two hundred; and as Alexander and Cornelius
report, there was one in Illyrium called Dodon, that lived the full and complet
term of six hundred years; and Xenophon writes of one, who in the i will of the
Latins, lived eight hundred years. But I am of opinion with Pliny, that it is
very unlikely, seeing it may be that they erred in their computation, not
knowing how according to diversity of nations in former ages, there were
manifold and sundry measures of the years; for the old Arcadians made four
years of one of ours, allotting unto every year three months. The Egyptians
made as many years as months, according to the Moons finished and renewed
course: and according unto this reckoning, it will be no strange thing, that a
man should even in these days live a thousand years. But not to prosecute the
diverse continuance of things in diverse kinds, as also to let pass the farther
examination of the decayed estate of man's life, lest we again revive the now
quenched fire of godless indignation, at the shortness of our life, we will
come to the most pertinent comparison of man with man in this kind, if first
we shall only remember what was Plinies opinion of the shortning our lives,
namely, that God herein did greatly gratify us, by cutting off these days of
misery: agreeable to which, Silemus being demanded what was the greatest
happiness and good that God could do a man, made answer, Never to be borne;
and the next unto that, to die quickly.

But touching the causes of long life, we may thus briefly dichotomise them,
for they are either inward or outward; the inward causes are such as either we
have naturally ingrafted, or else gotten by art, industry and wisdom: that of
nature is the good temperature and proportionate mixture of the four first
qualities in the body; for moderate heat that is vnproportionate to the
quantity of moisture, rather hastneth death by the too speedy consumption of
its moist food, than any way prolongeth life, as we see in men of choleric
constitution. So also, too great cold, that is ouerswaying the quantity or
virtue of our natural heat, shortneth our life: and thence it is that old men
the nearer they draw unto their ends, have their bodies ouergrowen with cold:
whereupon all the Astrologians have observed Saturn to be a Planet enemy unto
life, as having a virtue of cold and drought, and accordingly (as some imagine)
was he painted with a sith in his hand, cutting down as it were and killing
men with the operation and infusion of these two deadly qualities: which may
also be said of the excess of the other two contrary qualities, moisture and
drought; for too much moisture oppresses the natural heat, as we see
greene-wood quench an unequal quantity of fire: and thence it is, that
willowes and such like, whose almost natural place is the rivers side, are of
short continuance, because their too much and too waterish moisture drowneth
their heat. So that hereby (as I take it) it is manifest, that none of these
qualities singly and by themselves, are true causes of long life, but jointly
all in a good and just proportion.

Now if any man shall (out of Aristotle) object, that the two qualities of
life, namely heat and moisture, are only causes of long life: we may answer,
that these two by themselves procure not length of life, but in a certain
measure and proportion. Now the rebater of the heats too too active quality,
is his contrary, cold; and the moderatour and temperer of the moistures
access is drought: so that in every man the four first qualities are
requisite; yet were two only mentioned by Aristotle, as being those only
which directly cause long life; the other two only inclusiuely set down, as
being no otherwise effectually profitable for life, than as they temper and
abate the excess of the two principal. But because every moisture is not
cause of life, nor the best moisture in every quantity, there are one or two
requisite conditions annexed: first concerning the quality, that it be not too
thin and fluid, such as is the natural disposition of water; but more
cleaving and fat, such as may resemble the nature of oil, for its better
preservation from putrefaction: secondly, that it have some competent degree of
heat, to keep it from congealing; last of all, that it be pure, not mingled
with excrementall superfluities; forasmuch as all mixture of superfluities is
against nature, enemy to good digestion, and sound nutrition. Those things
thus observed, our moisture shall be sufficiently qualified for our lives
maintenance. Touching the quantity, in a word, (as is before said) it must
neither be excessive, lest the too great quantity oppress our heat, as we
see infusion of too much oil oftentimes put out the lamp; nor yet defective,
lest the devouring action of our heat, too soon consume it: but in a competent
mediocrity, such as the heat may neither ouer-hastily vanquish, nor with the
violence of excessive inequality too suddenly be extinguished. Where briefly
we may see the reason, why man is longer lived than other creatures of more
vast bodies; for though in the large capacity of their great receivers, they
have a greater quantity of this natural moisture than is incident unto man's
small body, yet have they it not so well tempered and proportioned to their
heat, which may well be gathered by their slow and seldom breathing. So that
it is true which the Philosopher has, that the great or little quantity of
the body, is no sufficient cause of long life. And yet this is withal most
true, that where there is greatest store of humiditie with a competent
proportion of heat, there is greatest fitness naturally for long life. And
that is the reason why those that in their infancy are most subject to a
languishing diseasednesse, are afterward most healthful, and for the most part
longest lived. For the abundance of their natural moisture hinders the too
speedy prevailing of the heat, by resisting its action: and so is it the less
mingled with foreign impurities. For as we see the Smiths fire, by the moderate
sprinckling of water, though at first for a time its force is somewhat abated,
yet it at length having overcome its weak adversary, as in triumph burns the
cleerer, and lasts longer; so fares it in our bodies: for our heat not able
on the sudden to ouersway our multitude of moisture, is the longer hindered from
consuming it, whence proceeds long life, and after it has gotten the upper
hand, performs with more facility its natural functions, whence comes
healthfulnesse; where we may also explane that Problem, why children that are
too ripe witted in their childhood, are for the most part either shortest
lived, or else toward their old age most sottish, according to our Proverb;
Soon ripe, soon rotten: for hence we may gather, that from the beginning
they had but little moisture, over which their heat soon prevailed; for much
humiditie is cause of blockishnesse and folly: whence is that of Galen, that
fleame being a cold waterish humor, is of no force for ornament of good
conditions: and Plato doubted not to say, that look how much moisture there is
in us, so much also is our folly; and thereof it is, as the same Plato
observes, that children and women are for the most part most foolish. For the
glorious light and Sunne-like splendor of the soul, is therewith as with a
cloud obscured and intercepted, which is an evident proof of the small store
of moisture in these quick witted forward children, over which the heat so
much the sooner obtaining dominion, and in process of time drying the brain,
the subordinate instrument of understanding, either quite destroieth it, and so
brings death, or else so corrupts it, that it is altogether unable and unfit
to steed the inner senses in their functions, whereon the understanding in this
prison of the boby principally depends: which may no less fitly serve for
answer unto that consequent demand, why those infants for the most part are
soonest able to walk, to talk, to conceive, to remember, and such like; the
reason is taken from the little quantity of moisture; which may be gathered
by the contrary disposition in the otherwise affected subjects, as also by that
which we see in daily experience in creatures of other kinds. For whereas man
by reason of his fluid, unsettled substance, has for the better strengthening of
his ioints his body swathed, and is a long time before he is able to stand or
walk, or perform any such like his vital functions; we see other creatures
almost in the same moment, borne and enabled to stand, walk, and such like;
for their unequal quantity of heat, prevailing over the little store of
moisture, soon sits them for the performance of vital actions, that being
the souls chief instrument in the discharge of her duties. Now if any man
shall ask what this just proportion is, and when they are tempred so as may
best be available for long life, the answer is, that heat and moisture are
then well proportioned when neither the moisture with its too great quantity
deuoureth the heat, nor the overmuch heat, too suddenly consumes and eats up
the moisture. Yet must the heat have a kind of dominion over the moisture, else
can it not be able to nourish the body. For in nutrition the thing nourished,
by reason of the instrument ordained for that purpose, must actually work upon
that, whereby it is nourished. And because that every Agent must be
proportioned unto the patient, in the inequality of excess, therefore must the
heat being the souls sole active instrument of nutrition, have dominion over
the moisture, the subject matter of that faculty.

Fernelius doubts of, namely, that there are four, if not only yet
chiefly, notable complexions; we answer that those of a sanguine constitution
are by nature capable of the longest life; as having the two qualities of life
best tempred. And therefore is compared unto the air, which is moderatly hot
and in the highest degree moist. Yet not with that too thin and fluid watrish
moisture, but more oily; oil it self resembling the true nature of the air.
Therefore the sanguine complexion is fittest for long life. For choler is an
humor like unto fire, extreme hot and moderatly dry, and so insufficient to
make supply of moisture to the devouring operation of that fiery heat, which is
in it. In the flegmaticke the copiousnesse of that humor resembling water,
oppresses the heat and so hinders good digestion, whence proceed crudities in
the stomach and liver, from whence they are diffused into the veins, and so
unto all the parts of the body, and at length the body is ouergrowen with
corruption. Lastly, melancholy resembling the earth and its qualities, cold and
drought, both enemies to life, hasteneth the destruction of the body whereunto
it is incident.

The second inward cause of long life is, the moderation of our affections.
Whether it be that natural appetite of meat and drink for nourishment, or
those other of anger, love, joy, lust, sorrow, and such like. For all these are
available both ways, either in excess to kill, or in moderation to save.
Touching the moderate use of meats and drinks, what need we seek far for
proof of its profitablenes to preserve life, when we see so many daily by
surfeiting and ouercharging their stomachs with too much and too riotus use of
meats, untimely end their days: and contrariwise, men very crasie and sickely
by temperancie and moderation many times protract their lives almost to an
incredible length? For so is it reported of one Herodicus, a student in
Aristotle his days, the most weak and sickely of any that lived in that time
by the testimony both of Plato and of Aristotle; who notwithstanding, by his
diligent care and guidance of himself lived full out 100. years; and no
marvel, for so did he repair the daily decay of his humidity, by supply of
nourishment, and neither overwhelmed his heat, with the abundance of moisture,
nor mingled his radical moisture with too much external superfluous
impurities. Where we may resolve that doubt, how it comes to pass, that often
drinkers of wine for the most part hasten their death; The reason is, that the
vehement heat of the wine, consumes their moisture, and so by detraction of
the heats food, in time also extinguisheth the heat. Now if any man shall
require me to prescribe a diet unto him; though I be no Physician, yet will I
refer him unto that of the excellent Emperor, who never eat till he was
hungry, nor ever proceeded to a gluting satiety. For the extremes are
dangerous both excess and defect; too much meat hindering good digestion and
ingendring crudities, and too little giving occasion of the heats too sudden
prevailing over the moisture, both which are friends of death: Not would I
counsel men strictly to tie themselves unto set hours; for that, says
Paracelsus, is dangerous, causing many times, either delaie of applying
nourishment, or too speedy ministering before the former digestion is finished.

heat without exercise and motion is after a sort cast on sleep, or rather
benumbed, whence proceeds that other daughter of dullness, collection of
excremental superfluities, the heat being not able to digest our received
nourishment; and thence is that corruption and rottenness which ouertaketh
these slow-backes; as we see standing water soonest putrify and gather filth.
Wherefore Aristotle enquiring the causes of the toilesome travel of some women
in childbirth over others, sets down this as principal among the rest,
namely their idleness and want of exercise; for his experience of women in
other countries so accustomed to pains taking, had taught him; for to them
childbearing was not so painful, their labor consuming those excrements
that are the usual impediments of ease in that kind. Nor will I take upon me
to limit any man to any kind of exercise rather than an other, or appoint any
time; although this caveat will not be amiss prescribed, that they use not to
stir themselves more violently than is ordinary, before the through digestion
of meat; for then they clogge their stomachs and make them unfit for after
concoction, and withal fill their bodies with raw humors, which by exercise
are dispersed through the veins into all the parts of the body: only as
inother things, so especially in exercise of what kind soever, either for
delight, or of pains, let them remember moderation, that it be neither too
much, nor to little. Not too much, that is, neither too vehement, nor yet
continual, but interchangeable, for both these by consuming of the spirits, are
alike hurtful; not too little, for continued rest and idleness (as is before
said) engenders putrefaction. Where the consideration of the moderate use of
sleep and waking is very incident, for they are both things necessary for
maintenance of life in their mediocrity, both as hurtful if beyond measure.
For immoderate and unseasonable watching wastes the spirits, and by consuming
of the vital juice, causes leanness in the body, enfeebleth the parts
thereof, hinders the operation of the senses, dries the marrow and the
brain: insomuch that oftentimes it proceeds to doting and frenzy. So
likewise too much sleep hinders our health and welfare by loosing the parts
of the body, dulling the natural heat, consuming the moisture, and such like.
But moderatly used and interchangeably they are notable means of procuring and
preserving health, not only because this variety and change is very
delightsome and refreshing, but much more by restoring or hindering the decay of
Nature.

anger, joy, sorrow and such like, though we read not of many that have
suddenly died for anger, yet by reason of that sudden emission of hear into the
outward parts of the body, and kindling as it were the fire of choler, it must
needs be very hurtful, when as all suddenness, especially joined with
vehemence, is an horror unto nature. And choler inflameth the blood, whence
proceeds that unreasonableness and raging, usually observed in men overmuch
angered. But examples are plentiful of such as with sudden and immoderat joy
have died; as Pliny reports of Sophocles and Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant,
that immediately upon tidings of victory gave up the ghost. And Liuie makes
mention of two mothers at Rome, that after the bloody battle of Cannas, for
joy of the safe and unexpected return of their sons, suddenly fell down
dead: the one meeting her son at the City gate, the other in her house
bewayling the reported death of her son, when on the sudden beside her
expectation, safely presented himself to her sight. The like also Gellius
writes of one Dingenes of Rhodes, that having his three sons, for the mastery
obtained at the games, in one day crowned, after his sons imbracements and
the peoples applause, suddenly yielded up the ghost. The means of this death
was the sudden dilatation of the heart, the vital spirits and the heat whose
beginning is the heart, being too far carried from their fountain. So also
read we of Aristotle, that not able to find the reason why Euripus, (a part
of the sea situated between Aulis of Bootia and Eubaea) ebbed and flowed seven
times a day, for very grief died: the means and manner of his death being the
too great contraction of the spirits, whereby the heat was as it were with
smoke chaoked. The like is reported of Diodorus a logician, who for shame that
he could not at the first answer the trifling question which Stilpo put out,
suddenly ended his days. Which is also written of Homer, who in the I Will Ios
sitting on the sea shore, demanded of the fishermen if they had taken any
thing, they thus obscurely in riddle-wise made ananswer; Those that we took we
left behind, those that we could not catch, we bring with us. For in the
sunshine (as they say it is shipmens fashions) they made inquisition for their
backbiting familiars, and some they took, and cruelly pressed unto death,
leaving their liuelesse carcases to be devoured of the fishes: those that
craftily had insinuated themselves either into their flesh, or into the inside
of their apparel, they were feign to bring away with them. But quick witted
Homer, not able on the sudden to expound this problem, for shame, (as Plutarch
and Herodotus write of him) gave up the ghost. For the spirits and blood (as in
all kind of fear it falls out) retiring to the inward parts, as to a tower
of defense, by their sudden retrait, and reuerberation, redouble the heat and
so inflaming the heart, not able to be cooled again by respiration, stifles
the patient.

Venus provides not for those that are already borne, but for those that
shall be borne, and therefore Auicenna, a learned Philosopher and Physician,
doubted not to say, that the emission of a little seed more than the body could
well bear was a great deal more hurtful than the loss of forty times so
much blood. For it wastes the spirits, weakeneth the stomach, enfeebleth and
dries up the brain and marrow, whereby especially it hastneth death. And the
truth hereof Aristotle proves by his experimental observation, for so has
he noted the cocke-sparow by immoderate and too frequent use of Venery, very
seldom to live out the term of two years, and the same reason he gives
why the Mule a mixed creature begotten between an horse and an ass is longer
lived, tha^ either of them, for his insting in that kind, is but once only
through the whole course of his life. To which we may add the diversity of the
sex, for the male according unto Aristotle in every kind almost, is by nature
better fitted for long life than the female, having greater force of heat, and
the moisture more firm and better able to resist than the fluid substance of
the female; and thence it is that women for the most part are sooner perfected
than men, being sooner fit for generation, sooner in the flower and prime of
their age, and finally, sooner old, for their heat though little, yet sooner
prevails over that fluid thin substance and moisture of theirs, than it
possibly can over that solid and compact humiditie which is in man.

Galen, the father of Physicians, counseled his scholars to have especial
respect unto the conjunction of the Planets in their signs, whenever they
undertake any cure: and, which is more fit for the present purpose, the
Astrologers have assigned unto every Planet a monthly dominion over the child
conceived in the womb, according to their order and situation. The first
month is allotted unto Saturn: the second unto Jupiter, and so forth in
order, until they have all finished their dominion, and then they begin
again: which is the especial reason alleged by some, why the child that is
borne in the eight month, for the most part dies, when as oftentimes those
that are brought forth a month sooner or later, live in very good health:
for Saturn is a planet whose influence causes cold and dryness, which both
are qualities enemies unto life. Now follows the last, though not the least
cause of long life, and that is the goodness of the soil, and wholesomnesse
of the air: for it is so recorded in Histories, and approved by the
testimony of our late travelers, that in that part of India which is called
Oner, the inhabitants are very long lived, and for the most part very
healthful, insomuch that many of them live until they be above an hundred
years old; and we see by experience in our country, how perilous not only
pestilent air is, but even the vnholesomnes of the fennie countries, that are
often anoied with stinking and unsavory fogges. Aristotle in his treatise of
the length and shortness of life, makes choice of a hot country, as fittest
for preservation and maintenance of life; for so he observes it, that serpents
bred and brought up in hot countries, are generally bigger bodied then those
that are found in colder climets: and those fishes that breed in the red sea,
are also longer than those in the seas which are not so hot, and that, though
they be of the same kind; which is a manifest proof of their longer
continuance: else how comes it to pass, that they have greater growth? and
again, those creatures that live in cold climets, have a more waterish kind
of humor, and fitter for congelation; whence follows the speedier
destruction of the inhabitants: but the truth is, that neither hot countries,
nor colder climets, are of themselves any furtherance unto long life, for those
that are of a choleric fiery constitution, live longer in cold countries,
and such as be of colder complexion, live best and longest in hot regions, but
according to the diversity of men's complexions, so live they better or worse
in diverse countries. Those that are too hot of co^stitution, by my counsel,
shall make choice of a country in some measure and degrees cold, lest the
outward heat of the circumiacent air increase the fire within, and make it
more vehement; and thence is it that those in the hottest part of Ethiopia are
shortest lived, having that natural excess of heat set on fire with the
access of the external heat of the air. Now for such as abound with too much
moisture, their best habitation in my judgment is in hot and dry regions,
that the heat and drought of the soil may abate the superfluity of the humor.
But there are some of a moderate and well proportioned constitution, and if any
man shall ask what country is best for them to dwell in, I answer, that there
are two sorts of men thus tempered; some are of a more weak and less hardy
disposition, and to them I would prescribe a dwelling in countries rather hot
then cold, that the heat of the place may comfort and strengthen the heat of
their bodies. Others again are more hardy and better able to endure any not
extreme violence of cold; and for them it is best to live in colder climates,
for so is their heat better enabled to perform it functions of digestion and
such like; and therefore Aristotle in his Politics says; that Northren men,
and generally such as dwell in colder countries, are stronger and bigger
bodied, and most an end better couraged, and longer lived: for the coldness of
the compassing air, reflects the heat into the inward parts; and by that
reflection, the heats force is increased, and the parts gathered better and
closer together, which both further the performance of its duties. And that is
the reason why men in Winter are more hungry and devouring than in Summer, as
experience teaches us all: for the stomach is strengthened by the heats
compression, to the better concocting of the received nourishment. Thus
therefore may we conclude with the exposition of Aristotle his opinion in this
case, when he says, that hot places are fittest for long life, in his book of
the Length and shortness of man's life; and in his Politics, The inhabitants
of colder climates, are stronger and longer lived: for thus may we reconcile
this apparent contradiction: that for men of more cold complexions, hot places
are most preservative and healthful; and for the contrary complexioned men,
contrary affected places; so that, if two of the same constitution (imagine
them both to be hot) live, the one in a cold, the other in an hot region (if
their heat was not accordingly proportioned to their moisture, but unequally in
the excess) he that made choice of the colder habitation, provided best for
his life. And thus have we briefly set down the common-receiued causes of
long life, where-out by the consequence of contraries we may deduce the causes
of short life. And they are, first the small quantity and watrishnesse of the
moisture. Secondly, the superfluous abundance of excrements. Thirdly, the
badnesse and vnholesomenesse of the soil. Fourthly, the ungentle aspects of
the Stars, that ruled either in our conception or birth. Fifthly, want of good
nourishment. Sixthly, intemperance either in our diet, or exercise, or obeying
of our affections. To which some add the fewness or tenderness of teeth, for
that is a sign of thickenesse in the bone of the head, the matter allotted to
the teeths generation being turned into the substance of the scull, which also
imports the weakness of the brain, which is by means thereof unfit for
breathing, and therefore being of a moist disposition, the more fit for
putrefaction, as standing-waters soonest putrefie and gather filth: but this I
take rather for a sign then a cause of short life.

Definition, (for more orderly proceeding) it may thus briefly be described:
An age is a period and term of man's life, wherein his natural complexion and
temperature naturally and of its own accord is evidently changed. For such is
the disposition and nature of our body, that by the continual combat and
interchangable dominion of the euer-iarring elements it often changes its
primary constitution, so that though there were no outward cause of
transmutation, which notwithstanding are many and manifold, yet have we that
homebred cause within us that would in time alter our temperature, for our
natural heat incessantly working upon our natural moisture does, though not
suddenly, change the proportion into extremes, yet by degrees perceiuably
prevails more and more over the humidity. For so see we the same body in our
youth and childhood, diversely tempered, our infancy full of moisture, as the
fluid soft substance of our flesh manifestly declares: our youth brings a
farther degree of solidity: our riper age ever te^perate: thence still
declineth our body unto cold and dryness, till at length death cease upon
our bodies, being the last end and period of our life. But every slight change
of the four qualities proportion changes not our temperature, for then we
should every day have a diverse complexion, our bodies eftsoons with wine and
exercise changed from cold to heat, and by the contrary from heat to cold: yet
by reason of the short indurance of these distemperatures, the body returning
to its former constitution, we cannot say there is a new complexion wrought in
the body: for a temperature or complextion is a firm and standing habit of the
body. Nor yet must we imagine the tallness and growing of the body or the new
budding of hairs, to be causes sufficient to procure this distinction; but the
variation of our original constitution is the true and proper cause of this
diversity and difference. And yet not every change of the complexion, but that
only which proceeds from that inwardly engendered cause of destructions; for
many times by the unseasonable and immoderate heat of the air, as also by
intemperate and riotous living, men even in the most mild and temperat
countries, alter their complexions, and with the Ethiopian, become even
decrepit old men (if we respect their constitutions, and those other incident
qualities of old age) before they have finished the full term of thirty
years; and therefore was it added in the description, that it must be a
natural and a selfe-alteration. Now according to these natural and evident
alterations of heat and moistures proportion, so may we best and most properly
divide the ages. Pythagoras diuides the^ into four kinds, or rather sets
down their number, which be according to his reckoning four in number,
Childhood, youth, manhood, old age, proportioning our life to the four parts
of the year, our Childhood to the spring, wherein all things together with a
pleasant verdour and greenenesse flourish and by a plentiful supply of
moisture continually increase in growth. Our youth unto Summer, for that grown
strength of the body and mind. Our man-age unto the Autumn or Harvest, when
after the manifold turmoiles and dangers of our fore-spent life, the good
gifts and indowments of our mind (as we see it fall out in the fruits of
Nature) receive a kind of seasonable and timely ripeness. Our old age he
resembles unto the cold and troublesome winter season, very fitly thereby
expressing the cumbersome coldness of the latter end of our life. Aristotle
sets down only three distinct ages, childhood, floursshing man-age, and
old age; the first plentifully abounding with heat and moisture; the middle age
having the same two qualities of life, as well tempered as their nature possibly
can be; old age declining and swaruing from that good and moderate temper, and
by little and little decaying in both these qualities, till at length they be
both of them consumed. Now that our life is thus often, and thus in order
changed in the temperature, it will easily appear, if we consider the matter
whereof we are all made, and that is semen and sanguis parentum, both abounding
with heat and moisture, whereout arises this consequence, that in the first
entrance into life, we have groatest store of those two lively qualities,
which decay not but by length of time; and that in our infancy we are fullest
of moisture, our experience and sense teaches us, for so we see infants flesh
most fluid and almost of a waxen disposition, ready to receive impression of
any light touch; and as for heat, Galen and Hippocrates both consent, that man
is most hot in the first day of his birth, though by reason of the great store
of moisture, the heats power does not so evidently appear: and because the
heat without any the least intermission or pause, works upon our moisture,
and by little and little consumes it, it self also in time decaying, who
sees not that the best part of our life, even necessarily is most cold and
dry? whence also this may be inferred; that the space between the two
extremes, is most temperate, forasmuch as Nature never passes from one extreme
unto the other, but by the mean: and this is the warrant of Aristotle's
tripartite division of ages; the seuerals are thus briefly defined.

Childhood is the first part and age of a man's life, wherein their generation
and growth is perfected, and this lasts (for the most part) until we be
five and twenty years old, and this age is proportionable unto the Spring,
hot and moist, for in this time our natural heat supplieth greater store of
vital aerie moisture, from the nourishment received, than was spent of that
our natural store; and thence it is, that within compass of this time, our
bodies grow bigger and taller. But according to the successiue decay and
diminution of our heat and moisture, it has pleased antiquity to point out
certain degrees of this first age; the first is our infancy, and that lasts
until the third or fourth year of our life, and is always best stored with
moisture: the next is our boy hood, and that lasts other five years: the
third our budding and blossoming age, when our cheeks and other more hidden
parts begin to be clothed with that mossie exerement of hair, which is
proroged until the eighteenth year: the last our youth, lasting until we be
five and twenty years old; and these are the parts of our growing age. The
next is our flourishing and middle age, and this is, when a man is come to the
highest degree of perfection in the temper of his body, and continues in that
flourishing liveliness, without any notorious decay or impairing his heat,
supplying the just quantity of moisture from the nourishment, which in the
former action of it, was consumed; and this is compared to the Summer, hot and
dry, or rather moderately moist, dry only in comparison of the former age,
not simply, lest the heat should too soon dissolve the body; and this also
has it parts; the first is our youth, (for so the penury of our English tongue
warranteth me to call it) when our growth is stayed, and our natural heat
begins to be most flourishing; you may call it our Prime, for then indeed
are we in our prime and most flourishing estate; it lasts from the five and
twentieth to the five and thirtieth or fortieth year of our life: the second
part of our middle age, is our Manhood, the most constant and settled part of
our life, as having our lifequalities most firm and in greatest mediocritie,
wherein notwithstanding our natural heat begins a little to decay and
decline from its vigor; yet so, as it cannot by sense be perceived, and this
lasts oftentimes till we be fifty years old. The last is old age, when not
only the augmentatiue faculty of the soul cease to increase the quantity
of our bodies, but also by reason of our heats and moistures decay, there is a
manifest declining from our former lustiness and liuelihood, our bodily
strength together with the weak and feeble operations of our soul in her
functions sensibly impaired. And this last part of our life is resembled unto
Winter, for that although it be in it self hot and moist, (as life consists
wholly in these two qualities) yet in comparison of the former ages, and in
regard of death, unto which it leads us, is accounted cold, and this has
also its degrees or parts: the first wherein our strength and heat are
evidently impaired, yet not so much, but that there remains a will and
readiness to be doing; and this lasts usually from our fiftieth year unto
our threescore and five. The second part of this last part of our life, which
they call decrepit old age, is when our strength and heat is so far decayed,
that not only all ability is taken away, but even all willingness, to the
least strength and motion of our body: and this is the conclusion and end of
our life, resembling death it self, whose harbinger and forerunner it is: and
so have we seven several parts of our life, comprising our Pubertatem and
adolescentiam, under one: accordingly whereto the Astrologers have assigned to
every of them their peculiar predominant Planet: our Infant age is allotted to
the Moons mild and moist dominion, cherishing us with her sweet influence
which she has especially upon moist bodies: our Boy-hood, Mercury has charge
over, inclining us to sportfulness, talk, and learning: Venus guides our
blossomming lustful age: our youthful prime, by the Suns lively operation
is lifted up from base delights, to a loftier and more man like resolution and
liveliness. Mars the stern god of war, has the precincts of his dominion
limited within compass of our man-age, adding courage to our liuelihood, and
whetting our otherwise dull spirits, unto a more ventrous boldness in
quarrelling combats: Old age from Jupiter receives granitie and staidness:
Decrepit crooked age, from the angry aspect of dry Saturn, sucketh the
poisonous infirmities of crasie sickness and waiward pettishnesse: and this is
briefly the summarie explication of the differences of man's ages, and the
causes of this distinction, together with those properties which the
Astrologians mystically and darkly have propounded, as proper and peculiar to
every and all of them, to which if we add the exposition of some few problemes
incident to this Treatise, we will presently annex our Epilogue.

What the reason may be of our crying and lamenting at our very first entrance
into the world. There are that attribute this mourning unto a divining, and
natural forefeeling as it were of the calamities to come: but I rather think
it arises from those infirmities and griefs which we presently feel, as well
for want of some good thing which we desire, as also for some mislike and
greeuance of some incumbent misery: as first that violent motion from that
before so quietly inioied bed (as it were) in the womb. Secondly the
straight narrowness of that passage by which we enter into the world.
Thirdly, the cold and hungry intertainment which we have, driven out of our
warm harbor in the close imperceiueable habitation of our mothers womb, and
barred of that nourishment which we before had incessantly ministered unto us;
and thence is it, that presently we betake our selves to that dary-house of
nature, even by a natural instinct and direction, where when we have well
battled our selves, and by the enwrapping in our clothes, are armed against the
cold aires injuries, our begun lamentations are pacified and turned into a
quiet contentedness.

why children in their sucking age are naturally more given unto sleep, then
when they be of more ripe years. The reason is natures mother-like providence
that for the better strengthening and speedier perfection of her of spring,
uses this as a means to increase the virtue, and operation of the heat, and
for that purpose has stored their head with moist vapors, fitted through
their rarity and thinness, for the brains cool operation upon them. For as
united forces are strongest, either for assault or resistance, so the
scattering discontinuity of the thin vapors is an occasion of the colds easier
impression, and so of their thickning and better stopping of the passages of
the spirits unto the outward senses. Another cause may be the brains
coldness, as having in so little time received no great annoiance from the
stomachs distemperature, it self also abounding with moistuure and fit matter
for procuring of sleep. Thirdly, the good digestion of that mild milkie
substance, whence ascends into the head the soundest and most pure
exhalations. And therefore are their sleeps (for the most part) without any the
least painfulness and molestation, whereas contrarily we see surcharged
stomachs breed unquiet sleeps.

why the natural vital actions, as nutrition, augmentation, and such like,
are in infants so powerful, and those other of sense so feeble and
ineffectual. The answer is, that the good performance of those actions of life
depends principally upon our natural heat; For our soul, the prince of our
body has assigned to our heat the administration and ordering of that
province: no marvel therefore if those duties be well performed in our
infancy, when the author of them is at that time most powerful and plentiful.
Now the reason of the senses weak operation is the fewness of spirits deputed
to that function: for the isntrumental spirits of sense being to be made in
the shop or worke-house of the brain by the brain, that excellent spiritual
artificer, the workman howsoever he be his craftsmaster, as having been
Natures Apprentice, yet by reason of his imbeeillity and weakness is not able
in so short space to make many or at least not so forceable instruments, as may
serve for the high function and duty of the soul. To which we may add the
abundance of moisture, wherewith the celles of the brain are in our infancy
overflowed hindering the actions of the souls sensitive parts, and dulling her
thereto ordained faculties.

why children have so slippery and short memories. The reason thereof is, their
brains too great humidity, whereby it is disabled to keep the impressions of
the outward senses objects. For there are two especial annoiances of the
brain that hinder our memoratiue faculties, immoderate dryness and too great
moisture. For the excess of drought causes excess of hardness to resist the
impressions. And therefore it is that old men for the most part have so bad
memories, their natural moisture being by the heats long continued operation
almost wasted. And Galen in his treatise of the memories, failing because of
dryness, makes mention of a Student, that through immoderate watching and
studiousnesse had so excessiuely dried his brain, that he had almost quite
lost his remembrance: as also of an husbandman that by too much pains in that
his painful vocation, and the slenderness of hungry-fare, was in danger of
the like forgetting inconvenience. And as dryness by not admitting the
impression, is an impediment to the memory, so is also too much moisture by not
preserving the imprinted species. For so see we water howsoever most yielding,
yet least fit to retain any figure imprinted. Children therefore so moist
brained must needs be short remembranced.

Whether speech be natural or wholly from discipline. The answer is, that it
is natural, as virtue and other good habits be, nature having given a
disposition and fitness, together with instruments fit for that purpose. But
as wax howsoever capable of any impression by reason of its pliable nature, yet
without the putting to of some outward seal, has no actual print or
resemblance of any thing; so our nature, though as fit to receive any thing
taught as wax is to receive impression from the seal, yet without the help of
some outward instructor, is not actually and fully endowed with any how proper
so ever a quality, especially such as are auailable for knowledge. In the which
kind this of speech has a special prerogative; but lest I should seem to be
needlessely busied in this question, I refer the Reader for his farther
satisfaction to that excellent French Poet Du Bartas, in his Babylon, Englished
by master William L'isle.

Why children in their infancy have no actual evident use of their reason.
The cause is, the abundance of moisture incident to that age, whereby the
functions of the inward senses as with a cloud are either obscured, or else
quite hindered: whence was that forementioned speech of the learned Plato, That
there is a little mixture of folly and moisture in men: and therefore Galen was
wont to say, that phlegm the most waterish of all bumors, was little or
nothing profitable for the attainment of learning. In the seventh place it is
demanded, why children most fretfull are usually shortest lived? the reason is,
their plenty of heat in comparison of their small store of moisture; for
therefore are choleric complexioned men most pettish, because their blood is
by the fiery heat of that humor so soon inflamed: whereupon the Egyptians
avouched the Fly to be the Hieroglyphick of anger, and pertinacie, because (as
Pierius observes) it is of so choleric and fiery a disposition, and we see
in experience, men in anger fiery colored, which proceeds from their heats
inflaming of the blood. Now heat vnproportioned unto the moisture (as is
aforesaid) quickly consumes that small store of moisture provided for its food
and so procures death.

Aristotle: why children breath faster and with less intermission then do
better grown men. The answer is, their great store of heat in comparison of
that small measure in the after-ages, causes nature for its better
preservation, to draw the air oftener for the cooling of the hearts heat: and
that is the reason that men who have been any long time troubled with an
ague, or any such like distemperature, are always very short winded: The
contrary Aristotle witnesses to follow, in things contrarily affected, for so
he prooneth the horse and exe not to have so much heat in them; because they
take not their breath so thick together; implying that the cold temper of the
heart and other inwards, is cause of longer breath; which is also evident in
reason, for the attraction and emission of the air being ordained only for
the cooling and tempring of the hearts heat, according to the necessity thereof,
must breathing be either oftener or more seldom. What is the reason that in our
youth we are more hungry, and have a greater desire of meat, than in our
declining and elder ages? The reason is, our sound and speedy digestion of fore
received nourishment performed by means of our natural heat, whence arises a
new sucking of the veins, and so an incitement of the appetite.

Whence is it that old men are commonly so iealously suspicious? The cause is
their incredulity and hardness of belief, which it self also proceeds from
their much experience of men's wily practices, according to that, The burnt
child dreadeth the fire. For such is the extreme badnesse of our nature, that
still we go from one extreme unto another; and so become of men extremely
credulous, in our last age extremely suspicious. And that indeed was Aristotle's
remedy, who to draw us from conetousnesse, biddes us incline unto
prodigality: and yet only with this condition, if we cannot at the first
instant after our long custom in the one extreme, light upon the mediocritie
between both. What makes them so sottishly devoted to the things of this
world; that when they are nearest unto death, they are most desirous not only
to keep that which before they had gotten, but more and more to increase their
store? The reason is given by Aristotle in his Rhetoricks: and it is their
exceeding great desire of life, even after those many days which they have
forespent. Whence proceeds that other inordinate desire of things necessary
for life-maintenance, they having in their experience observed how hardly
things necessary are gotten, how easily also they are lost. What is the cause,
why old men are so talkatiue and full of words? Either because nature loves to
exercise that part most which is least decayed: or that knowledge, the only
thing old age can brag of, cannot be manifested but by utterance: or that old
men, the nigher they are to their end, they much more desire to have their
memory not only by children and posterity, but even by the speeches and deeds
fore-vttered and performed in their life: or that wisdom (as all good things
naturally communicate their good properties) makes them desirous to profit
others.

Whence is that frosty horinesse that usually lights upon men's heads in the
winter and coldest age of their life? There are some, that imagine it to
proceed from the dryness of those excrements: which also they go about to
prove by the like experiment in bones, which after their humor is drawn out
by seething, grow more and more white, till at length they come unto a perfect
and full whiteness. But the untrue resolution of the doubt propounded, is
thereby discovered, because that men who use to cover their hair, are sooner
gray headed than those that use no covering, when as notwithstanding it is
manifest, that covered hair has more store of moisture than that which has
been exposed unto the injurious tossing of the wind, and the scorching heat
of the sun. Therefore I rather allow of Aristotle's reason, namely the put
refaction of that excrementall humor, whereof our hair is made: for our
natural heat through its vnintermitted operation, being disabled fully to
digest that excrement sent from within to that outmost covering, our skin, for
the hairs nourishment, it putrefieth and corrupts. Now that there is such a
rottenness and putrefaction in the hair, it is evident by experience of such
as by long sickness have become untimely grayheaded: for after the recovery
of their disease the feebleness of their heat being together with their
health restored, the hair receives its former flourishing and (that I may so
speak (unwasted greenenesse, which restitution can be attributed unto no other
cause but only to the through concoction of that undigested excrement by the
restored heat. The like whereof we see also in corn and grass, that having
lost its flourishing greenenesse, by the continual beating upon and
ouerwhelming of the waters, afterward being by the Suns lively heat cherished
and revived, resumeth its natural vigor and viridity. And that this
hoariheadednesse proceeds from a defect of heat, it is farther euidenced by a
strange example recorded by Scaliger, of a man who in one nights space had his
head ouergrowen with hoarinesse. The cause was this. The Prince of Mantoua,
Francis Gonzaga, had upon suspicion of traitorous conspiracy, either against
his person or state, imprisoned one of his kin and alliance that for his age
was wholly incapable of that alteration: and upon the next morrow news was
brought unto the Prince that his head was all upon the sudden grown hoarily
gray; which almost miraculous alteration moved the Princes mind to grant him
life and free use of his former liberty. Now if any man should demand the
reason of this sudden change, it is given by the Philosophers, and is nothing
else but the extremity of his grief and fear, whence proceeded that
withdrawing of the dispersed heat unto the inward parts, and so was the
humorous nourishment of the hair for want of concoction turned into
rottenness.

Prolegomena or preface to the purpose, but as things essential and of the
substance of our matter. Wherein if I have either omitted any thing pertinent,
or admitted ought that is superfluous, I hope, the eye of favor will wincke at
my missing; as for the malicious, seeing I cannot look for favorable
acceptance, I weigh not their verdict: only as the Poet says, Equitem mihi
plaudere curo:

The baser sort I care to please no more;
One if I please, enough is me therefore.

FINIS.

