A BRIEF REPLY TO George Whitehead's Book, Styled, A Rambling Pilgrim; In
Answer to a Book, Entitled, The Pilgrim's Progress FROM Quakerism to
Christianity:

SHOWING The Danger of the Quakers Government within the Government, and
opposite to it, as contrived and carried on in their Monthly, Quarterly,
Six-week, Second-day, and Yearly Meeting or Convocation, contrary to the Laws
of the Land, and particularly, to the Act of Toleration.

By FRANCIS BUGG.

Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might, for there is no Work,
nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom, in the Grave whither thou go.

London, Printed, by R. Janeway, Jun. and Sold by J. Robinson, at the Golden
Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard, and C. Brom, at the Gun in Ludgate Street. 1700.

TO THE Right Honorable AND HONORABLE, THE Lords Spiritual and Temporal, AND
Commons in Parliament ASSEMBLED.
May it please Your Honors,
I Humbly make Bold to lay before Your Honors the Occasion of Presenting these
Papers: It is not unknown how Sollicitous the Quakers have been from time to
time under every Revolution and Change of Government, from 1652. to this
present Day; but of late they have advanced to a degree higher, not only to
Present their Books and Papers in Session-time, but in the Intervals of
Parliament they have been so Bold, as to send them to the very Houses of
Members of Parliament; upon which I thought it highly necessary to make some
Observations on their Way and Method of writing, as in my Modest Defense, etc.
Presented this Session to Your Honors, and with all dutiful Submission,
leaving the Matter to Your Mature Deliberation and Consideration.

But having understood since that, that the Quakers have privately Presented
diverse Books under the Sham Titles of Answers, not only to that, but to other
Books, I still thought it my Duty to write some farther Observations thereupon,
which being read and compared with theirs, together with my Book, The Pilgrim's
Progress, etc. Second Edition, now Published, and to which the several and
often repeated Pages herein mentioned do relate, (these Papers being part of
the Preface thereto belonging) it will make some farther Discovery of their
Mock Answers, both to the said Pilgrim's Progress, etc. and Modest Defense,
etc. and being loath to have the Porch exceed the House, I Humbly beg leave to
submit what I have said herein, to the Consideration of Your Great Wisdom, and
conclude with all dutiful Submission,

Right Honorable, and Honorable, Your Honors Most Obedient Servant, FRANCIS
BUGG.

George Whitehead's Fallacy Reproved, In his ANSWER to My Pilgrim's Progress,
etc.
GEORGE,
I Have seen thy Book, A Rambling Pilgrim, etc. said to be an Answer to two
Books of mine, i. e. The Pilgrim's Progress, etc. A Modest Defense, etc. which
is so far from being an Answer, that it does not touch at the Tenth part of the
Books; and that little you spoke to, have (to them who will compare the Books)
rather confirms what I charge you withal, than otherwise. But that I may show
(for your Peoples sake,) how you wilfully mistake me, and the state of the
Charge, and then mislead your People, etc.

I find the first part of your Book is chiefly to insinuate that I said the
Sermon was Geo. Whitehead's, of his Forming, of his Preaching, and that in so
many Words; and thereupon you call it Forgery. Now, George, this is all
Fallacy: For thou, know, George, in thy Conscience, that I never intended to
have it believed, that you at your Yearly, Meeting Preached that very Sermon,
in so many Words; but that I did it to expose your Errors contained in your
Books, out of which that Sermon was by me formed; and in p. 108. and p. 222. of
the Second Edition, it is expressly said, A Sermon for George Whitehead to hold
Forth, etc And the Chapter before gives several Reasons why I proceeded in that
unusual method: So that your way to have done your Cause good, and your People
good, had been to have confuted me; first, Touching your Doctrine, which I
alleged out of your Books. Secondly, That your Practice is otherwise than by
me represented. This had been your way to have confuted my Arguments, and to
have established your People. But for you thus to act against Light and
Knowledge, is such a self-condemned Practice, that as for your own sake, as
well as your People whom you mislead, I could he glad to see you leave it now
in your Old Age. Take one instance.

A Rambling Pilgrim, etc. p. 5. Francis Bugg makes Geor. Whitehead thus speak,
Friends, I am now come to the last thing proposed to speak to on this Solemn
Occasion; first, Respecting Confession of Sin; showing your Exaltation above
the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, etc. as at large in p. 221. of this Book;
so that I need not repeat it. Now what Answer, George, do thou make to this?
Do thou say, it is your Friends Practice to make Confession of Sin to God in
your Prayers? Not a word of it. Do thou prove in any one page of those
5555555 I there mention, that you ever recommended the practice of making
Confession of Sin to God, and begging his Pardon for Christ's sake? Not a word
of it. Do thou prove but of any of those Books, wrote by thy self, Fox,
Buroughs, etc. that ever you recommended the Practice of the Ten Commandments,
the Lord's Prayer, the Apostles Creed, either to be read in your Families, or
in your Religious Meettings practiced; or the reading the Scripture in your
Meetings? Not a word of It. No, here is no denial or Matter of Fact but of your
Books, nor the natural Consequences deduceable therefrom, or your practice
agreeable to the same: And that it may appear so, take your Answer in your own
words, viz. Thus Fran. Bugg. represents me Preaching such stuff as I never
preaeched in my Life, nor ever owned any such flattery or deceit, as to exalt
any Auditory above the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, etc. or to dissuade
any from making Confession of Sin, or asking Pardon for Christ's sake, who have
need of both, or who have not received forgiveness of their Sin.

First, It Is not what you did not dissuade from, that we are examining; but
what you persuade to: We want not Negatives, but Affirmatives; here you leave
your Reader in the Dark: Can you prove that in all those Books and Pages
recited, that you ever made Confession of Sin; that you ever asked Pardon for
Christ's sake; that you in your Religious Meetings, or in your Families,
practiced the Lord's Prayer, the Ten Commandments, the Apostles Creed; that you
ever read the Holy Scriptures in your Meetings; or further, that you ever in
all, or any one of your Books, recommended the practice thereof? If not, the
Charge lies still against you, and your Negative Answers rather confirm what is
said than otherwise.

As to your Certificate, p. 28. about your Cottage; you that can forge
Certificates, and set Men's Names to it, without their Privity, Knowledge or
Consent, as you did that from Huntington, in your Book, Judgment fixed, as Anne
Docwra, in her Letter to Mr. Crisp, March 25. 1684. says you did; what credit
is to be given to it? And besides, those three Certifiers conclude thus, On
credible Information, we verily Believe. Here then is but their belief on
Information; and I am credibly informed of what I wrote; so the Reader is left
to believe as he is persuaded. The like may be said of Will. Mead, touching his
saying to William Harris, that Fox's Journal is a better Book than the Bible;
this Will. Mead does not deny under his Hand; I have only Geor. Whitehead's
word for it; and he that can forge Certificates is not to be believed.

Again, p. 38. What Earnings did thou (F. B.) make in the late Discourse
before the Bishop of Norwich, and the four Members of Parliament, where l
discovered thy repeated Falsehoods, Forgery, Deceit and Wickedness in diverse
Matters? And how thou were counfounded when Matters were closely urged against
thee? etc.

Now, George, thou know in thy own Conscience that this is a Lie spoken in
Hypocrisy, on purpose to mislead thy Disciples; for thou did not prove one
false Quotation, Matter or Thing, against me: But I proved thee guilty of
contempt of the Scriptures, in exalting your sayings above them, as of greater
Authority; and for the truth of this, I submit my self, to those Five Persons
present, one of them having often showed his Approbation of my management of
that Affair. These things, George, do not redound, to thy Credit, and I can
truly say I am sorry for thee. George, we both grow Ancient, let us write for
the good of others, not for Victory; for my part, I do upon the word of a
Christian design it, and if I saw my self in an Error, I should willingly
submit. Again,

P. 46. Beside the false Printing and bad English (as Fr. B. has exposed my
Book Ishmael) there is another defect after the words [The Lake is thy Portion,
which is the Portion of Liars,] the words, [except thou speedily repent;] are
omitted there, and in some other places.

To which I Answer, let any body compare your Book, Ishmael and his Mother cast
out, etc. in the Original Impression in Quarto, and the Reprint in my Modest
Defense, etc. Part 2. and they shall find it, for English, Comma's, and Points,
and Words, the same. For in the Quarto Impression, p. 3. l. 15. There is we for
woe, as in Mod. Def. p. 7. l. 13. there is also we for woe; and so in all other
places where it was bad English, and false Spelled, and false Pointed, so it is
Reprinted: And as for the words [except thou speedily repent] being left out, I
do positively say it is a most horrid Lie; there is not a word in the whole Book
left out; so careful was I. And how then can thou pretend to be a
Conscientious Writer, when in the face of the Sun thou can thus Prevaricate,
Dissemble, and Lie, and that knowingly? What is become, George, of thy
seriousness, sincerity and plainness thou so often boasts of? Again,

P. 34. He (F. B.) assumes the boldness to promote in Print an Abstract of two
Letters of two Clergymen I pray God open, the Eyes of our Governors, and cause
them to take into Consideration this too much, and too deplorable, unlimited
and unbounded Tolleration; especially as the Quakers both claim and use it,
etc. as in Pil. Prog. p. 175. was not this, (says George) a piece of insolent
confidence, to expose this in Print, and thus openly to oppose the Liberty
Granted, and legally Confirmed by King and Parliament, and thus to render our
Governors blind? etc.

Now as I think this was a good Prayer, so do I think it no boldness to expose
it in Print: For, George, it was not the Liberty Granted, and by Law Confirmed,
which these Clergymen either called unlimited or unbounded, for the liberty
granted is both limited and bounded, as from diverse branches of the Laws
appear; and particularly by the very Act of Tolleration; see p. 86, 88, 101,
189, 339. No, the unbounded Liberty which the Quakers take, claim and use, is
what the Clergy is against, and which they Pray the Government would take into
their Consideration; and I am sure it is a base, bold and insolent things,
George, in you to expose in Print, that the Clergy would represent the King and
Parliament blind: But I have not herein room to set forth your baseness in
calling all Kings Spiritual Egyptians; all that own any King, since the days of
Christ, Apostates; that Parliaments chosen by most Voices, are not like to Act
for God, or the Good of his People; that Parliaments are the Beast that carry
the Whore; Nay, in your Book, The West Answering to the North, etc. you
justify the Murder of King Charles I. saying, The cutting off his Head, was a
remarkable Record of the Righteous Judgment of God; and for a true sight of
these your Antimonarchical, as well as Antimagistratical Principles, see p.
157. to p. 175. hereafter. And George, you tell us in Print, that your
Principles are now no other than they were in the beginning. And what they were
in the beginning, I in this Book, the Pilg. Prog. etc. have set forth: And I
think it is both bold and insolent Confidence in you to revive all these your
horrid Principles destructive to Government and Humane Society, by telling us
you are the same in Principles still; and I am afraid we may in this believe
you.

In the next place I shall show, even thee, George, what Liberty the Quakers
both use and claim; which not only those two Clergymen, but many Ten Thousands,
both of Laity and Clergy, are against.

First, Your sending into the Churches Challenges, as your Friends did at
West-Dereham.

Secondly, Your going from House to House, like the Popish Priests, to seduce
the People, inviting them to your Meetings, giving them Books which say the
Quakers are the one only Church of Christ, and that out of your Church there is
no Salvation.

Thirdly, That your Monthly, Quarterly, Six Week, Second Day, and Yearly
Meetings, where you revive your old Treasonable Principles; which Meetings are
expressly against the very Act of Tolleration, these, and the like, (as in the
ensuing Discourse) are the Meetings and the Practices both used and claimed by
you: Namely, to hold Convocations, which the Established Church, without
License from His Majesty, cannot legally do. These, and the like Practices of
yours, all good Christians, and the Laws of the Land, are against; and I still
pray God to give the Nation a sight and sense of it, before it be too late.

In Answer to your 48th Page, I query thus, Whether it be not as proper for me
to Address His Majesty, on the behalf of the Church of England, and other sound
Protestants, who hold the Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, as it is for
G. Whitehead to Address himself, by Dedication, to the Clergy and Universities,
personating a Schism which professes such Doctrine as tends to overthrow the
Christian Faith? Come, George, Answer me this Question; how came you to be such
a Man? You know I could show Books of your Friends, Borough, Fisher, Fox, and
others, who though as great Imposters as any in the World ever knew, yet they
have Dedicated and Addressed, and not only so, but Dictated to Kings, Lords and
Commons. Come, G. what was your birth? Whence came your breeding? Were you not
Rambling Pilgrims, who (like Gypsies) lay in Barns, See E. Burrough's Epist. to
his works.
lived upon Alms, with your Feet at other Men's Tables? What, must none Address
now but you? Must none apply themselves to the Government but you? Surely,
George, you are a Pegg too high.

Come, George, let us reason together, what power have you to summons all
Ecclesiastical Courts and Officers, more than I have to summon you? What Power
have you to Dialogue the Bishop, and the whole Church, more than I have to
Dialogue you? What Authority have you to Arraign, Try, Judge and Condemn all
the Clergy in a Kingdom, more than I have to Arraign you, and Try you by your
Fruit? I tell you, George, I cannot see you mount the Stage, and thus Insult,
Domineer and Exalt your selves, not only above the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Saints and Martyrs, and all Christians, with respect to your so much
boasted-of Sinless Perfection, but above all the King's Subjects, as if you,
and you only, had right to Address, Dedicate and Present Papers to the
Parliament; and that it were Treason to confront you: I tell you, as above
noted, that you are a pegg too high.

But, George, before you had Addressed your selves, and Dedicated your Books to
the King and Government, you ought to have condemned your Books mentioned p.
154, 157, 167. And before you had Dedicated this Book to the Clergy, you ought
in prudence to have retracted your Books mentioned p 217, 249, 250. And as to
G. K's. Book, it was approved by the Quakers; and you ought to have retracted
the Doctrine of it, as G. K. has; and likewise W. Penn's and Alexander Skien's
mentioned in p. 168, 170. But your Temporizing is both seen, and discovered to
be seen by others: And now for your Dedication to the Clergy.

A Rambling Pilgrim, p. 3. An Epistle Dedicatory to those of the Clergy, and of
the two Universities, whose kindness Fran. Bugg boasts of. 30th of the 4th
Month, 1629. By George Whitehead.

Now George, to show you what a kind Reception your Dedication met with from my
Benefactors; I shall, though I have no order, present you with part of a Letter
which one of them sent me; which take as follows, viz.

March 11. 1699. Mr. Bugg,
I Cannot but thank you for the service you have done, especially among the
Common People, by your way of Writing; and for the plentiful materials you have
furnished out, to employ others, with respect both to the Principles and
Practices of the Quakers; and your laborious Attendance at Parliament, as a
Check to the Insolences of the Quakers in their presenting their deceivable
Papers in which they have been too much neglected; wherefore be not
disheartened, but go on, and Charge, the Quakers Party through and through with
their Blasphemies against the Blessed Trinity, their Doctrine of Infallibility
and Sinless Perfection, their denying the Fundamental Articles of our most Holy
Religion, viz. The Incarnation of Christ, the Resurrection of the Body, and the
Day Of Judgment. For to talk of Lenitives, and Gentle Applications, is like the
old way of sowing Pillows under their Arm holes; and you may as well give Opium
in a Lethargy, as to fancy to cure some Men into their Senses by your mild and
tender Remedies: And, therefore to deal plainly is the best way to work their
Conversion, from the Infidelity of Quakerism, to the Faith of Christ Crucified;
which God of his Mercy grant them, if it be his Will.

It was a notable Confession of St. Paul, when he drew up an Indictment, and
Arraigned himself in the Murder of St. Stephen, for his standing by and
consenting unto his Death, and holding the Garment of them that slew him. I
wish the Quakers were Humble enough to follow his Example; whose malice I am
afraid is greater, and the dignity of the injured Person higher; for they have
Spirited away our Blessed Savior, and have left us nothing but a Notional and
Chimerical Christ; so that we may take up the Lamentation of Mary Magdalen,
They have taken away the Lord, and we know not where they have laid him.

That was well noted in the Spirit of the Hat: For I am persuaded there cannot
be an Instance made in any Society of Men of that bigness, that have gotten
more Bastards, and more unnaturally disposed of them, that have drank deeper
Draughts of stolen secret Intemperance, that have fed higher, and fared more
deliciously every Day, than have some of these Perfectionists in their shining
brazen disguises of Religion.

I am heartily sorry for the poor Quaker, I heard lately of, who hanged himself
viz. John Rust, a Preacher at Chate^ice in the ^sle of Ely, who op^osed G. K.
with G. K's Narrative in his Pocket; and the more for the exact parallel must
make between him and Judas, both in his Life, and in his Death. I pray God give
them Grace to lay it to Heart, and humbly to confess their Sins to God, and to
beg pardon by the Merits of Christ, that God may give them Repentance unto Life.

SIR, Your most Faithful Friend to Serve you, etc.


FINIS.

