The QUAKERS Yearly Metting or Convocation Impeached on the behalf of the
Commons of England, by Francis Bugg. An Apologitical Introduction.
Courteous Reader,

MArvel not that I pursue the Quakers into their strong Hold, That I have
besieged their City Abel, 2 Samuel 20. and cast a Trench about it, and hemmed it
round on every side, insomuch that Sheba the Son of Bichri, alias George
Whitehead, cannot get out nor clear himself, unless he Retract and Condemn
those Errors and pernicious Principles which he has vindicated in his own and
his Brethrens Books, with which he and them stand charged in my Book Quakerism
Withering, and Christianity Reviving, etc. p. 3, 4. and New Rome Arraigned,
etc. both sold by Mr. Guillam Bookseller in Bishops-gate-street, London. No;
thou have no cause to think it strange, that the same Cup this painted Harlot
has so plentifully filled to others, should be now filled to her, yea, even
the Dregs thereof: For who have wrote more than the Quakers? whoever exposed
the Professors of Christianity more than they? Have they not this forty years,
and more, laid Siege against the Christian Reputation of both Magistrates and
Ministers? rendering the first in their Narratives of their Trials, the
Pharoahs, Nebuchadnezzars, etc. and themselves the only Daniels of the Age. The
second, in their Book styled, A Discovery of a threefold Estate of Antichrist,
etc. Conjurers, Thieves, Antichrists, Witches, Devils, Baal's Priests, yea,
Hell Hounds, whose Commission and Call came from Oxford and Cambridge; crying
Woe and Misery to the upholders (whether Kings or Parliaments) of that
treacherous Crew and deceitful Generation. But William Pen in his late Book
styled The Guide Mistaken, etc. goes a little farther, viz. Whilst the idle
gormondizing Priests of England run away with above 150000 l. a year, under
pretense of being God's Ministers -- And that no sort of people have been so
universally through Ages, the very bane of Soul and Body of the Universe, as
that abominable Tribe for whom the Theater of God's most dreadful Vengeance is
reserved to act their Eternal Tragedy upon, etc. I say, can thou behold
these their Pamphlets spread up and down the Nation, and not be amazed at their
Impudence? It Is not a year since it fell to my lot to Administer on the Goods
of a deceased poor Widow, a Quaker, whose Substance did not amount to 10 l. yet
she was so well stored, that she had by her more than 200 printed Books and
Pamphlets of the Quakers writing, enough to infect a Nation, their chief
tendency being against Magistracy and Ministry, and all instituted Religion;
and yet none so bad, none so gross, none so blasphemons, but George Whitehead
the Quakers Bellarmine, will undertake to vindicate them, who for this 40 years
and upward has been like Ishmael, his hand against Episcopalians,
Presbyterians, Independants and Baptists, and theirs against him. Thus much by
way of Introduction.

The IMPEACHMENT.
THat George Whitehead and his Brethren, at a Convocation began at London the
fifth day of May 1693. ending the eighth day of the same Month, did contrive,
make, and promulgate several Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical,
containing in them diverse Matters and Things contrary to the Fundamental Laws
and Statutes of the Realm against the King's Prerogative, against the Rights of
Parliaments, against the Property and Liberty of the Subject, and Matters
tending to Sedition and of dangerous Consequence, as will abundantly appear by
the recited Epistle, and that Epistle of 1692. a few Instances thereof, as
proof, I shall recite, etc.

The IMPEACHMENT proved.
The Quakers yearly Epistle 1693. p. 1. And therefore that all due care be
taken against the grand Oppression and Antichristian Yoke of Tithes; that our
Christian Testimony born, and greatly suffered for, be faithfully maintained
against them in all respects, and against Steeple-house Rates and Lays; as also
against the Burden and Imposition of Oaths -- That Friends at all their Monthly
and Quarterly Meetings be reminded to call for the Records of the Sufferings of
Friends; to see that they be duly gathered, truly entered and kept, and
accordingly sent up [to London] as has been often advised, both of what
Tithes, etc. are pretended to be due, and for how long a time, and the time
when taken, and by, and for whom; and what Goods are taken, and the value
thereof, as well as of those not exceeding, as those exceeding the Sums or
Quantities [of Tithes] demanded, (it being a Suffering in both for Truths sake)
they being in these Particulars found defective and imperfect in diverse
Counties, which is an Obstruction to the General Record of Friends Sufferings,
etc.

OBSERVATION.
Friendly Readers and Country men, I having proved my Charge and Impeachment, I
cannot but observe to you, That the Ground; upon which the Quakers refuse to
pay their Tithes and Churchwardens Rates, is not bottomed upon Scripture
proof, but the sole Authority of these their Canons Ecclesiastical, made and
promulgated at their Yearly Convocation. And where is there a Parish in the
Dominion of England but feels, more or less, the sad Effects and Consequences
of these their Anti-Magistratical Encroachments; you also may see their great
Ingratitude to the present Government, who (notwithstanding these their
Affronts) have indulged them in the Exercise of their Persuasion, who at the
same time call Tithes An Antichristian Yoke; yea, they will and require their
Proselytes to maintain their Testimony against the Payments of Tithes in ALL
respects; and that their Monthly and Quarterly Meetings fail not at their
peril^ to send up to London, a true and perfect Inventory of all and singular
the Distresses taken for Tithes, whether no more than the value due, or whether
five times the value; all must be equally recorded A Suffering to Posterity,
that after Generations may see in what perilous times the poor Quakers lived
in, and what storms of sore Persecution there was under the Government of King
William the Third. O horrible ingratitude! thus to render our Legislators so
many Antichrists, so many Persecutors, nay worse. See some proofs out of their
Books to corroborate and strengthen their Canons, that so their Loyal and
Obedient Subjects may stoutly oppose Tithes and Church-Rates, An Antidote, etc.
by Tho. Ellwood, p. 78. Truth allows no payment of Tithes at all under the New
Covenant, but condemns it -- They who pay Tithes do therein uphold a Legal
Ceremony, abrogated by Christ; and thereby deny Christ to be come in the Flesh,
which is a mark of Antichrist, etc. And to prove it he quotes 1 John. 4.3.
which place of Scripture does not so much as mention Tithes. O how miserably
are their poor Disciples deluded! well may it be said, The blind lead the
blind. The next Book I shall mention is Burrough's Works, p. 780. Tithes (says
he) as received and paid in these days -- are of Antichrist. Again, read his
Works p. 869. Antichrist in himself is the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition,
which is indeed and in truth the very Devil. Thus Readers, I have showed you by
their Convocation Canon, that Tithes are an Antichristian Yoke, and by
Burrough's Works, Antichrist is the Devil, so that it is the Devil's Yoke by
Interpretation. See also another of their Books, styled The Ancient Testimony,
etc. p. 2. So it is no new thing that the People of the Lord call d Quakers
have suffered so deeply for, but the ancient Testimony to the Coming, Death,
and Resurrection of Christ, which they that plead for Tithes in this Gospel-day
do in effect deny, etc. O horrible! this is yet higher and higher: What?
Antichrists, yea, Devils that plead for Tithes. What? Absolute deniers of the
Coming, Death and Resurrection of Christ that plead for Tithes. What then are
they that take Tithes, pay Tithes, nay that make Laws that Tithes shall be
paid? Surely there never was such a censorious Brood ever hatched into the
World before Quakerism came up.

From all which note, That the Quakers hold a Government within the Government;
and not only so, but which is still worse, against the Government; which is
bold with a witness, and that from plain Matter of Fact: For whereas it is
enacted by the King, Lords and Commons in Parliament, That the Subjects of this
Nation shall pay their Tenths to such Persons, and for such Uses as the Law
directs. And by Virtue of this Law and Civil Sanction, the Clergy and
Improprietors receive them as a Civil Right. But in opposition hereunto, the
Quakers Summons two or more of their most eminent Elders, belonging to each
Quarterly Meeting in England and Wales, if not the Town of Berwick upon Tweed,
who, together with their Teachers from all parts of the English Nation, besides
Foreign Parts beyond the Seas, sit in Council by way of Convocation, and
Ordain and Enact, That Tithes are an Antichristian Yoke, a Grand Oppression,
and as such ought to be withstood, testified against, and that in all Respects.
And the like may be said touching their prohibiting the Payment of Church Rates
and Lays, carrying Guns, which the Quakers by their Edict repeal, so far as
their Power reaches, in their Convocation, the Laws and Statutes made by King
and Parliament, which suit not their Inclination; and Absolve the King's
Subjects from their Active Obedience to the Laws of the Land, and cause them to
adhere to a new Jurisdiction lately erected by a few Usurpers, who hold a
Convention Annually at London by way of Convocation, to make Laws and
Ordinances contrary and repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, which
tend to subvert the Government, and if not timely prevented, may be of
dangerous consequence; to say nothing of diverse other of their Laws and Canons
Ecclesiastical in other of their Yearly Epistles, as spreading their Books up
and down the Nation unlicenced, etc. Read 25 H. 8. c. 19, 21. 27 H. 8. c. 15. 3
Ed. 6. c. 10, 11. 1 Eliz. c. 2. 13 Eliz. c. 12. Magna Charta c. 29. Petition of
Right. 5 Eliz c. 1. 1 Ed. 6. c. 2. 37 H. 8. c. 17. 8 Eliz. c. 1.

And to warrant my Impeachment, not only from plain Matter of Fact, showing
that the Quakers proceeding, particularly in the Instance of Tithes, as well as
in twenty things more that might be mentioned, is against the known Laws of the
Land, but also against the declared sense of the Commons of England assembled
in Parliament. I shall recite the Votes of the House of Commons in the Year of
our Lord 1640. upon the Bishops, for some certain Encroachments, being
impeached by Sergeant Wild, though not the tenth part so bad, nor of such
dangerous consequence as the proceedings of the Quakers, who have not the least
color of Authority for what they do; for the Bishops had not only a share in
the Legislative Power, but the King's Majesty's License to confirm what they
did, etc.

The VOTES concerning the Bishops late Book of Canons in the House of Commons.
That the Clergy of England convented in any Convocation or Synod, or
otherwise, have no Power to make any Constitutions or Canons, or Act
whatsoever, in matter of Doctrine, or otherwise, to bind the Clergy or Laity of
this Land, without the common consent in Parliament.

That the several Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, treated upon by the
Archbishop of Canterbury and York, Presidents of the Convocation for their
respective Provinces, and agreed upon by the King's Majesty's License in their
respective Synods, began at London and York 1640. do not bind the Clergy or
Laity of this Land, or either of them.

Thus we see the sense of the then House of Commons, who would suffer no
Competitors, nor no Laws nor Ordinances made to bind the People, under any
pretense whatsoever (notwithstanding the Bishops Power, and the King's
Majesty's License) but what was made by common Consent in Parliament; what then
can the Quakers say for themselves, if a sight of all their yearly Epistles,
which contain their Laws and Ordinances, for 20 years past should be demanded?
wherein, and whereby they have absolved his Majesty's Subjects from their
Active Obedience to diverse Laws of the Land, as in this Instance of Tithes.

Object. Possibly some may say, Were it not better to have Friendly
Conferences, that so where any thing has been done or said, either in things
Religious or Civil, that cannot be justified, might be Retracted and Condemned,
rather than thus to expose each other.

Answ. I grant it so; and from time to time I have proffered to meet George
Whitehead on those terms, but he would never assent to it, and unless he would
engage a Retractation, if need were, or leave Matters of Fact to the Judgment
and Decision of disinterested Persons, I always refused to discourse him.
Indeed, in his pretended Vindication, etc. in answer to my Sheet delivered to
the Parliament December. 1693. he made this seeming fair offer, p. 4. viz. I
George Whitehead freely offer, and am willing to make it plainly appear before
any six, ten, or twelve competent Witnesses, who are moderate men of Sense and
common Reason, That Francis Bugg has grossly and wickedly abused and perverted
Truth, and wronged the People called Quakers, both in Charge, Citation, and
Observation.

Now in answer to this, I came up to London the February following (as I
remember) and accepted his offer, and offered to leave it to any six, ten, or
twelve Persons by us equally chosen out of the Episcopalians, Presbyterians,
Independants or Baptists, to judge whether I had so wronged them: But he
refused so to do; manifesting thereby, that he could not find six, ten, or
twelve moderate men of common Sense amongst them all; or else that the Quakers
Principles were so erroneous, as that I did not wrong them, either in Charge,
Citation, or Observation: For otherwise, since I left him so much Field-room to
choose his six, ten, or ^welve moderate men of common Sense and Reason, as
there is in the recited four Christian Societies, and he refused to comply
therewith, surely it must be either because he has not Charity to think there
is six, ten, or ^welve moderate men to be chosen out of them all: or else that
he was conscious to himself, that the Quakers Principles are so erroneous,
their Books so blasphemous, as that I had not wronged them, either in Charge
Citation, or Observation. See Quakerism Withering and Christianity Reviving, p.
1. to 12.

And since I came to London this present May 1695. I presented their Yearly
Meeting with certain Accusations against George Whitehead; the Substance of
which is as follows: viz.

1. That G.W. is a continual contentious Scribler, guilty of giving base and
skurrilous names, as Beasts, Dogs, Wolves, Devils Incarnate, etc.

2. That George Whitehead is guilty of vindicating his own and h^s Brethrens
Books, which teach to deny Jesus of Nazareth to be Christ, and the efficient
Cause of Man's Salvation; To deny the Scriptures by speaking contemptuously of
them, calling them Death, Dust, and Serpents Meat; That to Preach out of them
is Conjuration; That it is doubtful whether Moses or Hermes was the first
Penman of the Holy Scriptures; or whether either or neither; preferring their
own Books and Epistles before the Scriptures; To slight, neglect, and despise
the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, as Baptism and the Lord's Supper; To under
value the Death and Sufferings of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, exalting
their own Sufferings as greater and more unjust.

3. That G. Whitehead is a public Defamer, a wicked Forger, a wilful Liar, a
gross Perverter, a false Glosser, a great Deceiver of the People, a Counterfeit
Christian, a Scandal to Christianity.

These things I have, and now again I offer to make good against him before any
six, ten, or twelve moderate men of Sense and common Reason equally chosen by
us both, out of the Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Independants and Baptists, or
out of any one of those four Societ es, always excepting against Quakers and
Muggletonians; and do desire that you may bring him forth, and put him to
Answer like the wise Woman of Abel^: Not that I would have you throw his Head
over the Wal^: No; but either let him acknowledge his Wickedness, Retract the
Errors in his own and his Brethrens Books which he has vindicated, or else
let 24 of the chief amongst you come forth, and Condemn the same under your
Hands, upon proof thereof made to you; if not, I shall take it for granted,
that you stand by him, and justify him in his Abominations; and thereupon I
shall Impeach your Yearly Meeting, and maintain your Proceedings to be against
the Fundamental Laws of the Land.

Object. But grant they will not come forth, and meet you upon these reasonable
terms, nor suffer their Brother Whitehead, in regard they foresee their Books
are erroneous, their Principles dangerous, tending to subve^t the Christian
Faith; and that the natural consequence of such a Meeting would necessitate a
Retractation, which would be the utter ruin of Quakerism; yet for Peace sake is
it not better to let them alone, who in time will fall of themselves, for what
is not of God cannot stand long.

Answ. I have not room in this sheet fully to answer the Obj^ction: But it
suffices that we have the Example of the Apostles and Martyrs, as a Cloud of
Witnesses, who did not assent, nor tamely suffer that Woman Jezabel to teach
and seduce the Nations, but as Instruments in God's hand, witnessed against all
kind of Heresies in their day; and many of them sealed their Testimony with
their Blood. And what Heretics ever held greater Errors than the Quakers? and
prevailed more with the People to suck them in, even whilst the Wise and the I
earned take little notice of their growth, and the danger of it. I grant the
Ari^n Heresy continued long, even 300 years, before it dwindled and withered
away; and lamentable were the consequences of it; yet they were witnessed
against by diverse Bishops and Learned Men. The Pope and his Superstitions, have
not gone on without many Testimonies against the dangerous consequences of his
Errors, and that with good Success too. Our famous John Wickliff, an Oxford
Scholar, as History says, wrote more than 200 Volumes against the Pope and his
Religious Orders; yet none but Papists accounted him a contentious Apostate.
No: he was an eminent Instrument in the hand of God; and I hope we have some
such Scholars still in that, and the other famous University, who, as they
become sensible of the dangerous Errors of our Quicksilver Tribe, I mean NEW
ROME, and know where to fix upon them and their invisible Tenets, which at
present they mask under disguise, pretending to own in Words, being examined,
what by their Books they deny. And indeed their Books are of two sorts, and
carry two faces; the one to the World, the other to be read only amongst their
Friends, as I elsewhere have largely manifested, insomuch that it is hard to
know a Quaker; who, as Irenaeus of old said in his third Book against
Heretics, viz. Whilst Heretics speak like the faithful, they not only mean
otherwise than they say, but clean contrary; and by their Tenets full of
Blasphemy, they destroy the Souls of those, who with their fair words, suck in
the Poison of their foul Opinions, etc. Insomuch that what the Learned Dr.
Stillingfleet, now Bishop of Worcester, said in his Discourse of Idolatry, etc.
p. 282. is more than probable; vi^. Yet any one who compares them, (i. e.
Quakers and Jesuits) would imagine the Life of Ignatius had been their great
Exemplar: I know not (said the Dr.) whether any of that Innocent and Religious
Order of the Jesuits had any hand in forming this new Society amongst us, as
has been frequently suggested: but if one may guess the Father by the Child's
likeness, Ignatius Loyola the Founder of the Jesuits, was at least the
Grandfather of the Quakers, etc. Of which more hereafter, if need be.

However our famous Wickliff paved the way for great Luther in Germany, who was
wonderfully carried on, even as upon Angels wings, who both by word and writing
testified against the Pope and his holy Cheats, which made the Papists rave and
roar, fret and fume, calling him Apostate, Self-condemned Apostate, insomuch
that all men's minds stood (as it were) upon their Tiptoes, to see the Issue of
Pope Leo's rage, and brave Luther's courage, who went on undauntedly, writing
many Books, and by verbal Disputations, until he finished both his Days and
Testimony; of whom Beza said, Rome tamed the World, the Pope tamed Rome so
great;
Rome Ruled by Power, the Pope by deep Deceit.
But how more large than theirs was Luth^r's Fame,
Who with one Pen both Pope and Rome does tame.
Go fictious Greece, go tell Alcides then,
His Club is nothing to great Luther's Pen.


POSTSCRIPT.
NOte Reader, that as their Books are of two sorts, so are their Meetings; at
one sort the Doors stand open, that all may go in, and hear some general Truths
a little mixed with Nonsense and Error: the other sort, viz. their Yearly
Meetings, the Doors shut, and a Guard to keep out and let in whom they please;
for I was willing to appear at New Romes Yearly Meeting, to demand Justice
against G. Whitehead, who pretended to meet me before any six, ten, or twelve
men, to make it appear, that I had wronged them in Charge, Citation and
Observation, yet refused; but they would not let me come into their Meeting;
which shows tha^ New Rome grows timorous, and that her Foundation is shaken,
and that her two Pillars upon which she leans, to wit, Infallibility and
Perfection, begin to totter and shake, so that she cannot stand long.

Francis Bugg.

LONDON: Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by John Guillam in
Bishopsgate-street. 1695.


