A TESTIMONY TO THE Power of God, Being Greater than the Power of Satan:
Contrary to all those, who hold No Perfection here, No Freedom from Sin on this
side of the Grave. Which Doleful Doctrine is here Testified against.

By a Witness of the Power of God, against the Power of Satan, Richard Baker.

When a strong Man armed keeps his Palace, his Goods are in peace: But when a
stronger than he shall come upon him, and overcome him, he takes from him all
his Armor, wherein he trusted, and divides the Spoils,

Luke 11.21, 22. I am the Almighty God: Walk before me, and be thou perfect,

Genesis 17.1. Greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the World,

1 John 4.4. London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in
Gracious-Street, and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-Street, 1699.

TO THE READER.
THE Author of this little Book having been one, with whom I had an intimate
Acquaintance, and strict Friendship, for many Years: And he having, upon his
dying Bed, committed the Copy to my Perusal and Care: I hold my self the more
concerned to give the World this short Account of both Him and It.

I. Of Him.
As He at first received the Truth in the Love of it: So he testified his Love
to it, in a threefold way.

1. By a circumspect Walking in it. He was careful so to order his
Conversation, that he might not only not bring any Scandal upon the Profession
he made of Truth; but might show himself a Pattern of good Works. And therein
he was Examplary.

2. By a cheerful Suffering for it. He never flincht in any Trial, nor balked
his Testimony to the Truth, for fear of Suffering for it, either in Person, or
Estate. But a Prison, for the Truth's sake was pleasant to him; and he took
joyfully the spoiling of his Goods. Which showed, He knew in himself, that he
had in Heaven a better, and an enduring, Substance.

3. By an hearty Zeal for the Prosperity and Propagation of it. A vigilant
Watchman he was, in his Station, against every thing, of what kind soever,
which he saw would hurt the Truth, or bring any (the least) Reproach upon it. A
sharp Reprover of Evil: As well as an Incourager of the Good. An earnest
Contender, not only for the true Faith (by which the Heart is purified, and
Victory over the World obtained) but for the good Order and holy Discipline,
which Christ has established in his Church, rejected and opposed by too many
Modern Libertines.

In the Work of the Ministry, which the Lord had called him to, he was diligent
and fervent; earnestly Laboring, by a quick and lively Testimony, to bring
those he ministered to, into an inward Exercise of Spirit toward God, that
therein they might come to be more and more acquainted with, and subject to
that divine Power, of which, in the following Sheets, he treats.

II. Of It.
As for the Book it self, it treats of one of the highest, and most noble
Themes, The Power of God: Which (from the Author's Experience of the effectual
Working thereof) it exalts above the Power of Satan.

The Drift of it is.
1. To lay open the many Wiles, and crafty Devices of the Enemy, whereby he
lies in wait to destroy.

2. To set forth the Goodness and Power of God, in discovering, and breaking
the Snares of that Wicked One, and delivering the Soul therefrom.

3. To invite and persuade Men to forsake and abandon the Service of Satan, and
enter indeed into the Service of God.

4. To inform and direct Men, how they may get from under the Power of Satan;
and how they may come to be guided and governed by the Power of God, and be
kept thereby, through Faith, unto Salvation.

How well the Undertaking is performed, thou will be best able to judge, when
thou shall have read, and weighed the whole, with a sober and impartial Mind.
And that I may not anticipate thy Judgment, by a Commendation of the Work, I
shall only say, It is written in a plain familiar Style, not decked with
Flowers of Rhetoric, nor set off with Ornaments of Humane Learning; which it
needed not: Being more comely to the Eye of the serious Mind, and pleasing to
the spiritual Ear, in the native Beauty and unaffected Simplicity of Truth.

By the Date, it appears to have been written many Years ago: Which may raise
Inquiry, Why it was not published sooner, or in the Author's lifetime. Of this
I have no other Account to give, but that which he himself gave me, when he
imparted the Copy to me, a few days before his Death, viz. That he had read of
many, in former days, and observed some, in his own time, who had made fair
progress in the Way of Truth, and had said, done and suffered much on behalf of
it; who yet had not held out to the end: But, through a too great Security, or
Self-confidence, and for want of a continual Subjection to the Power of God (in
and by which alone Strength and Preservation is to be found) have, by the
violent Assaults, or subtle Insinuations, and mysterious Workings, of the
Enemy, been drawn back again under the Power of Satan, to the Invalidating (at
least, in the Eye of the World) the Testimonies such had before given to the
Sufficiency of the Power of God. And that 'He, having by others Miscarriages
learnt to beware, had, from a Godly Jealousy over himself, suspended the
Publication, of the following Sheets, until he could with greater Confidence,
and more full Assurance, say, with the holy Apostle (when the time of his
departure was at hand, 2 Timothy 4.6.) I have fought a good Fight, I have finished
my Course, I have kept the Faith, etc.

How far this Consideration will justify his depriving the World so long of
the Benefit of so serviceable a Treatise, I will not undertake to determine.
But certainly, it is an Indication of uncommon Modesty, and rare Humility of
Mind; a sufficient Proof, that the Author did not seek Applause to himself.

It is now published in Love to Mankind: God grant that It may be
Instrumentally Serviceable, to the turning many from the Darkness, wherein
Satan's Power works, to the divine Light, in which the Power of God is felt,
and Deliverance thereby, from Satan's Power, witnessed: That God may be
glorified, his holy Name honored, his divine Power exalted, his blessed Truth
promoted and spread, and Mankind benefitted thereby, and blessed therein for
ever! Which, Reader, is the earnest desire of him, who heartily wishes thy
Eternal Welfare.

Tho. Ellwood.

Mary Baker's TESTIMONY Concerning her Husband.
WE read in the holy Scriptures, that when Jesus went into the Temple of God,
and cast out the Buyers and Sellers (the many things that had taken up the room
there) and healed the Blind and the Lame, that came to him, the little
Children, crying in the Temple, said, Hosanna to the Son of David. At which the
Chief Priests and Scribes were sore displeased, and said unto him, Hear thou
what these say? To whom he answered, Yea; have ye never read, Out of the Mouths
of Babes and Sucklings thou have perfected praise, Mat. 21.

The same Power, which so affected the Hearts of those Little Ones, to make
them cry Hosanna, did affect the Author of this little Book, when he was but a
Little One, in a Spiritual Sense, newly delivered out of the Power of Darkness,
and brought into subjection to the Power of God. The feeling of the cleansing
Operation whereof in his Heart, constrained him to bear his Testimony to it, as
in this little Treatise may be seen. Which is now published, that Generations
yet unborn may be invited thereby to bow to the same Power, and to admire the
Excellency and Greatness of it, which he did Experience in the Morning of his
Day, when it was writ.

And as the Sun of Righteousness did arise higher and higher in his Heart, by
the Light, and comfortable Warmth of the same was he guided, and strengthened
to go on, in the Spiritual Journey, from one step to another, till his Mouth
was opened, by the same Power, to bear Witness of it, in the Assemblies of the
Lord's People, and to call and invite Others to retire inward, that they also
might come to Experience the Work of this divine Power in their own Hearts: And
that such as were come thereunto might watch and wait for the stirring and
arising of this mighty Power, in its further Strength and Glory, which is able
to overcome all other Powers, both within and without.

In his Testimony he was Zealous, because his Heart was zealously affected
therewith. And when any, who professed to know the Work of this heavenly Power,
turned from, and acted against it, his Concern was great for such; laboring to
bring them to a sense of their Evil, if by any means they might be recovered:
Which, to many, proved effectual.

His Service in the Church of Christ (especially amongst the Meetings, both
Monthly and Quarterly, to which more particularly he belonged) has a living
Remembrance in the Hearts of many Members thereof: And the sense of his absence
has deeply affected the Spirits of some of them.

His Love was to all the Sons and Daughters of Men: But especially to the Flock
and Family of God, the Witnesses of this Power of Jesus, their Savior; amongst
whom his Heart was open, and his Life went freely forth. In their Converse was
his delight, and he would often say, The Friendships and Converse of the World
was a great Hurt to Friends, and drew their Minds too much out: Which thing he
kept clear of. And though he had Dealings and Concerns in the World, as well as
others, yet was always watchful against the Spirit of the World, which leads
from God.

In the latter part of this good Man's days, it was my Lot to come into so near
a Relation to him, as to be his Wife; who was a very kind, tender and
open-hearted Husband to me: By which means I had the Opportunity to have a
Relation of the Course of his Life. And he has oft-times expressed, how the same
Power, which (in the following Sheets) he exalted at the beginning, had carried
him through all Exercises, which were not a few. When he had Goods taken from
him, for his Testimony to the Truth, he has said, that the inward Joy he felt,
in that he was counted worthy to Suffer for the Truth he professed, was beyond
what he could speak. And having been a Prisoner, with other Friends, for the
Truth's sake, about the space of Two Years, he took delight to speak of that
time, often mentioning, how mightily the Lord was with them, and how good a
time it was. He would say many times, If People did but know the Pleasure of
Godliness, they would not live in the Earth as they did. But (said he) nothing
but God's Spirit can mortify the Flesh. And often would he mention that place,
Romans 8.13. If ye live after the Flesh, ye shall die: But if ye through the
Spirit do mortify the deeds of the Body, ye shall live. And he would say, He
had felt the mortifying Work of it, beyond what he could have thought; and that
over that, wherein his greatest Besetment was, he had obtained a perfect
Conquest. For which he offered the Thanksgiving and Praise to God's Everlasting
Power, who not only begins the Work of Redemption, but is able to carry it on,
and finish it, to the perfecting of his own Praise, which he accepts out of the
Mouths of Babes and Sucklings, Little Ones; which incourages me thus to appear,
in the publishing of this little Book, that it may go forth for the
Encouragement of all the Weary, and such as are heavy-laden with the Burden of
their Iniquity, that they may come to find rest to their Souls, as this
faithful Witness did. Who, when he lay on his dying Bed, was kept quick and
living in his Spiritual Senses, and had a suitable Word to every one's State
that came to him; and would often clap his Hand on his Breast, and say, All is
well here. The day before he departed, many Friends visiting him, he spoke
sensibly to all, and, in great Expression of Love, took his leave of them. And
taking his leave of a Child, who wept, he said, Do not Cry: I am well; my Peace
is made with the Lord. If thou Cry, Cry that Iniquity may be brought down, and
Righteousness brought up. The Power and Strength of God is with me. I am going
the Way of all Flesh. I am going before; and others must follow after.

So he laid down his Life in the feeling of that Power, which at the beginning
of his day he bore Witness to. Which I here mention for the comfort of those,
who are kept by it, through Faith, unto Salvation; and for the Inviting Others
to come, to feel the Work of the same: Which I felt to be my Stay and
Strength, in the parting with so near and dear a Relation.

And as the Children in the Temple cried Hosanna, so the Multitude of the
Disciples also did Rejoice (when Jesus came riding on the Asses Colt, bringing
that into Subjection which before had been at Liberty) saying, Blessed be the
King that comes in the Name of the Lord: Peace in Heaven, and Glory in the
Highest, Luke 19.38. For which some of the Pharisees would have had him rebuke
his Disciples, ver. 39. To whom he answered, If these should hold their Peace,
the Stones would immediately Cry out. ver. 40. Which causes me thus to cast in
my Mite, to the Praise of him that lives for ever: Who told his Followers,
Because I live, ye shall live also, John 14.19. Who is the Alpha and Omega, the
Beginner and Finisher of the Work of Faith, by his own Power, which this his
faithful Servant was a Witness of. Concerning whom I was pressed in Spirit to
write this short Testimony, without which I could not be clear in the sight of
the Lord.

Mary Baker.
The 31 st of the 10 th Month, 1697.
THE Power of God Known to be Greater than the Power of Satan, etc.
IT has been the Design, and still is, of the Enemy of Man's Salvation, to
make Men believe they are serving God, whilst they are actually serving the
Devil. And he has so far prevailed with many, that they call Evil, Good, and
Good, Evil; and put Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light. And being thus
blinded by the God of this World, he has raised and fitted them to stand up as
Advocates for his Power: And so bold and confident have some of them been in
their Master's Service, that they have in Effect said, Who is able to make War
with him, and overcome him? As if his Power were the greater, and his Dominion
over all. Now seeing he has so far prevailed upon many at this Day, as to make
them plead, There is No Perfection here; No Freedom from Sin on this side of
the Grave: And seeing many of his Servants and Ministers do stand up so boldly,
on behalf of their God; I was moved with an Holy Zeal from the Lord, to stand
up on behalf of my God. And I do here proclaim, that Greater is my God, the God
of Truth, than the God of the World: And his Power is more able to redeem out
of Sin, and to preserve from Sin, than the Enemie's Power is to keep in Sin, or
to lead into Sin. And because I have had Experience, in my Measure, of the
working and operation of both Powers in me, I do here give my Testimony, that
The Power of God is the greatest. And, Reader, for thy further Satisfaction, I
have freedom to set forth, in some measure, the working of the Enemy in me,
until he was cast out.

While I was a Child, I had often secret desires raised in me after the Lord:
But not knowing from whence they came, nor yiedling obedience to that which
raised them, they soon decayed and died. Then the Enemy sought to get room and
entertainment in me: And the Enemy tempted and ensnared me, with the Pleasure
of some Evil, which the Witness of God in me, made manifest unto me, and
reproved in me for it, but by yielding to the Enemy, the Witness was quenched,
but I joining with the Enemy in the Temptation, and continuing in the Evil,
disregarded the Witness, and caused it to withdraw at that time. But soon after
it did arise again, and condemned me for the Sin I was guilty of, and began to
take away that Peace and Delight which I formerly had therein, and told me,
There is no Peace to the Wicked. Then being troubled in Mind, that I had
offended the Lord, the Enemy stepped in to give me a false ease, and perverting
the Scriptures, he said, God is merciful to a Sinner, at what time soever he
repents; And If we confessor Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us: But
he never brought in the following Words, [ And to cleanse from all
Unrighteousness] and so he led me into a large Form of Words, which I then
called Prayer: and I could make large Confessions in Words, and so got again
into a false Rest and Peace, and committed Sin with delight. But many times,
after the committing of it, the Light of Christ in me did so reprove and
condemn me, that I have inflicted Punishment upon my Body, for the Sin of my
Soul. Then would I seek to heal my Self with that which I called my Prayers,
and with making many large Confessions without forsaking. But while I was in
this State, this was brought to my remembrance, viz. That I had read of a King
of France, who used, when he had sworn an Oath, to Kiss his Crucifix; and then
Swear again, and Kiss it again. And my Condition was represented to me to be no
better then his (which I concluded was had enough: For I was convinced Swearing
was bad, and had always a detestation of it.) This brake my Peace exceedingly,
so that I could not go on with that Delight I had done before.

But the Enemy had still something at hand, to uphold his Kingdom in me, and he
brought these carnal Reasonings into my Mind, that most People, who knew me,
looked upon me to be a Sober Man; and that this was but a small Sin, and was no
scandal to me, nor was it any occasion or Encouragement to others to Sin: for
it was known to none but my self. And that I must not expect to live without
Sin: For, said he, We do not read in the Scriptures, of any that ever did. Thus
he added more Weight to that Burden, which my poor Soul was weary of before;
and all my seemingly Religious performances could not ease my wounded
Conscience, being closly pursued by the Witness of God in me. But not having a
true Knowledge of that which did reprove me, and so not turning at the Reproof,
I did daily yield to the Enemy's Temptations, and was led Captive by him at his
will. And so customary and habitual it was become to me, that I then thought, I
could as well have lived without Meat or Drink, as without yielding thereunto.
So with Pleasure and Delight I went on longer in the Devil's Service, tho not
without Secret Reprovings in me. But having heard some of the World's Priests
say, such Condemnations proceeded from the Devil, I was still further ensnared.
But now I know them to be Liars that have said so; and I testify, there is
something of God in all Men, which, at one time or other, does reprove and
condemn them for their Sins, in order to recover them out of them. For the Lord
has not left himself without a Witness in all Men, that thereby they might
believe, and by believing might come to obtain the Salvation of their Immortal
Souls; which my Soul desired after. And though the Enemy had said, that none of
the Holy Men, who writ the holy Scriptures, were free from Sin: Yet the Witness
of God said, Walk in the Spirit, and thou shall not fulfill the Lust of the
Flesh, Gal. 5.16.

Then did the Enemy bring more Scriptures, to hold me still under his Power,
and by perverting those Scriptures, he raised up his seeming-religious Props in
me, thereby to support his Kingdom, as he does in many at this day, who make a
great Profession in Words, and talk much of God, as I then could do; but did
not know him, any more than they do now. For the natural Man understands not
the things of God: It is truly so, though Men please themselves with their own
vain thoughts.

First, He suggested to my Mind, That the Just Man Sins seven times a day;
which I then took to be Scripture: But since I came to read the Scriptures, in
that Spirit by which they were written, I find it is not Scripture, but a
mis-representing of that Scripture (Prove. 24.16.) which says, A Just Man
falls seven times, and rises up again, but the Wicked shall fall into
Mischief. Which falling of a Just Man, some of the better sort, even of the
Priests themselves, have interpreted to be, not a falling into Sin, but a
falling into Affliction.

Secondly, He perverted that Scripture, 1 John 1.8. If we say that we have no
Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us

Thirdly, He urged that the Apostle Paul said, When he would do Good, Evil was
present with him, and how to perform that which was Good, he found not.

Fourthly, He alleged that All Men have their Failings, and the best of Men
their Infirmities, as may be read in the Scriptures; instancing David, and
others. The Perversions of these Scriptures, I may well call Satan's Props, for
he propped up his Kingdom in me a great while by them, and so begat me into the
World's belief. That there is No Perfection here, no Freedom from Sin to be
expected on this side the Grave: And then I began to make merry over the
Witness of God in my self. But the Lord did not leave me there, but in tender
compassion visited me, and his holy Witness began to arise again in me and to
strike at those Props which the Enemy had set up in me. And this holy Witness
said, that unless I was regenerated and born again, I could not inherit the
Kingdom of Heaven. Then I began to see, there was nothing but Purity and
Holiness could stand before the Lord: For all things are naked and bare before
him. And then I cried out for a Deliverer, one that could redeem me from that
which was too great a Burden for me to bear; as one once said, A wounded Spirit
who can bear? Prove. 18.14. But I could then see no way of Deliverance; but
being exceedingly troubled, I went from Mountain to Hill, from hearing this
sort of People, to the other: But among them all, there was none did speak
Peace to my weary Soul; nor could, unless I could have had Peace in my Sins,
which I could not. For all of them cried out, No Freedom from Sin on this side
of the Grave. But I felt a necessity for it, else I could not enjoy Peace with
the Lord; which made me still cry out for a Deliverer.

In this great distress, being turned with my Face Sion-ward, and inquiring the
way thither, I was at length (through the abundant Goodness of the Lord, who
led me) inclined to go to a Meeting of the People called Quakers, where I did
hear a Servant of the Lord declare, that That which reproves and condemns a
Man, in himself, for Sin, and will not let him go on in Sin without reproof, is
the Light of Christ, who is the Light of the World, which enlightneth every Man
that comes into the World, that all Men through him might believe, and so come
to be saved from Sin. And that this Light, which does convince of Sin,
Obedience being yielded to it, will redeem out of Sin, and preserve and keep
from Sin. And I having a Witness for God in me, it did testify to the Truth of
what was declared; and I was then by it convinced, that That was the Way of
God, and Those were the People of God.

But I thought I saw a Lion in the Way, and that there was a great Cross to be
taken up: Yet I found, if I could be delivered from that, which was so great a
Burden to me, I could be contented to undergo a great deal. From that time
forward, I still kept to the Meetings of the People of the Lord, who are at
this time distinguished by the Name Quakers, as the People of the Lord were in
Ages past called Christians. Which Name is now given to Drunkards and Swearers,
and all manner of profane Persons, and by the Sons of Belial one to another;
so that the Name Christian, is become a reproach amongst them that are called
Heathens, through the Blasphemy of those, that have covered themselves with the
Name Christian, but do not live the Christian Life.

Now keeping to the Meetings of the Lord's People, I did there hear many
Declarations, testifying to the Power of the Lord, what it had wrought for his
Servants in this Age, and likewise what he do for all those who are faithful
and obedient, in this day of his Power; Yet still Sin remained in me, and that
was my great Weight and Burden.

But now, knowing where Strength and Power was, a Secret Hope wat raised up in
me, and a Belief, that All things are possible with the Lord. So I committed my
Self and Cause to the Lord, having had Experience, that my own Strength was
altogether in-sufficient: For, when the Judgments of the Lord have been upon
me, I have often made large Promises in my own will, that I would resist the
Enemy when he came; but I could never prevail by my own strength, or any thing
set up in my own will, while that was standing.

But now, having listed my self under an another Commander, my old Master was
enraged, and comes with his usual Boldness and Confidence, to demand Entrance;
and being denied, he makes use of his former Weapons, but was disappointed, and
driven back by the Power of the Lord; Glory be unto his holy Name for ever.

For I keeping (or rather, being kept) to that, which did make it manifest to
me to be Sin, it furnished me with this Weapon against him, viz. Walk in the
Spirit, and thou shall not fulfill the Lust of the Flesh. And so the Enemy was
chased away, by the Spirit of the Lord, who had lifted up a Standard, in me,
against him. And he being thus put to flight, there did arise Joy unutterable
in my Soul, feeling the work of the Lord begun in me. And so continuing
faithful and obedient to the Lord, he has, by his mighty Power, redeemed me
from that, which once I did believe I could never be redeemed from. Praises,
Praises be given unto the Omnipotent God, who reigns for ever. For that which
formerly was so pleasant and delightful to me, and was as my Meat and Drink, is
now become hateful and abominable in my thoughts; Glory be to the Lord for
ever, whose Mercy is over all his works, and is not to be forgotten by those
that have tasted of it.

Yet the Enemy would not leave me so; but going up and down, like a roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour, he comes and presents his Temptations again,
though the main Pillar of his Kingdom was broken down in me. So now he goes
another way to work, and sets before me the difficulty and straitness of the
Way I was to walk in: For my nearest and dearest Relations would be great
Enemies to me, and would slight and contemn me, whereas before, I was well
beloved and esteemed by, and amongst, them, and they were ready and willing to
do me what kindness they could. And if I would now turn fool at last, and
disoblige my Friends, and so leave my Wife and Children to the Mercy of the
World, who would pity me! For he that takes not care for his Family, is worse
than an Infidel. And (said the Enemy) if thou were of any other Religion, but a
Quaker, thy Relations would be contented; but that is the most contemptible
Religion in the World, and laden with Reproaches. O see the Deceit of the
wicked Enemy, and avoid it, as I did, by keeping to the Measure of the Grace of
God in my self. And as my mind was turned inward, to consider and see what the
Lord had done for me, this sprang up in me, as a Defense against the Enemy, If
I have not done those mighty works for thee, which no other could do, believe
me not, else believe me for my works sake. Then did the Enemy vanish at the
Brightness of the coming of the Lord, who has preserved me out of the Mouth of
the Lion, and out of the Paw of the Bear, and out of the hand of that
uncircumcised Philistine, that once had encompassed me about; Praises be given
unto the Lord for ever.

O Friend! Let me beseech thee, let not the Enemy of thy Soul deceive thee,
under what pretense soever, though he should guild his Bait, and cover his
Temptations over with never so many Scripture-words; But keep thou to that true
Light in thee, which makes all things manifest. And by taking heed to that pure
Witness of God in thee, thou will come to see Satan's Devices, which they of
Old, who were led by the Spirit of God, were not ignorant of; as such now are
not.

And now I have this Testimony to bear for the Lord, with many Thousands more,
That Perfection, or Freedom from Sin, is to be obtained on this side the Grave,
through Faith in Christ Jesus. And I do Testify and Declare, That in this Life
is the time of working out our Salvation: For, where the Tree falls, there it
shall lie; and in what State Death leaves a Man, in that State Judgment will
find him: For, in the Grave there is no Repentance. Now true Repentance,
through a godly Sorrow, is a Change from Sin and Iniquity, to serve the Living
God in the New Life, or in the Newness of Life: Not in the Oldness of the
Letter, which too many are found in at this day; but in the Newness of the
Spirit: For, it is the Spirit that gives Life; the Flesh profits nothing,
John 6.63.

Reader, If thou are a stranger to Truth, and to the right Way of the Lord, and
have been led Captive by the Enemy at his Will (as I was, while ignorant of the
Light of the Lord in me) and art now come to a sense of the Burden and Weight
of thy Sins, and have a desire to be Redeemed from them: To thee, and for thy
sake chiefly, are these Lines written, that thou may here see the Mysterious
Working of the Prince of Darkness, and take Warning in time, whilst the Spirit
of the Lord strives with thee: For the Spirit of the Lord will not always
strive with Man. But be not discouraged at the Greatness or Number of thy Sins:
For all Power in Heaven and in Earth is given to Christ Jesus. Only Faith in
him, and Faithfulness and Obedience to what he makes manifest is thee, is
re-required of thee. And if thou have Mountains of Sin, thou shall see them, in
the Faith, to vanish away: For it is The Willing and the Obedient shall eat the
good of the Land.

And if thou are one that has known, in any measure, the Work of the Lord
carried on in thy Heart, I have this further to say, for thy Encouragement,
from my own Experience, That thou have to do with a Tenderhearted Father, who
gently leads those that are but young in the Truth, and his Lambs he will carry
in his Arms, and will lead thee no faster than thou art able to follow. But be
sure, whatever he makes manifest to thee to be Evil, Give up to the Lord in
Faithfulness and Obedience, and the Lord will give thee Power over it. For the
End, wherefore the Lord does manifest Sin to be Sin, is, that he may Redeem out
of it. And as thou are faithful in the small thing, thou will be made Ruler
over more. And as thou stand in that Faith, which is the Gift of God, thou will find nothing too hard or difficult for thee; but thou will be able to say
(as the Servants of God did in Days past, and do now in this Age) All things
are possible with him, with whom we have to do. And thou will feel the same
Power to work, and beget the same Faith in thee, as it did in them: For without
Faith it is impossible to please God, whatever Men may pretend to in words.
There are many Pretenders in our day, to the Worship and Service of God, as
there were in Ages past: But what avail their Pretenses, or Performances, while
they are fain to confess, their Worship ends in Imperfection, and that their
best Duties are Sin; or they Sin in performing their best Duties; Sin in
Praying, Sin in Preaching, Sin mixed with their most holy Duties. That it is so
with them I do not deny: But my Heart is grieved at their Captivity, Bondage
and Misery, because they believe it never can be otherwise: And, indeed it
never will be otherwise with them, so long as they content themselves, with
large Confessions of their Sins, and come not to forsake them. Would they
content themselves, that the time past is sufficient that they have wrought the
Will of the Gentiles, there would be some ground to hope, that they were as
willing to forsake their Sins, as to confess them; and so might come to have
Faith in the Gift of God, with whom all things are possible; which thing many
have formally in words acknowledged, who in works have denied it. But I
testify, If they, who make such large Confessions of their Sins, do not come
to that Gift of God in them, which can enable them to forsake their Sins, their
Condition is no better than his, who knew his Master's Will, and did it not;
who was to be beaten with many Stripes. For the Lord has made manifest his
Unerring Way, and he is daily calling and inviting the Sons and Daughters of
Men to walk therein, and to be reconciled unto him, that they may know their
Sin blotted out. For the Lord has no delight in the Death of a Sinner (of
which I am an Instance and a Witness) but is willing that all should Repent,
Return, and come to the Knowledge of his Truth and be saved. For he has not
Ordained Men to Reprobation, so that they cannot be saved: Neither has he so
absolutely Elected a certain Number of Persons to Salvation, that what Evil
soever they do, they cannot miss of Salvation, as many do falsely believe. Which
dangerous Doctrines have, on the one hand, thrown many down to the Bottomless
Pit of Despair: And on the other hand, raised too many up into a Presumptuous
Security. Reader, my desire is, that thou would come to the Witness of God in
thy self, that thou may see and learn the Mystery of these things. For the
Grace of God, which has so manifestly appeared in this our day, has brought
mighty things to pass, which many will not believe, though it has been often
declared. It has wrought the same Works now, as it did in the Apostles days,
in teaching to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts; and also to live Soberly,
Righteously and Godly in this present World, Tit. 2.12. And there be many
Witnesses, that have been raised from the Dead (or out of the Spiritual Death)
who do declare of it; who were once dead in Trespasses and Sins: But the
Goodness of the Lord has led them to Repentance, and raised them to Life. Now
the Reason why many will not believe, is, because they love their Evil Deeds:
Therefore they hate the Light, and will not bring their Deeds to it, lest by it
they should be Reproved. For this is the Condemnation, That Light is come into
the World, and Men love Darkness rather than Light; and such have ignorantly
called the Light, Darkness: But they that love the Light, and know what it is,
they do bring their Deeds to it, that they may be made manifest, that they are
wrought in God, John 3.19, 20, 21. For the Light makes all things manifest;
yea, the hidden things of Esau are made manifest by the Light. My Advice and
Counsel to thee is, in the Fear of the Lord, Bring thy Deeds to the Light, if
ever thou intendest, or desire, to be Everlastingly Happy. Let not the Enemy
of thy Soul deceive thee any longer: For it is better to Suffer Affliction with
the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin, which are but for a
season; though they be never so much applauded by the Sons and Daughters of
Men. Such as Men sow, they must reap: They that sow to the Flesh, must of the
Flesh reap Corruption; and they that sow to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit
reap Life Everlasting, Gal. 6.7, 8.

Consider well those words, ye Proud and Haughty Ones, and be no longer joined
to the Spirit of this World: For the Lord God has a Controversy against it.
And he has determined the Downfall of the Man of Sin; which many have witnessed
already fulfilled in themselves: And the Lord is now fitting and preparing them
for himself. For it is not the Devil's right to rule in Man: But it is the
Lord's right alone to rule there, and he will have no Sharers with him in his
Government.

Let none put the Day of the Lord afar off; for this is the Day of the Lord:
And unless thou know him to rule in thee now, who alone can destroy the
Devil and his Works, thy believing he shall rule hereafter (if Satan continues
to rule in thee here) will stand thee in little stead; fot that Belief will not
purify thy Heart, and it is only the pure in Heart that can see God, Mat. 5.8.
Heb. 12.14. For Christ Jesus was made manifest for this very End, that he might
destroy the Works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. And although the Men of this World
have set themselves in Opposition against this Truth of the Lord, and have
pleaded for the Continuance of Sin, and therein for the Devil's Power; yet we
know in whom we have believed, and in the Light of the Lord they are seen, and
their Fruits have made manifest whose Servants they are: For his Servants they
are to whom they obey, whether of Sin unto Death, or of Obedience unto
Righteousness, Romans 6.16. And though many of them have promised (or others have
promised for them) to forsake the Devil and all his Works, and to keep God's
Holy Will and Commandments all the days of their lives; yet they are ready to
cry out Blasphemy, when they are told, Whosoever is born of God does not commit
Sin, though they are the plain words of Scripture, 1 John 3.9. So Zealous are
they for their Master's interest.

Reader, if thou art one, who has been taught for Doctrine Men's Precepts, as
too many now are, let me persuade thee to come to the Witness of God in thee,
and try which is the best Teacher. For that Inward Teacher teaches safe and
sure, neither can it be removed into a Corner: And if thou turn'st to the right
hand, or to the left, thou shall hear a Word behind thee (from this Inward
Teacher) saying, This is the Way, walk in it, Isa. 30.21. This is the plain
Man's Path, wherein (though a Fool in the Worlds esteem) he shall not err, Isa.
35.8. What though the Lord leads his People in a way, contrary to the Wisdom of
the World, which makes them the Scorn and Derision of the World! Be not
discouraged; for how can it be otherwise, it being the same way which the holy
Men of God walked in, in Ages past? But our Rejoicing is this, The Testimony of
a good Conscience: And we do know (as God's faithful Servants did of old) The
Reproaches for Christ are greater Riches than any there are in Egypt's Land;
which is a Place of Darkness. But we have known the Lord to Redeem us out of
that Bondage and deep Captivity; and now we can sing Praises and Thanksgivings
unto our God, who is over all, both in Heaven and in Earth, blessed for ever
and for evermore.

Friendly Reader, I have here, out of Love and Good Will to thee, and to all
Mankind, declared unto thee the Goodness of the Lord unto my poor Soul, that
thou may be encouraged to walk in the Light of the Lord, which he has made
manifest in this our day: For it concerns thee most to know the Lord's Work in
thy day, that thou may have a sense of the Operation of the Power of God on
thy Heart, before thou go hence. O let not the Enemy of thy Soul prevail
with thee, to plead for the continuance of Sin term of Life. Did Men but know
how they do thereby advance the Kingdom of the Enemy of their Souls, they never
more would open their Mouths on Sins behalf, unless they are like those of old,
who said, We have made a Covenant with Death, and with Hell are we at an
Agreement, Isa. 28.15. For they who deny Perfection, or Freedom from Sin, deny
the very End and Purpose for which Christ came, and was manifested in the
Flesh, which was, to destroy the Works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. which all, who
profess Christianity, do agree, is Sin. And his Name was therefore called
Jesus, because He should save his People from their Sins, Mat. 1.21. Not In
their Sins; mark that, thou Unbelieving Professor. Why should this be thought
Impossible, seeing All things are possible with God, Mat. 19.26? It was the
Command of the Lord to Abraham, Walk before me, and be thou perfect, Genesis 17.1.
And to encourage him thereunto, he brings it in with these words [ I am the
Almighty God.] The holy Apostle said, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not
fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh, Gal. 5.16. And I can do all things through
Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4.13. And As many as are led by the Spirit
of God, they are the Sons of God, Romans 8.14. Such cannot plead for Sin, because
they have Fellowship one with another in the Light, and the Blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses them from all Sin, 1 John 1.7. From whence then do thou
think the Impossibilities do arise? (for some have ignorantly said, It is
Impostble ever to be Perfect, or Free from Sin, on this side the Grave) If thou
can not tell (as some Tenderhearted Ones could not) I will tell thee, It is
from the Man of Sin, who rules in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience:
From him proceeds these Thoughts of Impossibilities, and not from the Lord.

And now, let the Witness of God in thee judge between the Precious and the
Vile; between those who serve the Lord, and them who serve him not. For a
Separation there must be; the Lord will no longer be mocked with an
Hypocritical Pretense of Zeal for him, while the Devil has the Heart. They
that pretend the Scripture is their only Rule, why will they not come to it,
and walk according to it, that we might see their Fruits to be agreeable
thereunto? They have made use of the Scriptures to plead for Sin term of Life,
and have raked up the Failings of the holy Men of God recorded in them, thereby
encouraging others to Sin, which never was the End they were written for: But
they were given that Men might come to be Perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good Works, 2 Timothy 3.17. And it was the Labor of the Apostles, to present
every Man Perfect in Christ Jesus, Col. 1.28. The Holy Scriptures were not
written for Men to make a Trade of, as in Buying and Selling the Words of the
Holy Men of God, who spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and as the
Spirit gave them Utterance: No, but that Men might come to the same Word in
themselves, which they testify of. And if thou, Reader, come to that, thou will come to know the Word of God, which lives and abides for ever: And then
the Scriptures will be indeed precious to thee, as thou come to see the
fulfilling of them in thy self; and so thou will have Unity with that Spirit
which gave them forth: And the right End for which they were written thou will
see; which they are ignorant of, who go from the true Light, the Holy Witness
in themselves. The want of keeping to that, makes them run into so many Heads
and Heaps of Confusion as they are; one calling This the Way, another saying
That is the Way: So that Mankind is out of Order, by refusing to be led by the
Spirit of Christ Jesus, which would bring all things into Order again. And was
it not so in the Apostles days? Did not Demetrius, and the Multitude, make an
Uproar, though the most part knew not wherefore they came together? But they
all agreed to cry up, Great is Diana of the Ephesians! For by this Craft (said
Demetrius) we have our Wealth. And is it not the same in effect now, though they
have got more Plausible Words to cover themselves withal, that they might not
be discovered. Do not both Priests and People cry out now, Great is the Devil's
Power! Great is the Strength of Sin! So great, that it is Impossible to be set
free from Sin on this side the Grave? And has not the World admired the Whore,
because she has had a golden Cup in her hand, by which she has deceived, and
does deceive the Nations? O that Men would be so wise for themselves, as to
come to that which would open an Eye in them to see the Enemy of their Souls,
and would help them to work against him, before the Night comes, wherein none
can work! For it is the Light that makes things manifest, and by that Light
thou may see the Mystery of Iniquity still working, under the pretense of
Zeal for the Worship and Ordinances of God (as Men call them) but they will not
come to Christ, whom God has Ordained to be a Light to lighten the Gentiles,
and the Glory of his People Israel, Luke 2.32. But as Backsliding Israel made
to themselves a Golden Calf in old time: So these will needs have something
that may appear glorious to their fleshly Eye, which many in their Imaginations
have made and set up, and so are worshipping the Works of their own Inventions,
as they of old did the Works of their own Hands. For whatsoever Man forms, and
sets up between Christ and his Soul, is an Idol, and must be broken down,
before Redemption can be truly witnessed. But are there not many now adays,
who persuade themselves they are Redeemed by Christ from their Sins, whilst
they live in their Sins? O! what an unheard of Redemption was this in the
Apostles days! He said, When ye were the Servants of Sin, ye were free from
Righteousness, Romans 6.20. And, What Fruit (said he) had ye then in those
things, whereof ye are now ashamed, ver. 21? That was not the Redemption which
Christ Jesus came to purchase for his People: But to purify to himself a
peculiar People, zealous of good Works; and to redeem them from all Iniquity,
Tit. 2.14. That they might serve him in Holiness and Righteousness, all the
days of their lives, Luke 1.75. This was the End or Effect of the Redeeming
Power of the Lord in Ages past. And I give my Testimony for God, it is the same
now in this Age, and works the same Effect, even to redeem from all Sin. Let
the Enemy, and his Instruments, be never so much enraged at us, for bearing
Testimony to the Truth, we matter not; for we are Witnesses for God against
them all, and have boldness, in the Strength of the Lord, to Publish to the
World the Greatness of the Power of our God, and of his Christ, who has
determined, that Sin and Iniquity shall have an end, and Everlasting
Righteousness shall be brought in, Dan. 9.24. Which is believed, and waited
for, by the Upright in Heart, who have turned their Faces Zion-ward. And we
know* the Lord has many more, whom he will gather, from off the barren
Mountains, into the same Faith with us, to declare of his Noble Acts, in this
his mighty Day, wherein he is shaking, not only the Earth, but the Heavens
also, that That only, which cannot be shaken, may remain ( Heb. 12.26, 27.)
which will stand in stead, when time shall be no more.

And friendly Reader, If thou desire to die the Death of the Righteous, and
to have thy latter End to be like his (which most Men do) thou must live the
Life of the Righteous: For there is not another way that is certain. What,
though Men have cut out Ways to themselves, and have made large and pleasant
Paths to walk in; and say, Come, walk in our Way, or be of our Society; for it
is the Way of the Lord. Before thou venturest into it, ask them this Question,
Have you found out a Way to overcome Sin? If they answer, No; that cannot be
expected on this side the Grave: Then I testify, It is not the Way of the
Lord; neither art thou to walk in it. But thou art to walk in the Light of the
Lamb, which all the Nations of them that are saved, shall walk in, Rev. 21.24.
Light is sown for the Righteous, and Gladness for the Upright in Heart, Psalm
97.11. And the Lord will keep him in perfect Peace, whose Mind is stayed upon
him. Which words are often spoken by the Hireling Priests; but the thing can
never be experimentally Witnessed by thee, till thou come to give up thy self
wholly to be led by the Lord: Which if thou do, then will the Lord take delight
in thee, to do thee good, and hard things shall be made easy to thee. And as
thou abidest in the Faith, thou will see over all the Ways of the World, and
the Foundations whereon they stand, and thou will see cause for ever to Praise
the Lord, for that he has redeemed thee out of those Paths that lead to the
Chambers of Death, and has built thee upon the sure Foundation, which cannot
be shaken, the Rock of Ages, and of many Generations, Jesus Christ, the chief
Cornerstone.

Had I the Tongue of Men and Angels, I could not demonstrate unto thee, in
words, the Peace and Happiness that is enjoyed in walking in the Way of the
Lord: For in his Presence there is fullness of Joy, and at his right hand are
Pleasures for evermore, Isa. 16.11. O, Come away, come away, for the Lord's
sake, and thy poor Soul's sake; and partake not with the Wicked in their Sins,
lest thou receive of their Plagues, Rev. 18.4. Let not a little momentary
Pleasures beguile thee into Eternal Misery. The Lord having redeemed me out of
the hands of my Soul's Enemy, I am moved with the Bowels of Pity and
Compassion, to beseech thee to come and be reconciled to the Lord: For I
testify, he is more willing to receive thee, than thou art to come: Why then
will thou not come, that thou may be Everlastingly Happy? For the Door of
Mercy is set open, so that all that will come, may come freely, without Money,
or without Price, Isa. 55.1. Therefore why will ye die, O ye foolish People and
unwise? Seeing the Way is open, and the Path so plain, that the Wayfaring Man
(though a Fool) cannot err therein, Isa. 35.8.

What could the Lord have done more for Man, than he has done, having sent his
Only Begotten Son a Light into the World, that the World through him might
believe, and so be saved, John 3? For the Light shines in Darkness, though the
Darkness does not comprehend it, John 1.5. It was that Light that gave Paul,
and Others, the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, 2
Cor. 4.6. And it is the same Light that brings to the Knowledge of God now, and
not Another; though the Enemy has taught Men to give many bad Names to it,
that Men might not believe in it. But they who do believe in it, know it to be
the true Light, which lights every Man that comes into the World, John 1.9.
And that In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men, ver. 4. And that
the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all Sin, 1 John 1.7. That he might
present his Church, a glorious Church, without spot or wrinkle, or any such
thing, Ephesians. 5.27. Which of all those called Churches in the World, whether
Public or Private, is the Spotless Church? Are there not Spots of Pride, Envy,
Malice, Dissimulation, etc. upon them? Bow therefore ye tall Cedars, and ye
sturdy Oaks, who have lifted up your selves in your vain Imaginations, above
the low, meek and gentle Witness of the Lord in you: And know, that for all
this God will bring you to Judgment, though ye have covered your selves with a
Profession, in drawing nigh to the Lord with your Mouths and with your Lips (as
some of old did, Isa. 29.13.) when your Hearts have been after your other
Lovers, and have made a Profession of God in Words, when in Works ye have
denied him. Do ye think Words will stand you instead at the Day of Judgment?
Though ye could say, We have Prayed in thy Name, and Preached in thy Name, and
in thy Name have done many wonderful things: Yet hear your Sentence (if ye
continue to work Iniquity) Depart from me, ye Workers of Iniquity, Mat. 7.23.
What we, (may some perhaps say, we) who have driven a Trade with the
Scriptures, and have formed to our selves a Way of Worship, and Religious
Exercises, and have spent much time in the performance thereof: Ah! But what
will ye answer, when it shall be asked of you (as it was of some of old, Isa.
1.12.) Who has required this at your hands? It is this the Lord requires of
thee, O Man, To do Justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk Humbly with thy God,
Micah 6.8. And if thou answer his requirings therein, then shall thy Peace be
as a River, Isa. 48.18. And thou shall know the flowings of that River, the
Streams whereof make glad the City of our God, Psalm 46.4. Now it is my desire,
that thou should be a Fellow-Citizen with us: For in the Father's House are
many Mansions; if it were not so, I would have told you, said Christ to his
Disciples, John 14.2. But, said he, I go to prepare a place for you, that where
I am, ye may be also, verse 3.

O that Men would be so wise, as to come to the serious Consideration of these
things, before the Day of their Visitation be over! For whoever thou art, this
know for certain, Thou have a Talent given thee by the Lord, and so art left
for ever without Excuse. Therefore see that thou make good use of it, and
that thou improvest it to the Lord's use, and to the Good of thy Immortal Soul.
Then will thou answer the End for which the Lord created thee, and wilt bring
unto the Lord the Glory due unto him. Which that thou may, is the desire of
him, who is, Reader,

Thy Friend in the Truth of God. R. B.
Written the 13th Day of the 1st Month, 1670.
THE END

