THE QUAKERS DETECTED, Their Errors CONFUTED, And their Hypocrisy DISCOVERED.
By a Lover of the Truth as it is in Jesus, Francis Bugg.

-- They have spoken against me with a lying Tongue: They compassed me about
with words of hatred; and fought against me without a cause. For my love they
are my Adversaries, but I give my self unto Prayer, Psalm. 109.2, 3, 4, 5.
LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by Edward Gyles Bookseller
in Norwich, and Ralph Watson Bookseller in St. Edmunds-Bury, 1686.

THE INTRODUCTION.
HAVING of late sometime gone to the Public Worship; and considering the
various Reports raised thereupon, I thought meet to Write something in my
Vindication: Though with Respect to many of the Quakers, I may say as W. Penn
once said to the Papists, In his Book Entitled a seasonable Caveat against
Popery. p. 5.
viz. To argue against a Tribe of Men that esteem all Reason Carnal, and
Scriptures Imperfect; might rightly be judged a mere beating of the Air. -- Yet
to prevent those that may be deceived; and if possible to reclaim such as are:
And lastly, to clear mine own Conscience, I shall consider the unsound
Doctrines and Practices of the Quakers in their late method of Church
Government: And also show,





etc.

Which being perused and considered, together with what I have formerly wrote,
may show, That as I was not hasty in leaving them, but privately and publicly
labored eight or nine years to redress those things I found amiss amongst
them; so I was not hasty in going to the Public, until I was well satisfied
that I might do it, and not therein sin against God; thus much by way of
Introduction.

THE QUAKERS DETECTED, etc.
The First point under consideration, is, how I came to be a Member of their
Society, etc.
IN the beginning, they taught, that all Men were Enlightened according to John
1.9. And that this Light wherewith Christ had Enlightened them, was sufficient,
if obeyed, to lead to Salvation; and that it was the work of the Ministers of
Christ, to turn the Peoples minds from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of
Satan to God: Affirming that this Light was a sufficient Teacher, Leader, and
Guide to every Believer, without the help of outward Prescriptions, Forms,
Orders, and Decrees of Men. Upon these and the like Notions, I became persuaded
to make trial of their Doctrine; and when I came to see and observe their
Practice, Conversations, and Deportments in the beginning, and what simplicity
and plainness attended their Ministry; I was still more confirmed that it was a
Dispensation of the Love of God, sent as a Visitation to Mankind, and being
thus persuaded, I was resolved to bear the Cross, and did utterly despise the
shame that attended them and their Message; and was not behind any of my
Equals, both in doing, and suffering for the Testimony thereof, as some amongst
them can still bear me witness: And in this manner we went on for many years,
and loved one another with love unfeigned; and doubtless God blessed our
meetings with the comfortable enjoyment of his presence, and gave us favor in
the sight of Men, and not a word of Conformity was heard amongst us for many
years together, nor no Lording over each others Consciences; but as every Man
was persuaded by the Lord, so he was frequently exhorted to walk, etc.

Thus I have given a hint, how I came to be of their persuasion and Society.

The Second point under consideration, is, how I came to see and perceive their
Apostasy, whereby I became weary of their Society.
Afterward there arose a new King, who knew not Joseph, namely George Fox, who
perceiving the People to grow and increase, began to set Taskmasters over Us;
and then a Church Government was Erected, Monthly and Quarterly Meetings was in
every County established; several outward Orders, See de Chr. Lib. p. 41, 42,
43. 48. 60, 61.
Laws, and Canons Ecclesiastical were made, and Books of Record in each Meeting
placed; and such as could not Conform to these New Ordets De Chr. Lib. p. 63.
were Excommunicated, or Recorded out of Unity: Thus did they go on in their
new Erected Church Government, prosecuting such as could not for Conscience
sake Conform to their Ecclesiastical Laws, and Unscriptural prescriptions; and
also such as testify against their Arbitrary proceedings, yea, so hot and
violent were they, that they Excommunicated See de Chr. Lib. p. 197.
J. Bernard for Selling of William Rogers his Book, Entitled The Christian
Quaker, distinguished from the Apostate and Innovator, in five parts, etc.

And having thus mounted the Seat of Government, Robert Barkley, one of their
Ministers, put out a Book, Viz. Anarchy of the Rant. etc.
setting forth amongst other things, That the Ancient Apostolic Order of the
Church of Christ, was re-established amongst them upon its right Basis and
Foundation. And by this time, Rich and Poor, High and Low, Bond and Free, Male
and Female, must all submit and Conform to their Church Government; and it
became a vain thing to plead the Sufficiency of the Light of Christ, to Lead,
Direct or Guide us: Whereby we came to see W. Penns Words truly verified.
Address to Protestants p. 149.
Viz. For all Societies are to govern themselves according to their
Institution, and first Principles of Union, where there is Violence upon this
part, Tyranny and not Order is Introduced. Now since Persuasion and Conviction
began all True Christian Society. All Christian Societies must uphold
themselves upon the same Free Bottom, or they turn Antichristian, etc. And this
we came to experience; for they no sooner did violence by their Impositions to
our first Principles of Union, which was persuasion and conviction: But Tyranny
instead of Order was introduced to the utmost of their power, whereby I and
others came to see a great Change and Alteration: For whereas in the beginning
they said Christ was the Light, and this Light was a sufficient Rule, Guide,
Teacher and Judge, See de Chr. Lib. 2d. part p. 91.
but now no such matter: The Church requires active obedience to her
established Laws; and by virtue of her Authority, she Excommunicates, or
Records out of Unity such as shall neglect, or refuse to submit to her Decrees.

Moreover, by a late Book of W. Penns Entitled Exam. and state of Lib.
spiritual.
p. 11. He now tells us his dislike of pleading to be left to the Grace of God
in the Heart, notwithstanding they have heretofore magnified the same, his
Words are these, viz. By that Loose Plea, what have thou to do with me, leave
me to my freedom, and to the Grace of God in my self, etc. By which its plain,
that they reckon it a Loose Plea, for any to assert their Christian Liberty:
And the sufficiency of the Grace of God to Teach and Instruct them, unless they
square their Actions according to the outward Rules and Prescriptions George
Foxes Church has made, and set forth for them to observe. Thus have they made
the Commands of God and their own Primitive Testimony of none effect by their
Traditions: Nay, hear W. Penn once more in p. 3. For it is a dangerous
Principle, and pernicious to true Religion, and which is worse, it is the Root
of Ranterisme, to assert that nothing is a duty incumbent upon me, but what I
am persuaded (or convinced) is my duty; which sufficiently contradicts his
Address to Protestants, p. 149. Where he says, That Persuasion and Conviction
began all true Christian Society; and that therefore they must uphold
themselves upon the same Free Bottom, or they turn Antichristian. And yet to
uphold George Foxes Image of Church Government, outward Orders, and
Prescriptions, he now accounts it a Loose Plea, for any to say, Leave me to my
freedom, and to the Grace of God in my Heart, etc. Yea, pernicious to Christian
Religion, and which is worse, the Root of Ranterisme, etc.

Thus have they by their late Doctrine and Examples, rendered their Ancient
Doctrine and Example, a mere Decoy to catch Simple Souls by; and being once
caught, it is altogether in vain to plead the sufficiency of the Light of
Christ, to Lead, Teach, and Guide. No, no, the Church now has given forth
Rules, Laws, and outward Directories; and by Virtue of her Apostolical
Authority, She Imposes the Observation of them upon her Members, whether they
believe that what She Imposes be a duty incumbent upon them to practice, yea,
or nay: And for any amongst the Quakers (who formerly magnified the sufficiency
of the Light of Christ to be a Guide, a Teacher, a Rule, and a Judge, above
Scriptures, above Councels, above Fathers and Primitive Antiquity) to desire to
be left to their freedom, and to the Grace of God in their Hearts, and not to
act until they are persuaded, that what the Leading Quakers impose upon them,
be their duty to perform: I say, all this is now by George Fox his Church
accounted a Loose Plea, and pernicious to true Religion, and what any false
Church can say more to the point, I know not; and for these, and the like
Reasons, I became weary of their Society, and left them.

The Third point under consideration, is, how, and by what means I came to have
satisfaction in going to the Public.
HAving briefly showed how I came in Society with the People called Quakers,
and also showed what cause I had to leave and forsake them: I am come now to
show, how I came to have satisfaction in going to the public Worship, which by
many of them is looked upon a sin, almost like that against the Holy Ghost, so
void of charity are they.

For as one alone from the Tumult, or outside of a Wood, can easily hear the
Clamours and Outcrys within; so I being come forth of the Forest of their New
invented Formalities to a Retired Life, I set my self to the study of the Holy
Scriptures, and other good Books; as particularly Bishop Sandersons Thirty four
Sermons Printed in Folio, and Bishop Brownriggs Works, which I much value, and
therefore Recommend them to the perusal of all serious People, who desire
Information, and are willing according to the Apostles advice to try all
things; as also the Works of Bishop Latimar, that constant Martyr of Jesus: I
say, having thus informed my self, and perceiving the soundness of the Doctrine
of these Men, I was willing to hear a public Preacher, where I was not known;
that so if I could not for Conscience sake have complied, I resolved to hear no
more; and this I thought I might do without public notice taken thereof: And
being in London in January 1684. I went to Cripplegate Parish, and heard Mr.
Smythies, which was the first Sermon that I had heard a Clergyman Preach for
about Twenty five Years, and I liked his Matter very well, and found that he
proved his Doctrine in all points by the Scripture; and the Tuesday following,
I went to his House, who treated me very civilly, and answered to what I
Objected courteously: And from that time, both at London, and elsewhere, when I
happened to be from home, I went to some Parish Church or other to give my self
satisfaction. And being satisfied that I might safely hear them, and not
therein sin against God: The next thing I had to consider of, was, whether I
ought not to Conform to the Religion Established by Law, so far as I could with
a safe Conscience; and then to resolve this Question, I read and considered
Matt. 22.21. Romans 13.1.2. Titus. 3.1.2. 1 Pet. 2.13.14.17. And there I found it
a positive command, to submit our selves to every Ordinance of Man for the
Lords sake; and this submission I concluded from the Apostles words and
meaning, was to yield Active Obedience so far as with a safe Conscience we may,
and when any thing comes to be imposed contrary to the revealed Will of God;
then a Passive Obedience, (which is a Patient, bearing and suffering the
penalty assigned for Non-submission) answered the recited command of the
Apostle; for otherwise they had not answered their own Rule; who when they were
commanded to speak no more in the Name of Jesus, spoke yet the more boldly.

The next thing I came to consider was, how far my self and others called
Quakers, had from time to time upon several occasions, professed a readiness to
obey Magistracy, and to submit to Authority, so far as we could for Conscience
sake. This is laid down as a duty Incumbent upon us by the Apostles; and is
owned in many of their Books and Writings: As in particular, The Qua. Address
to King Charles the II.
their Humble Address Presented to King CHARLES the Second at Windsor by George
Whitehead and others, the 8th of August 1683. Wherein amongst other things it
is thus said: O KING! We do further declare, that God Almighty has taught and
engaged us, to acknowledge, and actually to obey Magistracy (as his Ordinance)
in all things not repugnant to his Law of Light in our Consciences, etc.

Whereupon, I thought my self obliged to pay that Tribute of Duty and
Allegiance to my Superiors; which my self and others upon several occasions had
so often promised, and so solemnly engaged, viz. Actually to obey Magistrates
in all things, not Repugnant to the Law and Light in my Conscience, and by
these Means and other Reasons I came to be satisfied, that I might go to the
Public, and hear with a safe Conscience, and am still satisfied therein; and
find no cause to Repent for the same; but can say, as Joseph did to his
Brethren, Genesis 50.20. But as for you, ye thought evil against me, but God meant
it unto good, 45.5. Now therefore, be not grieved nor angry with your selves,
that ye sold me hither.

I know there is one grand objection made by the Pharisees of this Age against
the Church of England, as cause sufficient to Refuse Communion with Her; upon
which I have heard many a large Discourse; but having consulted the Scriptures,
and considered the Saints practices therein Recorded, as also Christ's Parable
of the Publican and the Pharisee, I thought the Church of Englands practice in
her Confession; was more Justifyable than the practice of the Quakers; who
neither make Confession of their Sins to God in their Prayers; nor yet ask
forgiveness for Christ's sake; as if they were not like other People: I
challenge any Man to make it appear that ever any Minister amongst the Quakers
of G. Fox's party confessed his sins to God in his public Prayer, or asked
forgiveness for Christ's sake.
And thereupon, I shall undertake to Answer the Objection.

Object. The Church of England (say they) Confesses that they have erred and
strayed from the ways of God like lost Sheep, and have followed too much the
devices and desires of their own hearts; and have left undone the things they
ought to have done, and have done those things they ought not to have done; and
are saying, O Lord have mercy upon us miserable Sinners, etc. And therefore not
worthy to have Communion with all; but to be separated from.

In my Answer to this great objection; to guard my self from their Common
Accusation, which they usually cast upon all sorts of People, who oppose their
Pharisaical practice in this point, viz. that I plead for Sin, and the
continuance of it, and for the Devils Kingdom, etc. I shall show out of
Scripture, that it was the practice of the Saints and People of God to confess
their Sins, and to bewail their own unworthiness; and to ask forgiveness for
the same for Christ Jesus Sake, who is our only Advocate and Intercessor, in
whose Name alone is Remission of Sins; World without end, Amen.

Christ Jesus the Author of the Christian Religion, gave his Disciples for that
end and purpose a Precept, Luke 11.4. Forgive us our Sins, as we, etc. Also
John that beloved Disciple; who had great experience of the Love of God in
Christ Jesus, said 1 John 1.8. That if we say that we have no Sin, we deceive
our selves, and the truth is not in us, etc.

This he spoke, who knew well what he said: And yet he did not plead for Sin,
and the Devils Kingdom; nor yet said, that such a People cry out of Sin, and a
body of Sin; and that they are miserable Sinners, and have erred and strayed
from Gods ways: And as such, no Communion nor Fellowship ought to be had with
them: No? But (said he) if WE who believe in Christ, WE who profess our selves
followers of Christ, If WE say, WE have no Sin, WE deceive our selves, and the
Truth is not in US: Yet to Comfort and Encourage his Brethren, he tells them,
v. 9. saying, If we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our Sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness: Here then is good
Encouragement to the People of God to Confess their SINS, and to forsake the
same, for c. 2. v. 1. John shows the end and purpose he had in his thus writing
to them; and what fruits and effects such Confessions, and Prayers ought to
have upon the Penitent Sinners: Namely, that for the future they ought to
forsake their Sins, and to lead, a new life, to walk circumspectly, redeeming
the time; his words are these; my little Children, these things I write unto
you, that you Sin not, by which it is plain, that though John Acknowledged they
had Sinned; and that therefore they ought to Confess the same, if ever they
expected Salvation: And that if they sincerely did so, God was so merciful, as
that he would for his dear Sons Sake forgive them, and Cleanse them from all
Unrighteousness; yet the end why he wrote thus, and acknowledged these things,
was not to plead for the Devils Kingdom and the continuance of Sin: For said
he, These things I write unto you, that you Sin not, neither did he leave them
there, but in case of a relapse, or Sinning again, adds a Comfortable passage,
for all Tried and Tempted Souls, who are sensible of their own Insufficiency;
and what need they have of an Advocate, his words are these, If any Man Sin we
have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours ONLY, but for the Sins of the whole
WORLD, by which he sets forth the Universality of Gods Love to all Mankind.
Likewise David, a Man after Gods own heart, thought it not below him, to
Confess his Sins to God; but in great Humility said, Psalm. 38.18. I will
declare (or confess) mine Iniquity, I will be sorry for my SIN; and Psalm. 51.1,
2, 3. Have mercy upon me O God, according to thy Loving kindness, according to
the Multitude of thy tender Mercies, blot out my Transgressions, wash me
thoroughly from mine Iniquity, and cleanse me from my Sin, for I acknowledge my
Transgressions, and my Sin is ever before me: Here I find the Prophet David
has nothing to rely upon, but the Mercy of God: And therefore he bottoms his
Address thereupon, and makes his Application to God, first by Confession and a
sorrowing for Sin; and then he begs pardon for the same, not for his own
worthiness, but of Gods mere Mercy, saying, have mercy upon me, O God,
according to thy Loving Kindness, according to the Multitude of thy tender
Mercies, blot out my Transgressions: I have also observed, what low thoughts
the Prophet Isaiah had of himself, and the Church in his day; when he said,
Isa. 64.6. But we are all as an Unclean Thing, and all our Righteousness as
filthy Rags, and we do all fade as a leaf, and our Iniquity like the Wind, have
taken us away. And Lam. 3.41, 42. I find Jeremy the Prophet, who was a chosen
Vessel, and sanctified from his Mothers Womb; saying, let us lift up our Hearts
with our Hands unto God in the Heavens, we have Transgressed and Rebelled, etc.
And Job confesses c. 7. v. 20. Saying, I have Sinned, what shall I do unto
thee, O thou Preserver of Men: And because I would not be too tedious in the
proof of this Christian practice, I will conclude, with the saying of Holy
Daniel, that Prophet beloved of God, Dan. 9.4, 5. And I prayed unto the Lord my
God, and made my Confession and said -- we have Sinned, and have committed
Iniquity, and have done wickedly; and have Rebelled even by departing from thy
Precepts, and from thy Judgments: -- and (v. 20.) while I was speaking and
praying and confessing my Sin, and the Sins of my Peeple Israel, etc.

Thus it is Apparent, that the Prophet Daniel (as well as the People) Confessed
his Sin; and yet he did not plead for the Devils Kingdom, which had he lived in
our days, and made such Confessions, the Quakers would (no doubt) have disowned
him, and the rest of the Prophets; saying, what! own a People that Confess
themselves to have Sinned, and committed Iniquity, and thereby, have followed
too much the devices and desires of their own hearts: What! Own a People that
have done Wickedly and Rebelled against Gods Precepts, and thereby, have
offended against Gods Holy Laws, and left undone those things they ought to
have done; and done those things they ought not to have done: What! Own such a
People, as have departed from Gods Precepts and Judgments, as Daniel
Confesses, which is sufficient Cause for them to say, Lord have mercy upon us
miserable Sinners: I say, had Daniel lived in these days, and made such
Confessions, the Quakers would have said upon their present Principles, he
pleaded for Sin and upheld the Devils Kingdom; and said stand off, for we are
more Righteous than thou; and therefore we make no such Confessions; nor no
such acknowledgments, for that would Eclipse the Glory of our Perfection, and
mar the Beauty of our Infallibility: Oh! that these Proud self-conceited
Pharisees could see themselves, and perceive the Errors they are run into, for
whose sake I chiefly write these things, that I may be clear of their Blood in
the Day of the Lord Jesus.

I could Collect and Transcribe several Testimonies of the Blessed Martyrs, who
frequently confessed and acknowledged their Sins to God, and craved pardon for
Christ Jesus sake, bewailing their own unworthiness and unfruitfulness, when
Martyrdom was even at the door, but what I have said out of Scripture is
sufficient to answer the Objection; for if they will not believe Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.

And now consider of these things, and lay them to heart, ye Leaders of this
People; and remind your Hearers of Jer. 10.25. where its written, pour out thy
fury upon the Heathen, that know thee not, and upon the Families that call not
on thy Name: And see what Answer Ten Thousand of them can make, who have not
called upon God by Prayer, as they ought to have done for many Years together;
I speak this to your shame, to the intent that you may be ashamed thereof; but
if that be your Rule that all are to stay from performing any duty to God,
until he move them by a special impulse upon their Spirits; then why do you
not leave them to Gods movings in other matters, viz. their going to Meetings,
and publishing their Intentions to Marry, etc. As that you do not, for the
first, you have made an Absolute Law or Prescription, that they must constantly
meet? See Paint. Harl. p. 13.
And neither forsake, decline, nor remove their Meetings, like Worldly,
Fearful and Politic Professors, etc. And for the second you have made another
Order, that De Chr. Lib. p. 60. 61.
no Marriages are either to be permitted or suffered, unless the Parties
concerned publish their Intentions twice, before the Men's and Women's distinct
Meetings.

And your Edicts must be obeyed, whether Motion or no Motion; nay, though a
Motion against the Observation of it, or else they cannot be looked upon as in
the Unity. These Commands of yours are binding and obligatory upon all, though
the Scripture Commands to one, you say, are not Binding to another, see Ed.
Buroughs works p. 47. where he says, that is no Command from God to me, what
he Commands another. Thus have you made void the Law of God, and the practice
of the Saints by your Traditions. Wherefore, O! ye Hearers amongst the People
called Quakers? Rouse up your selves, and examine the Doctrine and Practice of
your Teachers by the Holy Scriptures; and consider of what Tendency they are,
and Exercise your selves in Prayer to God, though therefore they call you old
Professors, least the Lords Fury break forth upon you, for neglecting that
Religious Duty of Prayer and Supplication, which Gods People from Age to Age
have been Exercised in.

And whereas, they may call you Old Professors, that's no disparagement to you;
for Christ's Disciples were and are Professors of Christ's Religion, who taught
them to Pray, Our Father, etc. which G. Fox in his Gospel Liberty p. 7. calls a
Common Prayer, and the Common Prayer, etc. But whether his end thereby was to
beat us off from the use of it, he best knows, but since that Book was put
forth, which was in 1668. I have not known Ten Families of the Quakers in
England, that have used that form of Prayer. Well? but how Common soever it is,
it is the Lords Prayer, who not only taught his Disciples to Pray, but gave
them a Precept, and to enforce the performance, and to excite his Disciples to
Prayer; showing thereby, that God loves a Praying People; he further said to
his Disciples, Luke 11. Which of you shall have a Friend, and shall go unto him
at Midnight, and say unto him, Friend, lend me three Loaves, for a Friend of
mine in his Journey is come to me; and I have nothing to set before him; and he
from within shall say, trouble me not, my door is now shut, and my Children are
with me in Bed: I say unto you, though he will not rise and give him because he
is his Friend, yet because of his importunity he will rise and give him as many
as he needs: And I say unto you ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye
shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you; for every one that asks
receives, and he that seeks finds, and to him that Knocks it shall be
opened. And so on still, using more Arguments to enforce again and again, if
possible the duty of Prayer, and because I know that Family Prayer is generally
laid aside amongst the Quakers, and that giving God Thanks for the Blessings
and Mercies, we daily receive at his hands is also much laid aside in private
Families, notwithstanding the example of Christ and his Apostles, as you may
read Mat. 14.15. Mark. 6.35.41. Luke 9.16. John 6.11. Acts 27.35. 1 Timothy 4.4.
as also Bishop Sanderson's 5th Sermon, ad populum p. 2. 19. in his Printed
Works in Folio, where he speaks sufficiently to this point of Christian duty,
etc.

Likewise read Luke the 18.10.11. And Christ spoke a Parable unto such as
trusted in themselves, that they were just and despised others, two Men went up
(says Christ) into the Temple to Pray, the one a Pharisee and the other a
Publican, the Pharisee stood and Prayed thus with himself, O God, I thank thee,
that I am not as other Men, Extortioners, Adulterers, or even as this Publican,
But the Publican standing afar off; would not lift up so much as his Eyes to
Heaven, but smote his Breast saying, O God be Merciful to me a Sinner, I tell
you (says Christ) this Man departed to his house Justified rather than the
other; the Application hereof, I leave to G. Foxes Party Amongst the Quakers,
who neither Confess their Sins to God in their Public Prayers, nor ask God
forgiveness for Christ's Sake; thus have the Leaders of this People caused them
to err

There are other things which the Quakers object against the Clergy, of which
themselves are Guilty; as taking Money for Preaching, receiving Gifts and
Rewards; bearing Rule by their means, exercising Lordship, etc. In all which,
the Quakers their circumstances considered, exceed them, and all that ever I
Read of before them: For First, They make Laws that their People must Meet,
yea, constantly Meet, and neither Forsake, Remove, nor Decline their Meetings,
like Worldly, Fearful and Politic Professors, etc. And yet they themselves
that make these Laws, and write Letters, to have them come far and near to
Meet, and exhort them when met, to Boldness and Valiantness: And not to heed
the Fleece, but to give up All. And yet when all this is done, they themselves
refuse to stand in a like Suffering Capacity with their Hearers; insomuch that
their Hearers must not only Suffer for themselves, but for their Preachers too,
as my Book entitled the Painted Harlot both stripped and whipped, etc. And the
Postscript to the same Entitled Reason against Railing, etc.
does sufficiently manifest; which for Brevity sake, I shall only insert the
principal matters Treated on in the said Book and Postscript, with some few
Additional Observations, and refer the Reader to the same; who, if he will take
the pains to Read the said Books Quoted at large, and that impartially: He then
shall easily perceive, That for taking Money, Gifts, and Rewards for Preaching,
and for Oppressing their People, and for bearing Rule by their means, and for
exercising Lordship and Dominion over their Flocks: Their circumstances in all
respects rightly considered, none can readily exceed or outstrip the Quakers.

First, Their Preaching for Money, Gifts, and Rewards, is made appear in Paint.
Harl. p. 40. in the Preface thereunto.

2. At a general Council or Yearly Meeting at London, the 27th. of the Third
Month, 1675. They made a Law, or Cannon, that their People should constantly
Meet, and not Decline, Forsake, or Remove their Meetings, like Worldly,
Fearful, and Politic Professors, as at large in Paint. Harl. p. 13.

3. For obedience to the recited Cannon, there was in Fines and Distresses,
more than 13550 l. loss, of which the Ministers, where Strangers never lost 50
l. by concealing their Names and Habitations; such was their practice before I
persecuted S. Cater for the Fine I Suffered for him, See Paint. Harl. p. 5, 6,
7, 8.

4. Their method of appointing Meetings, and their recited Cannon, which
injoyns them constantly to meet, as aforesaid compared with their practice of
not declaring their Names, and Habitations upon their sight of the Informers;
when at the same time they know others must Suffer for them, as was the Case of
S. Cater, J. Moon, W. Benet, as in Paint. Harl. p. 7, 8. 15, 16, 17. Render
them such a Tribe of Oppressing Preachers, as scarce ever had a Being before
them: For First, They make a Law or Canon that their People must Meet, and that
constantly too, if they will be owned in the Church of Christ. And the Law of
the Nation says, that if they do Meet, they shall forfeit Five Shillings for
the First offense, and Ten Shillings for the Second, and every other offense;
and their Preacher the First time Twenty Pound, and the Second time Forty
Pound; but if he be fled, and his Name and Habitation unknown; then the Justice
is Empowered to Levy the Preachers Fines also upon the Hearers: Well! let what
will come, the Preachers they will not be obliged to declare their Names and
Habitations; They will sleep in a whole Skin, whatever become of their Flock. I
had a Letter to appoint a Meeting for George Whitehead once in a Suffering
time, wherein I was advised not to mention his Name to any particularly: See
Paint. Harl. p. 15. But let us compare, I say, their Cannon which enjoins to
Meetings, and their practice of concealing their Names and Habitations; with
their method of appointing Meetings, and surely they will blush and be ashamed
for ever.

See then a Copy of one of their Letters sent to Jos. Bangs, to appoint a
Meeting, only the Messenger brought it to me, Viz.

Loving Friend.
BY this thou may know, that God willing, Jo. Johnson and I, do intend to be
at Milden-hall Meeting the next First day, being the 17th. Instant, and shall
be glad, Friends generally know thereof, that we may have a good Large Meeting;
I mean, Friends that are afar off in the Country, Stirbitch-fair 15. 7mo. 82.

Robert Sandyland.

5. That these things are so, yea evidently so: See the Records of Conviction,
Justices Warrants, the Constables Receipts for the Distress, and other
circumstances, when I was Fined for Sam. Cater, by reason his Name and
Habitation was unknown, as in Paint. Harl. p. 6. 8. 13. 15.

6. The Late High Court of Justice, a lively Figure of their Courts of
Judicature: viz. their Monthly, Quarterly and Yearly Meetings, amply set forth,
and illustrated in Paint. Harl. p. 28. 29.

7. A short recital of the Heads of their Ecclesiastical proceedings in their
New Erected Church Government, from their Superior Meetings in London, to
their Inferior Meetings in the Country, held Quarterly, particularly their
sending out their Epistle, as need is, for a general Collection for the Service
of Truth, as they style it, through England and Wales; whereby such as Preach
up George Foxes Orders, their own Imaginations; and against all others, are
plentifully Rewarded, though few understand it; being privately given, and
privately received: See Paint. Harl. p. 70, 71.

8. Then Sam. Cater put forth his Narrative, wherein he vindicates himself and
his Brethren; but it was so stuffed with apparent Lies, gross Forgeries, and
scandalous Defamations, that to this Day he durst never own it, though often
pressed to it, as appears by Certificate under the Hands of Credible Witnesses,
in Postscript to Paint. Harl. p. 80.

9. And that his Narrative was false, great part of it being filled with Lies;
I offered to prove on the penalty of One hundred pound, and be bound in a Bond
to perform it, as at large may be seen in Postscript to Paint. Harl. p. 80, 81.
But they never accepted the challenge, nor answered the Book to this Day.

10. After Sam. Cater's said Book was spread by his Agents (for I believe it
was his, though I cannot prove it) Twenty seven Friends belonging to
Milden-hall Meeting, gave Testimony against it under their Hands; others by
Verbal Testimony signified the falseness of it: See Postscript to Paint. Harl.
p. 87, 88. where the Certificate under their Hands is Printed at large.

And when these Ten Instances are perused with the Books Quoted; the Reader is
left to Judge whether I have not used sufficient means to bring Sam. Cater to
prove his charge if he be able; and also may see that I have always offered to
prove my Charge against him, and his Accomplices. But more chiefly, that their
whole Frame of Church Government is thereby detected.

But by reason Sam. Cater says in his Narrative, That he was a Preacher, and a
Sufferer for the Truth, before I knew him or Truth either; and thereby boasts
of his Antiquity. And that (says he) without coveting other Men's: I think it
therefore necessary to Incert part of a Letter, sent him by T. R. an Ancient
Anabaptist, with whom he was formerly in Society before he was a Quaker, that
so it may appear how he has loved the Wages of Unrighteousness, and run
greedily after the Error of Baalam; even from the very time of his Apprentice
ship: And notwithstanding all this, I have not known amongst the Quakers, one
that have Cried more our against the Friests than himself; Lashing them with
his own Crime, for I have told him of 10 l. he took for Suffering, 3 l. for
Preaching, Forty Shillings to bear his Charges at a time, and yet I will not
pretend to know of the 20th part of his Gifts and Augmentations, and yet poor
Man, nothing troubles him more, then that People think him a lover of Gifts,
etc. When he tells them he Preaches freely, and thereby he thinks he has
sufficiently Condemned all the Clergy: O great Cheat, and deep Hypocrisy, hid
under a Great Deceivers Gray Coat? What! Preach freely and yet take Money for
Preaching, 3 l. at a time, Money for Suffering, 10 l. at a time; and free
Quarter wherever he came: And yet these are the free Preachers, the free
Gospellers; well let us hear what his Old Friends say of him, that knew him
before I knew him, an abstract of his Letter now follows.

Sam. Cater.
I Have heard Francis Bugg's Book and Postscript, and thy Narrative; which
falls short of what thou layest to his Charge. -- But this is like thy Dealing
with me, John Ray and others; for thou make use of our Money, which was lent to
thee for freeing thee from thy Master; but thou say we gave it thee, and so
makes no Conscience to return us our Money: But suppose we had given it thee,
as thou say, was it not for thee to be a Preacher amongst us; for the
Building and Upholding that Faith which we Walked in, if I give a Man 10 d. to
do me a days work, if he do not the Work, nor return the Money, is he not a
Knave, although he say I gave him it, and the work he was to do, was a bad
Work; I will conclude thou art one the Psalmist speaks of; who borrow and will
not pay again.

T. R.

Thus it appears that S. Cater is an old Preacher, and an Old Hireling, and an
Old Deceiver, for he quite went beyond the well meaning Baptists, whereby his
selfish Craft and Overreaching was manifest: First in his borrowing their
Money, under pretense to Release him from his Master; but being once obtained,
he then said they gave him it, and now the Complaint is strong against him,
that he makes no Conscience of returning their Money again, thus is his
fraudulent dealings come forth, which will redound to his Disrepute and Infamy,
in the Eyes of all sorts of Intelligable Persons, and lower his Top-sail to his
great Abasement, Shame and Confusion of Face; so that Daniels words to one of
the Corrupt Judges, is applicable to him, viz. O thou that art Old in a wicked
Life, now the Sins which thou have committed aforetime are come to Light.

Come George Fox, George Whitehead, and Samuel Cater, and the rest of you Babel
Builders, if you write a Reply to me, observe these my following Directions; or
else trouble me not with your endless Totolligies, and Impertinent Discourses,
viz.

1st. Answer particularly and distinctly my Six Queries, touching Church
Government, Printed de Christian. Libert. p. 72. to 78.

2dly. Answer as aforesaid my Nine Queries, which I sent to George Whitehead,
Printed in de Chr. Lib. page 15.4. to p. 163.

3dly. Answer my Great Query, Printed in Paint Harl. p. 40. 41.

4thly. And whether in your opinion, a Man may not go to the Public Worship
Established by Law, and yet be a Christian, and in the State of Salvation, if
you say nay, but Salvation is only amongst you, then show your Reasons for your
Opinion therein; and if yea, then whether such as so believe; ought not to obey
the Law of the Land that Require it.

5thly. And whether Samuel Cater ought not to own his Book, and be answerable
for the wrong he has done me, and for the Lies therein Printed: And if he
refuse so to do, whether he ought not to be recorded out of the Unity.

Answer these Questions, show your selves Men, Truth seeks no Corners, Twenty
Years since you use to say so, why should you refuse to own what you write, if
you write nothing but what is true, and if you write falsely with a Design and
Confederacy.

Then may you be compared to Joseph's Brethren, who hated Joseph, and could not
speak peaceably to him; but Conspired against him to Slay him, and then to
excuse themselves; and said, we will say some evil Beast have devoured him: But
if in your Answer, you again call me Beast, Dog, Wolf, Enemy of all
Righteousness, Child of the Devil, yea Devil Incarnate, and the like
Unchristian Names and Terms; as George Whitehead and others have done.

Then will you thereby further manifest your selves, as Edward Buroughs did,
in his Answer to certain Queries proposed by Philip Bennet; as at large in his
Works you have Printed in Folio p. 29. 30, 31. Where he tells the said Bennet,
saying, Thou art manifest -- what thou art -- where thou art, and what Spirit
thou art off, a Reprobate, a Child of Darkness thou art -- the Light Condemn
thee, and all thy Generation Eternally: We Witness thee and thy Generation to
be in the Witchcraft and Sorcery -- for thou art Darkness it self; -- here thou
full of all Subtilty, have made manifest thy Poison and Enmity -- here thou
Jesuit -- and thou Reprobate: See whether thou be not a Blind Ignorant Sot --
thou Blasphemer -- there thou Accursed art made manifest -- here thou Beast to
whom the Plagues of God are due, and upon whom his Wrath must be Accomplished
-- here thou Dark Blind Hypocrite -- thou Dead Beast, here thou Polluted Beast:
Here stop thy Mouth thou Sorcerer -- O thou Dark Beast and Conjurer, who art
Querying with thy Conjured Words, etc.

I say do not Answer me in this Language, as you have done him and many more,
and then tell me, that you write from the Spirit of the Lord; and from the
Mouth of the Lord: There Is none but your own Darlings (who have given up their
whole Concern, both Spiritual and Temporal to the Government of George Fox, as
the Barbados Church did) that will believe them, neither will such
Conjurations do now adays; your Language is known, and your Voice is
understood, and you are fully manifested to be of that Generation, that called
Christ Beelzebub.

Or if in your Answer to me, you do again call me Fool, Conceited Fool,
Ridiculus Novis and Ludibri, Ignorant and Conceited: And compare me to Elymas
the Sorcerer, as George Whitehead and others have done; then will you thereby
Manifest your selves, as S. Fisher one of your Ministers did, who Writing
against Mr. Baxter, Dr. Owen and others, in his Book Rusticus, etc. Do call and
compare them to Lizards, Moles, Tinkers, Red-coats, Cow Dung, Green-headed
Trumpeters, rare and base: Wheel-barrows, Gimcracks, Whirlpools and Whirlgiggs,
a Moon-calf, there Bell has no Mettel, but the tone of a Kettle, Capers about,
Quavers up and down like a Blind Night Bat, Ragged, Torn, Thread bare,
Taterdamallions, Serpents, Vipers, Grinning Dogs, etc.

This with abundance more ridiculous Nonsense and Idle Drollery, he Dedicated
to the King and all Magistrates, as his said Book at Large sets forth:
Wherefore I say, do not Answer me in this Language; least you thereby render
your selves so ridiculous, that Boys of Eleven Years Old will have you in
Derision: Your just Merit.

But what People have you not treated thus? what People that ever opposed you
in your Persecutions Current and Destructive Race, that something of this
Nature have not befell them? nay the very Martyrs whom you sometimes will speak
well off; and with the Pharisees, your exact Predecessors, will be ready to
Garnish their Sepulchers. Yet when there Doctrine is brought as a Proof against
your Impositions, you stick not to call their Doctrine Corrupt Doctrine, tending
to Practical Ranterism, yea Sordid Ranterism: Thus you bid Defiance to all, who
are not exactly of your Stamp: And that you deal thus with the Martyrs, Read
Geo. Whiteheads Book, styled Judgment fixed, etc. p. 259, 260. Where he Cites a
passage out of my Book, De Chr. Lib. etc. p. 123. Where I Quote Doctor Robert
Bains, viz. To eat Flesh or Fish, this or that Day, is indifferent and free;
and these with all other outward works be things indifferent, and may be used,
and also left: All which are the Words of Doctor Barns, as I took them out of
his Works, Entitled Men's Constitutions not grounded upon Scripture bind not
the Conscience; Yea, that One hundred and twenty third Page are every Word his,
but because they had a tendency to Christian Liberty (and are sound, being read
with the foregoing and subsequent Words, as I laid them down) and smote the
Image of George Foxes Church Government; see how George Whiteheads his Chief
Man of War Discanted upon them, saying, They came from a Libertine Spirit
tended to Practical Ranterism, Sordid Ranterism, Ranters Assertion, with
abundance more too tedious here to relate. I say, who can escape the venom of
their Tongues; who spare neither Living nor Dead, charging the very Martyrs,
who Sealed their Testimony with their Blood, with false Doctrine tending to
Practical Ranterism, yea, Sordid Ranterism, etc.

And now, Oh! ye Heads of this People, having Traced you step by step, and
Observed your Turnings and Windings, this way and that way, Judging and
Condemning all sorts of People that differ from you; whereby your Pharisaical
Hypocrisy has been manifest for some Years, zealous for some outward Things,
but not for the weighty matters. They in days past came to accuse Him, who came
to fulfill all Righteousness: That HE took more liberty than they, HE fasted
not like them, eat with Publicans and Sinners, broke the Sabbath; so you say of
any, who for Conscience sake dare not abide any longer in your Forms; that they
are gone back into Egypt, that they are turned into the World, that they are
departed from the Truth.

Thus do you make the Commands of God of none effect through your Traditions,
limiting the Holy One of Israel. There was a time when the Lord led Us through
the Cross into some outward things; but alas, you have set them up as Idols.
And therefore through the Cross again we must go to leave them. And happy are
they whose Hearts are kept single herein, and can choose no Path for themselves.
They shall be found lovers of Truth, redeemed from the Earth, and brought out
of Egypt willing and obedient Children; when such shall be ashamed, whose
Testimony stand in mere outside performances, Keeping to Meetings, Thee, Thou,
the Hat, and some other external Acts of Obedience, in an outside Righteousness
to be seen of Men, which now proves only the Harlot; therefore is that Demure
Image become loathsome.

Have you not read, that God commanded Moses to make a Brazen Serpent, that as
many as were bitten with Venomous Beasts, were to look up to it and be healed.
But when the Children of Israel went a Whoring after it, and made an Idol of
it. Have you not read how Good King Hezekiah (the Servant of the Lord) broke it
in pieces, and called it Nehushtan, viz. A piece of Brass; there was a time
when it was Death Not to Circumcize.

And there was a time, when the Apostle Paul made it worse than Death to use
it; and this is wrote for our Learning, that thereby we may perceive, that when
those very things which God Commanded his People to observe and perform, came
to be Idolized, that then God has sometimes lead his People out of those
things, even to the breaking them in pieces, as in the case of the Brazen
Serpent; or, laying them aside as useless, as in the case of Circumcision; yea
oftentimes the New Moons, Sabbaths, and Solemn Assemblies of Revolting Israel,
became an Abomination to the Lord; and yet under these his various
Dispensations and Providence, he then had a People, as he now has, who
observed the way of the Lord, and followed his Teachings, and were obedient to
his Commands; how various soever they seemed to be, without judging one
another, or Imposing their Practice upon each other, read Jeremy 13. Isaiah 20.
Ezekiel 4. Hosea 3. and diverse other places, in the Old Testament as well as
the New; all which may Teach us to observe the Rule of Charity, etc.

But to return; what shall I say unto you? O! ye Leaders of this People, who
would Impose your Unscriptural Practices upon your Brethren; and Record such
out of your Unity, that are not conformable thereunto: For, I have surveyed
your Old and New Doctrine, and measured your past and present Practices, and I
have compared your fair Pretenses, with your foul Hypocrisies; and when I have
done all this, I want words to set forth the depth of your Hypocrisy, deceit,
and self contradictions; and therefore bear with me, If I use your own Method
to others; even to a People more Righteous than your selves, and turn your own
sayings to others upon your selves, since its written, that the same Measure
you met to others, shall be Measured to you again, yea heaped, pressed down,
and running over, inasmuch as you have exceeded your Forefathers, the fare
saying Pharisees, in opposing your Brethren, and in contradicting your
Primitive Testimony by your late Practices.

Sometimes saying, the Light and Grace of God in the heart, is a sufficient
Rule, Teacher, and Judge; and by and by call it a Loose-Plea, to Assert and
Plead the Sufficiency of it, yea, pernicious to the Christian Religion, and the
Root of Ranterism.

Sometimes you Cry out against Set Forms, Impositions, outward Directories, and
Prescriptions; and by and by, your selves are for Set Forms; for Meetings, for
Publishing the Intentions of Marriage, for outward Directories and
Prescriptions; yea, severely Imposing upon your Brethren, the Observations of
these your Forms, Directories, and Prescriptions, none exceeding you; your
Power you have, and the Circumstances you stand in rightly considered, as I
have sufficiently made appear, in the first Three Chapters, in the second part
of my Book Entitled, de Christiana Liberate.

Sometimes you are against giving Respect to Superiors, but by and by your own
Servants and Apprentices, in your own Houses and Shops, where you are chief
Governors, must stand Bare-headed before you; which piece of Grand Hypocrisy,
I testified against more than Ten Years since, as I have showed in my Book
Entitled, Innocence Vindicated and Envy Rebuked, etc. p. 8.

Sometimes you are for Preaching freely, and Teaching and Instructing People
freely, and for Suffering freely, and for Recording Marriages and other things
freely: Witness your Books generally, and more particularly that of George
Foxes, which he wrote the 7th Month 1659. Printed for Thomas Simmons, p. 6.
where he thus says, viz. And that nothing be Recorded for Money, but freely; a
free People, and in Love serve one another. And not only with respect to their
own Society, was this Free Doctrine taught; but George Fox etc. Writing to
their Dear Friend O. C. as they then called him; Advised him and his Officers,
in their Book styled Several Papers, etc. Written Anno 1658. thus, viz.
Friends, you are to do the Nations business freely, and that is the way to get
into the Peoples Hearts, etc. I could say more to this purpose, but this may
suffice at present.

Thus they one while get into the Peoples Hearts (even as they advised their
Dear Friend O. C.) by pretending to Preach, Teach, Suffer and Record Marriages,
and other things Freely. But soon after, by the Rule of Contraries (even as
their Dear Friend O. C. did) they loose the Hearts of the People, as at this
Day. For,

Now they can take Three pound at a time for Preaching, and Ten pound at a time
for Suffering, and Thirty pound at a time for Writing Six or Seven sheets of
Instructions to People, and Fifty pound Per Annum for Clerks Wages, as standing
Yearly Sallery; and Twelve-pence for Writing a Marriage Certificate, containing
Ten or Twelve Lines: As is more largely set forth in Paint. Harl. etc. p. 40,
41. 47. and the Preface to it, and in Postscript to Paint. Harl. etc. p. 79.
89. And Innoc. Vind. and Envy Rebuked, p. 3. As also in 7th. part of Christian
Qua. disting. etc. by W. R. Sic mutantur.

Sometimes your People, viz. In the beginning, might publish their Intentions
of Marriage at the Market Cross: Or, before a Magistrate as they were free; and
sometimes at a general Meeting as their freedom was: But since your Church
Government was Erected, and your distinct Women's Meetings Established, (which
you say, was according to the Council of God, and done in the Ordering and
Leading of his Eternal Spirit, see de Chr. Lib. p. 43.) It is ordered anew,
that for time to come, none are either to be Permitted or Suffered to Marry,
unless they will publish their Intentions thereof, twice before the Women's
Meeting, (and that first, as your Practice is, they being of the Quorum) and
twice before the Men's Meetings, they being distinct, as I have from your
Written Orders at large Manifested, in de Chr. Lib. etc. 2 part p. 60. to 70.
and Innoc. Vind. and Envy Rebuked, p. 4. 5. 6.

So that here is Ambo dexter indeed; sometimes Liberty, and by and by its taken
away again, by these Infallable Legislators; who sometimes Cry down all Forms,
and are now Setting up Forms, and not only so, but compelling all both Great
and Small, Rich and Poor, Bond and Free, to Submit and Conform to them:
Sometimes saying, the Spirit is a sufficient Guide, above Scripture, above
Councels, above Fathers and Primitive Antiquity; but if any ask how long the
Sufficiency of the Guidance thereof, was to be in full force? I answer; until
their Church Government was Erected, their Forms Established, their Orders
Recorded, and their Authority Confirmed by Yearly Meetings in London; and
Monthly and Quarterly Meetings in the Country: And then away went all Pleas of
being left to the Grace of God; for that was in their Book aforementioned,
Asserted to be a Loose Plea, and pernicious to the Christian Religion, yea the
Root of Ranterism, etc. And away went the Teachings of the Spirit (they
formerly so much magnified) unless it did Harmonize with their written Orders,
Directories, and Prescriptions. For the Spirit and Grace of God is now
Insufficient, and the Scripture is a Dead Letter, and long since rejected as a
Rule, being subordinate to their Prescriptions.

O gross Hypocrisy! but where will you Center! who are This to day, and That
to Morrow, every thing and nothing. Thus have you made of the Light and Grace
of God in the Heart, a mere Monster of all Shapes; sometimes sufficient,
sometimes insufficient; sometimes safe, and sometimes dangerous; sometimes
useful with respect to Teaching, Leading, and Guiding; and sometimes in that
sense useless, unless a Quarterly Meeting, stamp their probatum est upon its
Teachings; sometimes Common, yea all are enlightened, and it has appeared to
all Men, and sometimes with Respect to Government and Direction, peculiar, viz.
None but your Ministers and Leading Party have it, and they so Infallably have
it, as that you say in plain words, in your Book Entitled, Judas and the Jews,
etc. p. 49. We need none (say you) to give us discerning or Judgment; Christ
has furnished us already, and does on all occasions, etc. So, that when all
come to all, it is no body knows what: But the Leading Quaker is all and all:
Tot Quot and Omnes: so that your own words may justly be returned upon you; and
thereupon, I shall conclude and say, viz.

THus Quakers Priests, who talk for Self,
Is Tangling talk against it Self;
Against Truth a Prate, a piteous Preachment,
That cannot make good, its own Impeachment.
As Penns and Whiteheads Doctrine do,
Who heeds not well, which way they go.
Fox, and Sam. Cater, Dances round,
And Round again, in the self-same Ground;
It staggers too, and fro, and Reels,
Skips up and down, and runs on Wheels;
Starts aside like some broken Bow,
Crosses Christ, like Cris in the Row,
Whosoever can feel, in it may feel,
As 'twere a Wheel, within a Wheel:
A Net, Gin, Trap, a Snare's in It,
A Whirl-pool, Gulf, Bottomless Pit;
Wind, Dust, Husk, Chaff, no stable Steeple,
A Tale, that takes unstable People;
A Toy, a Cloud, Mist, Smoke, a Fogg,
Right Quakerism, yea a Quavering Bogg;
A Quick-sand, a Quagmire, that Sucks,
Who Is in it his Feet, out seldom plucks;
Himself who is In, gets seldom out,
It self's more seldom In than Out;
It flutters like some Night Blind Bat,
Now here, now there, this way, now That;
Now it is one thing, then Another,
And now and then nor The One nor The Other.
Sometimes its This, sometimes its That,
Sometimes its This, and This, and That;
Sometimes its either This, or That,
Sometimes its neither This, nor That;
Now This, not the Other, anon its Either,
Then by and by, both, both, and Neither;
One while it looks like So, not No,
Another while like No, not So;
One way it seems or So, or No,
Another way, nor No, nor So;
Some way it shows both So, and No,
So it is a mere endless No, and So.
concentric circles formed from the words SO and NO SONOSONOSONOSONO

NOSONOSONO

O



POSTSCRIPT.
TO Write no more, I long since did Intend,
But none, but God knows now, when I shall end:
For still I find, when I think all is done,
As much to Write, as when I First begun.
Jan. 1st. 1686. F. B.

FINIS.

