A JUST REBUKE TO SEVERAL Calumnies, Lies and Slanders Reported against Thomas
Budd.
MAny have been the stratagems and devices of the old Enemy af Mankind, the
Devil, to deceive the simple-hearted in all Ages, from the beginning, and still
endeavors by his Instruments to belie and asperse the Innocent; and among the
rest it has happened to be my lot to have my share in being belyed and evil
spoken of, for no other cause, but my being zealous for the Faith of our dear
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that was crurified without the Gates of
Jerusalem, etc. which Faith has been so much denied and rejected by some here
among us high in profession, to the great admiration of many; and it it having
pleased the Lord to raise up some to bear Witness to the Truth, in
contradiction to the Unbelief of others, has caused this Breach and
Separation, which ceasing not there, nor in belying and falsely accusing the
Innocent, but several of the Opposers of the true Faith are entered into a
Spirit of Persecution, to the Imprisoning, Fining, and Taking away some of our
Goods, and that so illegally as scarcely to be paralelled, as in time may be
made appear, and therefore shall say no more of that at present, but come to
the matter, wnich I am more particularly concerned to speak to, and detect some
of the gress Lies and false Reports that are spread abroad.

Whereas since I published my Answer to the two Papers that came from Maryland,
there is another Lying story reported here, viz. That when I was in England
with G F. he informed me that it was revealed to him that an eminent Star
should fall in America, and that he should desire me to signify the same to
Friends here; and that this Star was George Keith, who should bring in Damnable
Doctrines among us.

Answ. I positively deny that ever I so said, or that G. F. did ever inform me
any such thing that a star should fall, or desire me to signify to Friends
that this Star ( viz. G K.) should bring in damnable Doctrines among us, but on
the contrary do say, that I believo G. F. W. P. G. W. R. B. and other faithful
Friends had dear Unity with G. K. and his present Christian Principles and
Doctrines, though I must acknowledge that my self partly, and many others who
have made a large Profession of the Principles of the People called Quakers,
did show our dislike to diverse Principles of Christian Doctrine held forth by
G. K. in some of his printed Books, and preached by him in our public
Meetings. But that I should write to G. F. against G. K. showing my dislike to
his Doctrine and Principles, is utterly false; for I never writ to G. F. or any
other Person either in England or elsewhere, in dislike of G. K's Principles
or Doctrine; but finding some persons show great dislike of some of them, sent
G. F. one of G K's Catechisms, concluding that if there was any unsound
Principles set forth therein, G.F. and Friends in England would signify the
same to Friends here, which yet they have not done, but on the contrary so far
as they have had knowledge of the said Difference have justified his Doctrine.

Now the most principal matters wherein I found some to differ with G. K. and
wherein our Opposers still differ with us, calling them Notions, etc. but we on
the contrary affirm them to be Gospel Truths, are as follweth, viz.

1. That it is absolutely necessary to our Salvation, and to make us true
Christians, to believe that Christ dyed for our sins, and rose from the dead,
and that he ascended into Heaven without us, and is in Heaven making
Intercession to the Father for us, as well as to believe in the Light within.

2. That Christ rose from the dead, and ascended into Heaven, and is now in
Heaven glorified in the entire and perfect Nature of Man, in Soul and Body,
appearing in the Presence of God for us, our Advocate with the Father.

3. That there shall be a Resurrection of the Body, both of the Just and
Unjust, the Just unto Everlasting Life, and the Unjust unto Shame and Torment
forever; and that the Resurrection of the Body is not received in this mortal
Life, nor immediately after Death, but the deceased Saints generally wait for
it, until the Coming of Christ; and that the dead in Christ shall rise first,
when the Body that is sown Natural shall be raised Spiritual.

4. That there is a general Day of Judgment yet to come, where^^ all Nations
shall stand before the Son of Man, even the Man Christ Jesus, at his Appearance
and Coming without us, (as well as at his Appearance and Judgment Seat within
us) to receive according to the Deeds done in the Body, good or evil.

Now I being newly come from England, and there being some Books published by
G. K. by the consent and approbation of Friends here, some came to me, and
showed their dissatisfaction with several things in the said Books, and
particularly with the above cited Doctrines, which indeed I did partly question
the Truth of my self, and having occasion to go into Maryland, did discourse
with some concerning the said Principles, and found that some there did (as
well as our present Opposers) account Carnal and dangerous Doctrines; and
thereupon did caution them to beware of the said Doctrines, which would shortly
break forth among us. But will it therefore follow that the said Doctrines are
false? Not at all. And I can do no less than acknowledge my rashness in
cautioning others to beware of what I did not rigthly understand my self, but
too much taking on Trust from others. But when I came to have more opportunity
to hear G. K. my self, and converse with him, and finding several honest
Friends to agree with him in those Christian Principles and Doctrines, it put
me upon the search and enquiry, whether these Principles were according to the
holy Scriptures, with Prayer to the Lord to guide me aright therein. And after
some time, it pleased the Lord further to enlighten my Understanding and to
confirm my Faith in those things wherein before I was wavering and doubtful,
and ready to be persuaded that they were Carnal Notions; which now, blessed be
the Lord, I believe to be Gospel Truths, and therefore can do no less than join
with and own G. K. in his present Christian Testimony, and hope shall seal to
the Truth thereof with my Blood, if called thereunto. And as I am sorry to find
some continue in their former Ignorance and Unbelief of those precious Truths,
so I am as sorry and much more offended at the Hypocrisy of others who in
public seem to own the Faith of Christ, thereby deceiving many simple hearted
People, when yet it can be proved, by this two fold Instance, that they have
not the true Faith, 1 st. In that they have never signified their Repentance of
their former declared Unbelief; and 2 dly. In that they continue in Unity with
them who have openly denied the Lord that bought them; and though others of
them in public say they own these Christian Doctrines, and know none that deny
them, satisfies not us, while the same men oppose these very Doctrines upon all
occasions in private conferences; And if they had the true and right Faith, why
should they be so unwilling to give their offended Brethren an account thereof,
when we have for so long a time desired it, either by way of Conference,
Writing or Print. But they have still denied to give us any account, but only
in Scripture words, when some of them have expressed their Belief of certain
Principles expressly contrary to the Dictates of the Spirit of Truth in the holy
Scriptures. We have given an Account of out faith, in the most necessary things
of the Christian Faith, in a Sheet added to the latter end of the Book
entitled, Some Causes of the late Separation, etc.

Next, whereas it is frequently reported by John Wilsford, Arthur Cook, and
others who are prejudiced against me, that I should say, That I did weep so
much in a Meeting as to wet two Handkercheifs of three Quarters of a yard each,
and all in deceit. To which I say, this is a great Lie, raised against me on
purpose to defame me, and to lessen Peoples love toward me and my Christian
Testimony. But suppose I did signify to some of my tenderness, and frequent
weeping in Meetings, when I was a Boy* viz. that in those days I was often
tendered in Meetings, insomuch that at one Meeting I did weep so much as to wet
my Handkercheif, but I cannot say nor never did say, that this was all in
deceit; and therefore the said Report is a Lie, and I do place it on the
Authors and Reporters thereof, let them clear themselves if they can.

Again, whereas it is further reported by Arthur Cook, That I struck him on the
face in the public Meeting in Philadelphia the 20 th of the 9 th Month last;
and this Report being spread abroad to my Prejudice and Defamation. This is to
signify to all who are desirous to know the Truth of the matter, and love not
to believe Lies, that the thing is utterly false, and without all ground; but
he has raised it from this, that the said Arthur Cook having the first day
before (being the 13 of the 9 mon.) stood close by G. K. while he was
declaring, and staring him in the face, intending thereby to disquiet him,
often saying, Deceit, Deceit, and who can bear this? that many that observed
it, thought very uncivil and rude; and the next first day Arthur Cook intending
to do the like again while G. K. was declaring, I stepped in betwixt G.K. and
him, to keep him off, from staring him in the face, but Arthur pressing to get
close to G. K. I stood in his way, and Arthur said, Will thou push me? No, said
I, but I think to stand in the way, and not let thee come close to him, and
withal, in a familiar way, I did gently stroke his face, as a Nurse would do a
suching Child, and as one will do to another that is familiar to him, intending
no hurt, nor doing no hurt in the least, more than a Nurse will do to a Child;
and my Principles have sufficiently been known to be Christian and Peaceable,
against all Violence and Striking, and my Practice has been known to be
corresponding; and because of my peaceable Inclination, I have refused for some
years past to be any wise concerned in Government, and serving upon Juries, for
which I am now under a Fine. And therefore that Suggestion and Report
concerning my striking Arthur Cook is a mere Calumny and false Accusation.

Thomas Budd.

THE END.

