THE Christian Ministry OF THE Church of ENGLAND Vindicated and Distinguished
FROM THE Antichristian Ministry OF THE QUAKERS. CONTAINING A Brief Reply to a
False and Foolish Libel, styled, A Letter to the Clergy of the Diocese of
Norfolk and Suffolk, etc. by a Nameless Author, yet a pretended Member of the
Church of ENGLAND. WHEREIN His Folly is Detected; His Lies Confuted; His
Weakness Discovered; and his Malice Reproved. By a Member of the Church of
England, FRANCIS BUGG.

That we henceforth be no more Children, tossed to and fro, and carried about
with every Wind of Doctrine, by the Slights of Men, and cunning Craftiness,
whereby they lie in wait to deceive. Ephesians. 4.14. LONDON, Printed for the
Author: And are to be sold by J. Robinson at the Golden-Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard. And H. Rhodes at the Star in Fleet Street. 1699.

Advertisement.
WHereas the Sheet, entitled, A Letter to the Clergy, etc. is to my certain
Knowledge universally spread in Oxford, Wickham, Ipswich, Colchester, Bury,
Cambridge, Norwich, Lyme, Ely, and diverse other Parts of the Nation, to the
great Scandal of the Church of England, and given Gratis, (they having a common
Bank for that and every such Purpose) into the Hands of Gentlemen, Tradesmen,
Innkeepers, Hostlers, and others, to the great Prejudice of common
Christianity, and is a cunning Stratagem, devised, and set on foot by the Arch
Emissaries of Quakerism, under the Vizor of a Member of the Church of England,
whilst there is great Reason to believe him to be a real Quaker; whose
Principle and Practice has been to Lie, Dissemble, Forge, and Subscribe,
without the Consent of the Parties, as Anne Docwra, (a Member of that Schism,
and now in their Unity, and a Writer and Defender of their Heresy) has
showed. These are therefore to give notice, That any Persons, zealous for our
Holy Religion, may have this Book ready stitcht for 2d. per Book, if they will
buy 25, 50, or 100 together, at Mr. Janeway's, Book-binder, next Door to
Child's Coffee-House in St. Paul's Churchyard, London, In order to a Universal
Discovery of this Hermophrodite in Religion, who lies sculking behind the
Curtain, stinging like a Serpent; whose Throat is an open Sepulcher, whose
Mouth must be stopped, and Folly manifested, least the uncircumcised Triumph
over the Israel of God.

The Preface to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THE Apostle, St. Paul, writing to the Ephesians, gives them many Precepts, and
sound Exhortations, in order to the building them up in their most holy Faith;
amongst which, this to me seems not the least, cap. 4. v. 14. That we
henceforth be no more Children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
Wind of Doctrine, by the Slights of Men, and cunning Craftiness, whereby they
lie in wait to deceive. Again, writing to his Son Timothy, he seems to
Inculcate the same over again, foretelling what should come to pass. 2 Timothy
3.13. But evil Men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being
deceived. It Is true, no Man can deceive another, but he deceives himself; yet
such is the Influence, that Interest, and the Love of the World, have upon the
depraved Nature, and ambitious Desire of some Men, that they will use all the
Slights and cunning Craftiness they can, to deceive others: And when one Engine
will not do, they will try another, as we see by the Quakers, who by their
Slights and cunning Craft, have deceived Thousands, under the Pretense of their
Seeming Sanctity, and Pharasaical Demureness, as well as by their Books, which
they generally pretend to be given forth by the Holy Ghost, from the Mouth of
the Lord, and by the moving of the Eternal Spirit, and as such, to be of
greater Authority than the Bible, as G. Whitehead teaches in his Book, Truth
defending the Quakers, p. 7. And thereupon they read their Epistles thus wrote,
in their Meetings, as the Word of God, whilst they never read one Chapter of
the Bible in their Meetings: I say, by these their Wiles and Slights they have
caught Thousands of unstable Souls, but through much Labor and Pains by my self
and others, there has been such a Discovery made of their Books, and the
Blasphemies and Corrupt Doctrine contained in them, that now their very
Ringleaders themselves have refused either to own or disown them, or the
Doctrines contained in them; by which many of their Hearers begin to question
the Pretensions of their Leaders, and many are come off from them, and have
been Baptized into the Christian Faith, by the Ministers of the Church of
England; and now they have started a new Gain, and used another Slight, and
cunning Piece of Craft, whereby they watch all Opportunities to deceive the
People; namely, to put forth a printed Sheet, under the Disguise of a Member of
the Church of England, with a Design to abuse her, and to deceive others, as
the following Discourse will show; and whereby we may see they grow worse and
worse; and this the Apostle foresaw: And therefore, like careful Watchmen, gave
us warning of them, as in the Places above cited. To which, let me add St.
Peter's Prophetical Care, Admonition and Caution, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. But there were
also false Prophets among the People, even as there shall be false Teachers
among you, who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord
that bought them: And bring upon themselves swift Destructions; and many shall
follow their Pernicious Ways; by reason of whom, the way of Truth shall be evil
spoken of.

Now how far these and other of the like Truths, (left upon Record by the
Primitive Inspired Pastors and Teachers of the Doctrine of Salvation) are
verified in our Days, may be seen, and ought to be more laid to Heart by us,
than I fear we do: For it has been manifest, and clearly proved, that the
Quakers, above all others, that I am sensible of, are the very Persons that
deny the Lord that bought them, and shed his most precious Blood for them; were
they but willing to accept of so great Salvation on Gospel Terms. For says W.
Penn in his Serious Apology, etc. p. 146. That the Outward Person that suffered
(at Jerusalem) was properly the Son of God, we utterly deny, etc. Here then we
see the Holy Apostle St. Peter's Words fulfilled; for he or they that deny him
that suffered at Jerusalem upon the Tree of the Cross, to be the Son of God, I
do affirm he or they, whoever they be, deny the Lord that bought them, and will
bring upon themselves swift Destruction; yea, and as many as suck in the Poison
of their Doctrine, unless they repent thereof. But W. Penn avouches the same in
his Christian Quaker, and his Divine Test. etc. p. 97, 98. and in many other
Places. See also Is. Pennington's Book, A Question to Professors, etc. p. 33.
Now the Scriptures distinguish between Christ and the Garment he wore; between
him that came, and the Body in which he came; between the Substance that was
veiled, and the Vail that veiled it. There was plainly He, and the Body in
which He came. There was the Outward Vessel, and the Inward Life. This we
certainly know, and can never call the Bodily Garment Christ, but that which
appeared, and dwelt in the Body.

Again, see W. Bayly's Work, p. 300, 307. quoted at large in my Book, The
Quakers set in their true Light, etc. p. 43. Whereas W. Penn denies the Person
that suffered at Jerusalem to be the Son of God, as above-quoted, and Is.
Pennington tells you, they can never call him Christ, only something that was
within him, etc. this W. Bailey he makes the same Distinction, and therefore to
show, that these Quaker-Teachers deny the Lord that bought them, and bring in
damnable Heresies, I shall in Two or Three Instances show, Mat. 16.13. Whom do
Men say that I the Son of Man am? v. 16. Thou art Christ, the Son of the Living
God. V. 17. Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona; for Flesh and Blood has not
revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven. Read also Acts 5.30,
31. The God of our Fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a Tree;
him has God exalted with his Right Hand to be a Prince, and a Savior, for to
give Repentance to Israel, and Forgiveness of Sins. Cap. 2. V. 36. Therefore
let all the House of Israel know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus
whom ye slew and hanged on a Tree, both Lord and Christ.

Now I would ask the Quakers whether their Light within, which they call
Christ, was ever hanged on a Tree, run through with a Spear, etc. Thus much then
to show, that the Quakers are the very Men that deny the Lord that bought them,
and that have brought in Damnable Heresies; who by their Slights and cunning
Craftiness, lie in wait to deceive; and the way to keep their People blind, is
to prepossess them against the Scriptures, (which I think they have more than
sufficiently done, by calling them Death, Dust, Serpents Meat, Beastly Ware,
and the like Contemptuous Names:) For should they read St. Luke 2. and the
Evangelists thoroughly, and the Acts of the Holy Apostles, and their Epistles,
they would soon find that the Person that suffered on the Tree of the Cross at
Jerusalem, was the Son of God, and the Savior of the World, in Opposition to
the Doctrine of all Jews, Mahometans, Deists, and Quakers. And thus I conclude
this Head, referring the Reader to my Pilgrim's Progress, etc. p. 150, to 174.

Finally, I heartily recommend to the well-disposed amongst the Hearers of the
Quakers, the frequent reading of the Holy Scriptures, and other good Books, for
their Information and Instruction: For as Ignorance cannot be the Mother of
Christian Devotion, neither will it be any Excuse in the great Day of Account,
especially when we consider the Means of Knowledge is so plentiful in this our
Christian Nation. Wherefore read 2 These. 1.8. How that God will take Vengeance
on them that know him not, at well as on them that obey not the Gospel of out
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and the Prophet Isaiah 27.11. complained,
saying, It is a People of no Understanding; therefore he that made them will
have no Mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no Favor, etc.
How then should this encourage you to read some other Books, besides those of
your Friends? What if your Teachers frown on you? And what if they set your
Fathers and Mothers, your Wives and Children against you? First, Do your Duty
to God, and next to your several Relations: But you that are Masters of
Families, God expects more of you than of others; He has made Man chief Ruler
in his Family, and put all in Subjection to him. Sarah was a good Woman, she
obeyed her Husband, and called him Lord: And Number. 30. his Sovereignty over his
Family is Confirmed and Ratified by the Apostles; but your Teachers have set
your Wives at Liberty from this Duty, so that I know whenever you turn your
Faces to Sionward, and begin to embrace the Articles of the Christian Faith; to
read Books wrote against the Quakers, to consider, and see whether it is so, as
is reported: I say, when any of you come thus to examine, and see for your
selves, you will have hard Work; but then, you that have good Wives, they will
be as Solomon says, Prove. 12.4. As a Crown to your Heads: Yea, as both Shield
and Buckler against all your Enemies: But if otherwise, she will be as Rottenness
to your Bones, which causes a Stink and Noisome Smell: She Will not only watch
for your Halting, but be glad to discover all your Humane Frailties, or any
Personal Fault she can find, and all to gratify your Leaders, who then will
turn your Implacable Enemies: But still keep you steady, and do your part, and
God will clear your Innocence; but this let me advise too, as one that has gone
before you; you must cast down your Crowns, and be willing to be accounted as
the Dung of the Earth, and as the Offscouring of all things; and that where
your Mercinary Teachers can prevail, you shall not have a Friend left you upon
the Earth: But for your Encouragement in this your Progress, the Bible is full
of Instructions, and many other Books, to which I refer you; and I pray God to
discover to you the Slights and cunning Craftiness of your Teachers, whereby
they lie in wait to deceive; that so you may shun their Snare, and escape their
Net, and fly for your Lives, and come forth of Babylon to the Land of Canaan,
which flows with many good things, which you neither know, nor are yet
acquainted with.

F. B.

The Christian Ministry of the Church of England, Vindicated and Distinguished
from the Antichristian Ministry of the Quakers, according to that Text, Ye
shall know them by their Fruits.
I Have seen a Printed Sheet, by a nameless Author, styled, A Letter to the
Clergy, etc. by a [pretended] Member of the Church of England, and also
observed how universally it is spread far and near, in all Towns wherever I
came, and how industriously it is as well dispersed, as espoused by the
Quakers, and as I am told, read in their Meetings, which is more than ever they
did a Chapter in the Bible. Thus do they, like the Revolting Israelites,
worship the Works of their own Hands, and dance about this their carved Idol,
as they did about the Golden Calf, Exodus 32. And as when I first saw it, I took
it to be a Project of the Quakers forming, so I do still; and that not only by
the Doctrine therein taught, the Dialect therein used, but knowing they can do
any thing that may serve a turn; Subscribe Certificates, never handed by the
Persons themselves, Alter, Add to, and Take from any Matter, whether of the
Dead or Living, either in Printing, or Reprinting; for their main Business and
whole Study is, to deceive the Nation, and to use those Slights, and cunning
Craft, which the Apostles have given us Warning to be aware of; yea, they can
Forge, Lie, Dissemble, and Act like Knights of the Post, under the Disguise of
the most innocent Saints, and harmless Lambs, that ever the Sun did shine upon:
But alas! all that I can say, and prove, as in my Pilgrims Progress, etc. will
not satisfy them by this last Project, I mean their Letter. Therefore, as the
Author pretends to be a Member of the Church of England, and have exposed the
Clergy, therefore, unless I Francis Bugg can produce one of the Members of the
Quakers Society, to testify against their Teachers, all is nothing, this is
their new Project; and therefore, though the Quakers are ashamed to expose the
Name of their Accuser, yet I am not; for it is Anne Docwra of Cambridge, an
ancient and eminent Quaker, a Deaconess of the Order of St. George Fox, late
deceased, as in some Letters to my self and Mr. Crisp, with their several
Dates, and her Broadside printed, as recited in my Pilg. Prog. etc. p. 25, 58.
Jezebel Withstood, p. 9, to 12. and other of my Books; all which, I hope, will
humor the Quaker's Tool, and great Prop, to uphold their tottering Cause, p. 5.
viz.

1. Because she writ thus in her Letter to me, dated the 6th. of May, 1683.
Viz. Dear Cosen Fr. Bugg, my true Love to thee: -- I have given my Witness
publicly against the Lies I found in Geo. Whitehead 's Book -- We have Knights
of the Post amongst us.

2. Another, 26. Feb. 1682. Dear Cosen F. B. G. Whitehead have sent me one of
his Books for me to read, and there is the old Money Story in it, with I know
not what besides; I was asked by an bonest Friend, if be (G. W.) was not a
Jesuit? I answered, nay; it is not solid enough for them to own -- There is
pretty much airy conceited Stuff in it.

3. In her printed Broadside, styled, The new projecting Formalist, etc. I know
it is common (says she) with some of them in their Books of Controversy, to
put the Names of such Persons as they account their Vassals, both to
Certificates and Books Why not then the name of a Member of the Church of
England, in the room of a real Quaker.
, sometimes without the Consent of the Parties, whose Names are Inserted, and
sometimes with Consent, through slavish Fear, of having their Trades Obstructed
and Ruined by Public Defamations. Two Years ago I saw a small Book, worded by
an able Penman, (G. W.) wherein was my Name, as a Witness, without my Consent,
to Testify more than was true, which I must disown: -- Yea, a barefaced Lie,
and an undeniable Truth, so closely Interwoven, that it is not easily
discovered -- Their separate Men's Meetings have been the Nurseries of
Contention, and I believe, the chief Cause of this long-grinding Persecution;
(for this she wrote about 1683.) the Magistrates has upbraided me as one that
adhered to them, looking upon those Meetings, as more dangerous to the Peace of
the Nation This Time will best demonstrate, if these Meetings and their Fund be
not taken into Consideration.
, than our Public Meetings; (with Doors open) separate Meeting have served to
little Purpose, but to shelter great Bellies, obstruct Lawful Marriages, and to
ingross honest Friend's Properties to themselves; -- the most innocent
self-denying People have been the Subject of their Clamorous Tongue, when the
Loose and Vicious, the Covetous, Proud, Lying Hypocrities, have been covered
and protected.

4. In a Letter to Mr. Crisp from Anne Docwra, Sept. 20. 1683. Sam. Cater 's
Narrative is come out in Print -- I suspect G. Whitehead to be the Author of
it; Sam. is not Sophister great enough, to twist his Matter together so
cunningly, either to make Truth go for a Lie, or a Lie go for Truth: It is part
of a Letter I wrote to Sam. Cater, concerning my Cosen F. Bugg, wherein they
have added a few Words, that quite alters the Sense of my Letter; neither have
they put in the greatest part of it, which would have overthrown their whole
Cause.

5. Again, That dated Feb. 13. 1683. viz. Sam. Cater (says Anne) is very angry,
because I call him to an Account for bringing me in for a Witness in his
Narrative; most of that he has written concerning me is false, but not all of
it; he has mixed a Lie and Truth together.

6. In another Letter to Mr. Crisp, Mar. 25. 1684. she thus expressed her self;
Sam. Cater has been lately with me, clamouring against F. Bugg and John
Ainsloe; I have had a sharp Conference with him about his Narrative, wherein he
has used my Name in Print, to justify him in his Contentious Pamphlet with
F.B. about Money -- I laid it before him smartly, before several Friends; he is
very bold, and the most confident Liar that ever I met with; I laid the Record
against John Ainsloe before him -- also G. Whitehead 's false Certificate about
the (said) Record, in his Judgment fixed, that it is an abuseful Forgery; for
some of those, whose Names are to the Certificate, absolutely disowns it, and
say they set their Hands to none. It is very sad (said she) that Men should be
so confident in their Wickedness.

Now, by the Author of this Scurrilous Libel, under Consideration, he argues,
in p. 5. that it was not the Disciples of Christ, and the Apostle Paul, that
called our Lord a WineBibber, a Friend to Publicans and Sinners, a Babbler, but
his professed Enemies, the Scribes, Pharisees, and Unbelievers; and thereupon
he drew his Conclusion, that the Ministers of the Church of England are not
Christ's Ministers, and think this will affect their sacred Function, being
thus charged by a Member of their own Church; then by the same Rule of arguing,
this Woman was, and still is of their Communion; a Writer in Defense of them,
and in their Unity: Therefore, I say, it must affect them; and that she then
spoke the Truth, my self and many others are Witnesses of most of these things,
or things equivolent; and were I to enlarge upon the Testimonies of John
Wilkinson, John Story, and many other Quakers, who lived and died Quakers, I
could greatly enlarge hereupon: But I thought I had done, when I showed in
Jezebel Withstood how this Woman wheels about; and to creep into their Unity,
is become Scandalous, in her now writing, and with the Dog turns and licks up
her old Vomit, which she spued forth many Years since, and when a Quaker too:
But what is her Testimony, but this, that the Quakers Teachers are the most
confident Liars, abuseful Forgers, Jesuits, and Knights of the Post; that their
Monthly, Quarterly, and Yearly Meetings, are Nurseries of Contention, who
wickedly forge Certificates, and put the Names of their Vassals, and tame
Slaves, to Books, without their License; or else, if they submit not to their
Tyranny and Usurpation, they may expect to be ruined in their Trades and
Reputations, which is most true; and that the most Innocent among them are the
Subject of their Clamorous Tongue, whilst the Vicious, Proud, Covetous,
Insulting Liars, are protected and encouraged; and if so, as so it is, and has
been, no marvel that the Quakers put out such a Letter to the Clergy, under the
Mask and Vizor of a Member of the Church of England, and then send it up and
down the Nation, to deceive the unwary Readers.

Besides, the very Title of this Pamphlet discovers the Juggle, viz. A Letter
to the Clergy, etc. wherein they are desired to challenge the Quakers once
more; now once more implies, the Clergy had already, or first challenged the
Quakers, when indeed the Quakers evaded my Challenge, and turned the Challenge
upon the Clergy; yea, to any of their Cloth, as is plain from p. 50. and other
Parts of the Quakers own Book, A Defense of the People called Quakers, etc.
Printed 1699. all which I have made appear in my Book, Quakerism exposed to
Public Censure, etc.

But this their Falacy once more looks like the Forehead of John Field, who I
take to be the Author of a Letter sent me to Milden-Hall, at the same time that
both Field and I saw one another at the Commons Lobby every Day; namely, March
the 31th. 1699. directed not to Fr Bugg the elder, but to Fr. Bugg, of
Milden-Hall, that so it might come into my Son's Hand, and serve to set him
against me; for Jesuit-like, their Work has been, not only to set the Clergy
and all Mankind against me, but my Wife and Children: But I thank God my Son
sees through many of their Jesuitical and Sly Insinuations; a few of his Words
are as follows:

F. Bugg, Any reasonable Man might think, that after thou had writ so many
Books, to so little Purpose, thou should forbear to write any more; for what
Effect has all thy Books had? -- Except it be amongst those that are as bad as
thy self, who do highly exalt and esteem them, and that for no other Reason,
but that they are against those that have discovered and brought to light many
of their Cheats, and evil Practices, which long lay hid in the Dark, whereby
the Simple was deceived, etc.

And that this J. Field does manifestly resemble the Author of the said Letter
to the Clergy, he, like him, if he be not the very Person, subscribed his said
Letter, i.e. Thus I subscribe my self, -- refusing to write my Name at length,
J. F -- d.

Thus much then, First, to show, That the Author of the said Letter to the
Clergy may be a real Quaker, and probably J. Field is the Man, because it bears
his Image: First, In his Impudence, Once more: Secondly, From his Practice, in
not writing his Name at length: Thirdly, in his Hypocrisy, to write to me at
Milden-Hall, when he saw me every Day in London: Fourthly, From his Malicious
End and Design therein, to sow Discord between me, and my Wife, and Children;
all which are the real Fruits of a real Quaker, and not of a Member of the
Church of England: And therefore, when I considered of the Evil which might
ensue the spreading of this Letter to the Clergy, I spoke of it to several
worthy and able Men, who thought it not worth the noticing; and then, though I
once thought I had said enough to it in Quakerism exposed, etc. p. 12. yet I
could not well pass it, but show the World, by what Falacies Quakerism is
supported; and now I shall proceed to show, that the Ministers of the Church of
England are Christ's Ministers, and that the Quaker-Teachers are Deceivers, and
Antichristian Deluders, and that too by this pretended Member of the Church of
England s own Method.

For having by this time showed sufficient Grounds to believe, that the
Quakers, who can thus forge, who thus can set their Vassals Names to Books and
Certificates, and are the most confident Liars, even Knights of the Post, as
asserted by one, and no small one neither, of their own Society, I hope it will
not seem improbable, but that a Quaker may be the Author of this Letter to the
Clergy, notwithstanding I have proved in Jezebel Withstood, that she is as
great a Liar, Forger, and Knight of the Post, as any of the Quakers: For
therein she is a right Quaker, and in her Element as brisk as a Fish in the
Water; and therefore, as I said, I shall now proceed to prove the Ministers of
the Church of England Christ's Ministers, and that by his own Method too, that
so I may the better wound him with his own Weapon; and therefore, though he walk
disguised, I shall draw my Bow at a Venture, not doubting but to shoot between
the Joints and the Harness.

The Tree (says he, p. 4.) is known by its Fruit.

I read Matthew. the 7th. that Christ himself gave us warning of false Prophets
and Deceivers, which should arise, but by their Fruits, said he, ye shall know
them; v. 15. Beware of false Prophets, (said he) which shall come to you in
Sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are Ravening Wolves: V. 16. Ye shall know
them by their Fruits: Do Men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? Now
what is this, but to tell us, that in the last Times there shall arise, as in
Matthew. 24.24. False Christ's and false Prophets, and shall show great Signs and
Wonders; insomuch, that if it were possible, they shall deceive the very Elect.
Such shall be their counterfeit Meekness, Gentleness, and outward Sanctity, as
if they were the very Saints of the most High, when inwardly they are the
veriest Hypocrites, Liars, Forgers, and wicked Imposters, that ever the World
knew, as this Anne Docwra (not an Unbeliever of the Quakers Doctrine, but one
of their own Writers and Defenders of their Faith) has showed very plainly:
And thus far, By their Fruit you may know them.

I come next to this Author's Method touching their Doctrine; for since I have
undertaken him, I am willing to follow him into all his sculking Corners, and
to trace him in his Bye-Paths, and shall at last challenge him into the open
Field; and who knows, but I may bring him out at last; if not, I hope I shall
discover his Night Walks, and Works of Darkness: But to his Method of Trial,
see p. 3. where he cites Christ's Commission to St. Paul, Acts 26. namely, To
open the blind Eyes, to unstop the deaf Ears, to turn them from Darkness to
Light, and from Satan's Power to God. But, Reader, he has left out great part
of St. Paul's Commission, and therefore to his own Confutation let him look p.
Ibid. -- where he grants, That glad Tidings of Salvation is part of the Gospel,
but there goes several other Rights with it; which leave out any one of them,
and it is no more the Gospel, than the Trinity is the Trinity, leaving out one
of the Three Persons: Insomuch, that by his Practice in the Commission of St.
Paul, above cited, Acts 26.18. he, Quaker-like, and therein the more like
himself, has left out great part of St. Paul's Commission, as knowing it not
agreeable to the Quakers Doctrine, Faith, or Principles; and therefore, to show
this sculking obscure Enemy to the Christian Religion, his Inconsistency with
himself, I shall cite the whole Verse, viz. To open their Eyes, and to turn
them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God: That they
may receive Forgiveness of Sins, and Inheritance among them that are
sanctified, through Faith that is in me. Now these Words, that they may receive
Forgiveness of Sins, and Inheritance among them which are sanctified through
Faith that is in me, he leaves out, as a Sign it is not within the Quakers
Creed, as anon I shall show; and indeed, all the time I was a Quaker, I do not
remember that ever I heard this whole Verse quoted, only the former part, as
recited by this disguised Author, to prove their Light within was Christ; yea,
the whole and complete Christ, as Buroughs, their great Prophet, teaches in
his Works, p. 149. I will mention here but one Scripture more, which the
Quakers pervert, and which I never understood, until I came to learn it of
such, as this Sculking Adversary would defame; namely, the Ministers of the
Church of England. It is Romans 10.6, 7, 8. So far they frequently quoted, to
prove their Light within was the complete Christ, and Righteousness of Faith;
leaving always out, so far as ever I remember, the 9th. Verse, viz. That if
thou shall confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus: And shall believe in thine
Heart, that God has raised him from the Dead, thou shall be saved. No, this
Faith and Confession of the Lord Jesus, who was Born of the Virgin Mary, and
his Resurrection from the Dead, is out of the Quakers Creed: And therefore,
like this Enemy to Christianity, when he cites St. Paul's Commission, and
leaves out that part, Through Faith that is in me, so do the Quaker-Teachers
leave out, That if thou shall confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thine Heart, that God has raised him from the Dead, thou shall be
saved. And thus, like Twins, begot by one Father, and brought forth by one
Mother, the false Church or Synagogue of Satan, do this sculking Adversary
agree in the Unity of the Quakers Doctrine, which still confirms me that he is
a Quaker in Disguise: But to proceed, to discover by the Doctrine taught by the
Church of England, and the Doctrine taught by the Quakers, which of the Twain
are Christ's Ministers; this is the Method he has proposed, and it is the
Method I shall take.

But first let me observe to the Reader one Passage, wherein the Quakers, and
this Corner Obscure Fellow, which they keep behind the Curtain, agree like
Birds of another Feather, viz. Page the 7th. of this Letter, etc. and another
of their Books, wrote by John Fiddiman, and others, p. 6, to 12. their
Arguments are the same, and their Words almost Verbatim. The latter I have
answered in Quakerism exposed, etc. p. 46. which Answer may serve for this
also; but that I may show the Nature of these Beasts or Birds of Prey, give me
leave to show their Complexion, that the World may judge whether they be not
Twins, begot by one Father, i. e. The common Father of all Liars, and false
Accusers, and brought forth by one Mother, Mystery Babylon, the Mother of
Harlots. The Words are these, p. 7. You charge the Quakers with Blasphemy, and
is not that very Charge blasphemous, in saying, The Light within, as taught by
them, leads them into these, and many more Errors? Is Christ the Author of
Blasphemy? You have now charged it upon him (Christ) with a Witness -- Who
said, I am the Light of the World -- So that, Sirs, you have not only charged
the Quakers, but Christ too, as high as you charge them, etc.

This then is the Member of the Church of England, that the Quakers so much
boast of, and glory in, even by all Signs and Tokens, John Field: For if they
can do as their Sister Anne Docwra says they can, that is, Lie Dissemble,
Forge, and Act in the very same Strain, like Knights of the Post: Then are they
fitly qualified to write any thing, and to bear any Name, whether Church of
England-man, or Quaker, that suits best with their Interest; for they stick at
nothing; and therefore I take the true Reason, why this Pamphlet is put out by
the Quakers, under the Name of a Member of the Church of England, to be this;
of late their own Books are (even by many of their own People) so loathed,
because of the Lies and Forgeries, Errors and Blasphemies contained in them:
That even the Teachers themselves are ashamed or afraid, or both, to own and
defend them: Therefore they put this Varnish upon their Works of Darkness, as
those false Coiners do; who, to cover their Brass, or other base Metal, cover
and gloss it over with Silver, and then, for the present, it will pass with
many; but this was soon seen, and discovered, and accounted to be not worth the
noticing; But alas, such is the Stupidity of the ignorant Followers of the
Quakers, and the cunning Craftiness of their Ringleaders, that it does great
Hurt amongst them; and for their sakes, these Wiles of Satan ought to be laid
open. But I commend Father Penn; he had more Wit in his Anger, than to recite
the Clergy's Fifth Charge, as by them stated; he is not such a Fool; but do
know, that the Light within, AS taught by the Quakers, leaves them without any
certain Rule, and exposes them to those Errors and Blasphemies the Clergy
charged them with, and many other Errors. And therefore, when he had Occasion,
in their new sham Bristol-Creed, to recite it, he politickly left out the Word
AS, and said, The Light within us, taught by us, seeming thereby to know very
well, that the Light within, AS taught by them, did expose them, etc. But I
having first replied to John Fiddiman, etc. who by the Sameness of the
Arguments, seems to be the Author of this Letter; but I rather take it to be
John Field, for the Reasons given. And next, not only the Clergy, but my self
have fully proved this Fifth Charge, viz. That the Light within, AS taught by
the Quakers, leaves them without any certain Rule, and exposes them to the
recited Blasphemies by the Clergy; which was,

I. Blasphemy against God. II. Blasphemy against Jesus Christ. III. Blasphemy
against the Holy Scriptures.
I say, these things being first proved by the Clergy in their Book, A Brief
Discovery, etc. and by me, by way of additional Proof, because one Book may
come where another does not; and not only so, but from many Instances out of
the Scriptures I have from thence showed; that the Way, Manner and Method of
the Quakers Teaching, is directly contrary to the Way, Manner and Method of the
Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, and all Christian Churches to this Day; but
that I may, so far as I can safely pursue the Method directed to, by this
obscure Author, I shall now proceed to distinguish between the Doctrine of the
Christian Ministers of the Church of England, and the Doctrine of the Quakers,
out of their Books, and so vindicate the one, and reject the other.

The Tree is known (says he) by its Fruit.

The Clergy's Doctrine.
They preach Faith in the Crucified Jesus, who was Born of the Virgin Mary, and
with St. Peter they agree, who said, Mat. 16.16. in Answer to the Question,
which Christ put to his Disciples, v. 13. Whom do Men say that I the Son of Man
am? Thou art (said Peter) Christ, the Son of the Living God. They agree also
with St. Peter, Acts 5.30, 31. The God of our Fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye
slew and hanged on a Tree: Him has God exalted with his Right Hand, to be a
Prince, and a Savior, for to give Repentance to Israel, and Forgiveness of
Sins. They preach and believe according to St. John's Gospel, John 5.22. For
the Father judges no Man, but has committed all Judgment unto the Son. V. 27.
And have given him Authority to execute Judgment also, because he is the Son of
Man. And they Believe and Teach all other necessary Truths out of the Holy
Scriptures, and have many Witnesses, that their Doctrine tend (to all who
receive the Truth in the Love of it) to open their Hearts, and are thereby
turned from Darkness, to the Light of the Glorious Gospel; and from Sathan's
Power, Reign and Government, to the Power, Providence and Protection of God
Almighty, in order to receive Forgiveness of Sins, through a Sincere and Hearty
Repentance, and an Humble Confession; and beging Pardon of the same, for the
sake of Christ, our alone Mediator and Advocate, and through Faith in his Name.
All this they Preach and Teach, according to the Holy Scriptures; though I grant,
that where it is not mixed with Faith in the Hearers, there is no profiting to
such; nor were they profited by the Sermons of Christ, or his Apostles, who did
not believe, though they might receive the Lord's Supper, as Judas did, and be
Baptized, as Simon Magus was: So that the Ministry is not to be blamed, in that
such as resist the Truth, and rebel against it, are not profited.

The Quakers Doctrine.
They Teach, that the Person that suffered at Jerusalem was not properly the
Son of God: That he was only a Vail, a Garment, a Vessel, etc. which they can
never call Christ: That the Name [Christ] belongs to every believing Quaker, as
well as to the Head: That all Power in Heaven and Earth is committed to the
Light [Within]; and for this, they quote John 5.22. They Teach, that the Son of
Man was before the Incarnation: That they cannot pray for the Priests, but for
their Destruction: That the Ministers that Preach Christ without, and bid
People believe in him, as he is in Heaven above, are false Ministers: They
teach likewise, that the Light in them is Christ, and that this Christ does
offer up himself in them, a Sacrifice to God, by which the Wrath and Justice of
God is appeased: They teach, that the very Christ of God is Within them, and
that in them he does Intercede for them, They teach, that upon, and for these
Reasons, there is not that need of Publishing or Preaching the Literal
Knowledge of Christ; for say they, the Historical Knowledge of Christ is
believed by all sorts, pretending to Christianity; His Death, His Miracles, His
Rising, His Ascending into Heaven. See Quakerism Exposed, etc. p. 55. Sheet to
the Parliament, 1693. and my other Books, set forth these Proofs out of the
Quakers most noted Authors, only I here abstract; for it is to show the
Tendency of their Doctrine, and wherein it differs from the Christian Religion.

The Clergy's Doctrine.
They teach according to St. Paul, Phil. 2.10. That God has highly exalted
Christ, and given him a Name above every Name: They teach, that His Sufferings
were Meritorious, and that the Sufferings of the Martyrs was the Seed of the
Church: They teach, that the Holy Scriptures are the Word of God, and Rule of
Faith and Practice to Mankind, and of greater Authority than any other Book:
They Preach out of it to the People, according to the usual Custom of the
Church, both Jewish and Christian, having the Example of Christ himself, Luke
4. And as his Custom was, he went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath Day, and
stood up for to read, and there was delivered unto him the Book of the Prophet
Isaiah; and when he opened the Book, he found the place where it was written,
etc. See also 1 Chronicles. 34.18, 19, 35. Nehem. 8.1, 2. Ezra 1.10, 11. They Teach
and Practice the Commands of Christ, Matthew. 28.19, 20. Go ye therefore, and
teach all Nations Baptizing, etc. Luke 22.19, 20. Do this in Remembrance of me.
When they pray, they say after this manner, according to Christ's Precept and
Command, Matthew. 6. Our Father, etc. Forgive us, etc. They Teach Subjection to
Magistrates, according to Matthew. 22.21. Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 17. Romans
13.1, 2, 3. Wives to their Husbands, according to Ephesians. 5.22. 1 Pet. 3.1. Col.
3.18. Tit. 2.5. Genesis 3.16. Numb. 30. And all other Christian Duties; and this I
take to be a Proof of their Ministry.

The Quakers Doctrine.
They teach, that the Name Christ belongs to every Believer, as well as to the
Head; utterly denying the Person that suffered to be the Son of God: They
teach, that the Sufferings of the Quakers in this Age are Greater, and more
Unjust, than in the Days of Christ and his Apostles, and Martyrs, or any time
since: They teach, that the Scriptures are not the Word of God, nor Rule of
Faith and Practice; and that it is Conjuration to Preach out of them; and that
they are Death, Dust, Serpents Meat, Beastly Ware. They question whether Moses
or Hermes was the first Author of them; and teach, that what good Men spoke was
ill expressed, what wise Men spoke was ill applied, and that what the true
Prophets spoke was false, and what the false Prophets spoke was true, at least
some of all these four Instances, which tend to overthrow the Divine Authority
of the Scriptures. See their Book, The Quakers Refuge fixed, etc. p. 17. They
also teach, that what they Speak [or Write] from the Spirit of Truth, is of
greater Authority than the Bible: They teach, that no Command in Scripture is
any further obliging to them, than they are convinced by their Light Within of
their Duty of Obedience; and thereupon throw off Baptism, the Lord's Supper;
affirming (in Penn's Reason against Railing, etc. p. 108, 109.) that
Circumcision is as much in force as Water Baptism, and the Paschal Lamb as
Bread and Wine: -- I do Renounce (says he, and in him all the Quakers) and can
testify from the same Spirit, by which Paul renounced Circumcision, that they
are rejected, as not now required, etc. and accordingly they have rejected
universally these two Ordinances. Instituted by Christ himself this 49 Years.
They teach by their Practice and Example, that it is not necessary to make
Confession of Sins to God, nor to ask Pardon for Christ's sake; nor can they
produce one Proof out of their Books that so teach: They teach, that their
Light within is the Magistrate, the Husband, etc. and that no Obedience is due
to either, when the Commands of either Magistrate or Husband contradict their
Light Within. To which they add, that all Power in Heaven and Earth is
committed to their Light, and that every Soul ought to be subject to it, as to
the higher Power; quoting John 5.22. See Coale's Works, p. 93. and Smith's
Primer, p. 13. And upon this Supposition they leave out of their Marriage
Certificates the Wifes Promise of Obedience to her Husband; insomuch, that I
have heard some of the Women Quakers say, that they saw no Reason, either to
Submit to, or Reverence their Husbands.

I might proceed to a Thousand Things more of this Nature, to show the
Disparity of the Doctrine of the Christians, and the Doctrine of the Quakers;
but this may show which are Christ's Ministers, and which are Antichristian
Seducers: And they are not changed; they tell you so, only see Cause to word
the Matter otherwise, whilst they intend the same thing: As Whitehead, that
Forger, says in Print, and by the honestest of the Quakers have been thought to
be a Jesuit; only his Writings are not solid enough.

Now if this obscure Author thinks I misrepresent the Doctrine of the Quakers,
let him pull off his Mask, and come forth, and meet me, and I will prove what I
say, from the Quakers Books, upon timely notice: For though Dr. Aldredge, Dean of
Christ's-Church-Colledge in Oxford, has bought my Quaker-Books, and given them
to the Colledge-Library, to remain as Monuments of the Quakers Errors, and
Blasphemous Principles, yet I can have them at a Months Notice: For there they
are set in order; first, Fox's Journal, next Muggleton and Reeve's Works, which
contain more than a Thousand Pages in Quarto; next Fox's Great Mystery; then
Burrough's, Fisher's, Smith's, Hubberthorn's, Bayly's, Coale's, and other
Folio's, besides many of the Books of Penn's, Whitehead's, and others of the
Quakers most eminent Writers, about 300 in number: As Nayler's, Lawson's,
Atkinson's, Howgill's, Pennington's, and others; and I am still getting more to
add to them: And let this serve for an Advertisement, where a Stock of their
Books may be seen, together with all I have wrote, bound up together, as a
Testimony against their gross Errors, and pernicious Principles.

Again, Whereas this Night-Bird pretends, that Mr. Archer accounts the Quakers
Orthodox, in that he did acknowledge the present Quakers then there at
West-Dereham, upon their Acknowledgment of their Belief of certain sound
Articles of the Christian Faith, on Condition they would condemn their
Blasphemous Books. This is no more than I and every charitable Man ought to do:
But when he see they refused to perform the Condition of his Acknowledgement,
the very next Sunday in his Pulpit, he did declare, in my Hearing, to all his
Congregation, that the Quakers Books contained the ancient Heresies of the
Sabellians, Arians, etc. and the late Heresies of the Socinians, Papists, etc.
And this shows his Sense of Quakerism, and that is far enough from approving
Quakerism to be Consistent with Christianity: No; he is an Ancient, Sober and
Sound Orthodox Christian, and an Able Minister of the Gospel, and a witness
against Heretics and Deceivers, and have often warned his People against
adhering to their cunning Slights, whereby they lie in wait to deceive.

But says this Corner Scribe, p. 6. The High Priest had a Judas at work for
Money, to betray Christ into their Hands; have not you a Judas? etc. Indeed, if
the Name Christ belongs to every Believer, as well as to the Head Christ, as
the Quakers teach, then to Fox, Whitehead, Penn, as well as to him that
suffered at Jerusalem: And upon that foot this Insinuation might have some
Color, and but some Color. For First, I did not go to the Priests for Money
to discover them, as Judas did, to betray Christ, it is well known, that for
them, whilst with them, I spent my Money freely: And when I came to withstand
some of their Pernicious Ways, I did not print and expose them presently, but
went to them, and in a friendly manner, let them see wherein they did not walk
uprightly, according to their Pretensions, First, In exacting Hat-Honour of
their Apprentices, Servants, and Inferiors, whilst they daily refused it to
their Superiors. Secondly, In advising their Hearers to be bold, to give up
all; and made an Edict, That they should constantly meet (whilst the Law
prohibited their Meetings under great Penalties) and neither Forsake, Decline,
nor Remove their Meetings, like Worldly, Fearful, and Politic Professors,
meaning the Presbyterians, Independants and Baptists, whilst they themselves
would give up nothing, but to keep themselves from suffering with their
Brethren, refused to declare their Names and Habitations, whereby they might
stand in a like suffering Capacity with their People, whom they thus exhorted
to Boldness and Courage, and to give up all; telling them the Fleece would grow
again; insomuch, as that in the Loss of 13550 l. and odd Pounds, the Teachers
never lost 50 l. as at large showed in my Book, The Painted Harlot Stripped and
Whipped, etc. p. 5, to 40. Thirdly, I showed them also their Hypocrisy, in
pleading to the Magistrates for Liberty of Conscience, when they themselves
imposed on the Consciences of their Disciples, the Observation of Women's
Meetings, and other Innovations, which Fox set up, under pretense of a Motion
from the Spirit of God, when he took the Headship upon him, as at large in my
Book, De Christ. Lib. etc. But did I print and expose them, before I privately
dealt with them? I tell you nay, those Books will show what Pains I took, by
Personal Conferences, by Letters and Propositions for an Accommodation and
Reformation amongst our selves, Two Years together, and more, before I printed;
but when all my Endeavors could not prevail, the last Means, to show and
discover their Hypocrisy, was printing, which is and has been the Method of
all Reformed Protestants, upon their Separation from Rome's Superstition and
Idolatry; and all this many Years, even until 1697. at my own Cost, until by
the Quakers prosecuting me, by their Books, by their Indictments in the
Old Bailey, London; by their Clamorous Tongues, and Defaming Libels; together
with diverse of them, and others breaking in my Debt, I was reduced, and made
incapable of maintaining my Post, and their common Bank was too Powerful for
me: But I have Two or Three Questions to ask this obscure Author (and if a
Member of the Church of England, which yet I question) a Judas. First, Are all
that separate from the Church of England, and write against her, Judases? If
so, how many Thousand Judases are there among the Quakers? Secondly, Are all
that receive Money to support them in their Livelihoods, Judases? Then G.
Whitehead, Fox, Cater, and all or most of the Quaker-Teachers are such. If not,
why may not, the Church of England be charitable, in their supporting their
Members, without being compared to the Jews, who Crucified the Lord of Life and
Glory, as well as the Quakers.

And Thirdly, If this obscure Author be a Member of the Church of England,
which I do not grant, but believe him to be a Quaker in Disguise, or at least
one nearly related to them, peradventure a Muggletonian, a Deist, a Socinian, a
Ranter, or a Jesuit. But still, suppose he be a Member of the Church of
England, has he gone to the Clergy? Has he spoke privately to them, and
endeavor a Reformation? And when that would not do, has he gone to their
Governors in a Regular way, and that for Two or Three Years together, as I did,
before he exposes them in Print, saying, p. 5. Let me go where I will, you are
all charged with one thing or other amiss: Some with Covetousness, some with
Pride, some with Drunkenness, indeed what not? For most Folks will have one
Story or other to tell of a Parson. Perhaps you would say, that is no new thing; the
great Lord Jesus was called a Wine-Bibber, a Friend to Publicans and Sinners;
and Paul was called a Sinner, and a Babbler. But, Sirs, remember this, those
that accused Christ and his Apostles were not of the same Society or Communion
with them; they were Unbelievers: But these that accuse you are Men of our own
Church, etc.

I say, did this Judas ever go to any of these Ministers, whom he thus secretly
smites at? If not, he can be no true Son of the Church, but some base-born
Bastard Brat, of Ham's Family; and this may be the Reason, why he is ashamed of
his Name: But may not I say the like of the Quakers? (for I am as much a Quaker
as he is a true Son of the Church) Do not I here, where ever I come, (or may I
not, if I were industriously concerned to find out their Immoralities) find
something or other amiss, even amongst their Teachers and Writers, and
Defenders of their Faith? Yea, that I do, or may, if I will. How that some are
Covetous, some are Drunkards ( alias wet Quakers,) some are Proud, some have
been Traitors to their Country, some have been hanged for Felony. See my
Pilgrim's Progress, etc. But says this base-born obscure Scribler, Sirs,
remember, those that called Christ and his Apostles Wine bibbers, Publicans and
Sinners, were not of Christ's and the Apostles Commanion, but those that accuse
the Clergy are of the same Communion; and therefore, what Fran. Bugg and other
Apostates say, let it be ever so true, let them have Witnesses to prove what
they say; let them name the Persons; let them particularize their Enormities;
tell them when and where; Day, Month, and Year, with all other demonstrable
Arguments; all this is nothing, the Quakers are still innocent, still
blameless, and true Ministers of Christ. A special Son of the Church of England
indeed, as Men sometimes speaks by the Rule of Contraries: No, nothing avails,
unless I can produce as good a Member of the Schism of Quakerism, to testify
against the Quaker-Teachers, as he is of the Church of England, who thus
exposes the Clergy, all will not do: But then, to suit him, and to bring an
equal Parallel, and of which too I can bring many Witnesses, to strengthen and
corroborate her Evidence, it shall be Anne Docwra, of Cambridge, eldest
Daughter of William Waldgrave of Buers, Son of Sir William Waldgrave the
younger. I know she loves to have it known that she came of a Family above the
common Size, as well as this obscure Author loves to have the Testimony of them
of the same Communion, and I am willing herein to gratify them both: And now
let us hear what she says of the Quaker-Teachers; namely, That they are the
most confident Liars that ever she met with; that they are abuseful Forgers,
and suspected to be Jesuits; as like Knights of the Post, as one Pea is like
another: That it is common with them to set the Names of their tame Vassals to
Books and Certificates; and that such as refuse Submission, to ruin them, both
in their Trades and Reputations: That their separate Men's Meetings are
Nurseries of Contention, and dangerous to the Peace of the Nation, and serve to
little Purpose, but to shelter great Bellies, and to ingross the Properties of
their honest Friends, whilst the Vicious, the Proud, the Covetous, and lying
Hypocrites, are covered and protected: It is very sad (says she) that Men
should be so confident in their Wickedness.

And now I will appeal to all good Christians, who have read the Histories of
the Popish Councils, and Club of Cardinals, whether ever there were a more
deceitful Tribe of Men. All this I believe is true, and know the greatest part
of it to be so; and I know also much more of the same Nature, and of as deep a
Dye, which I have set forth in my Pilgrim's Progress. But to humor this
pretended Member of the Church of England, (whilst yet I have Grounds to
believe him to be a real Quaker) I have produced the Testimony of a real
Quaker, and one that has been a Quaker nigh 30 Years, and now in the Unity,
that so it may have the more weight with him, and be a Means to bring him out;
to pull off his Mask, and to appear in his own Sanguine Complexion.

But that we may not want Evidence of what the Quaker-Teachers are, not to
mention the many Quotations, which I could bring out of the Books, wrote
against the Quakers Errors by the Presbyterians, Independants and Baptists,
(who, agreeable to the Church of England hold the Fundamentals of Christianity;
however, differing in some Ceremonies relating to Discipline, Order and
Government) which would be too voluminous here to recite; yet having their
Judgment of the Fruits and Doctrines of Quakerism, well attested, I shall here
incert it, that so the Professors of Christianity, whether the Church of
England, or the Protestant Dissenters, who agree in the main, may stand by
themselves on the one Hand, studying the things that make for Peace, and the
Increase of Love and mutual Forbearance one with another; all striving together
for the Maintenance of the common Cause of Christianity; and the Quakers,
Ranters, Muggletonians, and their Brethren, the Deists, Socinians, and
Mahometans, whose Principles and Doctrine tend to subvert the Christian Faith,
and to overturn both Church and State, may stand in their proper place; I say,
for this end shall I subjoin their Testimony against Quakerism, and with which
I find the Church of England have great Unity, and with it I shall conclude
this short Tract, viz.

That the Quakers render the Holy Scriptures to be of no more Authority than
Esop 's Fables: That the Blood of Christ is no better than the Blood of another
Saint; that the Quakers are the Spawn of the Ranters; that the Quakers owning
of Christ is no more than a Mystical Romance; that the Tendency of all the
Quakers reasoning about Instituted Religion is to debauch Mankind; that their
Principles improved are destructive to all Humane Society; that their Teachers
are Cheats and Impostors, and Implacable Enemies to the Christian Religion.

And as I believe their Testimony herein to be Truth, so I do also hereby
testify and declare, that what I have wrote in my former Books, and what I
have herein wrote, respecting their Errors, I do profess before God, Angels and
Men, that I believe what I have wrote; nor am I conscious to my self, that I
have wronged them, but am still ready to meet George Whitehead upon the Terms
proposed in my Pilgrim's Progress from, Quakerism to Christianity, etc. p. 172.
and to prove my Charge therein exhibited, as well from Matter of Fact, as
Argument; the former being already done at West-Dercham Church in Norfolk, Dec.
the 9th. School. in the Presence of several Gentlemen, Justices of the Peace;
many of the Clergy of the Church of England, and many Hundreds more of Persons
of Note. A Certificate thereof is incerted in my Book, Quakerism Exposed to
Public Censure, etc. in the Preface.

May 25. 1699. Francis Bugg.

Postscript to the READER.
Reader,
AS it was the Manner and Way of the Quakers in the beginning, to carry out
their Books to great Towns and Cities to spread Quakerism, so have I taken some
Pains to disperse my Books, as an Antidote against the Growth of Quakerism,
upon which I find their Rage increase against me, and the Proverb is, Words go
before Blows: And remembering what Mr. Young, an Independent Minister, told me
and George Keith, in the Presence of diverse others, that he having some Dispute
with Jacob Francklyn about Will. Penn's Doctrine, Jacob Francklyn grew high and
hot, and told him he deserved to be banged; and soon after, in Moorfields, the
said Mr. Young was knocked down, was carried into a House all bruised and
bloody, but not robbed, though both a Watch and Money in his Pocket: And George
Whitehead, the last time I saw him in Jewen-street, threatened me, that God's
Judgments would pursue me, and that now I write against I know not certainly
who. And knowing it is dangerous fighting in the Dark, and they that can thus
color over a Quaker with the Name of a Member of the Church of England, I have
great Reason to fear they can procure one to murder my Body, as well as my
Name, and then say he is none of them, 'twas some Member of the Church of
England. I do therefore most solemnly declare, that if I come to an untimely
Death, that I lay it to the Charge of the Quakers.

May the 5th. 1699. Francis Bugg.

FINIS.

