THE QUAKERS Set in their true Light, In order to give the Nations A Clear
SIGHT.

Of what they hold concerning Jesus of Nazareth, the Scriptures, Water Baptism,
the Lords Supper, Magistracy, Ministry, Laws, and Government.

HISTORICALLY COLLECTED Out of their most approved Authors, which are their
best Construing books, from the year of their Rise 1650, to the year of their
Progress 1696.

By Francis Bugg, Senior.

But evil men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being
deceived; For as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist
the truth: Men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith; whose mouths
must be stopped, who subvert whole households; but they shall proceed no
farther, for their folly shall be made manifest unto all men. 2 Timothy 3.8, 9,
13. Titus 3.11. LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by C. Brom,
at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's, and J. Guillim, Bookseller in
Bishopsgate-street, 1696.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND HENRY, L. Bishop of London.
My Lord,
I Humbly conceive it my duty to discover to your Lordship what I apprehend may
be of dangerous consequence either to Church or State: And this emboldens me to
offer the ensuing discourse to your Lordships pious consideration. I must
humbly confess it is a great presumption upon your Honors Patience and
Patronage: But that which (amongst other things) gives me encouragement
hereunto, and which I hape may plead my excuse, at least extenuate my offense,
is the Quakers frequent Dedications and Presentations of their Books to the
King, Lords and Commons, and other Magistrates, from year to year, one Sessions
of Parliament after another, for thirty or forty years together, beseeching,
begging, and craving their aid, support and authority; whilst in their Books to
their Disciples they utterly disclaim any such seeking to outward authority:
But instead thereof, when not suiting their Interest they will Impeach and
Condemn their proceeding as Antichristian, and Arraign, Try and Condemn the
Learned Protestant Clergy, as inconsistent to Christianity. Thus, like the
Camelion, they can turn themselves into all colors, their Books being of two
sorts, carrying two different faces: And it was by this method that the Arians
of old deceived the Emperor Constantius, who at last made Laws in their behalf,
against the Orthodox. And that this is no new Artifice your Lordship may
observe from the book of Exodus; that notwithstanding Moses was divinely
inspired and gifted witb Miracles to confirm his Commission, yet the Magicians
by their Magic Act and cunning Intreagues came very near him in show: likewise
Simon Magus, Acts 8. by his Sorcery and Juggling Tricks, so bewitched the
Samaritans, that they gave great heed to all he said. And History sufficiently
informs us what hard work the Protestants had to confute the Papists, whose
Books were like the Quakers, of two sorts, professing in one sort, what they
utterly rejected in the other sort: And this made Bishop Jewel in his Defense
to the Apology, etc. propose to his Reader, viz. Good Reader, if thou will
examine our doings, I beseech thee search and prove what has been wrote on
both sides, and do not suffer thy self by shows and shifts to be beguiled, for
what man will seem to deal so uprightly as a Juggler; he will strike up his
sleeves, make bare his arms, and open his hands and fingers, and bid thee
behold: And thou will think him to be a good plain man, and marvel thou
should possibly be deceived, and yet indeed his whole design is nothing but
to deceive thee: and the more simply and plainly he would seem to deal, so much
the more he will deceive thee, otherwise he were no Juggler, etc. And to this
agrees that notable saying of Ireneaeus, in his third Book against Heretics,
viz. Whilst Heretic speak like the faithful, they not only mean otherwise than
what they say, ^^^ clean contrary: And by their Tenants, full of Blasphemy,
they destroy the Souls of those, who with their fair words suck in the poison
of their foul opinions. And no marvel (says St. Paul) for Satan himself is
transformed into an Angel of Light; therefore it is no great thing if his
Ministers also be transformed as the Ministers of Righteousness, whose end
shall be according to their works, 2 Cor. 13.14.

And, my Lord, being sensible of the Quakers method, not only of their unw^
^y'd solicitation of the Members of Parliament, both Lords and Commons, for
many years; but also in sending their Books into all Counties, Shires, Cities,
Towns and Villages in England and Wales, as well as parts beyond the Seas, I
thought it my duty to let the World know their principles from their Printed
Books: For, as simple as they look, and as innocent as they seem to appear, for
deep subtilty they outstrip both Jew and Jesuit; and notwithstanding their many
and great pretenses to meeknes^ charity, and long-suffering, there is not a
more uncharitable and cens^^ (...) people under heaven. I am

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble and obedient Servant, Fr. Bugg.

An Apologetical Introduction to the History of the Rise, Growth, and Progress
of QUAKERISM.
Friendly Reader,
IF Athanasius made an Apology for his writing against the Arians, and other of
late for their exposing the errors of the Socinians; nay, if the Church of
England thought herself obliged to Apologize (in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth)
for writing against the errors of the Papists; it is but reasonable for me to
think myself under the same Obligation for writing against the dangerous errors
of the Quakers; for surely there has not appeared a more complete Monster upon
the Stage since the days of Simon Magus, than George Fox was in his day; nor
did Simon Magus more applaud himself, nor more of his Followers adore him; nor
take greater care to continue the Memory of him, than the Quakers have done of
G. Fox, witness the reprint of his Labors, his Travels, his Miracles and
Wonders: Insomuch, that what many Ages have perplexed the Church withal singly,
we are assaulted with at once; as if the scattered Limbs of Heresy had rallied
and reinforced themselves for a fresh Battle. I have seen Muggleton's
Transcendent Spiritual Treatise, etc. and I cannot find that he holds pace with
George Fox in his Books, Truths Defense, etc. Saul's Errand, etc. A Threefold
Estate of Antichrist, etc. and diverse other Books wrote formerly, and which
they ^^ill own commend, and recommend to their Disciples, as Books wrote by
divine Authority, yea from the Eternal Spirit, and Power of God; see Sect. the
XVI. Nay, in many things Muggleton and the Quakers seem to be Twins: For
Muggleton says, it is not lawful to fight with a Sword of Steel, so say the
Quakers; at least until they get power into their hands, as in Pensilvania,
where they can both fight with a Carnal Sword, fine, imprison, and persecute
their Brethren, as the Trial of G. Keith, and others, sets forth at large.
Muggleton denies the Blessed Trinity, so do the Quakers; see W. Pen's Sandy
Foundation Shaken, etc. Muggleton despises the Scriptures, in comparison of
his own Writings, so do the Quakers; see Sect. the XVI. and XVIII. Muggleton
pretends to know any thing, so do the Quakers, who say, We have a Spirit given
to us beyond all the Forefathers since the Apostles day: and we can discern
who are Saints, who are Devils, and who are Apostates, without speaking ever a
word, G. Fox 's Gr. Mist. etc. p. 89. And again, We need none to give us
discerning or judgment, Christ has furnished us already, and does on all
occasions, etc. Judas and the Jews, etc. p. 58. Muggletons Disciples adore him
as an excellent Prophet, so do the Quakers adore G. Fox, see Sect. V. Muggleton
is greatly given to curse and damn such as receive not his Message, so do the
Quakers; read their Books before named: Only for a Taste I may recite a few of
G. Fox his words to Mr. Calmfeild a Minister, in their Book, Truths Defense,
etc. viz. Thou painted Beast, thou art damned openly; I charge thee to be a
Witch, and bewitch the People: Brazen-faced thou art, for thou art a Beast,
thou blind Sot; for Destruction thou art ordained to go therein, and the Lake
that burns, and the Pit thou art to be turned into eternally: No Prayer can
we send to thee but for thy Destruction; thou art a Serpent, thou Man of Sin,
and Son of Perdition, a Child of the Devil, an Enemy of all Righteousness, etc.
with abundance more of the like tendency lie dispersedly in the said Book.

But notwithstanding all that can be quoted out of their Books which justly
render them Antichristian, Antiscriptural, and Antimagistratical, etc. yet they
have many Advocates, and some Arguments, as well as the Arians, Socinians, etc.
And the same cause move to the same thing, and this move me to Apologize, etc.

For although I am short of the gifts and parts of those who wrote against the
aforesaid Errors (and for which they thought themselves obliged to Apologize)
yet I do believe, that as we are Christians, we ought to contend for the Faith
once delivered to the Saints; and my Conscience bears me witness, that I have
endeavored to defend the cause of the same truth, with the same purpose, and
by the same principles, so far forth as I am capable; and that it may appear
such I shall answer some objections.

1. Fra. Bugg, say the Quakers, endeavors to render us odious.

2. That his Printed Sheet delivered to the House of Commons was malicious.

3. That his impeaching our yearly Meeting was presumptuous.

4. That great part of what he writ is not of his own doing, etc.

1. That Fr. Bugg, and i^ to render the Quakers odious and obnoxious.

I most solemnly deny that my end in writing against them is to render them
odious; but to convince them of their erroneous Principles and Practices, to
warn others to take heed of them: And this cannot be done without showing what
they hold, nor better than from their own construing Book; and that this is my
way I appeal to the Christian Reader. Nay, further I have from time to time
endeavored to prevail with their Teachers to retract their errors, and condemn
their most blasphemous books, upon which I should have gladly desisted; and
since I begun this Book, I sent a Letter to G. W. to let him know that if he
would meet me according to his proposals in his printed sheet, entitled The
Quak. Vind. etc. delivered to the Parliament, that I would desist: giving him
ten days time, etc. But no answer returned I shall proceed: And let them not
blame me for exposing their errors and pernicious principles, since they are
too proud to retract and condemn them: And withal let them remember, that
notwithstanding the Proverb, it is a greater crime to steal a Horse than to look
on, unless the stander by consent, etc. So that it is worse in you to hold these
Errors, to write these Books, to justify these Blasphemies, than for me to
recite them, and lay them open to public view: So that it is a web of your own
weaving that I cover you withal, how frightfully soever you look: besides, if
you look into your Book, styled, Plain and peaceable Advice to Presbyterians,
etc. p. 1. you tell them, That their principle was to fight for their Religion,
and to promote the same by the power of the Sword, and that their Ministers
always labored to persuade them to it, etc. And at that juncture of time too,
when there was great talk of a Presbyterian Plot. Again, see your Answer to
John Faldo, p. 109. "And why poor Nonconformists after all their preached up
Battles, Spoils, Plunders, Sacrileges, etc. p. 119. Here are true Gospel
Ministers, whose Gospel is peace on earth, and good will toward men; and not
garments rolled in the Blood of Kings, Princes, Rulers, and People; no worldly
Armies, Battles, Victories, Trophies, Spoils, Sequestration, Decimations, and
the like blood-thirsty and tyrannical projects, etc.

And yet at the same time when the Presbyterians were engaged as the Quakers
would insinuate; none preached up Battles, Murder, and Slaughter more than the
Quakers, as I could show at large, but choose rather to refer the Reader to The
Snake in the Grass, etc.

But why do they talk of exposing; who ever exposed, nay who ever slandered and
belied their Adversaries, both in words, writing, and printing, more than the
Quakers have done? who ever called the Public Ministers, Witches, Devils,
Blasphemers, false Prophets, etc. as they have done. And this was the War Edw.
Burrows talked, and by which they began, see his Epist. to G. Fox his Gr. Mist.
etc. viz. And first of all our mouths were opened, and our spirit filled with
indignation against the Priests and Teachers, and against them we first began
to war, as being the Causers of the people to err; yea the fountain of all
wickedness, the issue of profaneness, the Antichrists, etc. And this was (says
Burrows) the first work we entered upon, to thresh down the deceivers, and to
lay them open, that all people might see their shame, and turn from them, etc.

Come G. Whitehead let us turn the Scales, and try if you can be willing to be
dealt by as you have dealt by others, and whether you can freely drink (drink
it you must whether you will or no) the same Cup that you have plentifully
poured out to others: you began with the Clergy, and I begin with the Quakers;
your mouth was open, and your spirit filled with indignation against the
Clergy, because they preached out of the Scripture, called Baptism and the
Lords Supper Ordinances of Christ; and my mouth is open, (to use your phrase)
and my Spirit is filled wieh indignation against the Quakers contemning the
Scripture, profaning the Ordinances, and Idolizing each other.

Your first work you entered upon was to thresh down the Clergy, as the
fountain of wickedness, the issue of profaneness, and the deceivers of the
Nation; and to lay them open, that all people might see their shame, and turn
from them: And now my work I am entered upon is to thresh down Quakerism, as
the pest of the Nation, the fountain of wickedness, the issue of profaneness,
the deceivers of the people, and the broachers of damnable heresies, and to lay
them open, that all people may see your shame, and in abhorrence of your
abomination to turn from you. Come G. W. look for the same measure, for you are
like to have it heaped, thrust down, and running over. Come George remember
your Brother Pen, who in his Book, The Skirmish defeated, etc. being told that
the womb of Iniquity was in the Quakers Writings, said p. 10. He has invaded my
body and soul, religion and life: for I am ( said W. Pen) by my doctrine, if
the Priest may be believed, an Heretic, a Blasphemer, an Atheist, etc. And
what remains but that the Dogs or the Lions devour me, the Rabble or the
Government sacrifice me, etc. And I pray, good Mr Pen, what are the Priests, if
the Quakers may be believed, are they not Witches, Devils, Blasphemers,
Antichrists, etc. I say, if what you say may be credited, what are they good
for, but the Dogs or Lions to tear them to pieces, the Rabble and the
Government to sacrifice them, saying there goes a Witch, read Exodus 22.18.
which says it is death: here goes a Blasphemer, stone him to death, Lev. 24.16.
Here goes a false Prophet, who is not to live, Deuteronomy. 18.20. knock him down:
thus in every Town where you come to get credit, you have invaded their Soul
and Body, Religion and Life: Come smooth G. W. is not this seditious in the
nature of it? You know Westmorland Petitioners told you so.

2. That my sheet delivered to the House of Commons, Dec. 1693. was malicious.

Answ. Reader, I will give you some account of the reason of it. I having
occasion to attend the Parliament by way of solicitation about our Trade,
1693. there was every day 4 or 5 Quakers up and down attending also; at last
they presented a fine smooth printed paper, styled The Case of the People
called Quakers humbly offered to the tender Consideration of the House of
Commons, to incline them to grant the Petition of the said People, etc. The
Petition was to have their Word pass for an Oath, that they might be Rivals
with the Peers of the Realm. But when I saw it, and considered how they but a
little before had indicted me for printing a Book unlicenced, when I was 60
miles off, and they got them seized, and taken from my Bookseller;
notwithstanding they frequently print and publish without License: and also
considering how by little and little they are getting ground, and knowing what
a litigious People they would be, if there was not that Bar to keep them out
of Government, I took their printed fine wheedling sheet, and answered it; and
did immediately deliver the Answer to it to the Members, as I think it was my
duty; and it was as kindly accepted by the Members: and the very same day, I
delivered my said Answer to their Case their Petition was thrown out, to the
great joy of all Christian People; and notwithstanding G. W.'s belying Mr.
Goldwell, I had his leave and hearty ascent to deliver it, and never had of him
a word of dislike for all I have writ, nor of none such as he was.

3. That my Impeaching their yearly meeting was presumptuous.

Answ. If so? But why then did you teach me the way: See Buroughs works,
printed by the order and approbation of Geo. Whitehead, Anno 1672. p. 793.
styled, Persecution Impeached as a Traitor against God. Now all your wilful
sufferings for your obstinate disobedience to the Laws of the Land, by you are
called Persecution, and that you have the presumption to Impeach all the
Judges, Justices, and Inferior Officers, under the odious Name of Persecution,
why may not I for once. Impeach you who sit at Devonshire-house, to null, make
void, and repeal as unlawful, what the King, Lords and Commons, make lawful at
Westminster. And whether I be most presumptuous for telling you of your faults,
or you in committing them (for that is the great case between you and me) I will
leave the Reader to judge, when I have recited the said Impeachment and Proof,
as in the said sheet, viz.

The IMPEACHMENT.
That Geo. White and his Brethren, at a Convocation at London, the 5th of May,
1693. ending the 8th day of the same month, did contrive, make, and promulgate
several Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, containing in them diverse
matters and things, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, against the
Rights of Parliament, against the property of the subject, and matters tending
to Sedition, and of dangerous consequence; as may appear by the recited
Epistle. A few instances thereof as proof, I shall recite.

The IMPEACHMENT PROVED.
The Quak. Yearly Epist. 1693. p. 1. And therefore that all due care be taken
against the Grand Oppression and Antichristian Youk of Tithes, that our
Christian Testimony born and greatly suffered for be faithfully maintained
against them in all Respects, and against Steeplehouse Rates, as also against
the Burden and Imposition of Oaths; that Friends, at all their monthly and
quarterly Meetings, be reminded to call for the Records of the Sufferings of
Friends, to see that they be duly gathered, truly entered, and kept; and
accordingly sent up [to London] as has been often advised, both of what Tyths,
etc pretended to be due: and for how long a time, and the time when taken; and
by, and for whom; and what Goods are taken, and the value thereof; as well of
those not exceeding, as those exceeding the sums or quantities [of Tythes]
demanded (it being a suffering in both for truth sake) they being in these
particulars found defective and imperfect in diverse Counties, which is an
obstruction to the General Record of Friends Sufferings, etc.

Observation.
From whence we may conclude, that the main reason why the Quakers refuse to
pay their Tyths and Church Rates, and other things which the Government calls
for at their hands, is the Authority of their Yearly Meetings, and not
Scripture Proof; and where is there a Parish in England, but feel (more or
less) the sad effects and evil consequences of these their Antimagistratical
Encroachments; besides it looks very ill and ungrateful to charge the
Government with Persecution for Tithes, which is a civil right established by
Law. Yea even in that very Act of Parliament which gave them their Tolleration;
and which some, if not all these Anti-Lawmakers know well enough, it is in fol.
308. thus,

Provided always that nothing herein contained shall be construed to exempt any
of the persons aforesaid from paying of Tithes, or other Parochial Duties, or
any other Duties, to the Church or Minister; or from any Prosecution in any
Ecclesiastical Court, or elsewhere for the same.

And I knowing these things, and considering their calling part of the
Parliaments proceedings in the very same Act of Parliament grand oppression,
yea an Antichristian Yoke of Bondage, and, as such, warn their Disciples not to
pay them; thereby acquitting and absolving the Kings Subjects (if the Quakers
be such) from their active obedience to the Laws of the Land; and which is
still worse, to cause them to bring up to London a true and perfect Inventory,
of all and singular the distresses taken for their non-payment of Tithes,
Churchwardens Rates, etc. and all this disobedience is in a great part owing
to the usurpation of this Anti-magistratical Synod or Convocation: Nor is this
all, but if their yearly Epistles (which they keep as close as possibly they
can) were all seen, you would see a hundred Instances of the like kind; one
more I may show, viz. In the 22d Year of King Charles the 2d, there was an Act
of Parliament made to prevent seditious Conventicles, and that no Meetings
above the number of four, besides the Family, were to beheld under pretense of
Religious Worship in other manner than according to the Liturgy of the Church
of England. But in direct opposition to this, the Quakers made a Law at their
Yearly Meeting, or Convocation held at Devonshire House the 27th of May 1675,
viz. So it is our Advice and Judgment, that all Friends Gathered in the Name of
Jesus keep up those public Testimonies (meaning their Meetings in their
respective places) and not decline, forsake, or remove their Public
Assemblies, because of times of sufferings, as worldly, fearful, and politic
Professors have done (meaning the Presbyterians, Independants and Baptists)
because of Informers, and the like Persecutors. Signed per G. Whitehead,
William Pen, etc.

Whereby it may be seen that their Principles and Doctrine are
Anti-magistratical and Unscriptural too, for said Christ, If they persecute
thee in one City flee to the next. And his Desciples met privately for fear of
the Jews, as more largely handled in my Book, The Painted Harlot both stripped
and whipped, etc. Thus much by way of Apology for my Impeaching the Quakers
presumptuous Proceedings in their Synodical Assembly.

4. That what I have wrote hithetto, or great part of it, is not of my own
doing but by the Assistance of Learned Persons.

Answer, I know it has been the way and manner of the Quakers, from the first
day I wrote against their Errors, to use all the ways and means they can to
blast my endeavors, and by lies and false insinuations to weaken my Testimony:
sometimes I write (say they) like a Fool, a Boy of 11 Years of Age will laugh
at it; when that will not do, then I write so much otherwise that it cannot be
my own; but some of the wicked Priests (as they account the Clergy) help me,
etc. And this being bruted abroad, several Gentlemen have desired me to give
some account thereof, which is as follows.

When G. W. in his charitable Essay, p. 2. charged me with Socinianism, saying,
Why did not thy Minister stop thee from running into such Socinianism, etc. I
went to Mr. Archer our Minister, and showed him the passage, and desired his
assistance all answering that particular. He read Whitehead s Essay, and my
Book to which his was pretended to be an Answer, and he told me that what I had
wrote was found; and he immediately took his Pen, and wrote part of the 3d and
4th pages in the Introduction of New Rome Arraigned, etc. And which I also in
the same page acknowledge in these words, And this my Minister tells me is not
Ignorance nor Socinianism; but your Books teach it, etc. And except this, I do
not know that ever I had any Clergyman or other Scholar by me an hour in all I
have wrote; nor six lines added or diminished by any such a one, nor has any
Man so much as seen this before I sent it to London for the Press. I do say
that my Book, New Rome Unm. etc. and New Rome Arraigned, etc. I did show to Mr.
Archer, and to another neighboring Minister a very worthy and learned person,
in Manuscript; and both of them might alter here and there a word, which in the
whole, in both Books, might contain 3 or 4 lines; but they altered no matter
neither by adding or diminishing, but very well approved of what I had done,
considering my capacity, as to Learning, and my business as a Tradesman. But
what if I had assistance I am not the first, better men than I am, and fitter
for such work, have had assistance. I could, if it were for my present purpose
show, that the very Quakers, who pretend they write by the Eternal Spirit
immediately from Heaven, they not only have assistance, but when their Books
come at their second days Meeting in London for Approbation, they then will
take out, and put to, what is said to be thus wrote in the Name of the Lord,
which is a most horrible cheat, for their message so wrote is either so, or not
so; if so, how unfaithful are these Seers to alter what was given forth in the
Name of the Lord; if not, see what Impostors are these Elders to approve of
what they believe is false: And yet how frequent is it with their Quaker
Teachers to question the truth of all men's sincerity but their own; charging
the Clergy to be False Prophets, etc. And now I do challenge G. W. and W. P. to
produce one Clergyman in the Nation, that ever prophesied in the Name of the
Lord, and the thing came ot to pass. But G. W. and W. Pen know, that it is
frequent with their Preachers so to prophesy, and are found false Prophets, in
that the thing comes not to pass, witness Sol. Eccles who prophesied, that John
Story should dye within a year, he being at that time ill, yet it pleased God
he lived about 4 years after. But why should they render me such an Ignoramus,
as that I should not be able to deal with the Quakers, who are not such
Conjurers themselves: I know they did not always account me so, when they chose
me to be their Representative, to go to the London meeting about Sufferings,
about the year 1670. Nor when I was Clerk to their monthly and quarterly
meetings 16 or 18 years together: Nor when they had their Register-book to new
model, and to add Ely sufferings to it; (which old Records being by me, serve
to show me many of their Intrigues, particularly Sam. Cater's sham-suffering,
for preaching at Plakenham in Norfolk, (where, pretending he lost 20 l. yet got
10 l. clear by it) See Sect. 17. etc.) as this License shows, viz.

Fra. Bugg we desire thee to draw out the sufferings out of the monthly Book,
and record them in the Public Register-books, and add Ely and Littleport
sufferings to the rest. Let them be done carefully and speedily, it being by
our Assent,

Robert Smith, Rob. Letchworth, Jeremy Rose, Joseph Nun, Edw. Wingfeild, Robert
Barber.

And thus much by way of Introduction.

Mildenhall, Jan. 15. 1695. FRANCIS BUGG, Sen.

A Brief HISTORY of the Rise, Growth, and Progress of QUAKERISM.
SECTION I.
THe first rise of Quakerism was in the year 1650. For George Fox coming to
Derby, and going into the Church to disturb the Minister, was by the Justices
committed to Prison, for that and his other blasphemous principles; and to this
agree Edw. Burrough's Epistle on the front of Geo. Fox's Great Mist. etc. And
this Justice Bennet was the first that ever called them Quakers: This I can
prove by other Books, but you may read it in Geo. Fox's Journal, p. 32. to 40.
And that it may plainly appear with what principles the Quakers came into the
world withal at their first entrance, you may read a Copy of the Warrant, by
which they were justly imprisoned, viz.

To the Master of the House of Correction in Derby.
We have here sent you the Bodies of Geo. Fox and John Fretwell, brought before
us this day, and charged with the avowing, uttering and broaching diverse
blasphemous opinions, which upon their examination before as they have
confessed: These are therefore to require you forthwith upon sight hereof, to
receive them the said G. Fox and J. Fretwell into your Custody, and them
therein safely to keep, during the space of six months, without Bail or
Mainprize, or until they shall find sufficient security to be of the good
behavior, or be thence delivered by order from our selves. Hereof you are not
to fail.

Given under our Hands and Seals this thirtieth day of October, 1650. Ger.
Bennet. Nath. Barton.



I was once minded to have set forth more particularly what principles they
came into the world withal, as I find them, even by the Quakers themselves, put
forth in a Book styled Readiness Errand to Damascus, p: 1, 2. which, tho they have
in the same Book pretended to answer the said Petition, yet I do positively
affirm that their said Answer looks more like a Confession than a sincere
Denial: As also the said Petition and their pretended Answer, being, with other
their Time-serving Treacherous principles, fully spoken to, in that excellent
Book lately put forth by a Divine of the Church of England, entitled, The
Snake in the Grass; or Satan transformed into an Angel of Light: Discovering
the deep and unsuspected subtilty, couched under the pretended simplicity of
the principal Leaders of the Quakers, Printed for Charles Brom, at the Gun at
the West End of St Paul's, 1696. containing about 600 pages; insomuch that
should I write after him, to show their facing about to every power, even as
the Weathercock, sometimes for the Parliament, sometimes for the Rump,
sometimes for the Committee of Safety, sometimes for the Council of State, and
then for Monarchy; and to show their encouraging Oliver against the Royal
party, it would be like lighting a candle at noonday: Their temporizing being
so excellently set forth in the said Book, yet that the World may see with what
principles they pressed into the world, against all Rule, Law and Government, I
may transcribe the said principles; because by what follows it may be seen what
foundation they went upon, which was under pretense of magnifying the Light in
themselves, to deny Jesus of Nazareth, to undervalue his death and sufferings,
contemn his Laws contained in the holy Scriptures, despise his Ordinances,
revile Magistrates, reproach Ministers: In a word, they not only by these
principles hereto annexed, but by their whole proceedings, have not only
verified what I have already said, but manifested their principles to be
Antiscriptural, Antimagistratical, Antichristian, unreasonable and irreligious.
An Abstract of the said Petition is as follows. Readiness Errand to Damascus,
etc. p. 1, 2.

To the Right Honorable the Council of State, the Humble Petition of several
Gentlemen, Justices of the Peace, Ministers of the Gospel, and People within
the County of Lancaster.
Humbly shows,
THat Geo. Fox and James Nailer are persons disaffected to Religion, and the
wholesome Laws of this Nation, who have broached opinions, tending to the
destruction of the Relation of Subjects to their Magistrates, Wives to their
Husbands, Children to their Parents, Servants to their Masters, Congregations
to their Ministers; particularly,

1. Geo. Fox professed that he was equal with God.

2. He professed himself to be the eternal Judge of the World: (meaning the
Light in him.)

3. He said he was the Judge of the World: (still with the same Inuendo I
suppose.)

4. He said he was the Christ, the Way, the Truth, and the Life: (still meaning
the Light: This I can prove from his Writings extant amongst the Quakers.)

5. He said, that whoever took a place of Scripture and preached from it was a
Conjurer, and his preaching Conjuration: (this is frequent in the Quakers
Books, yea, an approved piece of Doctrine.)

6. He said the Scripture was Carnal: (yea, Death, Dust, Serpents meat, Beastly
ware, the Husk; this G. Whitehead has vindicated.)

Thus much respecting Geo. Fox: what is relating to Ja. Nailer is spoken to in
the recited Book, The Snake, etc. But G. Fox being their great Apostle, and the
founder of Quakerism, I was willing to set down the principles upon which he
set up, and for which he was imprisoned, as you see: And the rather because
Geo. Whitehead and his followers have published a Journal of his Noble and
Ignoble acts, of his disturbing Ministers, of magnifying himself, of his
pretended Miracles, and other deluding Charms; on purpose to bewitch the
people, like Simon Magus, his Predecessor. Wherefore in this contest there can
be no Neuters: if God be God, serve him; if Baal, serve him; who can have
patience to see the Name of God thus openly Blasphemed? he that can is no
Christian; he has not zeal for God, nor love to the souls of men: The Papists
will not have the Pope called Antichrist, nor spoken disrespectfully of; the
Turk will not hear Mahomet blasphemed; as we are Christians let us stand for
Christ, and the Christian Religion. I have read how dangerous it is to foster
Heretics, and shall England now become a nursery of Quakerism, which spread
itself like a Leprosy far and near, even to Nations beyond the Seas? And
therefore since G. Whitehead, etc. have printed the Acts and Monuments of Geo.
Fox, which the poor silly ignorant Quakers run a whoring after, as the
Idolatrous Israelites did after the Golden Calf, I am zealously concerned to
unmask the head of this Foxonian Tribe of Quakers, (i. e.) G. Fox; and in a
remembrance of what I was once my self, and that for many years, I can do no
less: And in this short Treatise I shall show how Geo. Fox resembles Simon
Magus and Ignatius Loyola, for the tree is known of the fruit.


SECTION II.
SImon Magus lived in the Apostles time, as says S. Luke, Acts 8.9, 10. There
was a certain man called Simon, which in fore time in the same City used
Sorcery, and bewitched the people of Samaria; giving out that himself was some
great one, to whom they all gave heed, from the least to the greatest, saying,
this man is the great power of God. And said Justin Martyr, Many adored him as
the supreme God, they gave heed to him, they believed and obeyed what he
taught, they placed their hope and confidence in him. See Pool 's Synopsis of
the Critics, p. 1462. for more of this nature. And Erasmus in his paraphrase
upon that place says, A man there was among the Samaritans called Simon, a
deceiver of the people, and a practiser of delusions; who before Philip came
there, practiced in that City Magic Art; and by his counterfeit Miracles had
made the Samaritans fond of him; who by means of such falsehood and deceit,
avaunted himself before the simple and plain people, boasting that he was an
excellent Prophet, unto whom the Samaritans, from the highest to the lowest,
gave good heed; but nothing had he done in Jesus name, and therefore they, as a
people astonished at such monstrous sights, said, This fellow is Gods own right
hand, which is called Mighty. Many a day had he been with them, and long had he
made them with his Sorcery to dote upon him, and therefore when he had once
gotten himself a name with them of great estimation, many one believed him in
all that he taught, etc.

And besides, as History says, Simon Magus was an early Blasphemer of the
Blessed Trinity, a slighter of the Scriptures, and a denyer of the Law of
Moses: from all which four things are observable,

1. That Simon Magus gave out of himself that he was some great man, that he
wrought counterfeit Miracles in his own Name, and never in the name of Jesus of
Nazareth.

2. That all the Samaritans gave heed to him, from the least to the greatest,
believing all he taught, saying, This man is the great power of God.

3. That he got himself a name of great estimation to be an (...) Prophet; they
at last adored him as the Supreme God.

4. That he was a slighter of the Scripture, and a denyer of the Law of Moses,
a blasphemer of the blessed Trinity, etc.

Now how far G. Fox is of kin to Simon Magus will appear in the next Section;
for the tree must be known by the fruit; men do not gather Grapes of Thorns,
nor Figs of Thistles; this is a true measuring Line, being laid to Scripture
Rule.

SECT. III.
1. THat Geo. Fox gave out of himself that he was some great one. 2. That he
wrought Counterfeit Miracles, and never in the name of Jesus.

For proof of the first of these read his Journal, p. 31. Being asked whether
he was sanctified, answered, Yes, for he was in the Paradise of God, ibid. The
power of God thundered (said George) amongst them: And they (the worlds people)
did fly like chaff before the wind, p. 60. So that it was a dreadful thing unto
them when it was told them, the man in the Leathern Breeches is come. Again, p.
55. A woman said that an Angel or Spirit came into Beverly Church, and spoke
the wonderful things of God, to the astonishment of all that were there, and
when it had done it passed away, and no man knew whence it came, nor whither it
went, etc. This G. Fox owned himself to be the man, and left the relation under
his own hand, which must be to magnify himself. Again p. 47. Then did I see
(said Geo. Fox) the heavens opened: p. 45. Whilst I was yet in the house of
Correction (said G. F.) there came unto me a Troop, saying, As I was sitting in
the Steeple-house (said the Troop) hearing the Priest, the voice of the Lord
came unto me saying, do thou not know that my servant (G. F.) is in prison,
go to him for direction; so I (said G. F.) spoke to his condition, and his
understanding was opened. Again, p. 67. I called the Accuser Judas, and said
Judas 's end should be his, and that was the word of the Lord and of Christ
through me to him, and shortly after he hanged himself. Again p. 74. Then said
Fra. Howgill of me, this man (G. F.) speaks with authority, and not like the
Scribes. Again, p. 63. Now I sat on a Hay-stack, and spoke nothing for some
hours, the professors being desirous to hear me speak, asked when I would
begin, and when I would speak? One present bid them wait, and told them, that
the people waited upon Christ a long while before he spoke. Again, p. 278. At
Leith ( in Ireland) the Innkeeper told me, that the Council had granted forth
Warrants to apprehend me; to whom I said, What do you tell me (G. F.) of their
Warrants against me, if there were a Cart-load of them I do not heed them.
Again, p. 431. The takers and payers of Tithes must be testified against in the
Lords power. Again, p. 438. Many friends were imprisoned at London and other
places, for opening their Shop-wndows on Holydays and Fast-days, which friends
could not but do, for we were redeemed out of days by Christ Jesus, etc.

Thus, Reader, I have given thee a small sample of G. Fox's own words of
himself in his Journal, showing that himself was some great one: I am next
coming to his Books, for another sample, and when you have them, compare them
to Simon Magus, touching that particular, and see which outstrips and exceeds
each other in magnifying themselves.

The Trial of G. Fox at Lancaster Assize, p. 21. And before I came to the Bar I
was moved to pray, and the thundering voice answered, I have glorified thee,
and will glorify thee again: And I was filled so full of Glory, that my head
and ears were filled full of it: And when the Judges came up, they appeared all
as dead men under me, etc. Alluding to Christ, John 12.28. 16.14. and 17.1.

News coming up, etc. Written from the mouth of the Lord, from one who is
naked, and stands naked before the Lord, clothed with Righteousness, whose
name is not known in the world, risen up out of the North, which was prophesied
of; but now it is fulfilled. G. Fox.

Several Petitions Answered, p. 60. My name is covered from the world, and the
world knows not me, nor my name.

Saul s Errand to Damascus, etc. He that has the same spirit that raised up
Jesus Christ from the dead, is equal with God.

A Battledoor, etc. Introd. All Languages are to me no more than dust, who was
before Languages were, etc. Alike to James Parnell, one of his Disciples.

The Watcher, etc. p. 37. But to the end of all disputes and arguments I am
come, for before they was I am. See W. P.'s Christ. Qua. and Dev. Test. p. 96.
And you will find both Fox and Parnell call themselves Christ, in W. Pen's
sense: And that in W. Pen's sense he that suffered at Jerusalem, was no more
Christ than they, (i. e.) G. Fox and Ja. Parnell: for Fox said he was before
Abraham, in that he said he was before Languages were: Parnell was before
Abraham, in that he was before Arguments were; for between Abram and Lots
Heardsmen there were Arguments. And for the Humanity of Christ, the Quakers
deny it, as clearly as the Socinians deny his Godhead; read Sect. the xviii.
thus I hope I have proved the first part of the Paragraph: And now to the
second, which is, that G. Fox works counterfeit maricles, and not in the Name
of Jesus Christ; for proof of this see his Journal, p. 170, 171, 30, 370, 373,
503. and there you will find G. F. spoke to a woman, and the Lord (he says)
raise her up: in 171 I find there is two miracles, and which to take I cannot
tell, but one of these two it must be, viz. A Woman married a Man in Debt, and
she went distracted; sent for G. Fox, he spoke to her, she mended. The other
was two men fighting, whom G. F. being a stout man, parted; but neither in the
Name of Jesus. In p. 167. he tells us of many Miracles the Quakers wrought, but
mentions not where, nor upon whom. Likewise Cley Pool had a fit of the Stone,
and G. F. laid his hand on him, and afterward he mended: One in Maryland, said
to be a Parliament Man (tho I am informed there is no Parliament there, and
that spoils this Miracle) healed. In short, they are all feigned, counterfeit
Miracles, and none done (as Erasmus well observes of Simon Magus) in the Name
of Jesus of Nazareth. But to read the story of Jo. Isays broken Neck, 'twould
make a melancholy man laugh: oh G. F. stand by him, and pity him and his
Family. Well to work went G. F. and throws away his Gloves and Stick, saying, I
got to him as soon as I could, I took hold of his hair, I took his head in both
my hands, and set my knees against the tree; I raised his head: mark Reader
here was all I, I, I, and my, my, not a word of Prayer, not a word like the
Apostle, in the Name of Jesus be thou healed; no: what can Whitehead say to
this? is he not ashamed of their horrible delusions? I have said enough to wise
men: and bray a Fool in the Mortar, and they will not be wiser.

SECT. IV.
2. AND the Foxonian Quakers gave heed unto G. Fox from the least to the
greatest, believing all he taught, saying he is the power of God.

1. That they gave heed to him in all he taught, it is demonstrable from diverse
reasons, but for brevity sake I shall mention this, viz. of all the Blasphemy
that ever G. Fox spoke or wrote, never a Quaker of his Party ever condemned one
passage, but either justified it, or if that could not be done, then excuse it;
see W. Pen in his Book Judas and the Jews, p. 44. Tho to do the dissenting
Quakers justice, who meet in Harp-lane, they did by their Book, An Answer to
several passages, etc. p. 10. condemn G. F.'s words in the Battledoor, as High
Blasphemy; and p. 6. said Geo. Whitehead as guilty of the aforesaid charge, (i.
e.) of being a contentious Scribbler, of giving base names, etc. and in part of
cloaking gross errors. Indeed when I saw this come forth, I was in hopes of a
Reformation; but alas this was no sooner come to my hand, but I had another
sent me which justifies G. Fox, and G. Whitehead in all their abomination,
signed by Edw. Brush, Waller Miers, Tho. Cox, Gilbert Laity, Charles Bathurst,
Tho. Lower, William Phillips, Tho. Mincks, John Vaughton, Nath. Marks, John
Cooper, Tim. Emmerton, John Field, Michael Russel, John Knight, Hen. Goldney,
Will. Bingly, Charles Marshall, Will. Sanders, Geo. Bowls, John Tomkins, Tho.
Hutson, John Evered, Dan. Wharly.


So that when all these came out in the name of the rest, I concluded the
Foxonian Tribe, from the highest to the lowest, believed all G. F. taught, how
Blasphemous soever it was. And now to the second part of the paragraph, that
they say he is the Power of God; for proof of this see the third Table or Index
to G. Fox's Journal, under the Letter M, for Miracles, where it is thus said,
Miracles wrought by the Power of God. And when I turned to p. 370, 371, where
one of the profoundest Miracles he did is recorded, and as a Miracle too, there
is nothing but I George Fox threw away my Stick and Gloves, I, I, I, etc. If G.
Whitehead say 'twas the life of Christ in him, I tell him No, it must be G.
Fox, for the life of Christ in him need no Stick and Gloves: from whence it is
plain they hold parallel with the poor deluded Samaritans, calling G. Fox the
power of God.

SECT. V.
3. THat G. Fox got a name of great estimation to be an excellent Prophet,
until his Followers adored him as God.

The fifth part Christ. Qua. disting. p. 77. That G. Fox is blessed with honor
ahove many Brethren, and that thousands will stand by him in a heavenly record:
That his Life Reigns and is Spotless, Innocent, and still retains his
Integrity; whose Eternal honor and Blessed renown remain still: yea, his
presence and the dropping of his tender words in the Lords love was my souls
Nourishment, etc. for more of this see New Rome unm. from p. 42 to 48. Yea, (so
dreadful was G. F. 's name to the people beyond Sea, that they published it to
the world) viz. That mentioning the name Geo. Fox did prick them to the heart,
etc. See their book A true Account, etc. p. 42.

The Quakers Challenge, etc. p. 6. Stand up Muggleton, who calls thy book a
Looking-glass for Geo. Fox, whose name thou art not worthy to take into thy
mouth, who is a Prophet indeed, and has been faithful in the Lords business
from the beginning: This Sell. Eccles who wrote the Quakers Challenge, is the
Prophet, who prophesied, that John Story should die within one year, being then
very ill, who lived 4 years after; and as G. Fox said, that neither himself nor
his name was known, see Sect. 3d. Yea a Prophet equallized with Christ, a right
Samaritan, etc.
it was said of Christ he was in the world and the world knew him not, so it
may be said of this true Prophet, whom John said he was not; but thou shall
feel this Prophet (i. e. G. F.) one day, as heavy as a Millstone upon thee; and
although the world knows him not, yet he is known.

Next see an Abstract of a Letter sent to G^o. Fo^^ in his Life time, from
Barbados, by Josiah Co^l, one of their eminent Preachers, dated the 21st, 12th
month, 1658. and every word of it vindicated by William Pen in their book
styled Judas and the Jews, etc. p. 44. viz. Dear Geo. Fox, who art the Father
of many Nations, whose life has reached through us thy childen, even to the Isles
afar off; to the begetting many again to a lively hope for which Generations to
come shall call thee Blessed, whose being and habitation is in the power of the
highest, in which thou Rules and Governs in Righteousness, and thy Kingdom is
Established in Peace, and the Increase thereof is without end.

Next a Letter to G. Fox from John Audland out of the West of England, somewhat
abstracted, etc. Dear and precious one, in whom my life is bound up, my
strength in the stand; by thy breathings I am nourished, by thee my strength is
renewed, life and strength come from thee; holy one, daily do I find thy
presence with me, which does exceedingly preserve me, for I cannot reign but in
thy presence and power; pray for me, that I may stand in thy dread for
evermore. I am thine, begotten and nourished by thee, and in thy power am I
preserved, glory unto thee, holy one, for ever, etc. See this Letter at large
in The Discovery of the accursed thing enlarged, etc. p. See their book styled,
This is to go only amongst Friends.

And thou oh North of England, who art counted as desolate and barren, and
reckoned the least of the Nation, Mich. 5.2. Matt. 2.6. Joh. 7 42.
yet out of thee did the branch spring Zech. 3.8.
, and star Numb. 24.17, 19.
arise, which gives light to all the Regions round about: In thee the Son of
Righteousness appeared Mal. 4.2.
with healing, etc. and out of thee the terrors of the Lord proceeded, which
makes the earth to tremble, and be removed; out of thee Kings, Priests, and
Prophets, did come forth: Lift up your voices, blow the Trumpet, sound an
Alarm out of the holy mountain, proclaim tbe acceptable year, and the day of
vengeance of our God; gird on your sword on your loins, put on the tried Armor;
Note this is one of their books the worlds people is not to see, it is to go
only amongst Friends.
ride on, ride on my brethren and fellow soldiers, make all plain before you;
make the heathen tremble, and the uncircumcised fall by the sword; spare none
neither Ox nor Ass, neither old nor young; kill, cut off, destroy; bath your
sword in the blood of Amalek, and all the Philistines and Egyptians; hew Agag to
pieces, break down the Rocks, cut down the Ceders, make the Devils ( i. e. the
Priests) subject, cast out the unclean spirit, ( i. e. that pay or receive
Tyths) raise the dead, shut up in Prison, bring out of Prison, cast in your
Nets, launch into the deep; bind the tares in bundles, cast them into the fire;
the good Angel (i. e. G. Fox) is come, thrust in your Cicles, reap the earth;
silence all Disputers and Diviners for ever; triumph upon all the chaff, the
mire and dung for ever; prepare your selves to battle, for the Nation does
defy our God, saying, Who is the God of the Quakers, A rebellious people that
will not come under our Law, etc. and so on, see New Rome unm. etc. p. 85. more
at large.

And thus you see, that as it is written, Acts 10.34. To him gave all the
Prophets witness, etc. so you see that all the Quakers Prophets being 400 in
number, give witness to Geo. Fox, and adore him, as the Branch, the Star, the
Sun of Righteousness, whose being and habitation is in the power of the
highest, ruling in his Kingdom, the increase of which is without end, as say
the Quakers his Idolatrous Adorers; by which it is clear he outstrips Simon
Magus.

SECT. VI.
4. THat G. Fox was a slighter of the Scriptures, a denyer of the Law of Moses,
and ordinances of Jesus Christ, and a Blasphemer of the Blessed Trinity.

News coming up, etc. p. 14. Your original is carnal, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin;
and the light is carnal, the Letter and your Baptism is carnal, and their
Sacrament is carnal, and their Communion is carnal; so dust is the Serpents
meat, their original is but dust which is the letter, which is death; so the
Serpent feeds upon dust, and their Gospel is dust, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and
John, which is the letter, p. 34. A voice and a word to all you Deceivers, who
deceive the people, and Blasphemers who utter forth your Blasphemy and
Hypocrisy; that tell people of a Sacrament, and tell them it is the Ordinance
of God; blush, blush, and tremble before the Almighty, for dreadful is he that
will pour out his vengeance upon you, who live in the Witchery and bewitch the
people; and these things ( i. e. Baptism and the Lords Supper) that God never
commanded, are given forth by you who are brazened with deceit: and no Witch
must live in Israel, (i. e. no Priest).

The Quakers Refuge fixed, etc. p. 17. Whether the first Penman of the
Scriptures was Moses or Hermes, or whether both these are not one; or whether
there are not many words contained in the Scriptures which were not spoken by
the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit; whether some words were not spoken by the
Grand Impostor; some by wicked men, some by wise men ill applied, some by good
men ill expressed; some by false Prophets and yet true; some by true Prophets
and yet false, etc.

Now this being proposed as doubtful, overthrows the certainty and authority of
the Scriptures; for if what the true Prophets spoke was false, and what wise
and good men spoke was either ill applied or ill expressed, and what the false
Prophets spoke be true, what certainty is here: this put to the Quakers
practice in laying aside in their Families, as well as in their Worship, the
use of the Ten Commandments, Lords Prayer, and the Apostles Creed, together
with what is above recited, is plain, that Geo. Fox and his Followers are
Slighters of the Scriptures. Now to the 3d part of the Paragraph, viz. A
Blasphemer of the Blessed Trinity, one of his Sons books, The Sandy Foundation
shaken, etc. p. 10. No one substance can have three distinct subsistencies, and
preserve its own unity; for granting them (i. e. Trinitarians) the most
favorable definition, every subsistence will have its own substance, so that
three distinct subsistences will require three distinct substances or beings,
consequently three Gods, p. 16. The vulgar doctrine of satisfaction being
dependent on the second person of the imagined Trinity refuted from Scripture,
etc. says W. Pen; but I say neither he, nor all the Sons of Simon Magus, are
able to refute that Article of the true Christian Faith.

SECT. VII.
I Am now coming to Ignatius Loyola, the first Founder of the Jesuits, and to
show that as G. Fox was one with Simon Magus in Doctrine, yet in Discipline he
very much resembles Ignatius Loyola; and before I proceed, I shall show, that I
am not alone in this opinion, and that from the judgment of two Learned Divines
of the Church of England, out of two books, the one entitled, The Good Old
Way, etc. p. 121, 122. But of all the Sects which are among us, undoubtedly the
Quakers have been, and are, most eminently serviceable to our common Adversary;
for their principles are such as could not come out of any other Mint but the
Jesuits. And truly no opinions can more resemble theirs, than those that are
held by that crafty and perverse Sect: do they (the Quakers) not think
themselves as infallible, as the Romanists think the Pope himself to be: and do
they not say, that one reason why they divide from us is, because we confess
our selves to be men subject unto error: do they not lower the Magistrates
Authority (as the Jesuits do) and by all imaginable methods endeavor to render
him contemptible; do they not villify the holy Scriptures (as the Jesuits do)
and call the Bible a dead Letter; do they not cry up the light, the light; just
as the Jesuits cry up tradition, tradition: do they not think themselves to be
the only people of God, (as the Jesuits think their Faction to be) and count
all others who are not of their Communion Reprobates and damned persons; do
they not take it for granted, that they are perfect and cannot sin? Why, do but
turn the Tables, and behold it is Jesuitism upon which they build the Doctrine
of Meritorious good Works; for where there is not perfection there can be no
Merit.

But the most lucky and advantageous principle that ever was infused into them,
is this; that they must not by any means swear, tho call d unto it by due
Authority: The Jesuit was no Fool when he taught them this, for hereby he keeps
out of harms way, and shelters h^mself from a necessity of taking any Oaths of
Supremacy or Allegiance; this Principle therefore they do arrantly guard, and
make many proposals that they may be allowed this, and as long as it is allowed
it will be impossible to hunt our Enemies out of the Heard, or to distinguish
indeed between a Quaker and a Jesuit.

By this any unprejudiced Man may see, that this sullen and dogged Sect is the
Jesuits natural and undoubted Issue, tho like other bastards they are ashamed
to own their father, etc.

A Discourse concerning the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, p. 282. Yet any one
who compares them (i. e. Jesuits and Quakers) would imagine the Life of Ignatius
had been their great Exampler: I know not whether any of that innocent and
religious Order of Jesuits had any hand in forming this new Society (i. e.
Quakers) among us, as has been frequently suggested; but if one may guess the
Father by the Child's likeness, Ignatius Loyola the Founder of the Jesuits, was
at least the Grandfather of the Quakers, etc.

And now it remains, that Ignatius Loyola and G. Fox compare notes, that we may
rightly understand, whether indeed the Quakers be the natural Issue of the
Jesuits, as both these learned Divines agree they are, and if they be, let us
lay this spurious offspring at Ignatius Loyola s door; but let us judge the
tree by the fruit. 1. Did Ignatius Loyola cry down the Scriptures; so do the
Quakers, witness the contemptible names they bestow upon them, as beastly ware,
carnal letter, dust, death, and serpents meat. 2. Did Ignatius, whose Life was
exemplary, delight in and read the Papists Legend of the Lives, Miracles, and
Enthusiasms of their Saints, as Don Quixot, rather than the Scriptures; so do
the Quakers, who read their own Epistles in their meetings for worship, and
suffer none to call the same Edicts and Canons. 3. Did Ignatius preach in the
Streets, Marketplaces, on Bulks and Haystacks, in opposition to Authority, so
did the Quakers for many years. 4. Did Ignatius exalt his own sufferings, so do
the Quakers, saying their sufferings are greater and more unjust than the
sufferings of Christ and his Apostles, and Martyrs, read Buroughs works, p.
273. 5. Did Ignatius refuse to put off his Hat to men in authority; the Quakers
do the same. 6. Did Ignatius allegorise the Scripture, the death and sufferings
of Christ, his passion, atonement, resurrection and ascension to be within, so
do the Quakers. 7. Was Ignatius a Tradesman; G. Fox was a poor Journeyman
Shoemaker, and wrought Journey-work for George Gee of Manchester, and so are
many of his Followers, the Preachers amongst the Quakers; and G. Fox was no
Scholar, but ambitious of being thought so; for instance, his Book styled A
Battledoor for Teachers and Professors, Anno 1660. to learn singular and
plural, viz. tu and vos, with the form and figure of a Battledoo^, to imitate a
Child's penny Horn-book, containing diverse learned Languages, as Greek, Hebrew,
Latin, Syriack, Italian, Caldee, and diverse others; and all this noise to bring
into contempt both the Gentry of this famous, christian, and learned Country,
and the learned Clergy. 8. Did Ignatius and his Disciples pretend to a gift of
discerning, to know the thoughts of their Neighbors, so did G. Fox, who said
the Quakers have a spirit given them beyond their forefathers, and know who
are Saints, who are Devils, and who are Apostles, without speaking ever a word,
etc. saying, as Christ is so are we (Quakers) in this world, Gr. mist. p. 89.
10. Did Ignatius travel up and down preaching; working Miracles, seeing
Visions, to Montsorret, Manresa, Barcelona, Padua; and after he was soundly
beaten for not putting off his Hat to the Governor of Barcelona, back again to
Salamanca, where he was put into the Dungeon, and there chained to a Post, at
which he gloried as much as ever his Grand Children did; after that to Antwerp,
Paris, Roven, where he stood up to the neck in dirt to represent to his
Companions the filthiness of sin, and to get commiseration in the people, and
thereby some followers; as G. Fox and his followers used to go into Churches,
till some or other brake their Shins, or made their Nose bleed, and then some
silly tender people would follow them, into some poor woman's house, where they
would hold forth, and tell them do you see the fruits of the Priests; and so
gat here and there a few unwary Disciples, etc. at last Ignatius got to Rome to
Pope Paul 3d, and got his Bull to confirm the Society of Jesus, October 3.
1540. and for more of Ignatius Loyola's Acts and Monuments I refer the Reader
to the Works of Maffejus Orlandinus and Ribadeneira, who wrote his Life.

So did G. Fox to settle Quakerism travel up and down, disturbing Ministers in
Churches, preaching in Barns, Marketplaces, on Haystacks, on Bulks, working
Miracles, yea as true ones as Ignatius Loyola, and as like them as if they were
Twins, quite through England, Wales, Ireland, Holland, Barbados, Virginia,
Maryland, and many places more, as his Journals set forth; so that it is
needless further to blot paper to manifest the parity between Ignatius and
George his Grandson: if Ignatius pretended to a sinless perfection, George and
his followers are full as good at it, read his Gr. mist. p. 33, 107, 267. where
he tells you he can give an infallible character of another man's state and
condition; and that he who is not infallible in his judgment, council and
advice, is no Minister of Christ, that the Quakers are the only Ministers of
Christ. And as a further proof that G. Fox and his followers are Ignatius his
dear Children, read the Works following, and a hundred more of their Books, and
you shall not find one passage wherein they make confession of their sins to
God, and beg pardon for Christ's sake, according to the example of the Prophets,
Apostles, Saints and Martyrs, in all ages; neither if you go to 1000 Meetings
shall you hear one of their Preachers have such an expression in their mouths,
viz. as confessing their sins, and begging pardon for Jesus Christ's sake: And
for example I have read great part of these Books following, and cannot find
such a passage: I was also a Quaker 25. years, and in all that time I do not
remember such a passage: If any think I wrong the Quakers, let them read and
search as I have done, and show me such a passage if they can: The Books by me
most examined are th^s.

Edw. Buroughs, in folio, containing pages 896 Sam. Fishers Works, in folio,
pages 954 Read Qua. detected, p. 8. to 12. and New R. unmaskt, p. 18.
Fr. Howgillt Works, in folio 709 Geo. Fox his Journal, in folio 632 Geo. Fox
his Great Mist. in folio 407 Will. Smiths Works, in folio 565 W. Pens and Geo.
Whiteheads Christ. Qua. in folio 555 W. Baylys Works, in quarto 774 Rich.
Hubberthorps Works, in quarto 374 W. Pens Invalidity, in quarto 451 6317

Thus I have given you a sample of their Books, and read as many of them as you
please, and if thou art a Quaker, and has but a spark of Christianity left in
thee, I admonish thee, and that for thy own Souls sake, read these Scriptures,
Luke 11.4. 1 John 1.8, 9. Cap. 2. v. 5. Psalm. 38.18. and 51.1, 2, 3. Isa. 64.6.
Lam. 3.41, 42. Job 7.20. Dan. 9.4, 5, 20. Jer. 10.25. Luke 18.10, 11. 1 Kings
8.47. Prove. 20.9. Eccles. 7.20. 1 Timothy 1.15. And then compare the practice of
the Saints of old to the practice of the Quakers, and they do no more resemble
each other than black does white. Here you will see that Moses that meek and
good man, David a man after Gods own heart, Isaiah, Jeremiah, John, Job, Nay,
so far are they from this practice, that one of their Preachers, In the Book, A
Music Lect. etc. says, p. 22, I do affirm that if John (the Apostle) had said
he had been a sinner, he had Lied, etc. Oh Impudence.
Daniel the beloved of the Lord, Paul the great Apostle; they all acknowledge
themselves sinners, they begged pardon for Christ's sake: But you can never hear
that G. Fox, Sam. Fisher, Ed. Burrows, W. Pen, G. Whitehead, W. Smith, Fra.
Hawgil, Wm. Bailey, nor Richard Hubberthorn, in all these 6317 pages that they
make the least confession of sin, and that they ever beg pardon for the same.
And this I take, and have done for many years, to be an Argument that they are
of a different faith and practice to the Apostles, the Prophets, the Martyrs,
and all true Christians to this day. And if any be desirous to be further
satisfied read my book, The Quakers detected, etc. p. 8 to 12. New Rome
unmasked, etc. p. 16 to 20, where I have largely treated on this head; I also
recommend an ingenious piece called The Quakers Quibbles, which to this day
they have not been able to answer.

SECT. VIII.
THe Invalidity of John Faldo's Vindication, etc. part 1. page 103. cap. 5. I
find William Pen making a piteous moan against John Faldo: And begging (like a
poor Friar) of his Reader, to do a poor people right for once, viz. Reader, I
beseech thee for truths sake, on whose side soever thou shall find it to be, to
examine with all impartiality his Charge, our Answer, his Reply, and our
Rejoinder; if his Honesty, Reason and Justice hold any proportion to his great
Confidence, we yield: But if upon an impartial consideration he shall be found
to clip and pervert our matter, and to shuffle with us in his own, once do a
poor people Right.

William I have read both sides, and do say that he has contracted yours
fairly, and taken in the sense fully, and what you add to it is but your gloss:
Edward Buroughs Doctrine is plain and positive, which teach, That is no
command from God to me, what he commands to another; neither did any of the
Saints which we read of, in Scripture, act by the Command which was to another,
not having the command to themselves: I challenge to find an example for it,
they obeyed every one the command to themselves, etc. See his works, p. 47. And
Mr. Faldo repeats so much of your Answer, as carries the strength of your
Argument, which is this, viz. No Command in Scripture is any further obliging
upon any man, than as he finds a conviction upon his Conscience; otherwise men
should be engaged without, if not aagainst Conviction; a thing unreasonable in
men. Thus far Pen.

Observation.
The Observation I make is this, that your Friend Buroughs Doctrine is perfect
Ranterism, and that by the Doctrine of William Pen too, A brief examination of
Lib. Spiritual, etc. per W. P. p. 3. For it is a dangerous principle, and
pernicious to the true Religion, and which is worse, it is the root of Ranterism
to assert that nothing is a duty incumbent upon thee, but what thou art
persuaded (or convinced) is thy duty. Again p. 11. The enemy is at work to
scatter the minds of friends by that Loose Plea, what have thou to do with me,
leave me to my freedom, and to the Grace of God in my self; this is a deviation
from, and a pervertion of the ancient principle of truth; if any one shall say
I see no evil in paying Tithes, I see no evil in marrying by a Priest, I see no
evil in keeping my Shop shut upon the worlds holy days, and Christmas days (and
fast days) which is confusion it self, etc. I say my Observation is this: the
Quakers will impose as an indispensable duty an absolute conformity to their
orders, to their laws, to their canons and decrees; and if any plead to stay
till they be convinced of the reasonableness of their commands, this is
Ranterism, yea downright Ranterism, although it be to pay Tithes which the Law
commands, to observe such days commanded by Authority, and which, as such, the
Scriptures enjoin, which say, be subject to every ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, etc. But to obey the Scripture commands, as such, that is no
obligation (by Wm. Pens doctrine) unless a man be convinced thereof, or unless
he have the command anew, and as immediately as the inspired Apostles and
Prophets had; see my Book de Christiana Liberate, etc. p. 30 to 45. where the
Quakers imposition about things of indifferency are at large handled.

But Mr. Faldo tells the Quakers (and I think not without good reason) that
this Doctrine of the Quakers springs from such a pernicious principle as carry
all iniquity in the womb of it, etc. But as W. Pen desires, beseeches and begs,
that I should for once do a poor [deluded] people right, so I will answer his
request, and the way to do it is, to set down Buroughs Doctrine, and W. Pens
Answer, at least so much of it, as carry the strength of his argument, viz.
Burrows Works, p. 47. That is no command from God to me, what he commands to
another; di^ any of the Saints which we read of in scripture, act by the
command which was to another, not having the command to themselves.

Whereas from the recited Doctrine of Buroughs, Mr. Faldo charges the Quakers
to teach, that no commands in Scripture, as such, are binding to us; which he
accounted as such a pernicious principle, as carried all iniquity in the womb
of it, etc. to salve which, pray hear Mr. Pens answer, To this, says he, I
answer briefly and plainly; no commands in scripture are any further obliging
upon any man, than as he finds a conviction upon his conscience; otherwise men
should be engaged without, if not against conviction; a thing unreasonable in a
man.

Now I cannot see how W. Pens argument can answer the end proposed, since it is
very hard for the Quakers, nay impossible, to be convinced of the
reasonableness of their obedience to Scripture commands, as such, if they
adhere to the Quakers Doctrine, and names of contempt they frequently cast upon
it, First for names, viz. Beastly ware, carnal letter, the husk, dust, death,
serpents meat; some of it spoke by the grand Impostor, some by wicked Men, some
by true Prophets yet false, some by wise and good Men, yet either ill applied
or ill expressed: And that whether Moses or Hermes was the first Penman remains
a question, etc. I say here is no ground to hope, that these Teachers will ever
convince their Hearers of their duty of obedience to Scripture commands, as
such: Again, that the people may as well burn the Scriptures as their Books.
Again, If ever you own Christ's and the Apostles, you will ever own our
Writings, (say the Quakers) which are given forth by the power and spirit of
God. Again, What is spoken from the spirit of him in any, is of as great
authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and greater; and very much to
this effect, as in this Treatise, as also in New Rome Arraigned, is plainly
proved from the Books of their Teachers of greatest note: Insomuch that there
seems no possibility for the conviction of their followers (who adhere and
believe such doctrine) of their duty of obedience to Scripture commands, as
also may appear from their practice, as for example Christ said, go teach all
nations, bapti^ing, etc. do this in remembrance o^ me, etc. here is two
positive commands which the Quakers have quite thrown off, upon their
principle, that no commands of God which he commanded to others are binding;
now unless they have a command from God, as the Apostles had, at least until
(as Pen says) they are convinced it is their duty to obey; which is impossible,
if they tell them, it is Conjuration to preach out of the Scriptures, that they
are beastly ware, serpents meat, dust, and deaths, etc.

Again hear what one of their most noted Teachers says, A Music Lecture, etc.
p. 35. Where they (the worlds people) are, I was, in performances, in
ordinances, in hearing, in reading, in prayers, and fasting; but when I came to
bend my mind to that of God in me, (viz. Quakerism) I durst not give God thanks
for the Victuals set before me, etc. And the reason is plain; he not having the
same command the Apostles had; for if Scripture precept had been binding, he
had not only the command, but example of Christ and his Apostles; and the like
may be urged for their disobedience to the Laws of the Land, particularly about
Tithes, which W. Pen and the Quakers make criminal in their hearers to pay, as
likewise to shut up their Shop-windows on Fast days commanded by Authority,
these are made capital sins in the hearers. But for non-submission to their own
humane inventions, they charge them with Ranterism; thus have they (like their
Predecessors the Pharisees, who strained at a Gnat and swallowed a Camel) made
void the commandments of God, and precepts of the Gospel of none effect by
their tradition. Thus it is apparent that this Doctrine, That no commands of God
in Scripture are any further obliging upon any man than he finds a conviction
upon his conscience, is so pernicious, that it carries all iniquity in the womb
of it: And that this position opens the Floodgates to all error, atheism,
impiety and wickedness; for if conviction be all the ground of obedience to the
commands of Scripture, and that no man until he is convinced that he is obliged
to obey the commands of God laid down in the Scripture; then all rational Laws,
Orders and Governments, both divine and humane, are overturned; and from the
date of this position a stop is put, so far as it is received and embraced, to
all Religion and Piety toward God: and upon this bottom, as their principal
foundation and corner stone, the Quakers first rose in the North, breaking all
Law, Order and Government, disturbing the Ministers in their Churches, and all
other Societies; for they were not convinced that they ought to obey
Magistrates, nor their Laws; and how far they still retain this principle this
Treatise will show: (tho I grant for self ends they are somewhat reformed, and
to maintain their Grandeur, their Trade, and to get into the favor of the
Government, that in time they may come to be Justices of Peace) For it is
certain that this position, together with their other doctrine, take away and
rob the Scriptures of their divine Authority, leaving all loose and uncertain;
and where this doctrine will end, were it generally embraced, God only knows:
for the Quakers conscience being hardened by the Doctrine of their Teachers,
against the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, Obedience to the Laws of the Land; the
Papists, the Jesuits, the Turks, the Arians, the Socinians, the
Antitrinitarians, all may as well plead to be left, whether to obey Scripture
commands as the Quakers; and the Hearers of them all, in all probability, as
like to be convinced by their Teachers, as the Quakers, etc. who yet at the
same time enjoin their Hearers not to pay Tithes, not to marry unless they
publish their intention before their Woman's Meeting, not to marry by a Priest,
not to shut up their Shop on a Fast day, but to keep it open in Testimony
against the command of the Magistrate and his Authority, and a hundred things
more; and for non-submission to these injunctions there must be no plea, nor
liberty given, nor forbearance, until conviction; but the Scripture commands
are not, say they, obliging, unless a man be convinced, etc.

SECT. IX.
HAving by the foregoing showed W. Pen to be for and against himself, for
conformity to the laws, orders and decrees of G. Fox; conviction, or no
conviction, against conformity to the commands of God in Scripture, unless
convinced, showing himself thereby to be tot quot and omnis, every thing and
nothing; I am now coming to the latter part of the paragraph, wherein you
sorely complain of Mr. Faldo; But if upon an impartial consideration he shall
be found to clip or pervert our matter, and to shuffle with us in his own, Once
do a poor people right, etc.

Mr. Pen, I am loath to provoke you, but if I should I do not fear you; you
complain of Mr. Faldo's clipping and perverting your matter, and shuffling with
you in his word: a crime no people upon the face of the whole earth more guilty
than your selves, and at which none better than your self, G. Whitebread, and
G. Fox in his time; and I must tell you G. W. has stood in great need of you,
and does still, one that can make a black thing appear white; but I fear the
Quakers will not yet depute you, and my reason is, Mr. Meads aversness to your
Preface to Fox his Journal being bound up therewith, but like some Lackey, it
is forced to run shrugging afoot in a poor thin blue coat, waiting at the
Readers Elbow like A Noun Adjective, wanting a word to show its signification,
as well as why it is left to shift for it self, etc. Well, William, I have not
forgot your complaint, I am now coming to do right between you. As to Mr.
Faldo, I have not read all he writ, but so far as I have, I find him fair and
ingenuous, leaving out your glosses, wiping off your paintings, and discovering
your fallacies; but William, cast an eye upon G. Fox s Gr. mist. and compare it
with the Books which he pretends to answer, and you will find it the greatest
Mystery of Iniquity that ever appeared in the world, under pretense of a
religious contest, of which Mr. Crisp has made a clear discovery, in his Book
entitled, The Discovery of the accursed thing in the Foxonian Quakers Camp
enlarged, etc. and An Essay, etc. to allay G. F. s Spirit. Oh the horrible,
clipping, mincing, and shameful pervertions, cutting sentences in two, taking
the middle of a line, and leaving both ends, altering the sense, laming the
argument, and defacing the whole matter; and if you please to do me right for
once, against his Son and your Companion, that stood up stoutly for you when
time was, (i. e.) G. W.'s answer styled, The content Apost. recharged, etc. to
mine entitled Battering Rams against New Rome, etc. where he took one line
here, another there, and sometimes five words out of the middle of a line,
sometimes but one word in a line, and leaves the next, and take the next, and
leap two or three lines off, and take two or three words more, see New Rome
unmaskt, p. 75. where this is fully discovered; it may be some may think this
is not worth the mentioning, but if they do but consider first, how they have
prevailed with these people to believe, that what their Teachers say is by an
infallible spirit, they will not err a jot, but do right to all impartially;
next that they hinder their Hearers from reading the Answers, or selling Books
that are against them, together with their way of spreading their own Books,
which suggest this; and I do say, it is one of the cunningest stratagems that
Satan has assisted them in, and a deep design to misrepresent their
Adversaries: I could write a Folio on this head, but Fox his Book styled, The
Great mist. being examined and compared is a sufficient demonstration, and if
they will not examine, but the blind will follow their blind Leaders, be it
upon themselves; for what can a man say to such as are willingly ignorant, and
resolve to oppose conviction.

I remember one little pretty story in Fox's Journal, see the 3d Table or Index
Treachery against Geo. Fox his Horse: Alas treason; for W. Pen knows G. F was a
King, if he that has a Kingdom be a King, see Judas and the Jews, p. 44, 45,
46. of his own justifying too. Well, however it was either Treachery or
Treason, that is certain, as you may find it printed in the 255 page, And I
looked back, and (the Hostler) was filing his Pocket with the Provender that
was giving to my Horse, etc. I confess it was a naughty trick, and the worse
considering whose Horse it was; but whether it deserves to be chronicled I
leave the Reader to judge. But Friend William, if you please to look into the
77 page of G. F. his Great mystery, there you will find him justifying Felony,
upon pretense of a motion, which show that the 8th Commandment, Exodus 20.15.
was not binding to the Quakers, at least to G. Fox their great Apostle and
Prophet, and Jacob of the age: well pray hear him, And as for any being moved
of the Lord to take away your (the Ministers) hourglass from you, by the
eternal power it is owned, etc. Here you see he owns Theft in the Quakers, with
this proviso, That if they be moved to it: And what Thief will not (to save his
Bacon, as the Proverb is) say he is moved: But the poor Thievish Hostler did
but steal 2 or 3 handfuls of Oats and he must be upon Record to posterity for a
Thief; only G. F. was so kind as not to write his name down, no more than he
did the names of several upon whom he wrought his Miracles, nor indeed where
they dwelt; only some in Maryland, some in Barbados, and some in Ireland. But
as to G. F. owning the Felony it is not strange, for if he was not convinced at
that time of his duty to Gods command in the 8th Commandment, he is by W. Pen
justified; and that this position is of a dangerous tendency, and does indeed
carry in it all iniquity, I shall yet further observe.

SECT. X.
HAving already treated of the Quakers Doctrine, particularly that position
which says, That no command in Scripture is any further obliging upon any man,
than as he finds a conviction upon his own conscience, etc. which is such a
pernicious principle, as Mr. Faldo said, that it carries all iniquity in the
womb of it, and indeed is the very floodgate by which Quakerism was first let
in among us, which came in as a mighty stream, flowing over all our Banks of
Laws, Order and Government, both divine and humane, overturning the very
Ordinances instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ; the authority of the
Scriptures, to the great scandal of our Christian Religion; and in the mean
while valuing their own Papers, Laws, and Orders, as superior to them; And
therefore, as I have begun with the first planting of Quakerism, which was in
the year 1650. and showed by what arts they have come on, and advanced their
Errors, I am now coming to show the way of Lucius the first Christian King (as
History says) that the world ever knew, to propagate the Christian Faith: he
did not stay at this place and that to write Papers and Books to spread truth;
nor did the Bishop of Rome at that time order him so to do; as was the practice
of Geo. Fox: no, to the Law, and to the Testimony, this was the way that every
planter of the true Christian Faith took, of which I will give you a noble
instance: Eng. Chron. by John Heath, p. 19, 20.
This Royal King Lucius being mindful of Religion (that dearest part of
Government) more than any other consideration, the better to prosper the work
so prosperously begun, sent two learned men to Elutherus then Bishop of Rome to
be farther instructed in the Christian Faith, who thereupon sent him Fagarius
and Damianus, with his Letter in the following words (as says the Historian)
viz. You have received in the Kingdom of Briton, by Gods mercy, both the Law
and Faith of Christ; you have both the Old and New Testament, out of the same
(through Gods Grace) by the Advice of your Realm, take a Law, and by the same,
through Gods Sufference, rule your Kingdom of Britain, etc.

Having such a good example from this Learned Bishop, and Religious King; I
shall first set down some Scriptures which have been both by Kings and Subjects
thought special commands, and binding and obliging all men, whether all have
been so persuaded yea or nay; yet I say the faithful Christians in all ages and
generations have taken them as their Rule of Obedience, and to be of that
authority to quell and subdue all those diabolical delusions which will suggest
the contrary, viz. Mat. 22.21. Render therefore unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods. St. Paul to Tit. 3.1. Put them
in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey magistrates, to be
ready to every good work. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 17. Submit your selves to every
ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreme; or
unto governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well. Honor all men, love the
brotherhood, fear God, honor the King. Romans 13.1, 2, 3. Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers, there is no power but of God: the powers that be
are ordained of God; whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation;
for rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Will thou G. F.
heed not a Cart Load of Warrants.
then not be afraid of the power; do that which is good and thou shall have
praise of the same.

W. Tyndals works, i. e. of the obedience of a Christian man, p. 111.
For God has made the King in every Realm judge over all, and over him there is
no Judge; he that resists the King resists God: If the Subjects sin they
must be brought to the Kings judgment: if the King sin, he must be reserved
unto the judgment of God; and as it is to resist the King, so is it to resist
his Officers which are set, or sent to execute the Kings commandment; for it is
written, let every soul submit himself unto the authority of the higher powers:
G. W. what think you of this Doctrine.
here is no man exempt; but all souls must obey.

Thus I have given a brief account of the Christian Faith. First what Christ,
who is the Head of the Christian Church, and Author of the Christian Faith, he
said, Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's; and his Apostle Paul bid
Titus, put the believing Christians in mind to obey Magistrates: and to confirm
this point St. Peter is very express, Submit your selves to every ordinance of
man for the Lords sake; not so much that he favors us, or is kind, and governs
gently, by wholesome Laws, these things indeed are good, and great mercies to a
people; but our submission ought to be for the Lords sake, who has ordained
Magistracy and Government, for so says St. Paul, the powers that be are
ordained of God; and whosoever resists the power resists the ordinance of
God. Likewise you may read the Doctrine of W. Tyndal, in his Book entitled, The
Obedience of a Christian man; and see how the blessed Martyrs espoused and
maintained the same delivered by the Apostles.

SECT. XI.
NOW in order to give a right understanding, and that from plain matter of
fact, of the difference between the faith and practice of the Quakers, of the
one part; and the faith and practice of the Christians, in all ages, since the
days of Christ, I have a purpose to set forth, as a particular instance, the
practice of the Reformed Churches of France: in regard they live under a Popish
King, rather than the Church of England; and chiefly for this reason, beeause
the Quakers are so prejudiced against our Clergy. Tho I believe, there is not
sounder men, nor a better disciplined Church in the world; yet I say, they
having always been so prejudiced against them, as to call them Beasts, Dogs,
Baals Priests, Witches, Devils, Antichrists, Blasphemers, and a thousand such
unchristian and horrible names; on purpose to beget an ill opinion in the
people of them (as Borough, in his Epistle to Fox his Mystery confesses) that
so they might leave and forsake them: also considering how frequently they have
in their Books arraigned, impeached, and condemned the Magistracy of England,
under the odious names of the Beast, which carry the Whore, the Persecuters of
Gods People, the Antichrists, etc. That I think it more proper to take a
foreign parallel, that, if possible, they may at last be brought to a
confession of their Errors, burn their Books, renounce their Religion, and
bethink themselves where they have been, what they have been doing, and how
scandalous their antimagistratical principles have been to the Christian
Religion: not that I have leisure or parts to set forth this matter as it ought
to be done; but am content to be as a Carpenters Man to hew off the knots, and
make the work fit for better Workmen, to complete what I leave imperfect, and
in order to this I shall abstract some few passages of the 28th Synod held at
Charenton in France, viz.

The Acts of the 28 Synod of the Reformed Churches of France, assembled by his
Majestys Permission at Charenton, near Paris, on Monday the 26th day of
December, 1644, and ended Thursday the 26th of January 1645.

See the Acts, Decisions, and Decrees of the Reformed Churches of France, per
John Quick vol. 2. p. 425.
First Monsieur Drelincourt opened the Sessions with Prayer; and then the Lord
Marquis of Clermont, General Deputy, presented the Writ, given forth by his
Majesty's Command, for calling the Synod, as follows, This day, being the
12th of February 1644. the King being then at Paris, upon the most Humble
Petition of his Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion, to permit them the
calling and holding a National Synod, desiring to gratify and treat favorably
he said Subjects, has permitted, and does permit them, the Convocation of a
National Synod, next at Charenton; but with this condition, that they treat in
it, of none other matters but of those which be allowed them; and that the
Commissioner whom his Majesty shall please to appoint be personally present in
the said Synod, as has been decustomed. In witness whereof his Majesty has
commanded me to issue out this Writ, which he has signed with his own hand,
and caused to be counter-signed by me his Councellor, and Secretary of State,
and of his Commands.

Signed in the Original, Louis. And a little lower Phelippeaux.




As Soon as the Officers of the Synod were chosen, the Lord Cumont, Councellor
for the King in his Council of State, and Parliament of Paris, deputed by his
Majesty, presented Letters Patents, which did commissionate him to represent
his Majesty in this Synod; these being read were incerted into the Register of
the Acts of this Synod, as follows.

Louis by the Grace of God King of Navarre to our trusty Councellor in our
Council of State and Court of ^arliament greeting.

We having granted our Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion to hold a
National Synod in the Town of Charenton, near Paris, on the 26th day of
December next coming, composed of all the Deputies of the Provinces of our
Kingdom, to treat of affairs concerning their Religion: And being to make
choice of a meet person, and of approved fidelity to us, who may precide in the
said Assembly, as our Commissioner, and may Represent us in it, we have
commissioned and deputed you, and we do commissionate and depute you, by these
Presents, signed with our own hand, to go unto the Town of Charenton, and to
sit in the said Synod there assembled, and to Represent our Royal Person in it;
and to propose and determine whatever matters we shall give you in Command,
according to those Memoirs and Instructions we have now delivered unto you: And
you are to take heed that none other affairs be there debated, but such as
ought to be in those Assemblies: And in case the Members of the said Synod
should attempt to do any thing contrary thereunto, you shall hinder them, and
interpose therein with our Authority, and to give us speedy and timely notice
of it, that such course may be taken to prevent those inconveniences which
would arise, as we shall judge most convenient: for the doing whereof we give
you Power and Commission, and Special Commandment by these Presents. Given at
Paris the 28 of November, in the Year of Grace 1644, and of our Reign the
second.

Signed in the Original Louis, And a little lower Phelippeaux.


The Speech of the Lord Commissioner unto the Synod, together with his
Propositions made in their Majesty's Name, etc.

Messieurs,
As it is a very great honor to me to be commissionated by his Majesty to
assist in your Synod, and to acquaint you with his Will and Pleasure; so also
have I a great deal of joy and satisfaction to behold this illustrious
Assembly, chosen out of all Provinces of this Kingdom: and that I can tell you
by word of mouth, what was expressly charged and commanded me by the King, and
the Queen his Mother, which is to assure you of their good will unto you, and
protection of you; and of all your Churches, and of the entire execution of the
Edicts of Pacification, so long as you continue your selves within the bounds
of your duty, subjection and fidelity which you owe unto their Majesty's; they
being the Higher Powers, set over you by God, entrusted with the supreme
Authority; and your lot and portion being the honor of obedience to them,
whereunto you stand obliged I am the longer in this recital, that the Quakers
may see; and in seeing may learn to know both their place and duty, both from
Scripture, and the Practice of the Martyrs and all true Christians, through all
Centuries, etc.
by your birth, the dictates of your Consciences, and the favors you daily
receive from their Majesty's; and by all kinds of consideration both general
and particular: and observe it, I beseech you, as a singular mark of their
Majesty's favor unto you, that there be of your Religion in the Kingdom It was
their obedience to the Laws brought them to that dignity: it is the
disobedience of the Quakers, and their antimagistratical principles, which keep
them out of all places of trust in the Government.
persons of the highest quality, there be amongst you most noble and
illustrious Dukes and Peers, Mareschals of France, Generals of Armies,
Magistrates, and Judges in Sovereign Courts: and their Majesty's now, this very
day, out of that great confidence they have in your Loyalty and Fidelity, have
granted you this Assembly at the very Gates of the Metropolis of this Kingdom,
in the very face and view of all France, and of this infinite people of Paris,
vastly different from you in manners and humors, inclination and religion, who
will be severe Witnesses and Judges over all your actions.

And that all things may be done in that order prescribed me by their
Majesty's, I am in their Names commanded to acquaint you, That all Ministers
who are not natural born Subjects, but Strangers, are to be excluded this
Synod; and that none may assist to vote in it who has not Letters of
Deputation from his Provincial Synod: and that during the time it be held you
may have no communication with Foreigners, or other suspected persons; and
forasmuch as your Assemblies are not by any legal constitution a Body Politic,
their Majesty's have forbidden you to meddle in State Affairs Come G. W. look
and learn, you are strangers to these limitations, you have the face to absolve
his Majesty's Subjects from their active obedience to the Laws, which require
them to pay Tyths, to pay to Church Wardens Rates, to take lawful Oaths, to
carry Guns, etc. by which it is plain that as you increase the strength of the
Nation will decrease.
or matters of Justice, because your Synod has no power to judge of such
matters, but only to treat of points of Doctrine and Church Discipline. G. W.
so do the Kings Laws forbid you, but whether you like the, French Protestants,
do regard those Laws I shall show by and by: no, the Law, what is the Law to
you; for as G. Fox did not heed a Cart Load of Warrants, no nor do you a Wagon
Load of Laws.
Moreover their Majesty's do forbid you to print any Books in any place
whatsoever, concerning your Religion, whieh are not attested ( i. e. Licenced)
by two Manual Certificates of two Ministers at least, under pain of
Confiscation of the whole Impression: nor may you denounce any Excommunication
against any Ministers and others, who shall change their Religion for that of
the Roman Catholic, nor treat them reproachfully, neither by word nor writing.
Hark G. W. then they were not to call such Beasts, Dogs, Wolves, Children of
the Devil, Devils incarnate, Enemies of all Righteousness, Apostates,
self-condemned Apostates, as you have called me and others for our forsaking
you, and conforming to the Religion Established.
Moreover when they speak of the Pope they are not to call him Antichrist But
you call both Ministers and People, Parliaments and Magistrates, who either pay
or receive Tithes Antichrist: Oh hetrodox in all points, etc.
, nor to treat him disrespectfully; nor shall they tax the Roman Church with
Idolatry, nor the Sacraments and Ceremonies thereof us humane Inventions and
Idolatry, etc. But you tell the Protestants their Sacraments are dust, and that
they rose from the Pope, etc. And treat the Dispencers thereof as Witches,
Devils, Antichrists, and what not, that is odious.
nor to make collections of Money, etc.


And now I come to show you the Christian Frame and Temper of the French
Protestants in their Obedience to the Kings Commandment, by their Moderator,
etc.

The Lord Commissioner having ended his Speech the Deputies returned their
Answer by their Moderator Monsieur Garrissoles. The Moderator's Answer.
WE thankfully acknowledge the great Goodness and Mercy of God Almighty, in
answering the Prayers of his poor Churches with his heavenly Blessing, and
their Majesty's Condescension in accepting our most humble Petitions presented
by the Lords of our General Deputies, and granting us this Privilege of holding
this Synod, and committing the Inspection of it unto a person most illustrious
for his Virtues, and well deserving that high place of Dignity and Honor in
the first and chiefest Parliament of the Kingdom; all these, and many other
considerations more, do enforce our Souls with a sweet and pleasing violence,
to break forth into enlarged Praises and enflamed Thankfulness, unto their
Majesty's; yea and in most ardent supplications unto our God for the
preservation of their sacred persons, his Benediction upon their Government,
the Glory of their Crowns, under whose comfortable Shadows the Churches
enjoying a sweet Peace will never have any other desire or thought, than to
practice faithfully and conscientiously that most express Command of our Lord
and Savior by his Apostle St. Peter, To fear God and honor the King; and that
with a most entire and sincere Obedience. And as we have no design to do it, so
we shall never admit any person to sit as a Member of our National Synod, who
has not a Deputation, etc. Nor shall we hold any Correspondency, nor receive
any Letters coming from Foreigners, See G. W the Quakers practice, and how
different herein, as anon I shall show.
nor return any Answers to them, unless that my Lord Commissioner, who
represents his Majesty's person, shall have first perused them: nor will we
debate about Matters of State, nor make any orders in relation to them; Hark G.
W. read your Edicts, and compare them, which resemble theirs as black does
white.
nor shall we set up Proivincial Councels in opposition to his Majesty's will:
Nor, as his Majesty has demanded of us, will we suffer those Canons of our
National Synods, concerning the Approbation of Books that shall be printed on
matters of Religion, to be violated, See and behold an Example, the Protestants
have regard to the Laws, the Quakers none.
nor shall we excommunicate any of those persons who quit the Communion of our
Churches, for we do not arrogate to our selves any Jurisdiction over them from
that minute in which they left us; nor shall we tolerate any Sermons fraught
with any injurious and reproachful Language against the Members of the Church
of Rome, whether in general or particular, nor suffer that Moneys be collected,
etc.


From all which it is self-evident from Scripture, Reason, and approved Authors,
that Christ and his holy Apostles commanded subjection and obedience to the
higher powers; their Commands are positive, and not with a Proviso, i. e. until
you be convinced of this your duty, etc. No they are Scripture Commands, and as
such ought to be obeyed; and so the Martyrs believed, and practiced, and set
examples: And you see how these worthy Christians, the French Protestants,
obeyed that wholesome doctrine; they did not answer the French King, that no
Commands in Scripture are obliging, unless a man be first convinced, that what
is there commanded ought to be obeyed; as Buroughs and Pen teach, and as the
Quakers practice, who run counter to the practice of Christ, his Apostles,
Martyrs, and all Christians to this day, etc.

SECT. XII.
AND thus the Quakers may see, as in a Glass, That first the French King was
humbly sought by the Protestants, to grant them leave to hold a National Synod,
upon which he answered their request, provided first, that he might have a
Commissioner in whom he could repose trust and confidence to be resident there,
to hear and observe, that their discourse did not tend to alienate the hearts
of his Subjects from their obedience to him, as their King and Governor.
Secondly, That they did not meddle with State matters, tending to beget
disobedience to the Laws of the Land, all which they as readily submitted to:
they promised they would not meddle with State matters, nor excommunicate and
revile his Magistrates and Ministers, nor hold a Correspondency with Strangers,
to let other Nations espy the Fashions and Customs of their Government, and
thereby take measures against it; that they would observe his Laws in not
printing Books without License, nor gather up Money to weaken the Subjects to
carry on designs against the Government.

But how far the Quakers differ in this point from the Christian, both at home
and abroad, I leave the Reader to judge, and that not from my bare say so, but
from plain matter of fact. But still to make it more plain, if more plain can
be, I shall in a few instances set 1st. The French Kings method in commanding
his Subjects. 2d. The manner of his Subjects Obedience and ready Compliance,
although not of his Persuasion, as to his Religion. 3d. The Quakers Practice and
Principles relating to Government. 4th. Some brief Observations from the
Premises.

SECT. XIII.
French King.
YOu shall have no Communication with Strangers; you shall neither read Letters
from them in your Convocation, nor return Letters to them, other than what my
Commissioner approves of.

Protest. Nor shall we read any Letters coming from Foreigners, nor return any
Answer, unless my Lord Commissioner approve thereof, ut supra.

Quak. (...) Epistle to the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings of Friends in
England and Wales, or elsewhere from our yearly Meeting held in London, the v.
vi vii and viii ^^ys of the 4th month, 1693. p. 2. Several other Epistles from
for^ign parts as Barbados, Maryland, Pensilvania, Virginia, Scotland, and
Holland, were read, an Epistle from Amsterdam in Holland; Ja. Dickinson, and
Tho. Wilson, at this Meeting gave an account of their Travels in Barbados,
East and West Jersey, Pensilvania, Maryland, Virginia, New England, North
Carolina, Rhoad Island, Long Island, Antego, Nevis, etc. Four Epistles from
Ireland, one from the last year Meeting in Dublin, another from Ulster
Province, another from Munster Province, the fourth from Conought Province
Meeting. An account was given of Dantzick friends. A Letter also from Jamaica,
that there are a People raised up, and increased in Germany from among the
Lutherans, called Pietists, by some called Quak^r^, persecuted by the Duke of
Saxony and the Priests, several of our Friends Books have been spread amongst
them. Again p. 3. Friends appointed to view the ^ccounts, report that they find
they are truly stated, and right kept; and friends are again advised to bring
up with them the t^tal sum of each Counties Collection. Query did Wm. Crouch
not forget the 5 l. he disbursed.
Again p. 4. the six friends of the City appointed and entrusted this Year with
the accounts are, William Crouch, John Staploe, William Macket, William
Chandler, William Beech, Nathaniel Marks.

Observation.
Reader, A small Remark will serve, 1st, It Is plain they hold a Correspondency
with, and receive Letters from Foreigners, return Answers, spread their Books
into foreign parts, pretending to spread truth, as if the Scriptures were
deficient. It Is also plain that they have a Fund or Bank, and a yearly Tax
collected to maintain their Teachers, Travelers and Spies, both at home and
abroad, see my Books Battering Rams against New Rome, etc. p. 14. New Rome unm.
p. 60. It Is also plain that they have Common Bankers with whom the keeping of
the Exchequer is entrusted; their Names are, W. Crouch, J. Staploe, W. Macket,
W. Chandler, W. Beech, Nath. Marks. See W. R.'s Second Scourge for G.
Whitehead, etc. on this Head.

SECT. XIV.
French King.
YOu are not to meddle with State Affairs, or matters of Justice.

Protest. Nor will we debate about State Affairs, or make any orders in
relation to them.

The King and Parl. of England. An Act of Parliament made the first year
Gulielmi and Mariae, entitled, An Act for exempting their Majesty's Protestant
Subjects dissenting from the Church of England, from the Penalties of certain
Laws, etc. Numb. 308.

Provided always that nothing herein contained shall be construed to exempt any
of the pers^ns aforesaid from paying of Tithes, or other parochial duties, or
any other duty to the Church or Minister, nor from any prosecution in any
Ecclesiastical Court, or elsewhere for the same.

Quakers Yearly Epist. p. 1. And therefore that all due and godly care be taken
against the Grand Oppression, and antichristian Yoke of Tithes, that our
Testimony born, and greatly suffered for, be faithfully maintained against them
in all respects, and against Steeple-house Rates; as also against the burden
and imposition of Oaths, that Friends at all their Monthly and Quarterly
Meetings be reminded to call for the Records of Friends Sufferings, to see that
they be duly gathered, truly entered, and kept, and accordingly sent up [to
London] as has been often advised, both of what Tithes are pretended to be
due, and for how long a time, and the time when taken, and by, and for whom;
and what goods are taken [by distress for non-payment] and the value thereof;
as well of those not exceeding, as those exceeding the sums or quantities of
Tithes demanded; it being a suffering in both for Truths sake. They [the said
Monthly and Quarterly Meetings] being in these particulars found defective and
imperfect in diverse Counties, which is an obstruction to the General Records of
Friends Sufferings, and therefore the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings are
desired to take more care for the future, that all Friends Sufferings for
truths sake, may be brought up (to London) as full and complete in all Respects
as possibly may be. A complaint being made, that some that profess truth carry
Guns in their Ships; it is therefore recommended to the Monthly and Quarterly
Meetings to deal with them, etc.

Observations.
Reader, the disparity between the Quakers and the Christians, in their
practice, behavior, gratitude and duty, is obvious. 1st. The French King
commands his Subjects not to meddle with State Affairs: the Protestants with
all complacency answer him no; they do not desire it, neither will they so much
as make orders about State matters, as not being their present station, being
Dissenters from the Religion by Law established. Thus you see the harmony of
the French King and his Subjects, and so much for that: next you see in the
first year of his present Majesty, he, with the advice and consent of his
Parliament, indulged the Quakers the free exercise of their persuasion, from
the penalty of poenal Statutes; but in the same Act for their Indulgence, there
is a clause, as above told, which ratifies and confirms the payment of Tithes,
and all Church dues, as firm as ever. In the next place you see what the
Quakers say of it: They tell you, That Tithes are a grand oppression, and not
only so, but, which is worse, an Antichristian Yoke; yea, such a yoke, as that
whoever receives or pays Tithes, does therein deny Christ to be come in the
Flesh by their doctrine: And thereupon by this Epistle, which is to go through
England and Wales, and elsewhere, they warn their Disciples to maintain their
Testimony against the payment of Tithes in all respects: the like against
Churchwardens Rates, and withal stoutly to oppose the Imposition of Oaths:
Nay, this is not all yet, but being sat in state to hear the grievances of the
Nation, there is a Complaint come up to the yearly Meeting, that some who
profess truth (as if there were none who profess truth but the Quakers) carry
Guns in their Ships: Well, they hear this Complaint, but refer that business to
the Country Sessions, I mean their Quarterly Meetings; for they have business
of great moment; and thus, instead of thankfully enjoying the Governments
kindness, they are privately undermining it, by alienating the Kings Subjects
from their active obedience to the known Laws of the Land; for this Epistle
alias Edict is to go through England and Wales and elsewhere, this elsewhere is
through the world: for as Rome is the Papists Metropolis, whose Decrees reach
to the ends of the earth, where Papists live, so is this yearly Meeting in
London the Quakers Metropolis, and from thence goes forth their Law, which is
obliging and binding as far as there are any Quakers. And if any desire to stay
until they be convinced; Oh no! says W. Pen, away with this loose plea, for it
is a dangerous principle, and pernicious to the true Religion: And which is
worse, The Examine. and State of Lib. Spir. p. 3, 11. pr. 1681.
it is the Root of Ranterism to asser that nothing is a duty incumbent upon
thee, but what thou art persuaded [or convinced] is thy duty, for the seared
Conscience pleads this liberty against all duty. The dark Conscience is here
unconcerned, the dead Conscience is here uncondemned. I see no evil, says one,
in paying Tithes to the hireling Priests; I see no evil, says another, in
marrying by a Priest; I see no evil, says a third, in hiding in times of
suffering, for I have Christ 's and Paul 's example; I see no evil, says a
fourth, The Quakers themselves force their Apprentices to stand bare-headed
before them in their Shops and Houses, where they are Superiors. Oh Deceit and
Hypocrisy, etc.
in putting off my Hat to my Superiors; I see no evil, says a fifth, in
shutting up my Windows in obedience to authority, on Christmas Day, or on
Fast-days, or other days set apart by the Magistrate, etc.

Thus, Reader, you may see the first capital sins against the Quakers
Commandments: and secondly, that they leave no room for their Disciples to stay
until they be convinced whether indeed these be sins either in their own
nature: or against the written word of God; or contained in the first or second
Table of the ten Commandments, oh no, they are transgressions against the
Orders, Laws and Commands of Geo. Fox: And as such, they are obliging upon all:
whether conviction or no conviction, etc. behold the Doctrine of W. Pen: yea,
the same William Pen that tells Mr. Faldo, That there is no Command in the
Scripture farther obliging upon any man's Conscience, than as he meets with a
Conviction.

SECT. XV.
Judas and the Jews, etc. p. 58. And their Rejoinder, p. 410. saying, Our
faithful Chronicle of the bloody Tragedies of that professing generation will
tell future ages other things, etc. I say, why future ages? This looks very
odd, to tell us 20 or 30 years together of a compendious History to come forth,
of their faithful Chronicles to come out, and yet none is come forth to public
view: No, they are sadly dull, they begin to draw back.
what! do not the Quarterly and Monthly meetings carry up enough every year? or
are they minded to reserve it till all persons concerned therein are dead and
gone, and see none left to detect it? At that rate indeed they may tell future
ages a lamentable story of cruel sufferings; and little of it true, if any.

Answer 1. As to the quarterly and monthly Meetings, tho they may be somewhat
dull, and want quickening, yet no doubt but they have gathered up enough to
print several volumes, for you see they call for the whole number, viz. Take
more care for the future, that all friends su^^erings may be brought up as full
and complete in all respects as possible may be, etc. Thus we see what care
they take first to magnify themselves by their great sufferings, which in all
the History that I have read of the French Protestants, I have not taken notice
of any thing of the like nature. 2. You may see by their threatened Chronicle
how they intend to represent this Nation, as a persecuting bloody-minded
people: And knowing that great part of their sufferings are shams, and nothing
but noise, they are ashamed (as well they may) to bring it forth. And to
convince the World that it is so see my Book New Rome unmaskt, etc. p. 54.
where Samuel Cater of Littleport in the Isle of Ely, one of their preachers is
detected, for being recorded in their quarterly book for suffering a fine of 20
l. for preaching at Plakenham in Norfolk, when indeed he was so far from losing
20 l. that he got 10 l. into pocket (tho a rich man) in clear money: It Is true,
he was fined and his goods destrained, but never carried away, and in a little
time every pennyworth returned, as 40 neighbors will witness; but this made
such a noise; and Sam being a right man for Fox, and as true to him as he was
to Ja. Nayl^r, when he led his Horse into Bristol, he had 10 l. sent him out of
the public Stock (Fund, Exchequer or Treasury, or what you will call the
Common Bank) by John Peacock, deceased, late of St. Ives, as a Reward for his
Valor and Courage; but you must note he was a Preacher; for June 9. 1670.
(which as my old Records still by me tell me) there was a meeting at
Littleport, where Sam. Fullig, Cl. Crabb, Tho. Hawks, Jo. Love, Henry Waddelow,
Tho. Pain, R. Crabb, and others were fined, who had their Cows, Horses, Mares,
Pewter and Brass taken away, but never any thing sent them from London, nor
their goods returned: But that which makes Sam. Cater's Case still worse, tho
indeed I think there can be no greater cheat put upon future ages, yet this is
more impudent, for anno 1679. S. Cater and Jos. Harrison put forth a Book
entitled, A Lamentable Cry of Oppression, etc. In which Book the said Sam.
renews the memory of his sufferings, for that meeting for which he did not
suffer a groat, but got 10 l. clear into pocket, as I have said, read p. 14.
There being a meeting at Jos. Harrison's in Plakenham, July 2. 1670. And Sam.
Cater being there, declaring the truth, W. Watts's his Wife came, and went and
informed the Officers who came and had him before Chr. Colthorp, who said he
would fine Sam. 2O l. which accordingly he did, and sent the Records of
Conviction to Ely Magistrates, who sent out their Warrants, and took away his
goods, etc. Thus ends the Relation, as to matter of fact, but he that writes a
History of that nature should tell the whole truth, viz. Indeed I was so
informed against, so fined, and destrained: But I had my goods again, this at
least he should have said, tho he had kept private his Reward of 10 l. which
was purposely sent him, etc. But alas, he to make the world believe that he
thus lamentably suffered under that lamentable Justice Sir Christopher
Colthorp, nine years after the transaction was committed and done, and also to
make the poor Quakers that heard him, and lost their Fines without any
reparation, believe that their Minister was zealous for the cause, a great
sufferer, yea, 20 l. thick, for coming to visit them as a servant of the Lord,
and a Messenger from the great God. He goes on, p. 44. saying, And now it is
upon me, from the Lord to warn you all that have had any hand in oppressing his
Children, and evil entreating his Servants and Messengers that he has sent
amongst you, to exhort you: But instead of receiving them and their Testimony,
you have caused them Here Sam. thinks to blind the poor Quakers, and make them
believe he was a 20 l. sufferer, when he lost not a groat.
to suffer: And them [also] that did receive them, and their Testimony: The
Lord forgive you, is the desire of him that chooses rather to suffer Affliction
with the people of God, than to live in the pleasures of this world. Sam. Cater.

I have laid a snare for thee, and thou art taken, O Babylon; and thou wast not
aware; thou art found and also caught; put your selves in array against
Babylon, round about all you that bend the Bow, shoot at her, spare no Arrows;
for the Lord has opened his Armoury, and has brought forth the weapons of his
indignation, for this is the work of the Lord God of Hosts, Jer. 50.14, 24, 25.

SECT. XVI.
Fr. King.
WE do forbid you to print any Books in any place whatsoever concerning
Religion, which are not Attested [ i. e. Licensed] by two Manual Certificates
at least, under pain of losing the whole Impression.

Prot. Nor as his Majesty has demanded of us, will we suffer th^se Canons of
our National Synod concerning the Approbation [ i. e. Licensing] of Books, that
shall be p^in^^d on matters of Religion to be violated; it being our sincere
and most fixed Resolution to ob^erve in the precisest and strictest manner
their Majesty's Edicts; and under the benefit of them to l^ad a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

Quak. Epist. ibid. p. 3. It Is desired that the monthly and quarterly meetings
respectively takes notice of all Friends Books that are or may be sent to them,
according to former agreement, and take care for the dispersing the same for
the service of Truth, etc. and take care to advise the Correspondents for the
Counties to write only to your Correspondents in London about their sufferings,
lest their suffering case be delayed.

Renewed advice to the respective Monthly and Quarterly Meetings in England and
Wales, and for the preserving and spreading Friends Books, for Truths service.
Dear Friends,
THese are to let you understand that our Friends have at several yearly
Meetings had under their serious consideration, hw all those Books that are
printed for the service of Truth and the unity of Friends, might most
effectually be spread, for a general service to Truth, and Information unto
Friends and others: And at the last yearly Meeting it was left unto this
meeting, who have settled as follows, viz.

That those that print friends books, shall the first opportunity after
printed, within one month at most, send to one of the Correspondents in the
several Counties, viz.

For each Monthly Meeting two Books of a sort if under Sixpence, and one of a
sort if above Sixpence, for these reasons.

1. For Friends to have general notice of what Books are printed.

2. That they may send for what other quantities they may see a service for.

3. That the Printer may be encouraged in printing for friends.

4. That one Book, at least, of a sort, that shall be printed [except
Collections] may be kept in each Monthly and Quarterly Meeting, for the service
of Friends and Truth, as there shall be ^ccasion for the future.

5. It Is agreed that the Printer will allow two pence in the shilling for all
such Books.

6. It Is Agreed, That some here shall be appointed to examine the Printer, to
see that they send no Books, but such as are appointed by Friends.

7. It Is Agreed and Advised, that the Printers account be fully cleared once a
year at least, by those Friends the Country shall send up to the yearly Meeting.

8. It Is Agreed, That the name of the Printer employed by Friends should be
sent, with directions how to write to him.

Dear Friends and Brethren, it is tenderly advised and recommended to you, that
you be careful and diligent in the spreading of all such Books that are printed
for the service of Truth, and are written either in defense of it, or Christian
Doctrine or Holy profession, or by way of Epistle, Warning, Caution,
Exhortation, or Prophecy; that so we may not be remiss or negligent in
promoting the holy truth, that nothing may be wanting on our parts to promote
it, and the spreading of it; that the Nations may be informed, and brought into
the knowledge of it; that in the end we may give an account with joy. An
ancient friend, the Printers name is as follows, to whom direct thus: For
Andrew Soale, at the Crooked Billet in Holy-well-lane, in Shoreditch, London:
Or to Thomas Northcoat, at his Shop in George-yard, in Lombard Street, London.
And this we think needful you should record in your Quarterly Books, and
sometimes read it for rem^mbrance and notice. Signed in the behalf of the
Meeting the 18th of the ^^th m^nth, 1693. by Benjamin Bealing.

The yearly Meeting Epistle, the 27th of the 3d month, 1675. It is our Sense,
Advice, Admonition and Judgment, in the fear of God, and the authority of his
Power and Sprit, to Friends and Brethren in their several Meetings, that no
such slight and contemptible names and expressions, as calling men and women's
Meetings, Courts, Sessions or Synods: that they are Popish Impositions, useless
and burdensome: And that faithful Friends Papers which we Testify, have been
given forth by the Power and Spirit of God, are men's Edicts or Canons, or
embracing them, bowing to men Elders in the service of Truth, Popes and
Bishops, with such scornful sayings be permitted among them: But let Gods power
be set upon the top of that unsavory Spirit, and them that use it.

Signed by George Whitehead, William Pen, and others.


I am the larger in this Citation, to convince the world that the Quakers
prefer their own Books before and above the Scripture, contrary to their
pretense in their sheet they delivered to the Parliament: as also to show the
impudence of some amongst them, that tell people they have no Epistles read
amongst them, as Francis Bugg sets forth; which I know they can no more be
ignorant of, than of the Suns shining at noonday: And in order to a further
discovery thereof, I shall recite the Titles of some of their Epistles, as I
did in New Rome Arraigned, p. 41. which to this day they have not denied, etc.

1. Two General Epistles to the Flock of God, wherever they are dispersed, by
M. Fell and J. Park, printed 1664.

2. To Friends in England, Ireland, Scotland, Holland, New England, Barbados,
or any where else where the Lord shall order this to come, etc.

3. A General Epistle to be read in the fear of God in the Assembly of his
people, by W. D.

4. The word of the Lord to Syon the New Jerusalem, the Bride, the Lambs Wife,
the excellency of all the Glory that is amongst the people, by W. D. printed
1664.

5. An Epistle to Friends every where, to be read distinctly in their Meetings,
by K. W. printed 1681.

6. All Friends every where, this is the word of the Lord unto you all; this
you may read amongst the children of the light, and of the day, per G. Fox.

7. This is only to go amongst Friends.

8. An Epistle to Friends in England to be read in their Assemblys.

9. An Epistle to the Remnant of Friends per G. Whitehead, concluding thus, Let
this be read distinctly in the life and authority of God (from whence it came)
among Friends, in and about the City of London, and elsewhere, as any Friends
are moved in the same Life.

10. To all people who meet in Steeple Houses in England, and elsewhere, p. 2.
A message from the Lord Jesus Christ in England, or elsewhere, into all the
Steeple Houses to be read.

11. To the Children of Light, etc. I desire this Epistle may be read in your
several Meetings, William Pen.

12. Several papers given forth for the spreading of truth, etc. I charge you
in the presence of the Lord God to send this [Epistle] among Friends and
Brethren every (...) to be read, in all Meetings, to you all, this is the word
of the Lord God, Geo. Fox.

SECT. XVII.
HAving in the foregoing Section proved from plain matter of fact, that the
Quakers prefer their nonsensical Pamphlets before the Scriptures, being
compared with the contemptible expressions they give them, as beastly ware,
death, dust, and serpents meat, etc. notwithstanding their Hypocritical Sheet
they delivered to the Parliament, and as a proof it will stand against them
beyond all their glossing; I think I need to make no other Remark or
Observation, having largely showed their practice from their own works, and
therefore I come now to answer an Objection, viz.

Object. Possibly some may say, that tho they take the liberty of the Press to
spread their Heretical Doctrine, and defamatory Libels, as the Battledoor for
the Magistrates, Teachers, and Professors, in the form and figure of a Child's
penny horn book, to learn the English of tu and vos. As likewise their Primmer
put out by G. Fox (formerly a Journeyman Shoemaker) containing 2434 Queries, as
what is a Noun, a Pronoun, a Participle, an Adverb, etc. as at large recited by
me in my book Battering Rams against New Rome, etc. p. 16, 17. yet they often
pretend to moral virtues; and they pretend they do not hinder the Sale of your
Books, as in W. Pens Rejoinder, etc. part 2. p. 404. I do aver (says W. Pen in
the name of the Quakers) we never endeavor any such thing as to prevent the
sale of an Adversaries Books: Therefore, in so many words, they [who say we do]
have certified an absolute Lie, etc.

Answ. Now for proof that the Quakers do hinder the Sale of their Adversaries
Books, I will give you three instances, whereby it will appear, how false
William Pen is in this case, as well as in many more that might be mentioned;
but what will they not say for holy Church. Oh the deceit, the fraud, and
religious cheats that are to be found amongst the Teachers of this people: but
as he himself observes in a little Pamphlet of his styled, A Brief Answer to a
false and foolish Libel, etc. p. 25. But the truth is, error can only be
maintained by error. And what can we expect from W. Pen, who has vindicated as
gross Idolatry wrote by Jos. Coal to G. Fox, as ever Muggleton uttered, in his
Book Judas and the Jews, and, c. p. 44 to 47. I say what can we expect of such
men as Pen and Whitehead who will say and unsay, this to day and that to
morrow, and by and by stand to neither? well but let me proceed to prove W. Pen
a Liar for once, since he avers in the name of the Quakers, that they never
hinder the Sale of their Adversaries Books, etc.

Instance 1.
About the year 168^. William Rogers put forth a Book against the Foxonian
Quakers Usurpation of their Women's Meetings, etc. entitled, The Christian
Quaker distinguished from the Apostate and Innovate, in five parts. This Book
John Barnard a dissenting Quaker sold, and for which thing only they
excommunicated him, as at large set forth in my Book de Chr. Lib. etc. part 2.
p. 179. An Abstract thereof I shall recite, viz. From the monthly meeting at
Devonshire-house, the 4th of the 11th month, 1681. Whereas there have been some
unruly Spirits gone out from the truth, and the unity of the blessed power of
God, writing, printing and publishing things hurtful to truth, by corrupting of
peoples minds, tending also to draw them into disesteem Mark the two things
this excommunication are bottomed upon, viz. first corrupting of peoples minds,
next tending to weaken the esteem the p^or ignorant Quakers have of such
Deceivers.
of many of the Lords Servants; we find our selves concerned to take notice of
some of this kind befaln Jo. Barnard, formerly a member of this Meeting, who
has dispersed into several parts of this Nation diverse of those perni^io^s
Ba^ks in print, wrote by W. Rogers, called The Christian Quaker distinguished
from the Apostate and Innovater: So that now we being wholly clear, having used
an utmost endeavor to reclaim him do not only T^stifie against that Spirit,
which has led him into that disorderly practice, but also against ^i while
joined thereunto; nor can we have Spiritual communion or fellowshi^ with him,
until unfeignedly he shall return unto the truth, by condemnation of that Work
and Spirit, etc.

By which it is plain that the Quakers do endeavor to hinder the Sale of their
Adversaries Books: as this excommunication out of their Fellowship and
Spiritual Communion, for selling the said Book, is an evidence and sufficient
proof, etc.

Instance II.
Whereas G. Keith wrote several Books against the errors of the Quakers in
Pensilvania, and for which they persecuted him, as their Book styled The Trials
of Peter Boss, George Keith, Tho. Budd and William Bradford, before a Court of
Quakers at the Sessions held at Philadelphia in Pensilvania, etc. at large set
forth: But the said Geo. Keith coming into England was examined by the yearly
meeting, June 1694. Where they advised G. Keith in these words; And therefore
it is the tender Advice and Counsel, that Geo. Keith should either call in
these Books, or at least publish something effectually to clear the body of the
people called Quakers, and their Ministers, from those gross errors charged on
some few in America, etc. This continued until May 1695. And G. Keith not
calling in his Books, nor clearing the body of the Quakers from those gross
errors which G. K. had charged on them, they excommunicated the said G. Keith,
May 17. 1695. As acted by an unchristian Spirit: and it is the sense and
judgment of this meeting (say they) that the said Geo. Keith is gone from the
Blessed unity of the peaceable spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, and has
thereby separated himself from the holy fellowship of the Church of Christ,
etc. Which is as large an Excommunication as the Pope himself or his Infallible
Council ever pretended to; for they have not only by their Bull of
Excommunication cut him off (as they dream) from the fellowship of the Quakers
in London, Wales, etc. but off from the whole Church of Christ: And as this is
a great arrogance in the Quakers, and presumption too, so do they thereby
differ from the French Protestants: And in regard this their Bull of
Excommunication was denounced against G. Keith, for that he did not effectually
call in his Books writ against the errors of the Quakers, and thereby clear the
body of the Quakers from those errors charged upon the Quakers in Pensilvania:
which in Conscience he could not do, in regard he knew them Guilty thereof:
This is a plain demonstration that W. Pen's averring that they never endeavor
to hinder the sale of their Adversaries Books, is a great untruth. See the next
proof.

Instance III.
In the year 1693. I put forth a Book entitled, New Rome Arraigned, etc. which
the Quakers by an Officer seized, and carried 60 of them to a Quakers house,
and Indicted me in the Old Baily, London. An Abstract of the said Bill of
Indictment is as follows.

London ss. At the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace holden for the City of
London at the Guild Hall of the said City, on Monday the ninth of October,
1693. before Sir J. F. Knight, Mayor of the said City; Sir P. W. Knight. Sir J. M.
Knight. Aldermen; Sir S. L. Recorder of the said City; the King and Queens
Justices, to hear and determine the transgressions of Felons, and other
enormities committed within the said City: The same Sessions is adjourned by
the foresaid Justices, until Thursday the 12th of the same month of October,
1693. at 7 of the clock in the forenoon, at Justice-hail in the Old Baily,
London, to be holden before the foresaid Justices and their Associates,
according to Custom, etc.

And now passing by most of the form, I come to set forth the Aggravating terms
of their said Indictment, etc.

Ut supra: A certain Bill of Indictment against one Francis Bugg, then and
there brought before B. B. G. B, etc. Jurymen, then and there sworn and
charged to enquire for the said King and Queen, and the body of the said City:
And was returned by the Jury thus Indorsed, Ignoramus. Which Bill follows in
these words: The Jury for our Lord the King and Queen do present upon their
Oaths, That Francis Bugg, late of London, Yeoman, being a person of an unquiet
and turbulent disposition; devising, practicing, and intending falsely,
unlawfully, seditiously and maliciously, Geo. Whitehead, Ja. Park, Ben.
Antrobus, Sam. Waldenfeild, etc. faithful Subjects of our Lord and Lady the
King and Queen, now of this their Kingdom of England extremely to scandalize;
to pr^cur^ and bring to Infamy and Reproach amongst their Neighbors, and other
Subjects of our said King and Queen: As also to move, stir up, and cause
discords, tumults and miser^^^* slaughters between the Subjects of this Kingdom
of England, on the 18th day of September in the 5th year of our Lord and Lady,
etc. And upon diverse other days and times, as well before as after, at London
aforesaid (to wit) in the Parish Church It Is not a Steeple-house it seems now,
however neither I nor the Quakers wear there.
of St. Christopher in Farringdon-Ward, he fals^y, maliciously, seditiously and
illegally made, composed and printed, published and dispersed amongst the
Subjects, etc. a certain scand^^ous, mal cious and defaming Libel, against the
said G. Whitehead, etc. -- The same English Book or Pamphlet not being first
Entered in the Register-book of the Cmpany of Stationers of No more do the
Quakers.
of London, and also not being Lycenced by Act of Parliament, Why does not G. W
get his Books Lycenced by Act of Parliament.
Proclamation, or added to the Book (this may be Printed) by virtue of any
Warrant under the Seal, etc. or one, or both the principal Secretaries of
State, etc. nor Lycenced, I hope the Quakers will License their
Meetting-houses, now they thus severely persecute me for not Lyce^cing my Book.
Canes timidi vehementius latrant.
nor Authorized by any person whatsoever, against the form of the Statute in
that case lately made and provided, to the bad example of all that shall offend
in that case, and against the Peace of our Lord and Lady the King and Queen,
their Crown and Dignity.

Ignoramus. Goodfellow.


Reader, I have transcribed enough to show their indicting me, and that for no
other crime than not Lycencing my Book: If they say I put up a mock-Pillory, to
show what they in reality deserved, who, as in the same Book I have set forth,
offered to suffer, as in the case of Perjury, if they falsify their word, which
they did do, in the Case of Evidence, and that in the Name of the Lord, which
amount to an Oath. But suppose the form of a Pillory was not easy to them, must
I therefore be tried and judged to move, stir up, cause discords, tumults, and
miserable slaughters, etc. Well however, as this shows what the Quakers would
do had they power, so it is a sufficient proof that they did endeavor to
hinder the Sale of my Books; also this their indicting me shows, what an
envious and lying spirit they, G. Whitehead and his Brethren, are of.

SECT. XVIII.
AS I have showed how contrary the Principles and Practices of the Quakers, are
to the Principles and Practices of the French Protestants, and indeed to all
other Christians, I am now about to show their disparity in the Articles of
their Faith; setting forth an Abstract of the French Protestants Confession of
Faith, containing 40 in number, which was presented to several French Kings, as
judging it a most proper way to obtain their Liberty; as at large in the 1st
Volume of J. Quicks History styled, Synodicon in Galia Reformata, p. 6. to 15.
And likewise what the Quakers believe, if they believe as they write; for by
reason they have not given forth distinct Articles of their Faith like the
Christian Churches in all ages, I must collect some select passages out of
their Books in one Column, and the French Protestants in another, viz.

The Quakers Faith.
A Declaration to all the world of our Faith, and what we believe who are
called Quakers.

Concerning God and Christ.
Burrows works, p. 439. We believe there is one only true God, who is a Spirit,
and his presence fills heaven and earth, and he is eternal and everlasting,
the Creator and Preserver of all things.

Saul's Errand to Damascus, etc. p. 8. He that has the same spirit that raised
up Jesus from the dead is equal with God.

The Sandy Foundation, p. 12, 16. The vulger doctrine of satisfaction being
dependent on the Second Person of the imagined Trinity of distinct persons in
the unity of Essence Refuted.

The Sword of the Lord drawn, etc. p. 5. Your imagined God beyond the Stars,
and your carnal Christ is utterly denied, and testified against by the light:
to say, that Christ is God and Man in one person is a Lie.

A Question to Professors, etc. p. 20, 27, 33. To whom do the Names Jesus and
Christ chiefly and in the first place belong; do they belong to the body which
was took by him, or to him who took the body? Is not the Su^stance, the Life,
the Anointing called Christ where^ver it is found? does not the Name [Christ;]
belong to the whole body, and every member in the body as well as to the dead.
Now the Scriptures do expressly distinguish between Christ and the Garment which
he wore, between him that came, and the body in which he came; between the
substance which was veiled, and the vail that veiled it; [Lo I come, a body
have thou prepared me] there is plainly he, and the body in which he came;
there is the outward vess^l, and the inward life; this we certainly know, and
can be ^er call the bodi^y ^arment Christ, but that which appeared and dwelt in
the body, etc. Thus do they deny Christ which the Apostles preached, saying,
Acts 5.30, 35. The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged
on a tree, him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a
Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. Acts 2.36.
Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God has made the
same Jesus, whom ye crucified, both Lord and Christ, etc.

The Christians Faith.
WE believe and confess there is but one God only, whose being only is simple,
spiritual, eternal, invisible, immutable, infinite, and incomprehensible: And
that the Holy Scripture teaches us, that in that one simple divine being there
be three persons subsisting, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; the
Father, to wit, the first cause in order and the beginning of all things; the
Son, his everlasting word; the Holy Ghost, his virtue, power, and efficacy: the
Son begotten of the Father from everlasting; the Holy Ghost from everlasting
proceeding from the Father and the Son; these 3 persons are not confounded but
distinct, and yet not divided, but of one and the same essence, eternity, power
and equality; and to conclude, we allow of that which those four ancient
Councils have determined; and we detest all other Sects and Heresies condemned
by those holy Doctors, St. Athanasius, St. Hillary, St. Cyril, and St. Ambrose.

Now if the Light only be Christ, and as they say, they can never call the Body
Christ, then are the Apostles found false Witnesses, and the Quakers acquit
Judas and the Jews, for they never did hang the Light or Spirit upon a Tree,
they never Crucified the Light; see Quakerism withering and Christianity
reviving, etc. p. 15 to 30, for more of this. Will. Bayley's Works, p. 300,
307. He being asked, What Body Christ has, and where is it, seeing its said to
be at the Right hand of God, he replies saying, A [Body] have [thou] prepared
[me] mark the distinction [thou] [me] and [a body.] This [me] that spoke in the
[body] was the [Christ.] Again, p. 307. For they [his Disciples loved his
person for the sake of the frame and quality of the Spir t that dwelt in him,
or else what was his person to them m^re than another person, but for [the sake
of] that which dwelt in him they loved him.

The Christ. Qua. and his Dev. Test. p. 98. The Se-pent is a Spirit, now
nothing can bruise the head of the Serpent but something that is Spiritual, as
the Serpent is; but if that body of Christ were the seed, then could he not
bruise the Serpents head in all, because the body of Christ is not so much as
in any one: And consequently the seed of the promise is an holy principle of
Light and Life, that being received into the heart bruiseth the Serpents head:
And because the Seed, which cannot be that body, is the C^^ist, as says the
Scripture, the Seed is one, and that Seed is Christ.

Touching the Scriptures.
Geo. Whitehead's Serious Apology, p. 46. That which is spoken from the spirit
of Truth in any, is of as great Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are
and greater. G. W.s Ishmael, p. 10. That which is written is the Letter, which
is death and kills.

Readiness Errand to Dam. etc. p. 7. All that do study to raise a living thing out
of a dead, to raise the Spirit out of the Letter are Conjurers; the Letter of
the Scripture is death and kills.

Several Petitions answered, p. 30. If ever you own the Prophets, Christ and
the Apostles, you will own our Writings, which are given forth by the same
power and spirit.

Truths Defense, p. 2, 102. You might have as well condemned the Scriptures to
the fire, as our Writings, for our giving forth Papers and Printed Books, it is
from the immediate eternal Spirit of God.

The Quakers Refuge fixed, etc. p. 17. Whether the first Penman of the
Scriptures was Moses or Hermes, or whether both these are not one; or whether
there are not many words contained in the Scriptures which were not spoken by
Inspiration of the Holy Spirit; whether some words were not spoken by the Grand
Impostor, some by wicked men, some by wise men ill applied, some by good men
ill expressed, some by false Prophets, and yet true; some by true Prophets, and
yet false, etc.

David's Enemies discovered, etc. per G. Whitehead and Christopher Atkinson, p.
7. And these [the Apostles] do not call the Letter the Rule; and the four Books
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, the New Testament and Gospel, as thou, and thy
generation [the Priests] do, and thy Ministry is in the Letter which kills.

News coming up, etc. per G. Fox, p. 14. Your Original is carnal, Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin; and your word is carnal, the letter and the light is carnal,
the letter and your Baptism is carnal, and your Sacrament is carnal, and their
Communion is carnal: A little Bread and Wine, so dust is the Serpents meat;
their original is but dust, which is but the letter which is death; their
Church is dust, so the Serpent feed upon dust; and their Gospel is dust,
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, which is but the letter.

Touching Ordinances.
P. 34. A voice and a word to all you Deceivers who deceive the people, and
Blasphemers who utter forth your Blasphemy and Hypocrisy, that tell people of a
Sacrament, and tell them it is the Ordinance of God; blush, blush. and tremble,
before the Lord God Almighty, you who live in the Witchery, and bewitch the
people, etc.

Buroughs Works about Water Baptism, p. 518. We do utterly deny, and do say it
is no Ordinance of God, but it is an Institution of the Whore of Rome, and
England received it by a popish Institution, and your practice of it is
Idolatry, and no part of the Worship of God, p. 51. have you been bewitched
from the ob^dience of the truth within to obey the Letter without.

Will. Smiths Primmer, etc. p. 36. Quest. How is it concerning these things
called Ordinances, as Baptism, and Bread and Wine? Answ. As to those things
they arose from the Pop^s Invention, who has had power in the night of
Apostasy, and has set up his d^vi^es which are yet continued in England, tho
he seemingly is denied; and the whole practice of those things as they use
them, had their Institution by the Pope, and were never so ordained of Christ.
Quest. How may I know when Christ is truly preached? Answ. They that are false
[Ministers] preach Christ without, and bid people believe in him, as he is in
heav n ab^ve; but they that are Christ's Ministers preach Christ within.

See my Sheet to the Parliament, p. 5.

A Music Lecture, etc. p. 25. For where they are I was in Performances, in
Ordinances, in Family Duties, in Hearing, in Reading, in Fasting; but when I
came to b^nd my mind to that of God in me, then I began to learn to be a Fool,
insomuch that I durst not give thanks for the victuals that were set before me.

Concerning Election and Reprobation.
Truths Defense, etc. p. 92. We [Quakers] are elected to Salvation, we have the
witness within us, praised be God who has elected and chosen us before the
foundation of the world: but thou [the Priest] art ordained of old for
Condemnation, and for Perdition among the ungodly ones, and art a Reprobate one
that hates Christ and art blind.

Reader, I have at large proved out of their Books, that all Ministers that
sprinkle Children with Water, all that preach Christ without, as he is in
Heaven above, at the right hand of God; all that take a Text, and preach out of
the Scriptures; all that either receive or pay Tithes, as at large in my Second
Summons, etc. p. 7, 8. And now I am willing to give you the Quakers Faith and
Persuasion concerning them, as in their Book, A brief Discovery of a threefold
Estate, etc. p. 7, 8. with the same Title set thus over their heads, viz.

Of the false Ministry.
The Priests of the world are 1. Conjurers, raising dead Doctrine out of the
letter, which is death, raising death out of death, notable Conjurers. 2.
Thieves and Robbers. 3. Antichrists, the Priests of Baal, cannot show any
Scripture for their heathenish ways and beastial worships. 4. Witches, blind
Guides. 5. Devils, the Serpent is head in them. 6. Liers, the Commission and
Call of Baals Priests come from Oxford and Cambridge. A poysonous-fountain, the
Sir Symons of the age, run to Oxford and Cambridge, they run with Simon. These
are not Ministers of Christ, but Stewards of the Devils Magazines, Dissemblers
and Liers. 7. A viperous and serpentine generation going about to murder the
Child Jesus, h^lding a worm-eaten beastly form. 8. Blasphemers, yea, of the
Devil, fearful Blasphemers. 9. Scarlet colored Beasts, a Harlot full of
abomination and filthiness. 10. Babilons Merchants, selling beastly ware for a
large price, the Letter which is d^st and death; the day is coming when these
Idol Merchants, these costly Sermon-makers shall cry, etc. 11. Whited Walls
prosessing nothing but poisonous stuff. 12. Ravenous Wolves. 13. Greedy Dogs;
really they are Blood Hounds, still hunting and gasping after their prey like
the mouth of Hell, barking and raging like Sodomites. 14. Eminent and ambitious
Pharisees of the Devil; woe, w^ woe, was the portion of those Pharisees then, and
woe, woe, w^, is the portion of these Pharisees now; and woe and misery is the
portion of the Upholders (whether King or Parliament) of that treacherous and
dec^itful generation.

The Guide mistaken, etc. per W. Pen, p. 18: And whilst the idle germundizing
Priests of England run away with 1500000l. a year, under presence of being Gods
Ministers; and that no sort of people have been so u^iversally thr^ugh ages the
banc of soul and body of the Universe, as that abominable Tribe, for whom the
Theater of Gods m^st dreadful vengeance is reserv^d to act their eternal
Tragedies upon, etc.

About Go^ernors and Government.
Burrows Works, etc. p. 442. We believe that all Governors and Rulers ought to
be accountable to the people, and to the next succeeding Rulers, for all their
actions which may be inquired into upon occasion; and that the chiefest of the
Rulers be subject under the Law, and punishable by it, if they be
Transgressors, as well as the poorest of the people, p. 507. But as for this
people [the Quakers] they are raised of the Lord, and established by him even
contrary to all men, and they have given their power only to God, and they
cannot give their power to any mortal men, to stand or fall to any outward
Authority, and to that they cannot seek, p. 501. We stand Witnesses against
Parliaments, Councels, Judges and Justices, who make and execute Laws in their
wills ever the consciences of men, to punish for conscience sake; to such Laws,
Customs, Courts, or arbitrary usurped Dominion, ^ cannot yield obedience, p.
621. Nay their [the Quakers] Kingdom is from above, and they reject the
countenance of the Beasts authority, and they reject any confidence that the
Dragon and unjust power can repose in them, p. 53. For we (say the Quakers) are
gathered up into the life which the holy men of God lived in, and are fallen from
the world, and its ways, and nature, p. 50. for even the Father bears witness
of us, and therefore our witness is true, p. 52. A running to the powers of the
earth? what have your Ministers lost the Lord to be your strength that you must
flee for help to men; must they m^ke ^aws to esta^lish you, and set you up; is
not this the Where that rode upon the Beast, and that the Beast carried. And p.
524. to the Parliament thus, viz. You do but cause people to drink of the
Whores Cup, and you are but them which carry the Whore, viz. the false Church;
and this is plain dealing to tell you the truth, etc. reprinted by the order
and approbation of G. Whitehead and others, Anno 1672.

For more of this see Geo. Fox to the Council of Officers, p. 7. Oh what a
sincerity was once in the Nation; what a dirty unto thing it would have been to
have heard talk of a Horse of Lords. Edw. Buroughs Advice to the Parliament,
etc. It was through Ignorance that the people subjected themselves to
hereditary Government, or to the Government standing in a single person
successively; and our Nation has been under the bonds of slavery in this
respest, etc. See Fox's Papers to the Presbyterians, p. 8, 9. All Kings and
Emperors have sprung up in the night, since the days of the Apostles, among the
Antichrists. There was no King owned among the true Christians, but only among
the Apostates since Christ's time. They were all Traitors against Christ that
desired an earthly King. The true Christians will not have any more Kings among
them but Christ, etc. News coming up out of the North etc. p. 18. Dreadful is
the Lord and powerful, who is coming to execute true judgment upon all you
Judges, and to change all your Laws. Ye Kings, all you Rulers must down and
cease, and all you underling Officers which have been as the Arms of this great
Tree; all your branches must be cut down, for you have been the fruitless
branches grown on the fruitless tree, p. 19. so you must be cut down with the
same power that cut down the King who reigned over the Nation, whose Family was
a Nursery for Papists, and for Bishops which held up Railes, etc. VVo, woe, is
coming upon you all, the same Teachers are standing that were in the time of
the King, and the same that were in the time of the Bishops; such as take
Tithes: you must both be tormented together, Beast and false Prophet, P. 20.
Sing all ye Saints and rejoice, clap your hands and be glad, for the Lord
Jehovah will reign, and the Government shall be taken from you pretended
Rulers, Judges and Justices, Lawyers and Constables; all this Tree must be cut
down, and Jesus Christ [in us] will rule alone, p. 27. Sound the trumpet, sound
an alarm, call up to the battle, gather together for the destruction, draw the
sword, hew down all fruitless trees which cumber the ground, hew down all the
powers of the earth, slay Baal; all the hirelings must be turned out of the
kingdom, p. 35. All you who receive Tithes deny that Christ is come to us in
the flesh, p. 38. And thou beast and false Prophet must into the fire; the
false Prophet is the Councellor to the Beast, and the Beast maintains the false
Prophet, etc. E. Buroughs Declar. p. 33. Upon a Rumor that the Quakers
Meetings were to be broken up they writ, viz. These Tidings do not trouble us,
neither are we thereby moved; no, not to beg of any man (or men) the contrary,
p. 40. and to any outward Authority we cannot seek.

Mildenhall, 25th of Feb. 1695. Fr. Bugg, Senior.

We acknowledge and believe the Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament to
be the most certain Rule of our Faith; and that not so much for the common
consent of the Church, but because of the Testimony and persuasion of the Holy
Ghost. And we believe that the doctrine contained in the holy Scriptures
proceeds from God; from whom only, and not from men, it derives its authority:
And forasmuch as it is the Rule of all Truth, containing all matters
necessarily required for the worship of God, and our Salvation, it is in no
wise lawful for Men nor Angels to add unto, or take from this doctrine, or to
change it: And hereupon it follows, that it is not lawful to oppose either
Antiquity, or Custom, or Multitude, or humane Wisdom, Judgments, Edicts, or
Decrees, or Councils, or Visions, or Miracles, unto this holy Scripture; but
rather that all things ought to be examined and tried by the Rules and Square
thereof; wherefore we do for this cause allow of those three Creeds, namely the
Apostles, the Nicene, and Athanasius his Creed; because they be agreeable to
the Word of God. We believe that all the Offspring of Adam are infected with
Original Sin, which is a vice hereditary to us by propagation; and not only by
imitations, as the Pelagians assert, whose errors are detested by us: we
believe that this stain of Original Sin is Sin indeed; howbeit, they that are
the Children of God shall never be condemned for it, because God of his rich
grace and mercy does not impute it to them; but out of his bounty does deliver
them through our Lord Jesus Christ. And we believe that Jesus Christ, being the
Wisdom, and Eternal Son of God, took upon him our Nature, so that he is one
person God and man; man that he might be able to suffer in soul and body; made
like unto us in all things, sin only excepted; so that as to hum^ne nature he
was indeed the Seed of Abraham and of David, conceived in due time in the Womb
of the Virgin Mary, by the sec^et and incomprehensible power of the Holy Ghost;
and that in one and the same person, to wit, the Lord Jesus Christ; his two
natures are inseparably conjoined and united; yet nevertheless in such a
manner, that each nature does retain its distinct properties; so that even as
in this divine conjunction, the divine Nature retaining its properties does
still abide uncreated, infinite, and filling all places; so also the humane
nature remains finite, having form, measure and property. And also the Lord
Jesus Christ when he rose from the dead gave Immortality to his body, yet he
never deprived it of the verity of its nature: therefore we do so consider
Christ in his Deity, as that we do not rob him of his Humanity. We believe that
by that one Sacrifice which Jesus Christ offered upon the Cross we are
reconciled unto God, that so we may be accounted righteous in his sight. And we
believe that Jesus Christ is conferred upon us to be our alone Advocate; and
that he commands us in our prayers to present our selves to the Father in his
name. We do also reject those means which derogate from the satisfaction of the
death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. And we believe where the word of
God is not received, and where there is no use of Sacraments, we cannot judge
that there is any Church; for we believe that the Sacraments are absolved unto
the word that they may be pledges and tokens of the Grace of God. We believe
that God will have the world ruled by Laws, and Civil Government, that there
may be some sort of bridles by which the unruly lusts of the world may be
restrained; and that therefore he appoints Kings and Commonwealths, and other
kinds of Principalities, whether hereditary or otherwise; and not that alone,
but also what pertains to the Ministration of Justice, whereof he avoucheth
himself to be the Author; therefore has he de^ivered the Sword into the
Magistrates hands, that so sins committed against both Tables of Gods Law, not
only against the second, but first also may be suppressed; and therefore
because God is the Author of this order, we must not only suffer Magistrates
whom he has set over us, but we must also give them much Honor and Reverence,
as unto his Officers and Lieutenants which have received their Commission from
him to exercise so lawful and sacred a Function; therefore we affirm, that
Obedience must be yielded unto their Laws, that Tribute and Taxes must be paid,
and the Yoke of Subjection born, although the Magistrates be Infidels, so that
the Sovereign Government of God be preserved; wherefore we do detest all those
who do reject the higher powers.



BOoks written by Fr. Bugg, Sen. as follows, some of which are intended to be
bound together and sold, as on the Title Page; whereby such as desire further
satisfaction into the nature of the Controversy, may inform themselves.
I. De Christianae Liberate, in Octavo, bound. II. The Painted Harlot both
stripped and whipped, etc. III. Reason against Rai^ing, and Truth against Falsehood,
etc. IV. Innocence vindicated, and Envy rebuked, etc. V. The Quakers detected,
and their Errors confuted, etc. VI. A Letter to the Quakers, showing their
frequent addressing to the late K. J. and their never addressing his present
Majesty. VII. Battering Rams against New Rome, etc. VIII. One Blow more at New
Rome, etc. IX. New Rome unmasked, and her Foundation shaken, etc. X. New Rome
arraigned, and out of her own Mouth condemned. XI. A Sheet delivered to the
Parliament Dec. 93. entitled, Something in answer to the Quakers Allegations,
etc. XII. Quakerism withering, and Christianity reviving, etc. in Octavo. XIII.
Quakerism anatomized, etc. being a Cha^lenge to R. Ashby. XIV. A Sheet
entitled, The Quakers Yearly Meeting impeached, etc. XV. A Second Summons to
the City Abel, 2 Samuel 20. by way of metaphor to deliver up Sheba the Son of
Bichri (i. e.) G. Whitehead. XVI. The Quakers set in their true light.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 7. for Book read Books, l. 28. for Book r. Books, p. 5. l. 4. for
White r. Whitehead, p. 7. l. 26. for ot r. not, p. 11. l. 23 and 24. for troop
r. trooper, p 12. l. 42. for Isays r. Jays, p. 21. l. 17. for of him r. of
truth.

FINIS.

