AN ESSAY OF TRANSMIGRATION, In Defense of PYTHAGORAS: OR, A DISCOURSE OF
NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.

Principio Coelum and Terras, Camposque liquentes,
Lucentemque Globum Lunae, Titaniaque Astra,
Spiritus imus alit; totamque infusa per artus
Men's agitat molem, and magno se corpore miscet.
Virg.

Natura naturans naturat omnia.

LONDON, Printed by E. H. for Tho. Basset, at the George in Fleet Street, 1692.

AN ESSAY OF TRANSMIGRATION, In Defense of PYTHAGORAS.

THE Epistle Dedicatory. To Mr. LEY.
It Was you, my Dear Friend, with whom I first enjoyed the Pleasures of
Friendship, and 'twas you that first invited me; though not into the Garden of
the Hesperides, yet into a Field of great Usefulness, and infinite Delight;
where, after the Fatigue and Embarrasment of a troublesome Employment, like the
wearied Traveller, I have often at Night lain down, and refreshed my tired
Spirits. If I have therefore nodded in the following Pamphlet, be you my
Witness and Excuse.

But whatever it is, to you, Dear Sir, of right it belongs, being that good
Friend, that first showed me my Faults, and moved me to a Study, which has
given me a true Prospect of the Trifles of Life, and how much more valuable the
Unseen Things are, than those our Senses daily converse with. For,

As the kind Heavenly Genius when we go
Out of that Path appointed us below;
Moved with great Pity to our declining State,
Does softly whisper, Turn; ere it is too late:
So my Leander, when I went astray
From the unbeaten Path of Virtues Way,
Swifter than Lightning darting from a Cloud,
Stretched forth his hand. --
But I forget I am in public, and that this is not my Province.

This show, that the Body is too gross to enjoy a refined Pleasure, and that
the Affections of a man given to the Delights of Contemplation and Search, are
too lofty to be allured down to sensual Enjoyments. Aquila non capit Muscas.
Des Carts expresses it well: Voluptas quam percipimus ex intuitu rerum, quas
oculi cernunt, minime aequiparanda est cum illa, quam adfert notitia illarum
quas Philosophando invenimus. The Pleasures of Sense, are in no sort comparable
to those, which the Mind enjoys by Knowledge and Philosophy. So that Philosophy
and Religion, or the latter alone, have truly the better on it in this Life, as
well as the next. God bids fairer for our Service, than all things else besides.

But to do Justice to both; I must acknowledge the Sensualist has Pleasures and
Diversions (such as they are) more ready and at hand, than a man of Thought and
Retirement. The one had need but look out, and he sees something that is ready
to fill up the narrow Faculties of Sense presently, whilst the other must go
farther off, and with great industry find out an Object that is noble enough to
divert and entertain him. The Pleasures of the one, are like Diamonds, rarely
to be found; but of the other, like Pebbles, every where to be had. Yet this
Advantage the Learned and the Wise, the virtuous Philosopher, when advanced to
some Height, has over the other, that he carries his Pleasures with him, in the
Streets, or in the Fields, or even in disagreeable Company, can find useful and
pleasing Thoughts, both to delight and improve his Mind; who not only dares be
alone, but finds infinite Pleasure in the Contemplation of the several parts of
the Universe; to whom, with Jacob, the World is a Bethel; for he can turn the
Darkness of a Dungeon, into the Light o a Divine Palace, and behold Nature
ascending and descending, like the Angels on the Ladder. But not to pretermit
any of the excellent Advantages the Dissolute enjoy.

The one, I must confess, more constantly gains his Point, than the other; for
what with his sordid Flattery, and Baseness of Spirit toward the Great and
Haughty, his Insolence toward the Modest and Humble, and other mean and
disingenuous Arts toward all, he obtains what he desires. But did a Beggar
gain a Crown by such means, he were not worth my Envy; for when a little
Affliction befalls such an one, so loose is his Constitution, by the
unsetledness of his Principles, (if a constant Byas to Baseness of Spirit may
be called unsettled,) he dissolves under the weight of a little misfortune; a
few Weeks imprisonment puts an end to his Life: But how does the Virtuous sit
smooth and sedate, whilst Lightning invades his Eyes, and Thunder his House?
Who though he would dissolve in Tears, for the least voluntary Sin, yet would
not shrink to see the World in a general Conflagration; who goes out of this
Life with the same Joy a man goes to see his affectionate Friend. Give me the
man, who having secured the Divine Love by an universal Obedience, carries his
own Heaven with him wherever he goes; that can see in every Field enough of
the Divine Wisdom to fill all the Powers of his Soul with a lasting Joy and
Pleasure. Compared to these, how mean are the Thoughts of a last Night's
Debauch, or the expecting ones of another? How sordid the Contemplation of many
Bags, and how empty the Titles of Honor? For my part, I have not Sense enough
to distinguish any real difference between a Feather in a Child's Cap, and a
Riband cross the Shoulders of a Man. Ah! how foolish is Mankind to neglect the
solid Joys of Wisdom and Philosophy, for the Rattles and Trifles of Life! So
that (the next World apart) with great Truth I may affirm, That the most
voluptuous Man alive, enriched with the Fancy of Aristippus, or a Lord
Rochester, that does indulge his Senses with all the Art that Wit, Health and
Riches can lay together, that has all the Court which the Devil in Nature, is
capable of making to him; falls infinitely short of the Pleasures of a Man,
that has a good Understanding, well governed Affections, and but a moderate
Fortune to enable him to enjoy the Pleasures of Philosophy, and to exert his
Religion in the pleasing Offices of Charity and Affection.

The Cynicks and Stoics will charge me with a surplus of Ingredients to the
constitution of Happiness; but I conceive their Notion of it to be Romantic
and Fanciful; but that of the Peripateticks and Epicureans sober and wise. For
Externals, in the hands of a wise man are good Instruments even of Beatitude;
and Pleasure and Pain must have some difference even in the opinion of a
Philosopher that is conversant in the World. It Is a foolish thing to make
Virtue the Object of a wise man's choice, and then set it above his reach, at
least above his desires; Virtue Thus high the Cynicks and Stoics advanced
Virtue, whose sole Reward, which it self brought, they held sufficient to
conquer the Miseries of Pain and Want.
I mean, stripped of Health and Necessaries, and clogged with Pain and Misery,
without the Prospect of a future Life. But the Cynick indeed had Wit, when
being blamed for giving a Pattern above Human Life, said, he was like the
Singing Masters, who sung a Note too high, that their Scholars (who would
naturally fall short of their Master) might reach a true Pitch.

I must confess, when I consider the Lives, not only of the Cynicks, but others
of the Pagan Philosophers, and to what a Noble Height they advanced their
Minds, merely by the due exercise of their Understandings; how meanly and
contemptibly they looked upon sensual Pleasures, to that degree, that the
former trampled upon Riches and Honor as vile things; Antisthenes, the Father
of them, saying, he had rather be mad, than given to Sensuality; and Heraclitus
contemned his Body, esteeming it as Dross, taking care for the Cure only as God
should command him, to use it as an Instrument; and this not as a sudden Fit or
Passion, or Declamation of Wit, but as a settled Principle rooted in their
minds, and exerting its Fruit and Effects in their Lives: I blush both for my
self, and other Christians, to think how impetuously we pursue the things of
this Life, and how coldly those of a better.

It may be enough to make a Christian ashamed, even in Heaven, to see Hermes,
Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, and the whole Crowd of virtuous Heathens there,
bearing the Honorable Badges of Mortification, and the Noble Scars of
Reproach, and Wounds, for Virtue's sake, as a Sacrifice pleasing to God; whilst
the Christian, at a distance, beholding in himself the Marks only of Professing
his Religion, where there was no danger in the doing it, and having received
much, gave a little, and loved with Sincerity; and yet how few are there reach
this Pitch? What Christian is there from the Debauchee to the Professor, that
conquers a Lust, subdues a Passion, or resists a charming Temptation Christi
gratia? If the Lascivious grows chaste, it is not because his mind is changed,
but his Spirits are weak, and his Blood low: But how did Socrates, of fierce
and choleric, become calm and sedate by Philosophy? And can Philosophy do more
than Christianity?

But why do I say this to you, my Dear Friend, who know all this, and your own
Merits too (or you would want Judgment) and are yet contented in a low Sphere,
grateful to the Almighty under a narrow Fortune; whilst you see others, that
set no Bounds to their Actions, with a mean Understanding acquire Riches and
Honor. I know it is easy for the Rich to speak fine things of a low state;
what Physic it is to the mind, and how it reduces the Fever in the Soul, to a
good Temper. But for a man that is generous in his Nature (which Plato tells
us, is the best kind of Nobility) and who would embellish his mind with all the
Useful Knowledge and Learning that can be had, to be stopped in this
commendable Ambition, against the Career of his Desires, and to acquiesce,
requires the Philosophy of an humble mind, which is often a stranger to the
Learned. This is more difficult than to conquer Kingdoms.

Fortior est qui se -- You are therefore the truly great Hero I have chose to
defend this Essay, which (though it has been disbelieved by all, because not
considered by the learned, nor understood by the Vulgar) you will do, neither
by the dazzling splendour of a bright Star and Garter, nor the clashing and
thundering Noise of Swords and Guns, nor by your ten Thousands, but by the soft
Voice of Reason and Philosophy, which is more valuable to the Wise and Virtuous.

Adieu, Dear Sir, and may you enjoy a calm and serene Mind, flat and
languishing toward the World, but active and vigorous, and full of Hopes
toward Heaven. May the Light of Wisdom and Knowledge fill you full of all Joy
and Ecstasie; and as no Variation of Fortune, has, or ever shall alienate my
Affections from you; so let 'no Disappointment abate your Zeal for the Honor
of our most Munificent Benefactor, (for whom you can never do too much,) since
He always chooses best for us, and never denies us, but for our greater Good. I
am (what Words need not express)

Your Affectionate Servant, Whitelocke Bulstrode.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Writ this Essay for my own Satisfaction and Use, and now publish it to
vindicate the Honor of Pythagoras, whom, though I would not, with the Heathen,
Deifie for his eminent Works; yet I would defend him from the Calumny of the
World, so unjustly cast upon him, as the Author of an erroneous Doctrine. This
is a Tribute, all Men that pretend to Letters (to which I do the least) owe
him, that has advanced Learning; especially to Pythagoras, who seems to have
been a Treasury of Knowledge, and that Fountain that watered the Grecian Empire
with all that Learning they afterward boasted. Nor were his Morals less
refined, than his Knowledge was eminent, and his Wisdom was equal to both; so
that should I give an Account of his Life, how careful he was to subdue all
sensual Passions; how temperate in his Diet, Clothes and Sleep; how
indefatigable to improve and adorn his Mind with all the Knowledge that was to
be attained; how zealous to promote the Honor of God, and the Good of Man; how
careful to reflect on the Errors of the Day; and in short, to advance all
Virtue, and depress Vice; 'twould put most of us out of countenance, to be so
much outdone by a Heathen. The Vindication therefore of so good and great a
Person, I hope, will not be thought impertinent.

But besides that, I propose to manifest this Opinion, not only as Orthodox and
Philosophical amongst the Ancients, but as True and Evident in Nature. Though
were it only a speculative Notion, and of no Use, as for me, it should have
slept in eternal Shades; but in regard it acquaints us, in its full Latitude,
with the various Operations of God, the Generation and Dissolution of all
Created Beings, under Heaven, i. e. the Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral, the
Accesses and Recesses of Life it self; it is a Subject not so mean as to be
despised, though it may be here but indifferently handled.

Epicurus, who has defined Happiness well, places it in the Tranquillity of the
Mind, and Indolence of the Body. To attain this, he makes Physics as necessary
as Ethics; for without knowing the Causes of Things, Fear and Doubts perplex
the Mind, and disturb that Quiet which is necessary to Happiness.

I am sure it is the Duty of all Men, that have Capacity and Opportunity, to
look into the Works, as well as Word of God. The Heathens had no other Book to
read the Majesty, Wisdom and Power of God in; it was the Heavens that declared
to them, as well as the inspired King, his Glory. Nor does the Knowledge of
God's moral Government of the World, supersede the Consideration of his
Natural; the latter being as worthy our Admiration and Praise, as the former is
of our Love and Affection.

It Is true, God has in nothing so intensely exhibited his Love to Mankind, as
in giving his Son; nor can Man receive a greater Honor, than by being the
Temple of the Divine Mind. The Consideration of which, may well strike us with
Astonishment, the Favor is so immense, and ought in Justice to raise our
Thoughts above the Dregs of Sense.

But though a Man, in so large a Field as this, may never want Matter to
exercise his Thoughts upon, and to raise his Mind to a noble Height; yet
whoever considers the Nature of Mankind, will soon find, that the Mind of Man
is of a very inquisitive and capacious Nature; that variety of Subjects are
more necessary for his Mind, than of Food for his Body; that by this he
enlarges his Faculties, advances his Thoughts, and comes to discern a clearer
Light and Knowledge of Things. Nay, the Acts of Religion it self, are often
better performed, with more Vigor and Zeal, after some Recess, than when often
repeated without some Diversion. And God having created such Variety of Things,
wherein dwells so great an Excellency, does more than hint to us our Duty to
enquire after them.

The Reproof of the Psalmist, They neglect the Works of God. -- That the Works
of the Lord are great, sought out by all that have pleasure in them; That they
are worthy to be praised, and had in honor, and ought to be had in
remembrance, and spoke of; That the Power and Glory of God might be made known
unto Men, does include a Command to search into them. Isaiah, speaking of the
Jews, says, They regard not the Works of the Lord, neither consider the
Operations of his Hands. Therefore my People are gone into Captivity, because
they have no Knowledge. God preferred our Knowledge of him, even under the Law,
to Burnt Offerings; and the Reason is plain; for unless we know somewhat of the
Nature of the Eternal, we can neither pay that Love to his Goodness, nor
Reverence to his Power, which we owe to both; we can in no sort serve him
acceptably, but we shall run into the Superstition of the Athenians, who
dedicated Altars Deo ignoto.

For my part, I know no difference that distinguishes Men from Brutes, but
Knowledge and Virtue; the first makes us like Angels, the latter like God. Be
ye holy as I am holy. But Virtue without Knowledge, runs into Enthusiasm and
Superstition; and Knowledge without Virtue, gives us the Tincture of Satan.
Both therefore are to be sought, which may be attained by a little industry;
for surely we are not born to eat, drink and sleep, and gratify our sensual
Appetites, like Beasts, (nay they all perform some beneficial Offices to Men,)
nor to snort in the Air, like a Colt; nor to trample on the Earth, like an Ox;
nor to walk in the narrow Track of our Employment, like a Foot-post; but to
contemplate the Divine Operations, and to look up toward God with Gratitude,
for making so glorious a World, replenished with such admirable works for the
Use and Benefit of Man. If this be not so, and that it is sufficient for a Man,
to attain an Excellency in his Employment, though he has a liberal Education;
what difference is there between a Littleton and a Van Dyke, both famous in
their way?

I must agree with Epicurus, That Justice is the common Tie, without which no
Society can subsist; it is that Virtue, which gives to all their due, and takes
care that none receive Injury. It Is therefore one of the noblest Employments;
yet if the knowledge thereof, (for I speak not of its Morals,) be confined to a
City or a Country; if it be merely municipal, when removed from ones Country,
it is but Pedantry; and therefore no Man has Reason to value himself much on
that account. But the Philosopher is a Citizen of the World, acquainted with
the Pandects of Nature; the other a Citizen of England, Venice, or Holland, and
confined to the Walls thereof.

The employing our Thoughts, how the Earth is continually sending forth a
Vapor; the Sea, and all its Rivers, giving up their refined Parts into the
Air, to meet, and allay the scorching Influences of the Heavenly Bodies. That
since the Water of it self is too gross a Food for the Lungs, and the Celestial
Heat too violent and intense, to cherish and support us; therefore God
stretches out the Waters on the Wings of the Wind, and rarefies the same; and
that it may be exempt from excessive Cold, impregnates it with Vital Heat, to
become the truest Food of Life.

That the Heavenly Bodies are continually at work for us, by their perpetual
motion, emitting a vital Heat, which clothing it self with an Aerial Vest,
enters into the Chambers of the Deep, and there frames all that Variety, which,
coming forth, we call the Works of Nature.

And that the Earth may not be too dry, nor the Rivers too empty, by a constant
yielding up their Moisture into the Region of the Air, on the absence of the
Sun, the Vapor condenses into a fertile Dew, which descending, cherishes the
thirsty Plants; and lest this should not be enough, the Clouds become
Storehouses of Water. And whereas the inward Parts of the Earth are kept moist
and cool by the infinite Channels, through which the Waters pass; so the upper
parts are refreshed by a more plentiful Irrigation, which is of more virtue
than Fountainwater, having somewhat of the Heavenly Influences. He that beholds
the Rays of the Sun against an opake Body, darting obliquely on the Earth its
Seminal Virtues, and considers that by the Command of the Eternal, the Wheel of
Providence is continually at work for us, (which brings Life it self, being
nothing else, as the Learned Monsieur d'Espagnet says, but an Harmonious Act
proceeding from the Union of Matter and Form, constituting the perfect Being of
every Individual,) which the Ancients sometimes represented by Vulcan in his
Shop, making and hammering out curious Works. I say, be that considers these
things (which a mean Understanding is capable of,) if he has any spark of
Gratitude, any Sense of Obligation; nay, if he is not worse than a Brute, and
more stupid than a Block, must be inflamed with the Love of so immense a
Bounty; which when he is, be will naturally express it, not only by an entire
Obedience to so infinite a Goodness; not only by an abstinence from all
appearance of Evil; but by choosing to do what is most eminently Good, and most
highly acceptable to him. Of what Use such a Temper of Mind would be, both to
the Person in particular, and the World in general, I need not declare, since
Love, (which Plato calls the most Ancient of the Gods,) is the most ravishing
Passion, and the most delightful Enjoyment: That Love, whose Center is infinite
Purity, who is continually issuing forth such emanations of Light, Joy and
Pleasure on the Mind of Man, that we seem but faintly to dart back somewhat of
that Love to the most Munificent, which the Shallowness of our Capacities were
unable to receive; for he first loved us.

It Is impertine nt here to describe the Beauty of the World, the Glory and
Excellency of its Parts, the Harmony and Order, the Usefulness and Benefit
thereof to Mankind, since Tully has done it in his Natura Deorum, beyond
imitation: This Sir Roger L'Estrange has ingeniously Translated, and
embellished with Learned Notes.

The Wisdom and Order by which the Parts were moved, made the Stoics think,
even the Parts themselves endued with an intelligent Mind, and therefore,
weakly enough, called them Gods, not distinguishing between the Creator and his
Works, which Epicurus has well confuted. But I am passed my Tedder, and must
ask Pardon of our Clergy for invading their Province.

The Sum of all is this; It Is the Duty of Mankind to consider the Natural, as
well as Moral Government of Divine Providence. This is the Mean to attain the
End of our Creation, i. e. to advance the Glory of God, and exalt and perfect
our Minds. If what I have hinted, does sufficiently show the Necessity of this,
the Neglect of it is a Fault too obvious to need an Inference, and the doing
it, an Advantage, that will justify (at least, excuse) the following Essay.

I have but this to add, That whatever are the Faults of the following
Discourse, I have avoided one, which the Learned generally incur; that is, of
being too praeliminary: One must dig fifteen Fathom deep before one comes to
the Oar; thus enfolding a little Truth in so much Rubbish, makes him that has a
quick Apprehension, and little Leisure, neglect the former for the sake of the
latter. But this Fault proceeds from a foolish, though customary Fancy, that
unless a Book has Folio 500 at the End of it, it makes no Figure on a Shelf,
but is like to dwindle into the contemptible Name of a Pamphlet. Hence the dull
and heavy Transcribers load Mankind with intolerable Burdens, and Men, like
Asses, receive that Weight, which fills their Heads rather with Smoke and Fume,
than Light and Truth.

When I consider that the Wisest of Men have delivered their Thoughts of Men
and Things, rather in short Apothegms, than tedious Discourses; and that the
Witty Greeks brought even Arguments into the narrow compass of a short
Sillogism; that Moses writ the History of the Creation in a short Chapter; and
that He who is more than Man, communicated himself, and what was necessary for
the Good of Man, in short Parables, that make a deep impression on the Mind;
and in pithy Sentences, that may be writ in a Sheet or two of Paper. I am fully
of opinion with the Ingenious Mr. Norris, That if Angels were to write, we
should have fewer Volumes, and that the Brevity of this Discourse is no real
Exception to its Truth.

THE CONTENTS.
1. THE mistaken Notion of Transmigration throughout the World; The Consequence
of it in Asia, where it is believed. Page 1 2. The Proposition stated; That the
Soul after its departure from the Body, does pass into some other Animal; this
is spoken of the Sensitive, not of the Rational Soul. p. 4 3. Proved in part by
way of Induction, -- either that God makes new Matter and Form daily, to supply
the perishing old, or that things pass and are changed into one another. -- But
God does not make new Matter, etc. p. 5 4. That Transanimation of Spirits may
refer to Plants and Minerals, as well as Animals; for they have a Spirit, or
vital Principle. p. 8 5. Of the Generation of Metals, and how the Spirit enters
Matter. Of the Imperfect Metals, and their Cause. p. 9 6. Of the Perfect
Metals, and how various Metals are in the same Place. p. 11 7. Of Stones; the
Precious, the Common: Plants, of two kinds; what grow of themselves, and what
are sown p. 14 8. Of Plants that grow of themselves, and the Cause of their
variety. p. 16 9. Of their Figure, whence it proceeds. p. 20 10. Of the sowing
of Seeds, and the setting of Plants. p. 22 11. Of the Generation of Animals. p.
23 12. How the Form leaves Matter in Animals, Minerals and Vegetables; and what
then becomes of it; that it passes into the Air, where it receives new Virtue.
p. 25 13. That thence it flows down again, and animates a new Body, which is
the true Notion of Transmigration. p. 27 14. Objection. That Animals convey a
sensitive Spirit in Generation; how then descends a Form? p. 32 15. Answered.
-- That though they do convey a portion of specific Spirit, yet the universal
cooperates; The manner how; from the Air. ibid. 16. Of the Air; and the
Mischief of sulphurous Vapors, that they cause the Plague: The Way to foresee
it, and a Dearth. Of Augary. p. 37 17. Homer's Juno explained. p. 43 18. Why
the seven Planets called Gods. That the Philosophers did not adore all they
called Gods. p. 46 19. Why so many called Gods. The first Principles of Nature,
by the Philosophers of all Learned Nations called Gods, to conceal them from
the Vulgar. p. 50 20. The Description of Nature in her Ascent and Descent,
according to Homer. The Consent of the Philosophers about the first Principles.
p. 54 21. The Publishing the Fables of the Ancients, an occasion of Idolotry;
the Original thereof, though from beholding the Stars; yet not for the Reason
R. Maimonides gives. p. 57 22. Of the Mysteries of the Ancients. p. 60 23. That
all the Ancient Philosophers, that treated mysteriously of Nature, meant the
same Thing under diverse AEnigma's. p. 62 24. This made manifest by explaining
an Egyptian Symbol according to the Chaldean Astrology, and Grecian Mythology.
p. 63 25. Objections against Transmigration answered. p. 80 26. The Notion
carried higher than what generally imagined. p. 82 27. Of the Identity of Form
in all Bodies. p. 83 28. A Comparison of the Form in Animals, Plants, and
Minerals. p. 90 29. Of the excellent Form in Metals, and of the perpetual Light
made out of them; of the great difficulty thereof. p. 91 30. Objection against
the Influences of the Heavenly Bodies answered. Objection, that the Earth has
Seed in it self, answered. p. 97 31. Other Objections answered, and the
Conclusion therefrom. p. 104 32. That Bodies are not annihilated when their
Spirit leaves them, nor new Substances made in Generation; but pre-existent
Substances are made into one, which acquire new Qualities. p. 107 33. How
Pythagoras might call himself Euphorbus, that lived many years before him. p.
110 34. Plato's Opinion answered, concerning the Degeneracy of the Effeminate.
p. 111 35. Pythagoras his Abstinence from Flesh, explained. p. 115 36.
Transmigration in Plants and Minerals, demonstrable to Sense p. 116
And this concludes the (...) of Transmigration.
37. Four Things touched (...) 1. The Duration of Bodies. 2. (...) Principles
and Elements (...) received, examined. 3. Some (...) ristotelian Hypotheses
examined and compared with those of Demo critus, etc. 4. How the (...) comes to
be filled with variety (...) Bodies, abounding with (...) Qualities, p. (...)
38. Of the Duration of (...) and of the Calcination of the (...) in the general
Conflagration. p. 119 39. Of Principles and Elements and first, of Principles;
how, (...) when they came into the World p. 126 40. That there are but two
Principles, notwithstanding the Chemists, and the Invention of Paracelsus. A
Description of Mercury. p. 132 41. An Objection of reducing Things by Fire into
three Principles, answered; Aristotle's Three Principles likewise answered. p.
138 42. Of Elements when distinguished from Principles. A short Description of
the Air, the Earth, the Water, and the Fire. That by the Words (Heaven and
Earth) are to be understood, the Form, and the Matter. p. 141 43. That Elements
and Principles may be termed Equivocal, and that there are but Two. p. 147 44.
An Answer to S -- s, touching Four Elements; wherein it is showed, that there
are but Two Elements; that of Water, the Passive Matter; and the Solar Influx,
the Form. p. 148 45. Some Aristotelian Hypotheses examined, and compared with
those of Democritus, That the Elements are not contrary and opposite, as
Aristotle holds; but agreeing, and alike, in a remiss degree, according to
Democritus. p. 150 46. Of the Primary Qualities in Bodies, (according to
Aristotle,) whence proceed their Effects; and of the Atomical Physiology of
Leucippus, Epicurus, and Democritus. Both Opinions examined. p. 152 47. Reasons
against both; and for a middle Opinion. p. 157 48. Of the Original of
Qualities, Herein the Creation is considered, and that according to Moses. p.
164 49. That these Words [ The Spirit of God moved on the Face of the Waters,]
are not to be understood of the Holy Ghost. p. 167 50. Of the First Day's Work:
The Creation of Matter and Form, and dividing the Light or Form from the
grosser Matter. p. 168 51. Of the Second Day's Work, or the Expansion, and
Division of the Waters above, from those below. p. 169 52. Of the Third Day's
Work: The Generation of Plants. p. 171 53. Of the Fourth Day's Work: The
Collecting of the Light or Form into the Body of the Sun. ibid: 54. Of the
Fifth Day's Work: The Generation of Fish and Fowl, by the Union of Water and
the Form. p. 172 55. Of the Sixth Day's Work: The Creation of Beasts and
Reptiles, and lastly, Man. ibid. 56. How the Earth comes to be filled with
variety of Bodies, abounding with different Qualities. p. 173 57. That the
various Accidents and Qualities of Bodies proceed from the various Intension
and Remission of the Form; not according to Des Carts, from the different
Magnitude and Figure of their Principles: This illustrated by several
Instances. p. 176 58. The Conclusion. p. 184
LICENSED, January 2d. 1691/2.

Ja. Fraser.

OF Transmigration, etc.
THis Opinion of Transmigration of Souls, which is fathered upon Pythagoras, is
mistaken every where; but very grossly believed in Pegu, Magor, and other parts
of Asia: For believing that the Soul does pass into some other Creature, after
its departure from the Humane Body, they abstain from no sort of respect to the
most contemptible Creatures, and superstitiously avoid doing any hurt to that
Animal whose Body, they think, contains the Soul of their deceased Father. Now,
how they could tell, or why they should think, that this, or that Beast is thus
animated, rather than another, I confess is strange: and what is more so, it
seems from the Belief of those in Bengall, and other Parts of the East Indies,
(who imagine that the Souls of Good Men pass into Cows, and such useful
Creatures; and the Souls of Bad Men into Crows and such hurtful Birds or
Beasts,) that these People think it of the Immortal Rational Soul, rather than
the Sensitive. For the Faculties of the Rational Soul are exerted naturally in
the kind Offices of Beneficence and Humanity; but those of the Sensitive, only
in Growth and Sense. It looks as if Folly begot, and Superstitious Fancy
propagated this Opinion: Though to do Right to Pythagoras, who was doubtless a
great Man, the absurdity of this Opinion is as far remote from his Sentiments,
as the Manichaean Heresy is different from the Christian Religion.

But Philosophy and Religion have both suffered alike by Ignorant Expositors:
For what will not a wild Fancy and little Judgment, centered in a Man fond of
his own Thoughts, produce? What strange Opinions in Religion? What barbarous
Cruelties by Humane Sacrifices to the Heathen Gods, has the World been filled
with? Nor is Philosophy it self exempt from very odd Conceits. Thus are the
best Things corrupted.

But to return to our Author, whose Opinion asserted is, That the Soul, after
its departure from the Body, passes into some other Animal. This is as strongly
put as any thing said of him (for we have all by Tradition,) will bear. (...)
Opinion I propose to defend and free it from the Absurdities Men have put upon
it, and restore it to its native Sense. But let me (...) here, That I do not
intend this Migration of the Rational Soul; but of the Sensitive and Vegetative
Spirit; which Terms of Soul and Spirit, being often used as Synonyma's, have
given occasion, especially to the Ignorant, to mistake the meaning of
Pythagoras.

He that considers the Frame of this World, the Contexture of Man, and the
perpetual Vicissitude and Change of Things, will easily believe, that either
God makes new Matter and Form daily, to supply the perishing old; or that
Things pass, and are changed into one another, by a continual Circulation. But
we all know that the Eternal having made the World by his Wisdom and Power,
does preserve it now by his Providence and Goodness; so that we must be forced
to acknowledge, not a new Creation, but a Mutation of Things, that begets this
Variety.

Man indeed is endowed with something more than the rest of the Creatures; he
has a Rational Soul, that should sit President in his Body, govern his
Passions, and direct his Affections. How little it does so, proceeds from the
Vileness of our Wills, rather than the Degeneracy of our Nature: but we would
excuse our selves. Besides this, he has a Vegetative or Sensitive Spirit,
which is perfectly distinct from the Rational Soul, as well as Body: It seems
to be a Medium to unite two Extremes, of a Divine Immortal Ray, and Gross
Matter.

I am not discoursing now of the Government of the Mind over the Sensitive
Part, and what Obedience the one ought to pay the other; nor how they contend
for Dominion, like Prerogative and Liberty in a disturbed State: But I am
laying the Foundation of the Reasonableness of Pythagoras his Opinion, which is
the Transmigration of Souls, or Spirits; for these Terms are used equivocally.

To go to the bottom of this Question, it is fit to consider Nature in her
several Provinces, Mineral, Vegetable, and Animal; for all created Beings on
this side Heaven, may be placed under one of these Heads; nor are the meanest
of them without a Spirit, or Vital Principle, which is all one; and these, like
the Sensitive Souls of Animals, evaporate on the Dissolution or Destruction of
their Bodies.

To say how these Spirits leave their Habitations, before I offer how they
enter, may be improper; I shall speak therefore of this first, and then of the
other. Nor will it be impertinent, to the Defense of Pythagoras his Opinion,
since Transanimation of Spirits may refer as well to Minerals and Vegetables as
Animals; in regard they are all animated alike, as to Vegetation. I shall begin
with Metals. Of the Generation of Metals.


The Globe of Earth being How (...) Spirit (...)
placed in the Air, and the Heavenly Bodies (...) which (...) the (...) (...)
you (...) the (...), (...), or (...), this Position answers them all.
moving round her, does receive into her Lap the Celestial Influences; they
give Heat or Life, she, Passive Matter. (...) may be understood the (...) of
Orpheus, the Father of the Gods, with Vesta, his Wife; and what he and the rest
of the Philosophers meant by a Generation of Deities proceeding from such
Parents.


The Air (the winged Messenger of the Gods) big with the Heavenly Fire,
penetrates the porous Earth, and there abides. Being there detained, it is
congealed into a moist Vapor, or subtle Water; and by the internal Vulcan of
Nature sublimed in the Vessel of Earth, through the Pores and Chinks thereof,
till meeting with compact Matter, that denies it entrance, or through defect of
the moving Instrument, it falls back into the Nest from whence it came By which
means it become less subtle, carrying with (...) somewhat of the gross Matter,
through which it passed both in its Ascension and Descension; it having not
(...) obtained the Gravity of a (...) Body, but enjoying still the Privilege
of a pure and subtle, Of the Imperfect Metals.
quick and volatile Nature it again takes another (...) through the dark
Chambers of the Earth; passing and repassing thus frequently through these places,
it becomes the true Laver of Nature, washing away the Defilements thereof;
which falling down with it, detains it, as in a Prison; and not being able to
free it self from its Bondage, suffers the impure parts to be congealed
together, with the pure Salt of Nature, its proper Habitation. And thus an
imperfect Metal is made, diversified only by the difference of the
heterogeneous Impurities, and the Remission or Intension of the Heat of the
Place.

But Nature, that tends always Of Perfect Metals.
to Perfection, makes an improvement from the (...) carriage of this Foetus;
for new Vapor passing Channels through these purified Channels, obtains what
its (...) could not, that is, pure and refined Salt, void (...) heterogeneous
Faeces. (...) uniting with the warm Vapor, and being dissolved (...) it,
causes it to lose its Air vaporous Nature, and become a clammy Substance from
which State (being digested by its own internal Fire and that of its Matrix,
continually replenished by a (...) Influx) it advances into a (...) but clayie
Body, till through length of Time, it become decocted into a more or (...) ripe
Metal, according to (...) more or less Purity and Heat of the Womb.

Thus in the same Vein of How various Metals are in the same place.
Earth, Metals of diverse sorts may be found; as Albertus Magnus testifies in
these words; In Naturae operibus didici proprio visu, quod ab una Origin fluit
Vena, and in quadam part fuit Aurum, and in alia Argentum, and sic de
caeteris; quae tamen Materia prima fuit una, sed diversus fuit locus in calore;
ideo diversitas loci, depurationis, Metalli diversitatem, secundum speciem fuit
operata. In English thus: I have seen in the Works of Nature, from the same
Original, a Vein of Metal, one part whereof was Gold, another Silver, and so of
the other Metals: The first Matter of which never (...), was one and the same
but the degree of Heat in (...) parts of it, was (...); therefore the (...) of
that, caused the (...) of the Metallic (...), according to (...) several
sorts. But he (...) doubts this, let him read (...) Three Tracts of Eirenaeus
(...) Great, who deserves a (...) of Gold to be erected to him in all the
Colleges of Learning throughout the World.

Stones fall under the (...) Denomination with Metals Of Stones: The precious.
the best of which, through their great plenty of Heat and Light, give a
Refulgency to the Matter, which is a Concrete of that Vapor, joined to a pure
Salt Water, and shines even to the Superficies; their form being so intense,
that they seem even to swallow up their Matter: Whilst the The Common.
Common, through their grosness of Matter, partly occasioned by the defect of
Internal Heat, become dark and opake; their Generation being rather a Mixture
of Earth and Water, baked in the Furnace of Nature, than the Impregnation of
Passive Matter, digested by a lively Form.

As for Vegetables, I divide Vegetables of Two Sorts; what grow of themselves,
and what are sown.
them into Two Sorts; the one, those that grow of themselves, without any
sowing; as Weeds and wild Plants: the other, those that are raised by Art, by
sowing the Specific Seed.

As for the First, The Production That grow of themselves.
of them seems to be thus. The warm Vapor that penetrates the Earth, is
sublimed by the Internal Heat and passing through large Pores, arrives near the
(...); and carrying with (...) or rather meeting there some what of the pure
Salt, dissolves it into a liquid Substance, which pure Salt give a
Specification to the (...) Vapor, and is a sort of a specific Matrix to that
Form which was before General and Universal; for Salts of (...) sorts do abound
in all parts of the Earth.

Thus variety of Plants may The Cause of Variety of Plants.
arise (as we see they do) very near one another, differenced by the several
Salts, through which the Vapor passed, and joined it self to them. For if the
Air impregnated with Vital Heat, congealed into Water, is one and the same in
all Places, free and undetermined, how is it possible it should have any
Specification, but by somewhat it meets with in the Earth, that joining with
it, becomes a Seed, and shoots up into a Plant This is evident from Tunbridge,
and other waters, which passing through Iron Mines, are impregnated with the
virtue of the Mines through which they pass: Nay, put but a few Iron Nails into
a little common water, for half an hour, and it shall have the same taste, not
to say virtue; for the Iron-stone is too hard to have much of its Particles
washed off by the soft gliding of Water; and common Water is too weak a
Menstruum to dissolve a Martial Body.
?

This, I conceive, is the meaning of Democritus, and Galen, That the first
Element of Things is void of Quality, that is, undertermin'd. But why the Salts
of the Earth give to some Plants a bitter, to others a sharp Taste; that is,
why are the Salts thus differenced? I had rather profess my Ignorance, than
with Democritus and Galen, say, They are all one, but only in Opinion.

This Question, how various Plants come to grow of themselves, appeared to the
Great Du Hamel so difficult, that, though he starts the Question, he slips from
it without a full Answer. His Quetion is in these Words: Unde prodeant quae a
terra nascuntur injussa gramina? Nunquid forte a coelo formantur? Sed Coelum
cum sit omni vita privatum, qui poterit vitam and sensum largiri? At last,
after giving many Answers, and then confuting them, he comes to this doubtful
resolution; Influxus Coelestes his inferioribus fortasse se applicant. But this
comes not up to the Point. Who doubts that the Heavenly Influences occasion the
Growth of Plants, and give the formal Essence to those that grow of themselves?
But why the same Universal Influence produces different Plants, which is the
great Question, in that he is silent. This Matter having not yet been spoke to,
at least as I have met with, and in regard the searching Nature to her Original
and first Cause, is more excellent, than to solve Phaenomena's by their
Effects, I shall say something to it in its Place.

But to return from whence Of their Figure
I have digress'd; taking things now as we find them, can it be a wonder that
all Plants of the same sort, have much the same Figure and Color? It Is not
certainly from their manner of pressing through the Earth, that they obtain the
same likeness; for how should it happen, that the Species of every Herb should
have such a particular manner of pressing through the Earth, as to make it
always retain the same shape?

But I rather conceive that the saline Particles that join with the Vapor,
being so and so modified, (for they must have some Figure,) do determine the
general Moisture, as well to a constant uniform Figure and Color, as to a
particular internal Nature and Quality. Not unlike This difference of Qualities
Epicurus imputes to the various transposition of Atoms.
the very minute Seeds that we see, whose Taste does more truly demonstrate the
Nature of its Plant it produces, than the Microscope can find out its Figure,
and yet its Figure is owing to the Modification of the Seed.

Thus Minerals and Vegetables seem to be made, not by Creation, as at first,
out of nothing, but by the Union of Matter and Form, blessed from the beginning
by the Word of God, Crescite and multiplicamini. This for the first sort of
Natural Productions.

As for the latter ( i. e.) the Of the sowing of Seeds
sowing of Seeds, and planting of Trees, (which came in with the Curse,) their
Production may justly be called Artificial; but neither are they produced
without the assistance of the Universal Spirit; for being sown in the Earth,
the moist Vapor (wherein the Universal Spirit rests,) dissolves the Body of
the Seed, whose vital Principle being let loose, becomes active and vigorous,
and meeting with the Vapor of the Earth, (like dear Friends) embrace and
unite; and being of an homogeneous Nature, grow up together, the General
Moisture being first determined by the Particular.

The Growth of Plants is Of Plants.
the same, the porous Roots sucking in the moist Vapor, which is assimilated
into the Nature of the Tree, by its specificated Virtue.

As for the Generation of Of the Generation of Animals.
Animals, they are not unlike the Production of Vegetables, raised by
particular Seed. The describing of which, may offend a chaste Ear, or excite a
lascivious Mind; therefore I omit it.

But this Opinion, it is plain, the Learned Ancients were of, when they
declared, That Man was not propagated by Coition only; but that the Universal
Spirit, which flows principally from the Sun, has a hand in it. And therefore
they affirmed, That Sol and Homo generant Hominem; which I shall explain more
particularly hereafter.

For as Man is not supported by Bread and Meat only in his sensitive Capacity;
but by a secret Food of Life, that is in the Air: so neither is he generated by
the Union of Two Sperms only, without the assistance of that secret Spirit,
that enters the closest Caverns; whence it is said, Non datur Vacuum.

It being now said how the Spirit enters, and vivifies Matter, it remains, that
we give an account how it leaves it again, and what then becomes of it.

There are various ways of How the Form leaves Matter in Animals.
dissolving Nature in all the Parts of her Dominion. Animals are destroyed
either by the Consumption (through the length of Time) of their Radical
Moisture, (the Oil that maintains the Flame,) or by accident, or violence; when
the Sensitive Spirit (for we speak not of the Rational) leaves its Habitation,
and returns into the common Receptacle of Sensitive and Vegetative Spirits, the
Air, from whence it came.

Minerals and Vegetables How in Minerals and Vegetables.
are destroyed by Fire, and evaporate likewise into the Air, (I mean the
volatile.) Here it was we found them at first and here, in a little circulation
of Time, we may perceive them again. Now What then becomes of the Form, that it
passes into the Air, where it receives new virtue.
being let loose from that Prison, where the Spirits (...) Forms were detained
and specificated, a little Time restores them to their native Simplicity and
Universality and flowing in an Ocean where the Celestial Influence are
continually descending and Vapors ascending (like the Angels on Jacob's
Ladder, they receive new impresses (...) Virtue, to fit them for farther
Service.

Thus Nature is never idle, and thus with Plato, all things are in a continual
Alteration and Fluctuation: Nothing, according Mundus nunquam est, moritur
semper and nascitur; id tantum habet constantiae, quod divina Providentia ab eo
nunquam recedit.
to Pythagoras, is simply new; nor any thing, according to Trismegistus, dies;
but all things pass, and are changed into something else. For all mixed Bodies
are made of the Elements, into which, after a little time, they are resolved
again. Thus Porphyry tells us, that every Irrational Power is resolved into the
Life of the Whole.

And thus these Spirits being That thence it flows down again, and animates a
new Body, which is the true Notion of Transmigration.
ready and fit to impregnate new Matter, and She (...) to desire it, according
to the Axiom of Materia appetit Formam, ut Foemina Virum the same Spirit which
animated one Body, may, on its Dissolution, animate another, which I take to be
the meaning of Pythagoras his Transmigration of Souls, or Spirits. Hence
Lucretius,

Huic accedit uti quicque in (...) Corpora rursum
Dissolvit Natura; neque ad (...) interimit Res.
"Nature the Form from Bodies often unties,
"New Bodies to inform, whence nothing dies.
If this be not so, I would If Bodies are not annihilated, much less are Forms
fain know, what becomes of the Form that animates Minerals, Vegetables, and
Animals, not to speak of their Bodies, which are only changed, not annihilated.
Can that Spirit that gives Life and Motion, that partakes of the Nature of
Light, be reduced to nothing? Can that Sensitive Spirit in Brutes, that
exercises Memory, one of the Rational Faculties, die, and become nothing?

If you say, they breath their Spirits into the Air, and there vanish, that is
all I contend for. The Air indeed is the proper place to receive them, being
according to Laertius, full of Souls; and according to Epicurus, full of Atoms,
or intelligible Bodies unapparent, the Principle (...) all Things. For even
this Place wherein we walk, and Birds fly, though it is properly rather Water
rarefied, that Air, (as I have proved by a Magnet attracting it,) yet it is
thus much of a spiritual Nature, that it is invisible therefore well may be the
Receiver of Forms, since the Forms of all Bodies are (...) we can only hear and
see its Effects; the Air it self is too fine, and above the Capacity of the
Eye. What then is the Ether, that is in the Region above? And what are the
Influences or Forms that descend from thence?

The Pythagoreans held, that the Souls of Creatures are a portion of Ether;
and all Philosophers agree, that Ether is incorruptible; and what is so, is so
far from being annihilated, when it gets rid of the Body, that it lays a good
claim to Immortality.

Treasures fallen into the Sea, are lost only to them that cannot find them,
witness our late Expedition. The Spirit is not lost, but moving in the Air, in
its natural Sphere, where it obtains new Strength and Vigor. It passes into the
Air, as the Rivers flow into the Sea.

Omnia mutantur, nihil interit errat and illinc,
Huc venit; hinc, illuc, and quo (...) bet occupat Artus
Spiritus, etc. Ovid. Met (...)
Lib. XV.
"The Spirit never dies, (...) here and there,
"Though all things change it wanders through the Air.
But do not Animals convey Objection. That Animals convey a Sensitive Spirit in
Generation.
a Sensitive Spirit as (...) as Body, in Generation? How then descends a Form?

I agree, they give a Portion on of Specific Spirit; yet this Answered. Though
they do convey a portion of Specific Spirit, yet the Universal (...)
hinders not, but that as the Body is supported by Food in which there is a
portion of Spirit, and as the Animal Spirits, that are continually flowing
forth, are supplied by the Influx of new, and assisted by the Universal: so in
the Business of Generation, as well as afterward, the Specific Spirit is
enlarged and multiplied by the Influx of the General, or Universal. Now this is
more or less according The manner how the Universal Spirit joins with the
Specific, in the Generation of Animals.
to the activity of the Specific Spirit; which being of the nature of Light,
does attract its like with more or less vigor; not much unlike an enkindled,
though not flaming Lamp, whose Smoke or Effluviums, reaching a neighboring
Light, attracts it, and becomes enlightened by it at a distance; and by how much
the Effluviums are more powerful, they attract a greater Proportion of Light:
For Light naturally joins and unites with Light, as Fire with Fire; and the
Souls of Animals (the Rational excepted,) are a Ray of Heavenly Light.

Hence it comes to pass, that, in Men, Horses, and other Animals, you shall
have a vast difference; the Race of some, appearing always full of Life, and,
as it were, all Spirit, whilst that of others, are always heavy and dull, and
as it were, half animated. And thus it is in several Plants, which every
Gardener knows by experience; for you shall have, in the same kind, some
produce great increase, and others very little, in the same Soil. Now I see no
Reason, why the Universal Spirit may not join with the Specific in Generation,
as well as afterward. And why not in that of Animals, as well as in the
Production of Vegetables? For though it is in the moist That the Universal
Spirit is more plentifully in the Air, than elsewhere.
Vapor latent in the Earth, as I hinted before, and imbibed more or less
plentifully, according to the activity of the Form; so is it more intensely in
the Air, in its proper Sphere; for the Universal Spirit lodging principally
there, permeates through all the Parts of the Universe, and is that Nature that
is always ready, and at hand, to vivifie disposed Matter.

That the Universal Spirit That the Animal Spirit increases in Animals.
does multiply the animal one, after the Birth, is obvious to the Understanding
of all Men; for that portion of animal Spirit that animates an Infant, would
scarce give motion to a Manly Bulk. But I think we may with as much reason deny
the Growth and Increase of the Body, as that of the Spirit. All Men that know
the Benefit of good air, and the Mischief of bad, must acknowledge it. How do
the weak and languishing in a good air recover Strength, and obtain new Spirit
and Vigor? And how languid and sickly do Men become in a bad?

And this may well be; for the Animal Spirits are of an Aereal Principle; which
appears from hence; whilst they inhabit the Body, through the intimate Union with
the Air, the Body is preserved sweet; the Air continually flowing in, adding
new stores of Life, and giving Motion, as it were, to the whole Machine: But
when the animal Spirit is departed, then for want of that Communion, the Body
putrefies and stinks. Hence Anaximenes makes Spirit and Air Synonyma's.

The Reason of bad Air is The Mischief of Sulphurous Vapors fluctuating in the
Air; that they cause the Plague.
occasioned by the grossness of the Watery Humors, or Sulphurous Vapors that
annoy the Celestial Influences, by adhesion to them. When the Arsenical Vapors
are multiplied, it begets a Plague; and it is more or less mortal, as they
increase or decrease. Dismal was the Place that Virgil speaks of;

Quam super haud ullae poterant impune volantes
Tendere iter pennis; talis sese Halitus atris
Faucibus effundens, supera ad convexa ferebat.
Hnde locum Graii dixerunt nomine Avernum.
'O'er which no Fowl can stretch her laboring wings
'Such are the Fumes arising from those Springs,
'They mortal are, and fill the Atmos-Hall;
'Whence do the Greeks that Place Avernus call.
These Sulphurous Exhalations destroy Plants and Fruit, as well as Animals;
Plants being blighted, and Apples being spotted, even with blue spots to the
Core, in the late Sickness-Year, where the Plague raged. The knowledge A Means
to foresee a Plague.
of which, by the inspection of the Entrails of Animals, may be had and
foreseen, and by removal prevented. For when the impurity of the air cannot be
discerned by the Sense of Smelling, and when the Malignity makes no impression
on the outward Skin, at least in its first approaches; yet the vital parts of
Animals, which hold the closest and most intimate Communion with the Air, will
presently discover, if there be an Infection in it, by the discoloring and
putrefying the Parts; for they are first tainted, then the Blood, thence the
Sore.

Hence, I conceive it was, The Foresight of a Dearth
that Democritus, when he was reproached for his Poverty, told his Despisers,
That he could be rich when he pleased: For by this Observation, being a great
Dissector of Bodies, he foresaw a Dearth, and therefore bought up all the
Olives. The Dearth happening, the Price of Olives rose; whereby he might have
sold them to great advantage; but the Seller repining at his Misfortune,
Democritus, like himself, returned the Olives at the Price he bought them.

Democritus therefore commended Of Augury.
the Wisdom of the Ancients, for instituting an inspection into the Entrails of
Sacrificed Beasts; from the general Constitution and Color whereof, may be
perceived Signs of Health, or Pestilence, and sometimes what Dearth or Plenty
will follow. Augury thus stinted by wise Observation, and having regard to due
Circumstances, may be useful; but the Practice of it amongst the Romans, as in
foretelling particular Events to Men, and the like, was justly enough derided
by Cicero.

But all Arts have suffered The Loss of Arts.
by the additions of foolish Impostors; whence the unwary reject the Truth, for
the sake of Error intermixed Hence Arts and Sciences have their Death, as well
as Birth Hence the Tinging of Glass is lost; Yet I conceive, that they who have
Leisure, and Knowledge in the Mineral Province, may extract a Sulphur from
Metals, that will tinge and penetrate harder Bodies, than that of Glass. But to
return to the Subject of Air, whence I digressed.

The good Air, and the The Benefit of good Air.
Life and Spirit it brings, proceeds from the sublimation of a light Water,
acuated with a volatile Nitre, which being rarefi'd and impregnated with the
Heavenly Influences, conveys down Life, new Recruits to the Spirits of Animals,
as well as to Plants and Minerals.

This, if you can receive Homer explained.
it, is Homer's Juno, whom Jupiter let down into the Air, with a weight at her
Feet, her Hands being tied with a Gold Chain to Jupiter's Chair.

The Meaning whereof, is this, That the Spiritual Influences flowing from the
Heavenly Bodies, are too subtle for a Descent, without a Body; that the Air is
the Body or Medium, that conveys them down to the Earth. And though these Forms
flow thus continually from the Ether, yet the Eternal God has the ordering and
disposing thereof, and that it is not done without his Providence and Direction.

Thus, according to Socrates and Plato, there are Three Principles of Things;
God, Idaea, and Matter: God, the Efficient Cause; Idaea and Matter, the Formal
and Material.

I have now described Nature Superior, govern inferior Natures.
in General, the Commerce between Heaven and Earth, and the mutual assistance
they give each other. The Waters giving forth a subtle Vapor, to dilute the
scorching Influences, and the Heavens endowing it with a Vital Principle,
sending it back into its Native Country, enriched with the Privilege of Life.
The incomparable Encheiridion Physicae restitutae, speaking of these Things,
has thus ingeniously expressed them. Haec est Naturae Universae Scala, Jacobo
Patriarchae in Visione revelata; illae sunt Mercurii Pennae, quarum open, Ipse
(Deorum Nuncius, antiquis mystice dictus) Superum, Inferorumque Limina (...)
adire credebatur: i. e. This is the Scale of Nature in general, presented to
the Patriarch Jacob in a Vision These are the Wings of Mercury, (mystically
(...) by the Ancients, the Messenger of the Gods,) by whose help, he was
believed frequently to visit the Courts of Heaven and Earth.

Thus do Superior govern The Seven Planets called Gods; and why, in a large,
not a strict sense.
and influence Inferior Natures; the former of which, that is, the seven
Planets, for their Excellency and Beneficence to this lower World, the ancient
Philosophers called (...), which we render Gods; from (...), their perpectual
Motion. So the Eternal, by his Providence vouchsa fing to be always at work,
they thought (...) a fitting Name for the Almighty. Not that God has properly
any Name; (though Kircherus gives us Seventy two, all in different Languages,)
yet we may invoke the Divine Majesty, by any of his Attributes.

So that the Philosophers The ancient Philosophers did not adore all they
called Gods.
themselves, (I mean those who were worthy of that Title,) neither believed nor
adored a Multitude of Gods, nor intended them for Worship; but propter
excellentiam, called both Things and Persons so. Thus Homer calls Sleep a God,
when it hinders Jupiter from assisting the Trojans; and Hesiod, in his
Theogonia, has infinite Deities Whatever is productive of something else with
him, is a God; thus Contention is (...) fruitful Deity, because it produces
Trouble, Grief, Quarrels, Fightings, etc. So the Name (...), might be given by
the Greeks to some of their Hero's and great Persons, (...) to Antiochus, who
was called (...), without adoring them as the Title Majesty is now given to
Kings; which being great in the abstract, is not an Attribute too low, even for
the Almighty; and yet we do not adore them, when we call them so.

Thus God himself is pleased in Holy Writ to call Great Men Gods; and thus the
Appellative, Good, (whence the Name God is derived,) is applied by us to all
excellent Things, as well as Persons. For Aristotle could prove, by Aristotle
proves from Motion, that there can be but one God.
an Argument from Motion, the Being of one Infinite God, by showing that there
must be a first Mover, who is the Cause and Origin of all Motion, who is
Immovable, One, Eternal, and Indivisible: Which several Attributes he has
proved by irrefragable Arguments. But this Subject merits a particular
Discourse.

I shall only therefore add How the Philosophers came to call many Things Gods.
here, That Philosophy coming originally from the Poets, they treated of Things
in a sublime and lofty Style; With whom every Hill was Olympus, and this
Olympus, Heaven every Valley, Erebus; and every Prince, a God. And when they
treated of Nature, they represented her as the most Beautiful Diana, no less
than a Goddess, whom to behold with unclean eyes, was Death and to unveil whom
indecently, to suffer the Punishment of Tantalus. The admirable Things spoke of
her, (which the People always mistake,) made Asia fond to adore her.

The Philosophers therefore, when they spoke of the First Principles of Nature,
or of her excellent Operations, could call them no less than Gods, after the
Laws of Poesy. And this, I observe, was an universal Custom in all Countries,
the Names only differing, according to the Language of the Country; but the
Thing was still the same. Hence are the Deities of Homer's Oceanus and Tethys,
Orpheus his Ouranos and Vesta, the Romans Coelus and Terra, the Father and
Mother of the Gods, ( i. e.) the Formal and Material Principle of all Things.
And for the Operations of Nature, they tell us of Rhea, whence Neptume, Pluto,
and even Jove himself was descended. For the universal Spirit falling on the
Water, they called Neptune, (a nando, says Cicero,) penetrating the Earth where
Treasures are found, Pluto, from (...), Riches and whilst floating in the (...)
Air, Juno, a Juvando; for all things live by Air; and because it included a
Fiery Sperit, which digesting apt Matter, became Metal, the Metallic Nature:
and by (...) (if you take it not as an (...), which here is not Jupiter ter
Opt. Max. not a Person but Place,) is meant the Empyraeum; for that being (...)
to the Throne of the (...) Majesty, was by a Metonymy not unfitly called by his
name, who sits there. To imagine these, Persons, according to the Letter of the
Poets, is beneath the Thought of a Man of Sense; to confute it, were to write
to the Crowd: it is not worth lifting up ones Pen against it.

These are all said to flow from Rhea, meaning the Chaos of Hesiod, and that
dark Abyss, the holy Genesis calls void and without form; because of this
Matter all things were made, which were afterward divided and distinguished by
an informing, I say Created, because this Spirit of Light was on the 4th Day
contracted into the Body of the Sun.
created Spirit of Light, raising the most subtle part into the highest Region,
whither corruptible Matter cannot ascend.

This Region the Philosophers called Empyraeum, Jove, or the Super-celestial
Heaven. And as a further Description of Nature's operations, they tell us the
Story of Thet is (...) The Description of Nature in her Ascent and Descent.
going to Vulcan's House of shining Brass, his falling into her Lap, when he
was thrown down from Heaven, her mounting the Sky in a (...) Dress, to visit
Jupiter, who received her kindly, and placed her near himself. Hence is the
Adad and Atargates of the Assyrians; the first representing the Sun, with his
Beams bending downwards, the latter the Earth, ready to receive them.

Then again for their Principles, this is the Mind and Water of Anaxagoras and
Thales; the Soul of the World, that animated all the Parts thereof mentioned by
Zoroaster, Pythagoras, Heraclitus, Plato, and Zeno. The Vesta and Jove (related
by Herodotus,) of the Scythians; the Ur, i. e. Light or Fire of the Chaldeans,
and Water of the Persians, (which the common People, through Mistake,
worshipped) the Fire and Water of Hippocrates, which could do all things, the
Aetes of Hesiod, that married the Daughter of Oceanus; that Fire, which some
made synonymous with Sol; the Air, which they called Venus, the Virgin,
(because not specificated;) and in a word, that Mystery, which the Ancients,
with great Industry and Art endeavored to conceal from the Vulgar, calling it
by diverse Names shadowing it in Hteroglyphicks, AEnigma's, and dark Fables, to
the end it might not become common; but yet so, that the Industrious might by
labor and search attain the knowledge of it.

For as Esdras had his Books of Wisdom, which the Wise only were to look into;
so had the Magi their Occult Philosophy, which they delivered down to their
Sons of Learning, either Cabalistically, or in a Style the Common People did
not understand. Thus Pythagoras and Aristotle had their secret Philosophy,
which they taught only to some particular Persons, whose Wit and Morals they
were well assured of. And though Aristotle published his Acroaticks, yet it was
in such a style, that he tells Alexander, that none but those who heard them
discourse thereof, could understand them; that is, they were expressed in a
manner difficult to be understood, to keep off the Multitude; yet they getting
sight of the Fables of the Ancients, by the unlawful Publishing of them, by
such as Hippasus, Hipparchus, and Empedocles, they became an Offense to them, (
Scandalum acceptum, non (...),) and thereby fell into Idolatry.

The Original [ of one I say of one Species, for various were the parts of
Idolatry; and there were several Origins from whence they sprang the Worship of
the Stars not being the Original of all Idolatry; for most Nations adored
several Deities. The Scythians ado red the Wind, as God being (as they say) the
Cause of Life. The Chaldeans adored Fire; the Persians, Water; the Romans,
Earth, under the Name of Vesta; the Egyptians, diverse Animals and Insects; and
all Nation had their Deisied Heroes.
Species,] whereof, might be as R. Maimonides says, from the Worship of the
Stars; (...) surely not for the Reason he gives, ( i. e.) from looking (...) to
Heaven, and behold (...) their Splendour, adore them as the Ministers of God.
(...) Stars, he could not mean (...) Fixed; (they might as (...) have worshipped
a Flock of Sheep;) nor is their Splendour considerable: If Planets; how comes
Saturn, that is a dark and obscure Planet, scarce visible, that moves slowly,
to have such glorious Things said of him (above the rest of the Planets, even
of Sol himself,) whose Life was the Golden Age? This could not be from the
outward Appearance, which takes with the People. This therefore could be no
Argument with them for Adoration; but this was spoke of somewhat else, under
the Homonymium of Saturn, which is highly valuable, understood by the Magi,
(and therefore not adored,) though not by the People, for whom these things
were never intended, nor yet for the Stoics, who trifled in this Matter.

The Truth is, the Metaphors Of the Mysteries of the Ancients.
and Allegories, and the exceeding abstruse way the Ancients took of veiling
their Knowledge in Natural Philosophy, shows, they were calculated only for the
most elevated Minds, whose happy Condition gave them leisure and opportunity to
advance their Contemplation into the satisfaction of experimental Certainty.
Whence these Men knew what the meaning was of Jupiter's expelling Saturn, the
Union of Mars and Venus, Saturn's devouring his Children, or (...) his Son
Sadidus, Atalanta fugiens, etc. That these were not spoke of Persons, but
Things, and are in no sort immoral; though some Pedants have given a barbarous
Account of them; who, having daubed their Writings with Greek and Hebrew, would
make one nauseate the Tongues, for the Stuff they deliver.

Jamblichus tells us of the Symbols of Pythagoras, that without a right
Interpretation, they appear like foolish, trivial Fables; but rightly
explained, discover an admirable Sense, no less than the Divine Oracle of
Pythian Apollo. But these were the Arcana Sapientum. Nam quae Sacerdotes
condita in Arcanis habent, nolunt, ut Verit as ignota sit, ad multos manare;
Poena iis adjecta, qui ea in Vulgus proderent, says Diodorus. That is, The
Priests were unwilling, that those Things which they had concealed should come
abroad; some Truths were to be kept secret, and Penalties inflicted on those,
who would prostitute them to the Vulgar.

Now that the Philosophers That all the ancient Philosophers that treated
mysteriously of Nature, meant the same Thing under diverse AEnigma's.
of all Nations, that were acquainted with the Mysteries of Nature, meant the
same Thing under different Masks, will appear more evident, by explaining an
Egyptian Symbol, according to the Chaldean Astrology, and Grecian Mythology.
Though it must not be expected from me, whilst I am building up the Honor of
Pythagoras, that I should violate his great Law of Secrecy; that I should
manifest in public, what is fit only for the communication of an intimate
Friend. But I shall offer enough to maintain my Assertion.

The Egyptians, in their Symbols, Au Egyptian Symbol explained. According to the
were wont to paint Mercury youthful, with Wings on his Feet, and at his Head,
a Caduceus in his Hand, twisted about with two Serpents, the Magical Number of
Seven, etc.

The Chaldeans, in their Astrology, Chaldean Astrology.
acquaint us, That Mercury is of the Nature of that Planet with which it is in
conjunction; that with the Malevolent, he is Malevelent; with the Benevolent he
is Benevolent; and (...) he always follows the Sun.

The Grecians, in their Mythology, Grecian Mythology
tell us, Mercury was the Messenger of the Gods was wont to pass from one to
another, and that he was a Thief, etc. Now all these Three are but several
Modes of expressing the same Thing; and that according to the Genius and
Disposition of each Nation.

The Egyptians affecting Painting, Egyptian.
were for communicating their knowledge of Nature, by that of Paint and Figure;
as a wise and discreet way of concealing from the Vulgar, what was not fit, or
necessary for them to know; but what the Wise and Learned by labor and
industry might attain, without which, they were unworthy of it. Which Practice
some continue to this day, as I have lately seen in Libro muto Philosophiae,
Printed in France; and as may be seen in the Emblems of Maierus.

The Chaldeans, that were Chaldean.
great Observers of the motion of the Stars, their Diurnal and Annual, their
Retrogradation, and Progression, and in short, of the whole Economy of the
Heavenly Bodies, had herein sufficient Matter to allegorize all their Knowledge
of Natural Philosophy, in the mysterious way of the Motion, Conjunction
Opposition, etc. of the Planets; as some Men now use to do their secret
Designs, under the Cant of Trade.

The Grecians, when (...) Grecian.
Learning was brought them by Pythagoras, and some few others that traveled
into Egypt amongst the Priests; being a witty People, abounding with a
Luxuriant Fancy, did not like the dull and silent way of Symbols, which they
called Hieroglyphics; wherefore they were for communicating their Knowledge of
these things in a Poetic, Romantic manner, disguising the same with strange
Stories, and fabulous Relations of Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women, Heaven
and Hell; wherein they scarce gave any restraint to their Wit, or confinement
to the Rules, even of Virtue or Decency; such is the Enthusiasm of Poetic
Rage. Sometimes they mixed Morals with their Mythology; at others, neither
sparing Heaven or Hell, Virtue or Vice, to represent their Knowledge and
Experiments in Natural Philosophy.

Thus when they would express the intimate Union of two Natural Bodies, because
the enjoyment of Marriage confined the Fancy, and, as they thought, lessened
the desire, nothing would serve their turn, but to heighten the Union, to bring
in the Adultery of Mars and Venus: but yet their being caught by the power of
Vulcan, and covered in an Iron Net, was sufficient to inform the Philosopher,
that there was no more intended by this, than to show how close a Union these
two Bodies would make by the power of Fire. 'The (...) whereof was not casually
mentioned, since there are some living, who have seen the Operation
reticulatim. Though after all, to do right to the Ancients; Ovid, and other
Poets, that have collected the Grecian Mythology, out of their Philosophers and
Poets, have (Poetica Licentia) added Inventions of their own, which are as
apparently to be distinguished, as the bold strokes of an Apelles, from the
shaking ones of a Tyro.

Having said this, I shall first show what this Mercury is: Secondly, His
Qualitiess Thirdly, How these Three Nations agree in their Descriptions of him,
all of them meaning the same Thing under different Veils.

But before I describe him, it is fit to premise this; That the Ancients, who
studied Natural Philosophy, found a greater Excellency in the Mineral Province,
than in all the Parts of Nature besides, and therefore applied themselves
thereto, and in their Mythology, have discovered their Experiments therein.

Mercury then is, what the Mercury described.
Chemists call Argent vive, and the People, Quicksilver; the Wonder of the
World, dry, and yet current; fluid, and yet not wetting the hand, an imperfect
crude Metal. For his Qualities, he is the most volatile of the Seven, (and may
well therefore be called the Messenger of the rest, who are all Gods,)
susceptible of any Form, yet will mix with nothing, but what is of his own
Nature.

With the Egyptians, he was the second Dynasta, according to Kircher, Aureumque
Deum vocabant, (ex eo enim Sol oritur:) and as a Planet he was so too,
according to Vossius upon R. Maimonides, in AEgyptiorum Hieroglyphicis, Stella
Deus exprimebatur. A Messenger of the Gods, with the Greeks; a Planet, with the
Chaldeans; both which call the Planets Gods; and with the Magi, who understood
him, one of the Seven Metals.

The Egyptians, to denote his Egyptian Explanation.
crude Nature, paint him young; his volatile, with wings on his Feet and Head;
his Caduceus that works wonders, with two Serpents seven times twisted about;
the mighty Power he obtains, when acuated seven times; that as the Egyptian
Serpents were wont to destroy, so he then becomes powerful in the Dissolution
and natural Destruction of Metals. This is that Serpent that devoured the
Companions of Cadmus; and who they are, he that now knows not, let him be
ignorant still.

The Chaldeans, to show his volatile Nature, make him Chaldean Explanation.
a constant Attendant on the Sun; and to show his Mutability, and susception of
diverse Qualities, that he is of the Nature of that Planet, with which he is in
Conjunction; Benevolent, with the Benevolent; Malevolent, with the Malevolent:
( i. e.) joined with a Metal abounding with an Arsenical Sulphur, he assumes
the Nature of that Metal, with which he is in Conjunction, and so becomes
Arsenical; which being a poisonous Substance, may well enough be called
Malevolent; but joined with a Metal abounding with a pure Metalline Sulphur, he
changes and puts off his Arsenical Qualities before assumed, and then becomes
impregnated with a true Metalline Sulphur, which for its excellency, may well
be called Benevolent.

The carrying this to its Height, would give a greater Blow to that vain Art of
Judicial Astrology, than either Cornelius Agrippa, or any Author I have yet met
with, has given; and give a rational account, why some Planets are called
Masculine some Feminine; some Choleric, some Phlegmatic Saturn cold, Mars
hot, etc.

The Grecians, to express The Grecian Explanation.
his young and volatile Nature, make him a swift Messenger of the Gods; call him
Thief, for stealing the Arrows of Apollo; whereby they show his susceptibility
of Qualities; that joined with Sol, acuated with the other Metals, he assumes
his and their Virtues and Qualities, and steals from them their Nature and
Essence. For Mercury is the same to Metals, as common Water is to Animals and
Plants; and as this imbibes the Nature of the Animal or Plant decocted in it,
so does that, the Nature of the Metal digested with it.

Hence may be easily understood what Pythagoras meant, when he says, he
received the Gift from Mercury, to know the Migration of the Soul, as it past
from one Body to another. This is that Proteus that assumes all Forms; but
enough of this.

I am not insensible, that I have gone against the Current of the Learned
Kircherus the profound Vossius, and the industrious Galtrucius, Bochartus,
Natalis Comes, and the rest of the College of Learning whose Memories I
reverence whose Works I honor, whose Library Keeper, I confess myself
unworthy; yet no humane Authority ought to weight more, than the Reasons they
give will naturally allow. So that I conceive all these Learned Men have
followed one another, in the same Learned Tract of ancient Error, a sufficient
(...) for those who are fond of that old Notion, Quo antiquius, (...) verius;
which Hypothesis will not always hold good; for who knows not, that there was
Darkness in this World before Light? That the Angels fell before Adam was
created? That Adam was deceived even in Paradise, by the Great Impostor; and
since that, the next Man, Cain, was both a Murderer and a Liar? He that
considers how soon Sin entered into the World, and that ever since Mankind has
been beset with Sin, Error and Folly, (of which he has been very fruitful even
from the beginning;) that the Devil has advanced his Kingdom to a great
height; that Error is more ancient than Adam, will not be easily persuaded to
believe, that what is most ancient, is therefore most true, though gilded with
a show of Learning. Were there not erroneous Tenets in Christianity coaevous
with the Apostles? Who then can say that the bare antiquity of an Opinion is a
good Argument for it is Truth? For my part I think it not fit to be the sole
Criterion of Matters of Fact for we are to judge, not only how ancient the
Historian is; but how agreeable the Thing delivered, is to true Reason.

Now the Great Men The Fables of the Ancients refer to Things, not Persons.
was speaking of, have been exceeding industrious to find out to what Persons
the Fables of the Poets do relate; when in Truth, they are not Historical
Relations of Persons, but real and true Experiments in Natural Philosophy,
though veiled in Fabulous Relations, to conceal them from the Vulgar: One
Experiment whereof, will give more Light, than the Talk of all Mankind without
it. The Explanation of which, may do great Right, I conceive, to the Ancients,
deliver them from Calumny, and give some greater Light to the Learned World,
than hitherto has been done, and yet so, as not to transgress the great Law of
Pythagoras, or incur the Punishment of Theopompus or Theodestes.

The Famous Lord Verulam has made this one of the great Pillars in the building
up his Instauratio magna, wherein that Great Man saw, that the Wisdom of the
Ancients (...) couched in these Mysteries Of which Opinion I find like wise Sir
Kenelm Digby. But (...) was fit for the Learned (...) of the Honorable Mr.
(...) the Ornament of our Nation.

But to return to Pythagoras Can the Belief of this Doctrine, Objection.
that teaches, that Spirit set at Liberty, by (...) Dissolution of its Body,
may afterward animate another Body, be an Argument for any man's paying a
Deference to that Creature, whom, he fancies, the Spirit of his Father animates?

He may with as much Respons.
Reason honor that Field, that produced his Father's Food, (being assimilated
into his Nature,) or adore the Wind, (that continued Life to him,) as this
Animal. For the Sensitive Spirit, after its dissolution from the Body, is no
more his Father's, than the Air he expired, was a part of himself; it was
nothing at first, but the Ligature of the Rational Soul and Body, which, when
they are dissolved, as to them, there is an end of the Tie.

No one sure will think this Objection.
Opinion does invade the Doctrine of the Resurrection since there can be no
need of Respons.
a Medium, where there are no Extremes. The clothing of the Blessed Spirits
after this Life, will doubtless be with a Robe of Light, because they are
always to appear before the Father of Lights. Our Savior's Transfiguration may
give us a glimpse of this; but where Flesh and Blood cannot enter, what need
can there be of a Sensitive Spirit?

But I think this Matter Of the Identity of Form in all Bodies.
may be carried higher than the Opinion laid down of Pythagoras; for this very
Particle of Light and Heat, when it is free from its Body of whatever sort, may
penetrate Matter that may concrete into Stone or Metal, produce a Vegetable, or
insinuate into an Animal-Matrix, and cooperate in the Generation of the Foetus;
for it is homogeneous with the Vital Heat in all but their Specification. It Is
true, Eirenaeus the Great, has said, There is nothing that has a Seminal Virtue
applicable to two things. But this is spoken of a Seminal Virtue latent in some
Body, not at Liberty and free, but specificated and determined.

That this Spirit is universal, I need not go back to the first Abyss and Form,
to show the Identity of Matter and Form in General, (which was afterward
divided and distinguished according to the Proportion of Matter and Form,) to
prove the Identity of Spirit in all these Three. It Is enough here to show, that
Minerals and Plants, (not to mention Animals,) being Physic and Food for Man,
are, by application to him, assimilated into his Nature, and that only by the
Power of his own Specific Spirit; which shows them to be of his own Matter and
Form, or it could not attract and convert into its own Nature what is repugnant
to it ( Aliment (says Aristotle) must be the same potentially, which the Thing
augmented, or nourished, is in Act.
). But that there is an Homogeneity of Spirit in all the Three Provinces of
Nature, will appear from hence (if it be true) that from the Dross of Metals
reduc d to Ashes, are generated Beetles; from Plants, Caterpillars; from Fruit,
Maggots; and from putrefied Animals, Bees and Flies; so that an Animal Life
flows from them all. And out of any Species of every one of the Three Kinds,
may be drawn a Light burning, and fiery Spirit; which could not be, were they
not homogeneous.

The great difference which there seems to be between the several parts of the
Creation, makes the People indeed believe them of contrary Natures. Thus the
Vulgar can hardly think that Fountain. Water will ever become Wood, Leaves,
Fruit, Bones, Sinews, Blood, and all the Parts of an Animal Body; But a
Naturalist can easily discern, that the Water or moist Vapor, that dissolves
the Seed, is by the Specific Spirit of the Seed converted into its own Nature,
and shoots up into Branches, bearing Leaves and Fruit, whose grosser part
increases the Body of the Tree. And so the Water drank by Animals, becomes
converted into Nourishment, and is communicated into all the Parts of the Body,
by which they all grow and are increased to a determinate Time. Thus are all
the Parts of the Universe related to each other by the common Bond of the same
Universal Spirit, which Parmenides in his famous Idea's calls That one Idea,
which is the Foundation of all Singulars; out of which, as from a Thread, the
whole Web, as it were, of Individuals, is woven.

Now this Universal Spirit residing in many Particulars, is the Support and
Foundation of them all; and is, according to Zenophanes, wholly together one;
though for distinction sake, and that we may better understand one another in
Discourse, we divide it into Three Heads, which are called Kinds, and into
almost infinite Species, which are the Particulars.

Thus we see Nature, though She is One, Pure and Simple, is yet beneficial to the
whole Creation, and continually supplies the perishing Old, by the Gift, as it
were, of New. And thus we may see, that without God, who is Nature's Governor,
we can do nothing even in this world.

O Eternal Wisdom! How excellent are the Divine Operations! How manifold the
divine Goodness! whose Wisdom, Power and Love are no less evident in the
Conservation, than the Creation of the World! If the Divine Mind should check
Nature a few moments, this delicate Machine would be without Spirit, the world
would be benumbed with an eternal Cold and Darkness, and an everlasting Death;
all things would run back into their first Mass, Chaos, and dark Abyss, never
to be renewed, without that Spirit that first banished Darkness, by separating
the Waters, and enkindling in their most refined Parts (advanced to the Region
Above) a Spirit of Light.

To the Eternal therefore be infinite Praises by the pure Spirits of Men and
Angels.

He that thinks I do a dishonor A comparison of the Form in Animals, Plants
and Minerals.
to Animals, in supposing, that that Spirit that animated a mean Vegetable,
(...) a sluggish Metal, on its leaving these Bodies, should give Life and
Motion to an Animal Being, will easily see his Mistake, when he considers (...)
those Things are always esteemed most Excellent (...) Noble that are of longest
duration. Now we see, (...) many Vegetables, and all Things of a Metallic
Composition, do exceed Animals (...) duration of Time. Besides all Things
receive a value from their Usefulness; now though diverse Beasts and Birds are
very useful both for Food and Pleasure, yet (...) of them are supported without
Vegetables; nor can any Man plow, or go to Sea, without Metals. But this is
speaking rather like a Merchant than Naturalist; therefore I shall wave it.

That Spirit seems to me to Of the Excellency of the Form in Metals.
be most Noble, that has so digested the Passive Matter, which contains it, as
to be able to defend it against all the assaults of the Elements; and on the
other side, that Spirit seems to be most weak and unactive, that suffers its
Body to be soonest dissolved on their Intention. Now Vegetables and Animals do
both perish in the Flames; but Metals do not: So that the Strength and Virtue
they enjoy visible to every Eye, gives them justly the Precedence But could
their Bodies be dissolved, and their Spirits (...) loose, as we see in
Vegetable Seeds, then their Excellency would be very manifest. (...) that has
seen the perpetual Of the perpetual light made out of them, and of its great
difficulty.
Light to which they have been advanced by Dissolution does know what place
(...) merit in this Life; (...) were the operation as easy, (...) the Reason
is evident, no ingenious Man would be without it. For my part I own myself
herein, only Un (...) yet he that is not able to (...) a Bow, may yet give
(...) Wherefore, to this, I conceive there is need of an homogeneous Agent,
defecated from all Impurity, and impregnated with a Metalline Sulphur, the
former found in the House of Gemini, This is Jargon to those only, who do not
understand it.
the latter in that of Aries, by the benign Influences of Libra and Aquarius.

But let none but the Happy pretend to this. He that can retire, and enjoy the
Freedom of Horace his Countryman;

Beatus ille, qui procul negotiis,
Ut prisca gens mortalium,
Paterna rura bobus exercet suis,
Solutus omni foenore, etc.
"Happy the Man from toilsome cares set free,
"Who does regain Man's ancient Liberty,
"Ploughing his Ground with Oxen of his own,
By Parents left; 's free from Usurious Loan.
To this Freedom of Thought, there is necessary a Knowledge of all Nature, a
plentiful Fortune, and above all, a wise and a Learned Friend. Qui publicis
(...) bus and Muneribus funguntur, (...) privatis and necessariis (...)
cupationibus jugiter incumbunt, (...) summum hujus Philosophiae (...)
contendant: Totum enim (...) illa desiderat, (...) possedet, Possessum ab omni
(...) and longo negotio vendicat, (...) omnia aliena reputans and flocci (...).
They who are (...) tigued with Public Honors and Employments, or have
continual Avocations of private and domestic Affairs, let them not pretend to
the Heights of this Philosophy; for she requires the whole Mind; which
obtained, she keeps, and retains him from all tedious Business; teaching him to
slight all Things else as Trifles.

This is an Eternal Bar to such as my self, who am bowed down to an Employment
of daily Attendance, Me Miserum! --

Well may the Qualifications above be thought necessary, since besides the
Fineness and Acuteness of Mind, there is required Herculean Labor.

-- Non viribus ullis Vincere, nec duro poteris convellere fern.
"This to attain, no Steel (...) any Force,
"Nor French Dragoons, (...) Missionary Horse.
For it is so difficult, that (...) tells us, Mars being imprisoned by Neptune's
Son Thirteen Months in a Dungeon, could scarce be set (...) by Juno's help,
though assisted by Hermes himself. (...) meaning whereof, when have told you,
that Mars the Son of Juno, and she the Metallic Nature, is too obvious to need
an Explanation; for a Surcharge is nauseous to the Mind of an Ingenious Man.

Now to remove all Objections to the Foundation of this Opinion of Pythagoras,
and what is superadded: It Object. 1.
may be asked, How does it appear that the Heavenly Bodies bestow an Influence,
or Universal Spirit on the Earth? Why may not the Earth it Object. 2.
self be impregnated ab initio with Seed enough, to hold out for all Species to
the end of the World?

That the Heavenly Bodies Respons.
move and transmit Heat, we Both see and feel: Nay, this Heat beyond the
Tropicks, is so intense and powerful, that with us collected by a concave
Glass, it will melt Silver, and that in a more extraordinary manner than a
Culinary Fire is able to perform. Whence Mechungus affirms, that there is no
artificial Fire able to give such a heat, (...) that which comes down from
Heaven. We see Infects, sort of Animals, in a feu days are generated by it is
waterish places. Those (...) pass for Animals, as Frogs Toads, and even Mice,
whose Generation is aequivocal, (...) so produced; by means whereof, we
perceive that Vegetables grow and increase.

Timaeus the Locrian, says, That God scatters Souls, ( i. e.) Forms, some in
the Moon, others in other Planets and Stars, whence they are instilled into
Creatures. To which Aristotle agrees, when he says, That the Universal
Efficient Cause of all things, is the Sun and the other Stars, and that their
Access and Recess, are the Causes of Generation and Corruption. If so,
Aristotle held, that there was an Element of Fire, above the Region of the Air.
what need is there of an Element of Fire, above the Region of the Air? But, I
conceive, 'twas placed there for Order's sake only.

Now this Virtue that is Of the Universal Spirit.
Ministerial to such Variety of things, must be in its own Nature General and
Catholic, or it could not be subservient to so many several different
Individuals. The Specification of it, naturally proceeds from the Particulars.
We see a little Salt seasons a great Lump, and a Scion transmutes the whole
Juice of the Tree into its own Nature. Wherein we may observe a twofold Change:
First, Of the general Moisture into an Identity of that of the Tree: Secondly,
A new Specification of it, by its passing into the Scion. Nay, such is the
virtue of Fermentation, that you may inoculate Scion upon Scion, after a little
Growth; and whatever becomes of Transmutation in the Mineral, we daily see it
various ways in the Vegetable Province, to that degree, that in many Trees you
may ingraft and inoculate out of species, as Cherries on a Laurel, Pears on a
Hawthorn-Tree; nor is it otherwise in the Animal, of which no man's Experience
is without some Instances.

Fermentation, says the incomparable Eirenaeus the Great, is the Wonder of the
World; by it Water becomes Herbs, Trees, Plants, Fruit, Flesh, Blood, Stones,
Minerals, and every Thing. This Epicurus calls the attracting and intangling
adaptable Atoms, by their Fellow-Atoms; by which they grow up into the same
Nature; of which hereafter.

As for the latter part of Respons. 2.
the Objection, touching the Earth's having Seed enough in it self, and
therefore needs not borrow of the Heavens: What I said already to the first
part of the Question, may be a sufficient Answer. But to proceed.

That the Earth is barren and sluggish, dead and passive, we may easily see, by
considering how unfruitful all places are that are surrounded with Buildings.
For if the Earth had Seed enough in it self, she might be as fertile in a
City-Garden, as in a Country. But it is plain, that the want of a free access
of the Air, whereby an Universal Spirit, or animating Heat is conveyed, is the
only Cause of Sterility.

Why do your Countrymen, after some years plowing, leave the Ground fallow? Is
there not Seed or Virtue enough in the Earth to hold out? If there is not,
whence does she receive it? It must proceed either internally from the Center,
or externally from the Heavens: if from her own Center, why does she wait the
accession of the Sun, to call forth her Vegetables? And why, where his
Influences are interrupted, is she barren?

But may not the Earth Object.
have a Feminine Sperm in it, and may not this vital Heat, be as a Masculine
Principle, that may only excite, and bring this dormant Seed from Potency into
Act, to which Opinion Xenocrates seems to be inclined? If the Earth Resp.
were filled with such an imaginary Seed, whenever the Sun approaches with his
enlivening Beams, surely all these Seeds would quickly appear to sight; what
then should the Earth do for the next year's Vegetables? The Propagation of
them only by their letting fall a Seed, and by that means another coming in its
place, is weak and frivolous; for though this in many places often happens, yet
Experience shows us, that though Weeds are grubb'd up before they run to seed,
yet the same, or others, soon grow up in their stead; And whence should this
happen? Who are the Conservators of the seeds of Weeds, and noxious Plants?
Noxious, only because their use is not known. What Enemy comes in the night and
sows them? And where are their Storehouses?

But may not the Birds in Object.
the Air let fall seed, and so it may grow? This Objection can admit no
Resolution but this: Take Earth, defend it Resp.
as you please, so it has some access of Air, and you will find an Herb of some
sort or other arise. It is therefore most evident, that by the Heavenly Bodies,
or from them, a germinating Virtue is emitted; that this Virtue is universal,
conveyed by the Medium of Air, filling all Places, and producing diverse
Effects, according to the plenty of Spirit, and difference of Place: That this
Spirit, on the dissolution of its Body, is not annihilated, but gets loose,
becomes active and vigorous, and impregnates new Matter, whose Nature is
varied, according to the diversity of Place; as Water mixing with salt things,
becomes saline; and with Acids, sharp.

Now, this to me, is so far That Bodies are only changed, not annihilated.
from being a wonder, that I should admire if it were otherwise; since Bodies,
that are but the Case of Spirits, are not annihilated, when their Spirits leave
them, but lose only their external Figure and Shape; for if Bodies on their
resolution, were annihilated, the World in time would be reduced to nothing.

For the World consisting of Parts, and those Parts of Bodies, as Bodies are
annihilated, so are the Parts; and the Parts being daily subtracted, this
Machine would fall to pieces, or rather to nothing. But as in Generation, says
Epicurus, there is no new substance made, but pre-existent substances are made
up into one, which acquire new Qualities; so in Corruption, no substance
absolutely cease to be, but is dissipated into more substances, which remain
after the destruction of the former.

So that though Bodies resolve into Dust, yet this Dust remains still, and
being quickened by a Solar Heat, shoots forth into some Plant; and this Plant
becoming Food to Man or Beast, and Beast to Man, is assimilated into the Nature
of the Eater, and becomes part of himself. Hence Hermes, and the rest of the
Philosophers affirm, that nothing properly dies; but all things pass, and are
changed into something else In nihilum nil posse reverti.
So that if one would urge it, he might prove this way a Transmigration of
Bodies, as well as Spirits; since the Bodies of the Dead become Food to the
Living after a little Circulation of Time, passing through a few Mediums, and
that Food becomes part of him that eats it.

This the Egyptians hinted by the Hieroglyphick of a Snake painted in a
circular form, the Head swallowing up the Tail: Of which, Claudian.

-- Serpens Perpetuumque viret squamis, caudamque reducto
Ore vorat, tacito relegens exordia lapsu.
' Python his Scales renews, and on the Ground
'With Tail in Mouth he lies, in Circle round.
Thus Pythagoras might say he was Euphorbus, who lived many years before him,
because of the Possibility both in respect to the Identity in some sort of his
Body (for we were once upon our Plates,) and his animation by the same
sensitive Spirit, being of a Temper and Disposition very like him. Thus for
similitude of Spirit, John the Baptist is called Elias.

But now for Plato's Opinion, The Moral of Transmigration.
and the rest of the Pythagoreans, who held, or rather seemed to hold, That by
indulging to Sense, the Souls of Men passed first into Women; then, if they
continued vicious, into Brutes, etc. This Degeneracy, if he had confined to the
same Body, would have had as much Reason and Truth of its side, as the other
has of Prettiness and Fancy: For Experience shows us, that many Men, by soft
and tender Habits, grow weak and effeminate; and by degrees slide into an
Indulgence of all Brutal Passions. Now it is more than probable, that there was
no more intended by this sort of Expression, than to show Mankind to what a low
Ebb Humane Nature might descend, to what a Brutal Sordidness Man might sink
that wallow'd in sensual Pleasures.

And what is the natural Consequence of this? That Men therefore to avoid this
Evil, should adorn and cultivate their Minds with useful Knowledge, and exert
Life in Practical Virtues. This was the Design both of Moral and Natural
Philosophy; and this AEsop, who flourished about an hundred years before Plato,
inculcated by his ingenious Fables; amongst which, had this of Plato's been
inserted, the Moral had been obvious to every Understanding.

This is no new Interpretation; for Timaeus long ago commended the Ionick Poet,
for making Men religious by ancient Fabulous Stories. For, said he, as we cure
Bodies with things unwholesome, when the wholesome agree not with them; so we
restrain Souls with Fabulous Relations, when they will not be led by the True.
Let them then (continues he) since there is a necessity for it, talk of these
strange Punishments, as if Souls did transmigrate; the Effeminate into the
Bodies of Women, given up to Ignominy; of Murderers, into those of Beasts, for
Punishment; of the Lascivious, into the forms of Swine; of the Light and
Temerarious, into Birds; of the Slothful and Idle, Unlearned and Ignorant, into
several kinds of Fishes.

Thus we see how Pythagoras has been miss-represented and what was made use of
only as the last Remedy to restrain Men from Vice; and was, what we call
Argumentum ad Hominem, is now, for want of Understanding in his Censurers,
returned upon him with great Reproach.

But did not Pythagoras abstain from Flesh-Meat, for fear of eating his
Parents, according to the gross Notion of Transmigration? Most certainly not;
for Jamblicus in the Life of Pythagoras, tells us, That he being the Disciple
of Thales, one of the chief Things Thales advised him, was, to husband his Time
well; upon which account, he abstained from Wine and Flesh; only eating such
things as were light of Digestion; by which means, he procured shortness of
Sleep, Wakefulness, Purity of Mind, and constant Health of Body.

But what if Transmigration Transmigration in Plants and Minerals demonstrable
to sense.
may be made evident to Sense in Plants and Minerals? That it may be in Plants,
every ordinary Chemist knows: For by the extracting the Spirit or Soul of a
Vegetable in the form of Oil, and by the cohobation of it on the calcined Salt
of a different Plant, they will impregnate that Salt with a new Life and
Spirit, and give it new Virtue, Smell and Taste. Thus they draw forth a Spirit
from one Plant and infuse it into the Body of another. And thus Van Suchten,
and the acuter sort of Chemists, tell us may be done with Metals.

But what need we fly to Laborious Art for the proof of this? Does not
sagacious Nature afford Instances enough of this sort in diverse Places, witness
the petrefying Baths at Buda, Glashitten and Eisenbach in Hungary, that turn
Wood and Iron into Stone; and the Venereal Mine at Hern-grunat near Neusol,
where, by leaving Iron in the Vitriolate Water for Fourteen Days, it is
transmuted into excellent Copper, better, and more ductil than the Natural. But
enough of this.

I have done with Pythagoras, and shall touch now on Four Things.

1. I shall speak somewhat to the duration of Bodies.

2. Examine some Principles and Elements generally received.

3. Compare some Aristotelian Hypotheses with those of Democritus.

4. Having already shown, how variety of Plants and Metals are now generated in
the Earth, from the Diversity of Salts, etc. I will endeavor to show how the
Earth comes to be filled with such variety of Bodies, abounding with different
Qualities.

First, As to the Duration Of the duration of Bodies.
of Bodies. Bodies, after the sensitive Spirit has left them, and before their
resolution into Dust, have a sort of Vegetable Life remaining in them; as
appears by the growth of Hair and Nails, that may be perceived in dead Bodies;
and a weak Animal one that lurks in the Moisture; whence in Putrefaction, Worms
and diverse sorts of Insects may be generated, who dying, others of another sort
arise.

If therefore Bodies obtain this sort of Immortality (not to speak of the
Resurrction of the Body in a Philosophical Discourse,) why should it be denied
to the Spirit, which has a much greater Right to it, by the pure and incorrupt
lasting Nature of its Essence?

But I shall advance the Nature of Bodies to a much more unmixt and pure
Immortality: For the Radical Moisture of Bodies, that lies in the Bones, may
justly challenge a Right (as things now are) to an eternal duration. For not to
mention Bones that are found entire after a Thousand Years Burial, nor the
Bodies of Egyptian Mummies, preserved whole for several Thousand Years; there
is in the Bones a Radical Moisture, that is fixed and permanent, and is so far
from giving way, or suffering loss by that Element that is the Destroyer of
mixed Bodies, that it is the Vessel made use of to purge the fixed Metals in
the Fire, and remains unhurt when the volatile Metals fly away; so that none of
the Elements can destroy it, no not the most torrid Vulcan.

Now for mixed Bodies; Fire indeed may separate the Parts of a mixed Body,
change the Figure, and so alter its Appearance, as to puzzle the best Mechanic
to reduce it to its primitive state; yet this is no Annihilation, but Division.
The burning of Wood or any Fuel, is a Destruction of it, I confess, as to the
Proprietor; but not with respect to the Universe, no more than there is less
Money in the World by the Profuseness of a Prodigal; as the one does but change
Hands, so the other alters only the situation of its Parts.

The Watery or Mercurial Part of the Wood passes away in Smoke, the Oily or
Sulphurous in Flame, and the Body of Salt rests in the Ashes. The Air preserves
the two former, and the Earth retains the latter; each part returns to its
native Country. What then can destroy this Body, except the First Cause, I am
yet to learn: For though Bone-Ashes, by reason of Moisture, may flow and become
Glass, the ultimate end and use of them; yet so glorious a lightsome body as
that of Glass, is rather an exaltation of its Essence, than diminution of its
Excellency; nor does it give any termination to its Being, but only a change to
its Figure. If Culinary Fire destroys the Parts of the Universe, in time it may
the whole. But this is inconsistent with the Wisdom of its Maker, to create
Principles destructive of one another.

The Light of Nature, as Of the general Conflagration.
well as Experience taught Plato, that the World was not destroyable by any
other Cause, but by the same God, who composed it; which the Eternal can easily
do by Fire, according as Things now appear, without the Light of Holy Writ:
Which makes me wonder, that Aristotle, Zenophanes, and other Great Men did not
see this; but thought the World of necessity as Eternal as God; for though the
Heat of the Sun is now tolerable between the Tropicks, yet he that considers
its being a little multiplied by a concave Glass, even in our Meridian, (though
its Rays pass through a vast Region of Water rarefied,) if reflected on a Man
for some time, it will scorch and destroy him, when the volatile Waters that
allay his Heat, become fixed, (which the People think now are, and a
Philosopher knows may easily be,) then the Sun having no Cloud to obstruct his
Light, nor any Water to cool the scorching Heat of his Rays, will necessarily
burn up and calcine the Earth.

Thus the very Elements would destroy us, did not the Eternal, by his
Providence, defend us from the Heat, by the interposition of the Waters, and
from the Chilness of the Waters, by impregnating them with a Solar Heat, whose
invisible congealed Spirit, (says one of the Learned Magi) is more valuable
than the whole Earth. Clementissimo itaque infinitae sint Lauds.

Secondly, As to Principles 2. Of Principles and Elements.
and Elements: being to speak of these, it will not be amiss to enquire, how
and when these came into the World. The Study of Natural Philosophy was as
early in the world, as Men came to call upon God: For whatever Appearances God
made to the Antediluvian Patriarchs, and by that means communicated his Divine
Will and Nature to them, yet we cannot suppose that the World in general had
any other Light of the Divine Glory and Majesty, than what came to them by
Tradition, and the Contemplation of the several Parts of the Universe; for God
is known by his Works; they are the Witnesses of his Wisdom, Power, and
Goodness. The Knowledge of these Works, comes not to Mankind (at least
generally) by Inspiration, but by exerting our Faculties.

And as for Tradition, that is apt to make but a weak impression on thinking
Men, unless it is backed with Reason.

But besides, though the Creation of the World was a Tradition, and the manner
out of Chaos; yet to give an account of the Phenomenon of Things, and the
manner now of Nature's Productions, could not be a Tradition. This was left to
Man, as the proper exercise of his Rational Powers, that by improving, and
advancing his Thoughts, he might come to have a clearer Light and Knowledge of
God, and consequently, love him the more intensely; for it is almost impossible
to have a true knowledge of God, and not to be inflamed with Love of him, such
is the Purity and Perfection of the Divine Nature.

When Men therefore began to contemplate the works of God, they found all the
Parts of Nature reduceable to two Heads or Principles; an Active, Vital or
Formal one, and a Passive or Material.

This I conceive Moses intended, when he tells us that in the Beginning God
created the Heaven and the Earth: which things are expressed in the very same
words by the Chaldeans, Assyrians, and Greeks, as I have hinted before.

Thales, who was one of the first amongst the Grecians, as, Laertius, Strabo,
Cicero, and Plutarch affirm, that made enquiry into Natural Causes, conceived
Water to be the Material Principle of all living Creatures; because all Seed is
humid, and Plants and Animals are nourished by it. This he had from a more
ancient Nation, the Phoenicians, by whom Orpheus was likewise instructed.

To this Material Principle, Anaxagoras is said to be the first that added
((...)) the Mind, by which, I conceive, he meant the Formal. Hence Virgil calls
the Universal Form the Mind.

-- Totamque insusa per artus Men's agitat molem, and magno si corpore miscet.
'A Mind infused through this World's every part,
Does move the whole Machine with wondrous Art.
But Homer and Hesiod both gave an account of these two Principles long before.

Various afterward were the Opinions of the Philosophers about Principles.
Pherecydes the Assyrian, asserted Earth to be the Principle of all things;
Anaximenes, Air; Hippasus, Fire; Xenophanes, Earth and Water; Parmenides, Fire
and Earth; Enopides, Fire and Air; Democritus and Epicurus, Atoms; Empedocles,
Plato and Aristotle, etc. to these Principles added four Elements, being the
visible Matter, as they conceived, of which all Bodies did subsist: And this
the Schoolmen, following them, have hitherto maintained, and it is now the
Doctrine of the World.

The Chemists hold Three Of the 3 Principles of the Chemists.
Principles at this day; these Principles and Elements I now intend to examine:
And first, for the Three Principles.

I know it is no less a crime Principles.
than Heresy, in the Communion of Chemists, to deny any of their three beloved
Principles, their Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury; but being not of their Church, I
need not fear their Censure. I do admit Salt in some sense, to be one of their
Principles; but I do deny Sulphur and Mercury to be several; for their best
Authors affirm Mercury to be only crude Sulphur, and Sulphur ripe Mercury; they
differ therefore not in specie, but in degree of Digestion.

The Ancients (says Eirenaeus the Great) thought them all one; and though
Paracelsus has invented a Liquor, by means whereof, he taught the way of
separating the Sulphur in the form of a tincted Metallic Oil; yet I conceive
this is nothing but an extraction of the riper, and more digested part of the
Mercury.

This will appear more evident, by considering the Matter of Metals; which I
will deliver in the sense of Eirenaeus the Great, having translated him, but
not having the Original in Latin by me. That Mercury (says he) which is
generated in the veins of the Earth, (and all Metals arise from the same
Matter) is the universal material Mother of all things clothed with a
Metallic Species, which may be easily proved, because Mercury is accommodated
to them all, and by Art may be conjoined; which would be impossible unless they
did partake of the same Nature. Mercury, says he, is Water, yet such as will
mix with nothing that is not of its own Identity; whereas therefore it drinks
up all Metals by its moisture, it follows they have all a Correspondency of
Matter with it.

Again, Mercury, by the help of Art assisting Nature, may be successively
digested with all the Metals. And this same Mercury retaining the same Color
and Form of flowing, will assume the true Nature of them, and by succession
exert their true Properties; which would be impossible to be done by Art, did
not Nature show us the possibility by their Correspondency of Matter. Besides,
all Metals and Minerals too, that are of Metallic Principles, may be reduced
into a current Mercury.



Hence I conceive, it is evident, that current Mercury is the nighest (though
not the first) Matter of Metals; which Mercury has a Salt included in it, and
becomes a more or less ripe Metal, according to the purity or impurity of its
Matrix. What need then can there be of Sulphur as a distinct Principle? But
they that contend that these three, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, are the
constituent Principles of a Metallic Body, ought to show that Nature produces
these three simple Substances, and then unites them in the composition of a
Metal. But who ever yet saw a Specific Metalline Salt void of Mercury and
Sulphur? Or simple Mercury without Salt, or a Metalline Sulphur by it self?

The Truth is, in a strict sense there are no other Principles, but the moist
vapor impregnated with vital heat; for these two alone constitute all Bodies.
As for the Salts I mentioned in the generation of Plants and Metals, I conceive
them to be only a congelation of a former Vapor, differenced in Metals by a
long circulation in the Alembick, of the Earth; and in Plants, by a speedy
resolution near the Superficies. Now this Homogeneity of Salts in two such
different Bodies, will not appear strange to them who consider the vast
Alteration Heat makes on Bodies by time, in different Vessels: thus common
gross Water, in an open Vessel, by a gentle heat is soon evaporated and
rarefied into Air; whilst Dew, a much purer Substance, by the same heat,
circulated in a close Vessel by length of time, is condensed into Earth.

But are not the Principles of Bodies known by their Resolution, Objection.
and may not Metals be reduced into three distinct Principles?

If the various Figures into Respons.
which the Fire is able to divide Bodies, must be called Principles, Monsieur
L'Emery assigns no less than five; but he honestly confesses, that this is
effected by the alteration the Fire makes on Bodies; not by a natural Analysis
into their first Principles.

But does not the Great Stagyrite Objection.
hold three Principles, Matter, Form and Privation?

By Privation, he does not Respons.
mean a Principle, in a strict sense, i. e. an Essence constituting a Body, or
part of such; but with respect to the previous Matter of each Body, before it
is specificated, which he calls the Terminus a quo; as when determined, the
Terminus ad quem. But if it must be a Principle, let it be of Death, not of
Life: For how can that be a Principle of Life, that is a separation of Soul and
Body? If instead of Privation, he had called it Putrefaction, that might well
enough have passed for a Principle, or something like it; since Putrefaction is
the Gate to Life.

I think therefore the Two Principles of the Ancients, Matter and Form, stand
firm, notwithstanding Aristotle or the Chemists.

But if there are four Elements Of the Elements.
that constitute Bodies, according to the general Doctrine, they, I must
confess, will overthrow the Two Principles of Matter and Form, unless these
Principles being first, the Elements afterward are made out of them, as
Plutarch will have it; and then 'twill be disputing only about Words. But we'll
consider this.

Elements seem to be but modern in respect of the Ancients: Moses speaks only
of the Spirit and the Abyss; and so, for what I perceive, it continued even to
the Time of Thales, who flourished in the 35th Olympiad; Principles and
Elements, being not then distinguished by him; for which Plutarch finds fault
with him. The same Author makes Empedocles to hold Four Elements, who, it is
said, was a Disciple of Pythagoras, who was contemporary with Thales. Here I
will suppose Elements to begin; the Reason this; They that held four Elements,
perceiving that besides the moist Vapor, and heavenly Influence, or Fire and
Water in the modern Language, there were Earth and Air; that Air is the Food,
and as it were, the Companion of Fire, and Water of Earth, and that things
generated in the Earth, could not but partake of its Nature, as the Foetus in
the Womb. That two of these were active, and two passive; two heavy, and two
light; must of necessity be those Parts of Matter, that constitute the Harmony
of each Being.

To speak clearly to this Matter, I shall take each Element apart, and by that
you will see, whether these four, or two only, are self-subsisting Beings;
Pure, Simple, Primitive, and Unmixt, which is the Notion of an Element. I will
begin with the Air.

That the Air we walk in, Of the Air.
is pure and unmixt, no one will pretend; for the Sulphurous Steams, that are
sublimed into the Air, and the abundant Moisture fluctuating in this Region,
show the contrary.

The Truth is, what we call Air, is nothing but Water rarefied, attracted by
the Heat of the Sun, or sublimed by the Archeus of the Earth; and this may be
made manifest by many several Experiments, as the evaporating of Water into
Smoke (which is a gross Air,) or calcined Tartar that will attract it, and
dissolve it into Water.

The Earth can never be Of the Earth.
said to be pure, simple, or unmixed; for it is the common Shop of Nature,
wherein bodies of all sorts and qualities do reside. It is in truth, nothing
more than the grosser parts of the Waters, which condensing into a body, became
the Settlement of the Waters, which God afterward caused to become dry, by the
removal of the Waters from it, and the Spirit of Light shining on it.

Though it is said, In the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth; yet
this is by a Figure (...) usual, as the Learned say, amongst the Hebrews; for
the Darkness was upon the Face of the Deep; and the Spirit moved upon the Face
of the Waters. The Chaos therefore, or first Matter, was plainly an Abyss of
Waters; and so our Latin Translators and Commentators render it, Aquarum Terrae
supernatantium, say Junius and Tremellius.

Water, I conceive, is in Of Water.
its own Nature, pure, simple, and unmixed, without any quality, though
susceptible of all. A Primitive in Nature, a middle Substance, whose one
Extreme constituted Earth, and its other Air or Heaven. This may well be called
a Principle; for she is the first Matter of all things, into which all things
may be reduced.

Fire, in its Original, is an Of Fire.
emanation of a Solar Spirit, its Rays darting downwards, impregnate and
enkindle Passive Matter, into Motion and Vegetation. It is the Life or Spirit
of the World, as Water is the Matter. To doubt this a Principle or Element (for
I think it no Blunder, under Plutarch's Favor, to make them Synonyma's,) were
a mortal Sin in Philosophy.

Having said this, it is easy to infer, That Water is the passive Principle,
and the Solar Influence, the Formal of all created Beings; and that, properly
speaking, these two are the only Principles, according to the Ancients, and the
other two only Derivatives.

But does not the excellent --, a Learned Magus, tell us, That the Four
Elements by their never ceasing Motion, cast forth a Sperm, or subtle Portion
of Matter, into the Earth, where meeting, and uniting, it is digested, and
brought to perfection, according to the purity or impurity of the place? The
Authority of this Person, and the Reverence and Admiration I have for him, as
it makes me conceal his Name, so it does almost make me blush to lift up my Pen
against him. -- Sed magis Amica Veritas.

If Four Elements go to the Constitution of each Being, these Elements must be
intimately united: Now that cannot be, unless the purest part of one Element
enter per minima, the purest part of the other. But Earth cannot enter Water
per minima, unless it be reduced to the Form and Tenuity of Water, and then
what need is there of Earth, if Earth must be first resolved into Water, ere it
can unite with it? Again, Water must be rarefied to the dignity of Air, or else
it cannot unite intimately with Air; if so, what need is there of Water, since
Water must become Air before it can assist in the Constitution of a Body?

It to me therefore seems most plain, that all created Beings here below, are a
Concrete of Water, the purest part whereof being rarefied, and impregnated with
a celestial Heat, (which is all the Element of Fire I know of,) is digested
into the various works of Nature, diversified now, according to what Nature has
wrought in the Matrix, before the Form enters; for the Form is as capable of
diverse effects, as the Water is susceptible of qualities. Thus much for the
Second, Viz. Principles and Elements.

Thirdly, I shall compare some Aristotelian Hypotheses with those of Democritus.

Aristotle and Heraclitus too, held the Elements to be contrary to each other;
as, Fire to Water, Earth to Air, two active and two passive Principles; but
Democritus denies it; alleging, that the Agent and Patient must be in some
measure alike, otherwise they cannot act upon one another. Wherein Democritus
is certainly in the right; for Fire and Water differ not in a remiss, but
intense degree: witness the quiet resting of Iron (in which the Fire of Nature
dwells plentifully) in Water; and witness the Generation of Animals in water,
which cannot be done without heat, and witness the Seeds of all Beings (whose
germinating Virtue, is the Fire of Nature) involved in Moisture.

There is, in truth, no more difference between these two, than between Water
and Plants; of which, the one is so far from being repugnant to the other, that
the Plant is nourished by the water; yet when the water is raised to an Acid,
and the Plant reduced to an Alkali, by the union of these two, a violent
ebullition is caused, a controversy even unto Death.

As for the Cause of the variety of Bodies, the difference between Aristotle
and his Followers, and Leucippus, Democritus and Epicurus, and their Followers,
is no less; and it is no wonder that they who differ in the Nature of their
Principles, should fall out in the effects they produce.

The Aristotelians impute the effects of Bodies to secret primary Qualities,
residing in them, by the conjunction of the Elements; and so under the Mask of
Qualities, which they could not tell what to make of, couch all ignorance of
Bodies, their Causes, if not Effects.

Democritus, and his People, impute nothing to Qualities, but all to Figure and
Motion, called the Atomical Physiology.

For my part, I think neither Opinion right; yet a middle between both may be
true. I shall consider both Opinions, and then give my Reasons against both,
and for the middle one. As for the Pyrrhonian Doctrine of Qualities, it is too
trifling to merit an Answer.

I might introduce this Question with a great deal of pomp, and show that it
has been a Controversy in the world for above Two Thousand Years; that it
has exercised the greatest Men, and that it is not yet determined. But I shall
think my self happy enough, if I can put an end to this Debate, without any
other consideration. The Method I propose to take, I think, differs from those
that have gone before me; for I intend to speak of the Creation of the First
Matter, and Universal Form, and show how from the various Union of these Two,
various Qualities arise. But it would be too Magisterial to reject Opinions,
without showing their Mistakes: I shall therefore endeavor to show the Error
of these two Parties, and then substitute what I conceive more true.

As to the Aristotelian; that of Occult Qualities, it is Ignotum per Ignotius; a
thing is hot or cold, bitter or sweet, because of some Quality in it; and what
is that Quality? It Is Occult, that is in plain English, it is so, because it is
so.

But the most that can be made of this Notion of Qualities, may amount to this,
That there is a Form, or Vital Principle latent, or occult in all Bodies, that
not only retains and keeps the Parts together (be the Genus or Species what it
will) and so distributes it self to all the Members, performing the Office of
Life, but is the Specific Formal Cause of all those Qualities, with which
Bodies abound; be they those of Sweet, Bitter, Sharp, etc. or Hot and Cold in
their several degrees. Which Form being a Vital Principle, is invisible, (and
therefore occult,) as Lucretius holds.

Ex insensilibus ne credas sensile gigni,
Nimirum Lapides and Ligna, etc.
'Of things unseen things visible are made,
'As Stones, and Wood, and all things that do fade.
But this, I conceive, cannot be; for though Galtruchius tells us in
justification of this Doctrine, That there is an actual Modification, and
Determination of the Form to the Matter; I would fain know what particular
Quality can a Form have, that enters passive Matter? Where can it receive,
before it enters Matter, such a Specification? For notwithstanding what Pliny
says of the Planet Venus, that she scatters a Prolifick Dew, which is but
general, and what the Astrologers say of the particular Influences of each
Planet; I desire to know, who can distinguish the Influences of Saturn from
Jupiter; Mars from Venus, and so of the rest, except that of Sol? The Sun
indeed melts Wax, but hardens Clay; but this diversity of effect proceeds from
the difference of the Object, not of the Agent; for the Agent is always one and
the same, though varied according to the passive Matter that receives it.

It Is not therefore the Form alone that gives, or is the Quality in the Body;
for as the Body was scattered Atoms loose and insipid, till its parts being
collected, constituted, by virtue of the Form, a mixed Body; so was its Form
simple and undetermined, till bound down, and tied to the Body.

Now for the Atomical Physiology of Leucippus, Democritus and Epicurus, which
is now called the New, by what Figure I know not. How can mere Matter, which in
it self, loose and scattered, is insipid, i. e. in its parts has no Taste, (
for what Taste have the uncompounded Bodies of Atoms, void of Qualities?) when
put together by the clinging of its Atoms, the emanation of its Particles, (or
imagine what other way you please) acquire a particular Taste, or give a
particular Odor? Nil dat quod non habet, may hold well enough here. That which
it had not in its Parts, it can never have in the whole; (I speak of the same
undetermined Matter; for I know that Bodies of different Natures, when
conjoined, obtain Qualities by Fermentation, which neither had a part;) besides
if Atoms by their Position and Figure, or by the manner of the flowing forth of
their Particles, do give a Taste and Smell, etc. these Atoms are so very small,
that the Body, though separated into many Parts, yet must retain
notwithstanding the Figure of the Atoms, the Atoms being too minute to have
their Angles and Points cut off by a small division of the Body; and
consequently the Parts of the Body, must have the same Taste and Odor, when
divided, as before, if the Qualities that are perceived by the Organs of Taste
and Smelling, be wholly owing to Matter, i. e. to the figuration of the Atoms.

But this daily Experience evinces the contrary; for Bodies divided, or but a
little opened, as Plants and Fruit, etc. lose in a little time both their Taste
and Smell, and yet no one can say, that the points or angles of the Atoms were
disfigured, or the Emanation of their Particles obstructed, since great
Proportions were left untouched.

But Galtruchius affirms, Matter to be previously disposed to such a Form, by a
Temperament of Qualities. But how can this be? Are not Qualities the Effect of
Life in every Body, what needs there then a Form where there is Life before?
The Qualities therefore of Odor and Taste cannot proceed from the configuration
of the Atoms.

Now if neither the Form gives the Quality of it self; for the Form, as I have
shown before, is simple, a vital Air undetermined; nor the passive Matter,
though Atomical, as I have shown here; and yet all Bodies have Qualities, they
must proceed from the Union of both, and not from any distinct Cause in either.
So the Spirit of Nitre and Salt Armoniack apart, have no Qualities or Power to
dissolve, or rather corrode Gold, but united, do it effectually.

4. This brings me to the Fourth and last Thing I intend to speak to; and that
is, How the Earth comes to be filled with variety of Bodies, abounding with
different qualities.

Since I propose here to treat of the Original of Qualities, I must, of
necessity speak of the First Matter, and its Formation; and that leads me
naturally to consider the first Creation; which I shall do as briefly as
possibly I can.

I shall not cite the various Opinions of the several Sects of Philosophers
that treat of the World's beginning, (though some thought it had none,) this
would look more like Show, than Use, which I have no Temptation to do, since I
write for Pleasure, not for Bread. Besides, for Philosophy's sake, I shall omit
it; for there is nothing so foolish, which some of them have not said. Nor
shall I borrow Parts of the Many, as the Greeks did, to patch up a New one of
my own. Nor shall I speak of the Creation any farther than as it relates to my
present purpose. But herein I will take the Philosopher Moses for my Guide,
who, exclusive of his Divine Authority, has given a wiser Account of the
World's Creation, than the whole Body of Philosophers put together; whose
Writings the most Learned Bishop Stilling fleet has defended in his Origines
Sacrae, against all the World.

God having created the Of the Creation.
First Matter, which seems to be a thin, fluid Substance, an Abyss of Fume or
Vapor, rather than Water, which was therefore the more passive and tenuous,
fit to be stretched out for the composition of Heaven, and capable of any Form;
he gave a Form fit to actuate and impregnate this Matter, which was to be the
vital Principle of this Body. This general Form was a Spirit of Light and Heat,
and so are all particular Forms now, and therefore capable of being the
Instrument of God, (not the Third It Is an usual Hebraism to impute second
Causes to the first. This distinction of First and Second Causes, was found out
first by the Greeks, who taught the World to speak Scholastically; but the Jews
made them all one; which indeed, in a large sense they are; for the world is
the Lord's, and all things therein. And therefore I saiah, c. 40. v. 8. says,
The Grass withers, the Flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord blows
upon it. As the World is God's, and all the Spirits in it, and Parts of it, so
indeed this may be said to be the Spirit of the Lord, in point of Property, but
not of Identity. Can any one think that this Spirit that blows on the Grass,
(or take it Metaphorically, for Man,) is the Holy Ghost? Junius and Tremellius
translate the Words Spiritus Jehovae, the appropriate Name of the Eternal; yet
in their Commentary say, it is not Regenitus Spiritus Sanctificationis in
Christo; which, if they had remembered, they would not have rendered the Spiritus
Dei, Genesis 1. Spiritus Sanctus, Tertia illa Persona Deitatis, a Deo Patre and
Filio procedens. But they have, I must acknowledge, not a few Commentators on
their side; though I conceive, the Jews never dreamed of such an
Interpretation: they might believe it some Vis, Potentia, or Emanatio Dei, but
not the Divine Nature himself, which it is dishonorable to imagine was
incubans superficiei Aquarum, brooding over the Waters, as a Hen does over her
Eggs. This piece of Mechanism may be suitable to Man, or some created Power;
but the Almighty Fiat is worthy only of God. But besides this Conjecture, the
Original will bear it; for the Learned say that Ruach signisies not only
Spiritus, but Ventus, Voluntas, Angulus, Pars, and Plaga. And therefore R.
Abraham on this Place, renders it, Spiritus (aut Ventus) Dei sufflabat (aut
cubabat) super faciem Aquarum; (i. e.) says he, Ventus missus a Deo, ad
desiccandum Aquas.
Person in the Trinity) to rarefie and subtilize the Superficies of this Abyss,
and to exalt it to the Dignity of constituting Celestial Bodies and Ether.

This Spirit of Light and The First Day.
Heat, whose Property is Motion, acting upon this Superficies, raised it up on
all sides, and mixing and abiding with it, in a plentiful degree, advanced it
up to the supreme Heaven, and enlightened all that Part, by its diffusion, which
we call Ether; though the lower part of that mighty Space, the Atmosphere, was
but glimmering, in respect of the Ether; and the Terraqueous Globe, by reason
of its distance, and gloomy Substance, was dark. This Division of the Light
from the Darkness, Holy Writ calls the First Day's Work.

This will appear more evident The Second Day.
by considering the Second Day's Work, and that was the making of a Firmament,
or Expansion, which was to divide the Waters from the Waters, (i. e.) the
Waters that resided with the Globe below, not only from the Celestial Bodies,
which were advanced above, whose material Principle was Water; but even from
the lower part of this Aerie Region, the Residence of Watery Clouds. The manner
of which, I conceive was thus by the Will of the most High.

This Active Spirit of Light surrounding the moist Vapor on all sides, drove
it down lower throughout the Aerie Region, and thereby compressed this tenuous
Matter, into a more close and narrow compass, whence it became condensed into a
watery Substance. The Vapor thus condensed into Water, and thus compressed on
all sides, flying from the Fiery Spirit, as from an Enemy, became still more
congealed, whose Center being the Sediment of the Waters, became Mud or Earth.
And this was the Second Day's Work.

This Fiery Spirit, by the The Third Day.
Will of God, acting upon the Waters, divided the same, so that the Waters
being rolled off on each side, the Mud or Earthy Substance appeared, which by
the Medium of the Form was made dry, and impregnated with virtue sufficient for
the Production of Plants. And this was the Third Day's Operation.

But on the Fourth Day, The Fourth Day.
the Almighty collected and pent in this seatter'd Universal Form into the Body
of the Sun, whose Virtue being shut up, and comprised in a narrow Compass, was
capable of a more intense Emanation, whence followed a more noble Production.

So that on the Fifth Day The Fifth Day.
God created Fish and Fowl, by the Union of the Passive Matter, Water, and that
of the Form.

And afterward, on the The Sixth Day.
Sixth Day, of the Earth God made Beasts and Reptils (the Matter being grosser,
the Generation was more sluggish,) and then, as the Colophon of all, God
created that mighty Creature Man, endowed with a Mind full of Virtue and
Holiness, in resemblance to the Divine Nature, (not to speak of his Knowledge
and Wisdom,) and made him Lord of all. Were I not here in Public, I could not
forbear a Rapture of Praise to the Almighty Builder of the World, for his
Bounty and Munificence to Man, in the mighty Privileges and Endowments of his
Nature. Sed quod palam non decet, clam fiat.

Having here given a short Abridgment of the Creation, I shall proceed to show
how the Earth comes to be filled with variety of Bodies abounding with
different Qualities. The Consideration of this, will take in Plants, Minerals,
and all Fossils.

As for Plants, we find them mentioned in the 3d Day's operation, and that they
included their own Seeds, according to their several Species: So that from
hence it seems that all Plants, being created from the beginning, had for their
continuance a Seed infused, that might be the Future Principle of raising the
like; I say, might be; for that I conceive, I have already showed, that Plants
may be generated of all sorts, without the sowing of the Specific seed, by the
Power of the Form, and the predisposition which the Solar Influx has previously
wrought on Passive Matter.

But now it remains we give an account how the Earth comes to be altered by the
Solar Influx; or in the Words above, how the Earth comes to be filled with
variety of Bodies, abounding with different Qualities.

I suppose the Earth and Waters, in the first Creation, had no Qualities but
the primary of Cold and Moist, and after the Waters were rolled off, and the
dry Land appeared, those that then were, were latent in the Plants which God
created, which were only in the Superficies. A weak Light, and a faint Form
being sufficient for the Production of these, so that the inner parts of the
Earth were still simple and undetermined.

But God having shut up this scattered and wandering Light, on the Fourth Day,
into the Body of the Sun, it became thence a powerful and universal Form or
Spirit to this simple or general Matter, which wheeling about this Globe of
Earth and Waters continually, and darting into it on all sides Rays of Light
and Heat, must of necessity fill the Earth with Heat and Spirit.

This vital Heat still being multiplied and increased by the Influx of more,
and this Form moving in its Sphere, by mixing with the Waters, and arising by
Sublimation with them, what with the Rays flowing in, and the Vapors by
subliming to the Superficies of the Earth, expiring; must of necessity work on
the Passive Matter, the Earth, through which they pass, and according to the
Plenty or Scarcity of the Form, cause diversity of Qualities in it; for the
warm Vapor still purifies the place where it passes; but where it is stopped,
before purification of the Place, an abortive or imperfect Thing is made.

Thus Mercury determined to a Metallic Species, for want of sufficient Heat in
the Matrix, becomes an Abortive. And thus the Earth, wrought upon variously
toward the Superficies, by the Intension or Remission of the warm Vapor,
though in a most minute degree, must produce a different Salt, and thence a
different Plant, as the least Stroke of a Pencil makes a different Face.

This will appear more evident, when we consider that the various parts of the
world are productive of different and appropriated Plants and Metals, which can
be owing to nothing, but the various information of the Matter, which proceeds
from the nearer or remoter access of the Parent of all Forms, the Sun,
differenced under the same Meridian; as I shall show hereafter.

It Is easy to observe how Fire alters Matter, though determined, both in
Figure and Quality: Thus a Culinary Fire, moderately applied to Fruit, Flesh,
or Plants, by boiling, baking, or roasting, causes a Taste quite different from
what an intense Heat, or over-boiling, baking, or roasting occasions

Thus the most Learned Metallinists affirm of the Generation of Metals, that
Saturn is produced of the moist Vapor adhering to Places impure and cold;
Venus, of that Vapor in a Matrix impure and hot; Sol, in a Place pure and hot,
etc. Of these Matters, I conceive, Des Carts has spoke but meanly; for he
makes the diversity of Metals to arise from the different Magnitude and Figure
of their three Principles, which is a Notion borrowed of Epicurus. But he
acknowledges in this Matter his want of Experience; for he tells us, Quae
fortasse singula descripsissem hoc in loco, si varia Experimenta, quae ad
certam eorum cognitionem requiruntur, facere hactenus licuisset. These Matters
(says he,) I would have described particularly in this place, if I had had an
opportunity of making some Experiments, which are necessary to the exact
knowledge of them. But I believe he had the Philosopher's Fortune, as well as
Wit; so that

Haud facile emergunt quorum virtutibus obstat
Res angusta domi.
'His Virtue's hardly to be seen
'Whose Fortune is but low and mean.
It Is not from the Configuration of the Metalline Principles, that Metals vary,
but by how much the Place is depurated, the Metal becomes more excellent, as I
have showed before. Besides the three imaginary Principles of Metals, were
never yet seen distinctly produced by Nature, and therefore no such various
Configuration is productive of various Metals.

The same Reason holds for all sorts of Fossils; so that the Terrestrial Heat,
flowing from the Central Parts of the Earth, (which some Philosophers call the
Terrestrial Sun, others the Archeus of Nature) and the Celestial flowing from
the Sun (being both alike,) continually into the Earth, do there meet and
unite, and what from the interposition of moist Vapors, arising from some
Marish Places, that hinders the Solar Influx, from the Inundation of Waters
into the Bowels of the Earth, in other places; the compactness of the Earth,
that represses the ascending Vapors I am confirmed the more in this Opinion,
by an Iron Mine which I saw at Tunbridge, whose Vein running about three Miles,
was stopped at a hard Rock; for this Rocky Substance hindered the ascending Vapor.
, in others; the looseness in others, that gives way to it, arises all that vast
variety of Bodies abounding with different Qualities, which we behold by
digging in the Earth, and see in Plants in the Superficies. And this
Alteration, that is, Remission or Intension of Heat in the Vapor, gives that
variety of Form to the Leaves of Plants, scarce one Leaf in the same Plant,
being in all parts like another.

This will appear more evident, by considering, that the permanent Matter of
all Bodies is Salt, and the Form, a Portion of Light. And for the Salt, it is
much the same in all Bodies, when stripped of its specificated Qualities; and the
Form differs rather in degree than kind in all Bodies, as is apparent to them,
who are acquainted with the Analysis of Bodies.

But after all, I have not Conclusion.
the vanity to think, that all that I have said, will obtain with the Reader:
The Minds of most Men stand bent, and inclined to the Pedantry of their
Profession and Education; not one Man in ten thousand is other than what he
learned from his Tutor or Master; for though God has given us large and free
Faculties, yet we suffer our selves to be bowed down to Principles and Notions,
without examining them with Freedom and Judgment. This is evident from the
Societies of Men, who always follow their Founder through blind and ignorant
Zeal.

Against this, I cannot but commend Aristotle, who opposed Plato, even whilst
he taught him: By which, I only mean, he examined the Food before it went down.
But our Palates are so vitiated, that we can taste nothing but what we are used
to.

Therefore I do not expect that they who have never looked into Natural
Philosophy, or have but just made an entrance, should imbibe what I have
offered; I have not writ to such, having only given Hints, not a System of
Philosophy.

There are Principles and Elements in all Sciences, that are first to be
learned; there are such Difficulties in Learning, as well as Knowledge, that
what afterward will appear plain and evident, at first sight, seems to raw and
crude Understandings, repugnant and contrary to Truth. It Is no wonder therefore
that Pythagoras taught, That the first Business of Man, was to free the Mind
from Pollution and Prejudice, without which Freedom, none can perceive aright.
Then the Seeds of Knowledge and Truth are to be inserted, then the Mind becomes
new, has new Appetite, new Passions, is dead (almost without a Metaphor) to the
former Life, and alive to Virtue and Philosophy. In this Soil the Tares and the
Wheat will not grow together: For Philosophy (says Hierocles) is the
Perfection of Humane Life, restoring it to the Divine Resemblance. Virtue and
Truth, effect this; the former subduing Excess of Passions, the latter inducing
the Divine Form.

The Mind of Man must be always filled with somewhat; here Nature abhors a
Vacuum; and the warmer every Man's Constitution, the more active his Spirit. So
that he who takes no care to fill his Mind with moderate Knowledge of God and
his Works, to be able from thence to entertain himself with pleasing Thoughts,
will give our great Enemy an opportunity to attack him when idle; with whom to
parley, is to be undone.

How have I known Men lost, in seeking for Game without, merely for want of a
good Stock within! Wherefore there is no Treasure like that of the Mind.

But you will say, May not a Man's Business, and the Affairs of the World
entertain him? Nature requires a Relax of Drudgery; The Vacation-Moments undo
Mankind; not knowing how, wisely to fill up those Spaces, runs us into
Miseries, hardly to be retrieved. But a Mind filled with Knowledge and Virtue,
is a Fountain of Eternal Light, has Communication night and day with Heaven,
and has Raptures of Pleasure, which this lower World knows nothing of.

Here the crafty Politician is at a loss; here the greedy Merchant has no
Commerce; here the subtle Casuist is puzzled; the Voluptuous, the Ambitious, the
Covetous, the Lascivious, the Dull, the Sour, and the Base, of these things
have no Gust or Relish: To these I may say, as the Herald used to do at the
Pagan Sacrifices; Procul este Profani. For the Wise and the Humble, the Modest
and the Virtuous move only in this elevated Sphere. But Morals are needless
after what the Excellent Dr. Lucas has said, in his admirable Works, who has
obliged an ungrateful Age.

If what I have said, take with the few Wise and Virtuous, I have my End; as
for the Dissolute, may he reform; but as Vicious, I neither court his Suffrage,
nor value his Judgment. -- Quid mali feci? etc.

Sempiterna Lux! Nec Honores nec Divitias peto, me modo Divinae Lucis Radio
illumines, and Sapientia, Rerumque Naturalium Cognitione instruas, ut hisce a
me probe perspectis, Majestatem tuam, earum meique Creatricem intensiore Amore
and Ardore Animi prosequar and adorem, ut cum mei transierint Dies, (Coelesti
Regno tuo illatus,) comparatior sim, ad Divina contemplanda, Sapientiamque tuam
Amore Seraphico amplexandam.

FINIS.

