A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE Rise, Growth, and Progress OF QUAKERISM; Setting Forth,
That the Principles and Practices of the Quakers are Antichristian,
Antiscriptural, Antimagistratical, Blasphemous, and Idolatrous from plain
matter of Fact, out of their most approved Authors, etc.

Containing Also, A modest Correction of the General History of the Quakers;
wrote in Holland by Gerard Croese.

By Francis Bugg, Senior.

Because I have called and ye refused; I have stretched out mine hand and no
man regarded; I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear
comes. Prove. 1. 24, 26. Raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof.
Psalm 137. 7. London, Printed Anno 1697.

THE INTRODUCTION.
Courteous Reader,
IN my former Books I thought my self obliged to Apologize for my writing
against the Errors of the Quakers, because some People then, even the Author of
the Snake in the Grass, etc. thought I might wrong them, as the Quakers
suggested, who since are better satisfied therein, their Mask being taken off:
But yet some objections still remain, to obviate which, I shall proceed to do.

Obj. 1. But say some, Fra. Bugg in his Book Entitled, The Qua. Detected, etc.
gave a tolerable account of the Quakers respecting their beginning; and now to
write contrary seems contradictory.

Ans. I do acknowledge, that in the year 1686. when I wrote that Book, I had
better thoughts of them, respecting their beginning, than now I have; neither
did I then in 1686. know them guilty of holding such pernicious Principles and
Fundamental Errors, as now I know they do; having then not seen many of their
Books, which since I have both seen and perused. But grant I did not so clearly
see them then as now, nor understand their Fundamental Errors so clearly then
as now; yet I saw enough to justify my separation from them, from the charge
of Apostasy, as I made fully appear, not only in that Book, but also in my
Book, i. e. New Rome unmasked, etc. neither did my acknowledging them and their
deportment, and the simplicity and plainness of their Carriage, which attended
them and their Doctrine [which I since understand was only a decoy to catch
simple Souls] to be a reason for their being Orthodox, and my self an Apostate
from the Christian Faith, since not only I, but Men more Learned, and of better
Judgments than I have been mistaken; Witness that famous Man and worthy Martyr
of Jesus Christ, Archbishop Cranmer. See Fox's Acts and Mon. p. 1488.

The Church of Rome Taught in the beginning a pure Doctrine; but after she fell
into the new Doctrine of Transubstantiation, I marvel that any one could allow
it if they knew it: But, whatever they bear the people in hand, that which they
write in their Books has neither Truth nor Comfort. Again p. 1325. ibid. I am
[said Huge Latimer that worthy Martyr] Ignorant of things which I trust
hereafter to know, as I do now know things in which I have been Ignorant
heretofore; ever learn, and ever to be learned to profit with learning. I
thought in time past that the Pope was Christ's Vicar, had been Lord of all the
World as Christ is: So that, if he should have deprived the King of his Crown
it had been enough, for he could do no wrong: Now I think otherwise. I thought
in time past that if I had been a Friar in a Coul I could not have been Damned,
nor afraid of Death; and by reason thereof, I have been minded many times to
have been a Friar, namely when I was sore sick and diseased: But now I behold
my Superstitious Foolishness. It were two long to tell you what blindness I
have been in, and how long it were ever I could forsake such Folly, etc.
Reader, These two Instances (if there were no more) show forth, that the best
of Men are fallible and may err as I did, and be mistaken; as also the Humility
of these two learned Prelates and worthy Martyrs are exemplary in their
Christian acknowledgment thereof, and forsaking such a corrupted Church,
infected with Idolatry and Superstition, which cleared them from the charge of
Apostasy; and the same cause leads to the same thing: And if I once had a good
opinion of the Quakers, you see these famous Men had as good, if not a better
opinion of the Papists, who yet left them and forsook them as I did the
Quakers; and for which I bless God, who put it into my heart to forsake such a
manifest Heresy. Amen.

Obj. 2. But say the Quakers in their Book Judas and the Jews, etc. p. 78. But
herein you show your malice; for, had G. F. been a cursing Man, like Muggleton,
etc. Implying it somewhat pardonable then to write against the Quakers.

Ans. See their Book Truth's Defense, etc. G. Fox's words to Mr. Camelford a
Minister, thus, O thou filthy Beast, no Prayers can we send to thee, but for
thy Destruction, thou Man of Sin and Enemy of Christ. -- O thou impudent and
brazen faced; -- thou Hypocrite and Pharisee thou art damned openly. -- Thou
art in the Sorcery, in the Witchcraft, and in the Adultery, and in the corrupt
Seed, whose Blessings are Cursed. -- O thou slanderous Beast; -- thou natural
Brute-beast: -- and here I charge thee to be a Witch, and to bewitch the
People. -- Thou deaf Adder and Serpent, -- thou child of the Devil, Blasphemer
and Enemy of all Righteousness. -- O thou falsehearted dissembling Hypocrite;
the Plagues of God are due to thee, and that is thy portion, -- thou blind Sot,
-- thou dark Sot; -- thy Torment is but beginning, and so fare thee well: Thus
far Fox. Again, hear another of the same Praternity, viz. Ed. Burrow in his
Works p. 29, 30, 31. In Answer to certain Queries sent to the Quakers by one
Mr. Bennet, Burrow's Answer runs in this Channel, viz. Thou art manifest what
thou art, where thou art, and what Spirit thou art off: a Reprobate, a child of
Darkness; the Light condemns thee and all thy Generation [of Priests] Eternally
we witness thee and all thy Generation to be in the Witchcraft and Sorcery, --
for thou art Darkness it self: -- Here thou, full of all subtilty, have made
manifest thy Poison and Enmity: -- Here thou Jesuit, -- and thou Reprobate, see
whether thou be'st not a blind ignorant Sot; -- there thou accursed art made
manifest: -- Here thou beast, to whom the Plagues of God are due, and upon whom
his wrath must be accomplished: Here thou dark blind Hypocrite, -- thou dead
Beast; -- here thou polluted Beast; -- here stop thy mouth thou Sorcerer; O
thou dark Beast and Conjurer, who art Querying with thy Conjuring words, etc.

Reader, behold and be amazed! that this people should blame any body for
writing against them, when never did any write like themselves; nor was
Muggleton a greater Curser and Damner than Fox. The next I shall mention is
their Learned Fisher, who writing against John Owen, Richard Baxter, Thomas
Danson, and John Tombs, In his Book Styled, The Rusticks Alarm, etc. calls and
compares them to Lizards, Moles, Tinkers, Red-coats, Cowdung, Green-headed
Trumpeters, Rare and Base, Wheelbarrows, Gimcracks, Whirlpools, and Whirlygigs,
a Moon-calf, their Bell has no Mettle but the sound of a Kettle, capers about,
quivers up and down like a blind Night-bat, Ragged, Torn, Thredbare,
Tatterdemallions, malicious Serpents, Vipers, grinning Dogs, Jack-puddings,
dunceable Darkness, gropable Blindness; -- Then so many leaps of a Louse, bo to
a Goose, Hedge-hogs, Fiery fighters; Baxter and Tombs as Twins that tumbled out
of one Belly, the Womb of that Babylonish Bawd, etc.

All which idle Drollery and ridiculous Nonsense is vindicated by W. Penn, in
his Epistle prefixed to this Sam. Fisher's Works, saying, It was so ordered by
God's Providence, that his [Fisher's] part fell to be most Controversial, in
which to carry a clear Mind, and an even Hand, is very difficult: However
allowing him, in some passages, the freedom of the Prophet Elijah against the
Prophets of Baal [1 Kings 18, 27.] sometimes exposing absurd things by vulgar
Terms and Proverbs to Derision, in the view of his ingenious Reader, he has
discharged himself as a conscientious, fair, and learned Apologist, etc.

Now, if the Quakers will have allowance from the Prophets to vent this sort of
wild Gibberish, I hope I may take a little liberty to expose their absurd
Principles to the just abhorrence and derision of the People.

Obj. 3. But some may say, was there no way to accommodate this Controversy
without this public method; surely a more Amicable and Friendly way had been
more suitable to a religious Difference.

Ans. It would be too tedious to recite the many and frequent offers that I
have given them from time to time to meet me, and that according to the very
words of their own propositions, but they would not; I have sent them Summons
after Summons, until at last I Summoned 12 of their Hearers to give me a
meeting, but they would not; a Copy thereof is as follows.

A third Summons.
For Jo. Hubbard, Thomas Brewster, J. Haws, Ed. Deeks, Jo. Peacock, Jo.
Cranwell, Jo. Carver, Jacob Baker, William Mead, John Knight, Sy. Birgis, Amb.
Friend, Hearers amongst the Quakers, to bring forth Sheba the Son of Bichri, 2 Samuel 20. Alias G. Whitehead to stand to his own Proposition, in his printed
Sheet delivered to the Parliament December 1693. Entitled, The Qua. Vind. etc.
p. 4. otherwise to give me a meeting your selves within 20 Miles of my
Dwelling, and timely notice thereof; and then and there openly and publicly
either justify your Teachers Books by Scripture proof, and if it be not
possible for you so to do, then to condemn the Errors contained in them under
your Hands, for the prevention of further controversies thereabout; but if not,
then know, that my hand will be heavy upon you, if God permit.

July 20. 1696. Fr. Bugg, Sen.

But this being sent to diverse of them near 6 Months since, and they will
neither hear nor answer any proposition how equal soever it be; though I have
often wrote to them and spoke to them. Therefore I now proceed to lay their
pernicious, as well as presumptious, Errors further open; and in so doing I
shall not spare them, nay, nor pity them, being wholly clear of them.

Obj. 4. But if this had been sooner, before they got to this height, and to
this order and settlement, as to have their Classes, their Provincial Synods,
their Anniversary Synods and Councels, and the favor of the Government, it
might happily have stopped their further growth, which now seems impossible.

Ans. I grant their Heresy is of long continuance, yet the Arrians much
longer; which continued, as I have read, more than 300 Years; who through their
subtilty got so much into the favor of the Government, as to get the Pulpit,
and the exclusion of the Orthodox; yet they are dispersed and withered away,
and these have not yet been half a century, and their Errors more notorious:
And it is my belief they will not remain the other half before they are
exploded. Why then should any be discouraged in such a work? The Pope and his
Superstitions have not gone on without many Testimonies against them. It Is said
that our famous Wickliff, an Oxford Scholar, has wrote more than 200 Volumns
against his Errors and Innovations: And I hope we are not without some such now
in our famous Universities; who, as they become sensible of this Quicksilver
Tribe, I mean New Rome; and know where to fix upon them, and their invisible
Tenets, which at present they mask under disguise, owning in words, being
examined, what in their Books they deny: For indeed, their Books are of two
sorts, carrying two contrary Faces. The one to the World, to decoy people, the
other to their Friends to be read in their Meetings, insomuch as it is hard to
know a Quaker, who, as Irenaeus said in his third Book against Heretics, viz.
Whilst Heretics speak like the Faithful, they not only mean otherwise than
what they say, but clean contrary; and by their Tenets full of Blasphemy, they
destroy the Souls of those, who with their fair words suck in the poison of
their foul Opinions, etc. And no marvel (says St. Paul) for Satan himself is
transformed into an Angel of light: therefore it is no great thing if his
ministers be also transformed as the ministers of righteousness, whose end
shall be according to their works, 2 Cor. 13. 14. And for our pattern we have
the famous Wickliff, who paved the way for great Luther in Germany, who was
wonderfully carried on, even as upon Angels Wings; which made the Papists rave
and roar, fret and fume; calling him Apostate, Self-condemned Apostate;
insomuch that all Men's minds stood (as it were) upon their tiptoes to see the
issue of Pope Leo's rage; and brave Luther's courage, who went on undauntedly
writing many Books, until he finished both his Days and Testimony, of whom Beza
said,

Rome tamed the World, the Pope tamed Rome so great;
Rome Ruled by power, the Pope by deep deceit.
But how more large than theirs was Luther's Fame,
Who with one Pen both Pope and Rome does tame.
Go fictious Greece, go tell Alcides then,
His Club is nothing to great Luther's Pen.
Jan. 18. 1697. Fra. Bugg, Sen.

A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE Rice, Growth, and Progress OF Quakerism; With a modest
Correction of the General History of the Quakers, writ in Holland by the
Learned Croese, Anno 1696.
The PROLOGUE.
WHen I first heard of the said History, I thought it might have spared me this
Labor; hoping it would have given an impartial Account; not only of the coming
in of that Sect, of the names of the Persons, of the places of their abodes, of
their Handicraft professions, of their tumultuous behaviors, of their belching
out their Defamations, and scurrilous Languages to Magistrates and Ministers,
and of their frequent disturbing the Churches, and contemning the Ordinances of
Christ and all Instituted Religion: But also the ways and methods by which
Quakerism have grown and increased, and prevailed to this height it is now
arrived at: But when I came to view it, and seriously to consider the Contents
of it, as I find it in many things very well done, with respect to the former
particulars, and thereby will spare me some pains and cost; so with respect to
the latter, viz. to set forth their pernicious Doctrines, their horrible
Blasphemies, their dissembling Cheats and religious Frauds; [by which they have
not only deceived Thousands, but almost persuaded many well meaning and worthy
Gentlemen to have a better esteem of them, and their Tenets, than they deserve]
I found it very deficient, viz. In showing the methods by which they have
risen, and their Hypocrisy and wretched ways by which they have spread their
blasphemous Errors, and pernicious Principles, and how they have unchurched all
but themselves; and thereupon it seemed to me, that the said History rather
tends to strengthen them in their Errors, then to help them out of them; for it
bends too much to the left hand, and reflects on our English Magistrates as
Persecutors, and on our Church as not well disciplired; which I charitably
presume, was occationed by that Learned Authors giving too much credit to the
Books and Manuscripts, and his conversation with some of them, for says he, p.
5. Since therefore I have had the fortune of a long time to be familiarly
acquainted, and much conversant with these men called Quakers, and that in many
places, and besides, many of their Writings and Manuscripts, of which some are
in print, some not, having fallen into my hands I thought it would be an
acceptable Enterprise to write upon this Subject, leaving it for every Man to
judge as he thinks fit, of their Actions, Tenets, etc.

And since I find the said History as above observed, to be deficient in the
main Part, at least, in many main Points, I shall write something by way of
Correction, which I hope neither he, nor any other indifferent Person will take
amiss, since I pretend to have as much experience and knowledge of the Quakers
as he can pretend too, having the misfortune to be many Years conversant with
them and their Teachers, as also the good fortune to know their Methods, to
have of their Writings and Manuscripts by me, some in print, some not, whereby
I have been able to derect them, and to confute their Errors; and so I shall
leave it to every Man (as he says) to judge as he pleases of their Actions,
Tenets, Customs, way of Church Government, and principles of Religion, and
Doctrine, which I shall produce from Book and Page of their most Authentic
Authors.

First then, that it may appear I have reason to know the Quakers as well as
this Learned Author, and thereupon as warrantable a Motive to write on this
Subject: In the Year 1657. I went first amongst the Quakers; and in 1659.
became one of their Society, and continued amongst them about 25 years; and
since that time I have been a narrow observer of them, and much acquainted with
many of them: I have near 300 of their Books by me, besides Manuscripts and old
Records; and besides all this, I was Clark to their Monthly and Quarterly
Meetings for the Isle of Ely and County of Cambridge; at Haddenham, Sutton and
Chatterise, for about 16 years and more, in all which Service I served gratis,
without Sallery, as others had. My House was a place of Entertainment for their
Teachers for many years together: I suffered Imprisonment at Ely and Nislech
for their cause, in which I was then Embarked 3 Years and about 4 Months: I
suffered the loss of more than a hundred Pounds for Meeting contrary to an Act
of Parliament, made the 22 King Charles II. besides many other affairs in which
I was concerned whilst with them: Sometimes chosen to go to London-Meetings,
sometimes chosen to end some differences which happened amongst us, sometimes
to assist in Marriages, about settlements of Estates in that case, as in the
Instance of William Read Widower; and the Widow Brewster of Brund, and diverse
others, as Stephen Clackson and the Widow Young; I say put all together, and I
think I may venture upon my own experience, to say as much as the Author of the
said Hist. and yet notwithstanding, I shall not impose upon my Reader; but in
the main of what I shall write, I shall prove from matter of Fact, and then, as
he says, shall leave every one to judge as he thinks fit, being at all times
ready to appear and maintain what I write according to G. W.'s own proposition
in his printed Sheet, styled The Quakers Vindication, etc. And when I meet Mr.
Croese I shall go along with him, in this History, as far as he goes my way,
and when he turns aside to the right Hand or to the left, I shall part friendly
with him, and deal kindly by him as we used to do to strangers. But since his
Book came over the Water and reflects upon the Government, Implicitly charging
the Magistrates with the crime of Persecution, a thing they are much averse to;
I shall therefore endeavor to Rectify it, and show him it is not persecution,
but prosecution; and to show that I am not alone in this matter, I received a
Letter wrote by a dignifyed Clergyman of the Church of England to a
Neighboring Minister. An Abstract thereof is as follows, viz

Worthy Sir,
Since I had the happiness of your good Company here, I read over the general
History of the Quakers which came from Holland, I find it wrote so much to the
advantage of that pestilent Sect, and so much to the disadvantage both of the
Government and Church of England, that I think it necessary to be again done by
some other hand, whom we may confide in for a better performance of it, and I
know none, better sitted for it [respecting matter of fact] than your
Neighbor, Mr. Bugg, and I doubt not but with your Assistance, he may be able
to give the World satisfaction in this matter. I earnestly desire you would
persuade him to it; and in Truth the daily growth of that Sect makes it
necessary to have it thoroughly laid open, that Men may thereby be warned the
more to beware of it: This will be a Service to God and the Church.

Your humble Servant.


And so I enter upon my Work.

SECTION I.
The Reason of their Name.
GEorge Fox was born Anno 1624. in a Village called Draton in Leicestershire;
his Father's Name was Christopher Fox, his Mothers Name Mary, who gained their
Living by Weaving. This George afterward learned the Trade of a Shoemaker, and
wrought Journey work with George Gee of Manchester, who having gained so much
Learning as that he could read print pretty well, but writing he could read but
little of, neither could write except very rudely. And this was the only piece
of Learning he attained too all his Life long: For neither then nor any time
after did he apply himself to any Liberal Study: So that he not only knew no
other Language, save his Mother Tongue; but even in that he was so little
expert, and so ill qualified, either for Speaking or Writing, all the whole
course of his Life; that what he understood perfectly well, he could not
explain or enlarge upon, in any tolerable good English, and far less could he
deliver it in Writing: And this I thought worth the remarking, because a great
many Books are extant in Geo. Fox's Name, writ not only in Letters of English
but also in Latin, and interlarded with Sentences of many other Languages which
are but little known to the learned World, which whether it was an effect of
simplicity in him, or of his Ambition and Ostentation I will not determine,
only it is plain he had not the gift of Tongues, p. 10. The Quakers Doctrine is
for a great part of it New, or taken from some Ancient Opinions condemned and
rejected by the Church, which have lain so long dormant, are revived anew by
them; and as to the rest it is a medly or hotch-potch diametrically opposite to
that of ours, and their manner of Life so singular from all Christians as
possibly can be: And these are the Tenets they have so busily spread both at
their first rise, and in the further progress of the Sect; and all that are
capable of Speaking or Writing, do diligently apply themselves in all places,
to the Explaining, Defending and Propagating their Doctrines, inveighng and
railing against the contrary opinions in others, with as bitter and reviling
expressions as they can invent. And such their accusatory Libels they disperse
abroad into all Countries, p. 11. The Original Mother and Nurse of the Quakers
is England, a Country once famous, for Banishing and Extirpating Heresies, now
the Seat and Center of all manner of Errors, p. 25. Nay when their Number
increased they became bolder, going into Peoples Houses when not invited,
intruding themselves into company, Litigiously starting Controversies. Thus
would they belch out ignominious Reproaches and Slanders against Religious Men;
and especially the Ministers of Churches, p. 26. And now would they publicly
appear on the Highways, in the Marketplaces, yea enter into Churches and that
boldly too; finding fault with the Discourses and Prayers of the Ministers,
disparaging and defaming them and their actions with all manner of Insolence
and Impudence, p. 32. Charging them to Preach only for love of Lucre and
Reward. But in all these controversies he [George Fox] never considered how
near of Kin his own case was unto theirs; for though he pretended to take all
this pains and trouble in running about to Preach Gratis, yet those he Preached
to, supplied his necessities before he asked it of them, at leastwise he never
was denied the Liberty of coming uncalled for (as the Flies) and like (Mice)
feeding upon others Provision, etc. Thus far Mr. Croese has given a very fair
account (though not from their Manuscripts I presume) and true it is, with
respect both to their rise and progress in every particular; as 1st. their
Censorious way to accuse, condemn, and set at naught all Christians. 2dly. That
their Doctrine is either new, or some old Heresy revived and new vampt. 3dly.
That their Religion is a mere hotch-potch, diametrically opposite to the
Christian Faith. 4thly. That their very business has been to rail on others; to
belch out ignominious Reproaches and Slanders, defaming them both Insolently
and Impudently. 5thly. That they banter other Ministers for taking Rewards,
whilst they themselves, like Flies, and Mice, come uncalled for, feeding upon
others Provision. 6thly. That it cannot be denied but that this grand Heresy
had its first rise in England, etc. whoever reads The Snake in the Grass, etc.
Mr. Falo's Quakerism, no Christianity, etc. may see every Point Confirmed.

SECTION II.
The Time and Place of their Rise, and the occasion of their growth. The
Historians mistake. The Quakers proved Blasphemers out of their own Mouths.
IN the Year 1650. G. Fox and John Fretwell went into the Church of Darby, and
uttered diverse Blasphemies, and pernicious Principles, for which he was
examined by Mr. Jer. Bennet, from one of the Clock till nine at night, at Mr.
Bennet was the first that gave them the Name Quakers 1650.
last sent him to the House of correction as a Quaker, and was so rightly
called as not deserving the Name of a Christian. A Copy of the said Mittimus is
as follows, viz.

To the Master of the House of Correction, in Darby, greeting.
We have sent you here withal the Bodies of George Fox late of Mansfield in the
County of Nottingham, and John Fretwell, late of Stansly in the County of
Darby. Husbandman, brought before us this present Day, and charged with the
avowing, uttering, and broaching of diverse Blasphemous Opinions contrary to a
late Act of Parliament, which, upon their examinations, they have confessed.
These are therefore to require you forthwith, upon sight hereof, to receive
them the said G. F. and J. F. into your custody, and them therein safely to
keep during the space of six Months, without Bail or Mainprise, or until they
shall find sufficient Sureties to be of the good Behavior, or be thence
delivered by Order from our selves; hereof you are not to fail, given under our
Hands and Seals this 30th. of October 1650.

Jer. Bennet
Nath. Barton


Upon the like Crimes, there was a Petition not long after by the Gentlemen,
etc. of the County, as Quoted by George Fox, in his Book styled Readiness Errand
to Damascus, etc. And by reason the Author of the Genesis Hist. is pleased first
to mention it, and then excuse the Quakers, to whom he had not long before
given their due correction. First reciting the principal part of the said
Petition. Genesis Hist. p. 103. says. But yet, as they left nothing that was
objected against them without some Answer, so did they also, confute this
(Petition) in their Writings, in such a manner, and with such Reasons, that it
was very apparent that they were wicked Men who invented these things, and that
those who believed them were Fools, excepting the Prophesies of Milner, the
vanity of whose Words they willingly acknowledged and reproved -- and overthrew
these Charges, etc.

Now if the said Historian had the said Book Readiness Errand, etc. not by him, he
is to be born with; if he had it, he deserves correction; and that the state of
the matter may be clearly seen as it is, I will transcribe the Petition, their
Charges in the Petition, and their Answers to the said Charges, and all of the
Quakers Writing and Printing. And when I have thus done, I doubt not but it
will appear, that they have rather owned the Charges than denied them; and that
instead of confuting, they are still most obnoxious to them: And that there is
no apparent Reasons given why they were wicked Men that charged the Blasphemies
upon them, nor Fools that believed it, viz.

To the Right Honorable the Council of State; the humble Petition of several
Gentlemen, Justices of the Peace, Ministers of the Gospel, and People within
the County.
Shows,
That George Fox and James Nayler are Persons disaffected to Religion, and the
wholesome Laws of this Nation; and that since their coming into this County,
have broached Opinions tending to the destruction of the Relation of Subjects
to Magistrates, Wives to their Husbands, Children to their Parents, Servants to
their Masters, Congregations to their Ministers, and of People to their God
Indeed Mr. Croese in the foregoing recital tacitly says the same.
and have drawn much People after them, many whereof, Men, Women and Children,
at their Meetings, are strangely wrought upon in their Bodies, and brought to
fall, foam at the Mouth, roar and swell in their Bellies; and that some of them
affirm themselves to be equal with God, contrary to the late Act, as has been
attested at a late Quarter Sessions holden at Lancaster in October last, and
since that time acknowledged before many Witnesses, besides many other
dangerous Opinions, and damnable Heresies, as appear by a Schedule hereunto
Annexed, etc.

May it therefore please Your Honors, upon consideration of the Premises, to
provide a Remedy, as to your Wisdoms shall seem meet, that some speedy course
may be taken for the speedy suppressing these Evils.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, as in duty bound.

1. Charge, That George Fox professed and avowed that he was equal with God.

Defense, It was not so spoken as Geo. Fox was equal with God, but the Father
and the Son is one, I and my Father are one; and where the same is revealed
this is witnessed. Let the same mind be in you that was also in Christ Jesus,
who being in the Form of God, thought it no Robery to be equal with God; and
this I witness to be fulfilled for the same Spirit where it is, is equal with
God, and he that has the same Spirit that raised Jesus Christ, is equal with
God.

Observa. Mark Reader, here is the Charge that is Blasphemy; you do not hear him
deny it, only he brings in an Equivocation like G. W.'s It is not spoken of
George Fox who then is that? He, I say, who is this? He, if not George that
Has, for He and Has are but the Relative and the Verb. It cannot be meant
here, that the Spirit of God is equal; no, it is, and He, the Man that has the
Spirit which raised Jesus Christ is equal with God: It Is proved Blasphemy
beyond all the Quakers Glossing.

2. Charge, That George Fox professed himself to be the Eternal Judge of the
World.

Defense, He that was a Minister of God said, that the Saints should Judge the
World, yea Angels: Herein they do show themselves to be no Ministers of God.

Observe, The Charge is confessed, and the Ministers, who handed the Petition,
condemned as no Ministers of Christ, for that they will not allow George Fox to
be the Eternal Judge of the World.

3. Charge, He said he was Christ, the Way, the Truth, and the Life.

Defense, The old Man cannot endure to hear the new Man speak, which is Christ;
and Christ is the Way, and if Christ be in you, must he not say, I am the Way,
the Truth, and the Life.

Observe.1. The Charge is Blasphemy. 2. It Is not denied, but fairly owned; and
the Petitioners justified to be wise and good Men, and not wicked Men nor Fools.

4. Charge, That George Fox said, whosoever took a place of Scripture and made
a Sermon of it, and from it, was a Conjurer, and his preaching was from
Conjuration.

Defense, And all that do study to raise a living thing out of a dead, to raise
the Spirit out of the Letter are Conjurers, and draw Points and Reasons, and so
do speak a Divination of their own Brain, they are Conjurers and Deceivers, and
their Teaching is from Conjuration, which is not spoken from the Mouth of the
Lord, etc.

Observe. What contempt is here thrown upon the Scripture, and upon all the
Servants of God, who from the beginning of the planting of Christianity, have
frequently read the Scripture in the Churches, and sometimes have expounded a
Chapter, and Catechized, etc. And frequently have taken a portion of Scripture
and opened it, and held it forth to the People? What signifies the Quakers
vindicating the Martyrs; printing a Book in Folio, Entitled The Spirit of the
Martyrs revived, etc. It Is not revived in the Quakers surely, when they thus
condemn them and their practice, and condemn all Ministers of the Christian
Faith as Conjurers, Diviners, etc. This I would ask G. W. whether these
following Martyrs and Ministers were Conjurers and Deceivers? Viz. Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury: Ridly Bishop of London: Latimer Bishop of Worcester:
Hooper Bishop of Glecester: Bradford Prebendary of St. Paul's: Dr. Tailor Parson
of Hadly: I say, were these and their Brethren which took places of Scripture
and Preached from them with the Assistance of God's Spirit accompaning the
Ordinance, all Conjurers and Diviners?

5. Charge, That Fox said the Scriptures were Carnal.

Defense, The Letter of the Scripture is Carnal.

Obser. This contempt is confessed, etc.

6. Charge, R. Hubberthorn said that Christ's coming in the Flesh was but a
Figure.

Defense, As he is held forth in the Scripture Letter without them, as in the
Flesh without them; he is their Example or Figure which is both one.

Obser. Then Christ in the days of his Flesh was but a Figure; his Death and
Sufferings a Figure; his Resurrection and Ascension a Figure of the Quakers
Light within them; his Death within them; his Crucifixion and Resurrection
within them: This is perfect Blasphemy, and infallible Quakerism.

7. Charge, Ja. Milner professes himself to be God and Christ, and gives out
Prophesies that the day of Judgment shall be the 5th. of Novem. next; that
there shall never sit Judge more at Lancaster; that he must ever long shake the
Foundation of the great Synagogue i. e. the Parliament, etc.

Defense, George Fox said; as for Ja. Milner, though his Mind did run out from
his Condition, and from minding that Light of God which was in him, whereby the
World takes occasion to speak against the Truth, and many Friends stumble at
it, yet there is a pure Seed in him.

Obser. I am the longer on this Head because it contains all the Pillars upon
which Quakerism stands, Genesis Hist. p. 103. say these Words were denied; there
is not a word of reproof, like that of the Apostle, who has bewitched you? Not
a word of condemning his Blasphemy, but all is hushed, he had a pure Seed in
him. I write the more for Mr. Croese his sake, that he may see, and in seeing
may correct the Quakers for their false Information.

8. Charge, Leo Fell said that Christ had no other Body but his Church.

Defense, There is one Body and one Spirit, even as ye are called, etc.

Obser. John Whitehead, Joshua Coal, and as many of them as have spoke honestly
what they believe, have said and wrote the same.

Read the Genesis History of the Quakers, p. 102. 103. where the Historian is
pleased to say, the Quakers left nothing unanswered: They confuted these
Charges of Blasphemy, with such Reasons, that it is apparent (says he,) they
are wicked Men that said so, and Fools that believed it, although the very Man
Geo. Fox himself, gives the whole Relation: And I affirm, there is not one
Charge answered or taken off as it ought to be, but rather all confessed: I
must confess G. W. I believe is ashamed of his Brother Fox, and of his Brother
Milner's Blasphemy; but yet cannot, nay, will not condemn the Book; they have
said it and will stand to it, which puts me in mind of a story I once heard of
a Woman whose Son was going out Apprentice, even at the Door; hold said his
Mother I have something to say, pray have a care of Lying, yea said the Son; ay
said She my Son, I charge you not to tell a lie, and the Lad going out, stay
Son said the Woman, I say again, be sure you do not tell Lies, but if it happen
at any time that you do tell a Lie, besure you stand in it, and so farewell.

The Quakers say in print, that he that has the Spirit that raised Jesus
Christ is equal with God; He yea He, the Man; and all the Quakers that hear of
this Book, I am persuaded [because the World's People have got it] would wish
it were burnt; yet for a thousand Worlds they would not have the World know
they burn it, so beloved a Point is Infallibility.

The Quakers say in print, that it is Conjuration to speak out of the
Scriptures, and not a Quaker is to be found that will condemn it.

George Fox said he was before all Languages were, and not a Foxonian Quaker in
England will condemn it.

George Fox said that neither He nor his Name was known in the World, not a
Quaker found to deny it.

George Fox said he heard the Thundering Voice from Heaven saying, I have
glorified thee, and will glorify thee again; but not a Quaker found to condemn
this Blasphemy.

George Fox said he was Christ, the Way, the Truth, and the Life; not a Quaker
found to condemn it.

Edward Burrow said that the Sufferings of the Quakers are greater, and more
unjust, than the Sufferings of Christ, his Apostles and Martyrs; not a Quaker
found to condemn this Book. I except the late separate Quakers both in England
and America.

I could enumerate a hundred Blasphemies like these, but the Quakers cannot
condemn one. Thus did Quakerism rise, thus did it grow, and by these principles
has it taken a deep root, and made a large progress: These principles are
Antichristian, they are Antiscriptural. Oh! that these poor deluded People
would once come to consider of them, and condemn them: If not, my Hand shall
not spare, nor my Eye pity, neither will I keep back any thing that may
discover their dangerous Errors: Who knows but their Children may see, and
seeing may abhor these most horrible Blasphemies.

Fox's Journal is full, take a Taste of them as follows. p. 37. Wife (said the
Jailer) I have seen the Day of Judgment, and I saw George Fox there, and then
going to George said, I have been as a Lion to you, but now I shall be like a
Lamb.

Obser. And great reason for it; for Geo. Fox whether the poor Jailer knew it,
before he saw the Judgment day and Fox there; I say whether he knew it, he said
he was the Eternal judge of the World, and therefore it was time for the Jailer
to come to him Trembling, as the Jailer came to Paul and Silas Trembling, p.
45. A Trooper at Church heard a Voice from Heaven, go to my Servant [George
Fox] for direction, so I [said Fox] spoke to his condition, and his
understanding was opened. Again, Fox said p. 47. that he see the Heavens
opened, and p. 55. etc. Thus have his Editors laid a Foundation for the Youth
at R. Scories School to believe the Fox was an Angel; and p. 60. it was a
dreadful thing to hear the Man was come with his Leather Breeches, meaning
himself.

Reader, I must mention these things if I perform what I promised, to give a
Relation of the Rise, Growth, and Progress of Quakerism: And surely the Papists
Legends are not more stuffed with counterfeit Miracles, and Self exaltations, and
horrid Blasphemies, read p. 57. 63, 202, 30, 18. of Fox's Journal.

And now I return to the Genesis Hist. to hear what news from Holland, touching
the Rise, and Progress of Quakerism.

SECTION III.
The Ringleaders of their Sect: Their early applying themselves to the Powers,
the Parties and Divisions amonst them.
GENESIS Hist. p. 136. 137. They address themselves to the Supreme Assemblies
(i.e. Parliaments) of the Nation, and set forth in their Petitions 140
Prisoners, etc. That 21 had dyed in Prison, in demonstrating of which, they
could not yet leave off their old way of Accusation, as well by concealing
their greater crimes and more notorious Offenses, that had brought many of them
under that confinement, as by aggravating too much the many Evils which they
Suffered, and oftentimes taking and amplifying a little scratch, a pinch, a
blue Spot for a grievous Torment, and bloody Wound; which two things seems to
me may well be observed in most of the Monuments of the Quakers, which they
have left of their Sufferings; for, indeed, I cannot allow that these Quakers
have been so often used, as that they were left half dead; for no example can
be produced of any of their deaths the same Moment, or in a short time after.
Again, p. 117. They made it their business to defame and heap up scandalous
Reproaches upon the Credit, Fame and Reputation of the Magistrates and Pastors
of the Church, in those most bitter Letters to their Friends; and such
practices as these did the Quakers extol as Noble doings, and Glorious actions,
etc. Again, p. 97. And others in their Sermons and Libels cast all manner of
Reproaches upon those Magistrates before all Men, and imprecated all Evils upon
them, and as it were, pronounce them by the command of God; forgetting the
Monitor and Author of that saying; that we should daily confess our own
Failings, and love our Enemies.

In which relation I find the Historian very partial; for certainly, never did
People amplify their Sufferings, and conceal their own Crimes, like the
Quakers; never so Insolently defame both Magistracy and Ministry, and extol
themselves and their actions like the Quakers. And that the World may see Mr.
Croese is in the right, I shall cite some few Instances of the Titles of their
Books, as a demonstration to confirm what Mr. Croese has said, with some
little matter out of some of them, as well as some observations upon them: But
I cannot enlarge least I swell my Book beyond my intention, which is only to
show by what means Quakerism has Advanced, etc.

Burrow's Works p. 223. A just and lawful Trial of the Ministers of this Age,
by a perfect proceeding against them; and hereby they are righteously examined,
and justly weighed, and truly measured and condemned, to disagree and be
contrary to all the Ministers of Christ in former Ages; and to agree and concur
with all the false Prophets and Deceivers, in their Call, in their Maintenance,
and in their Doctrines, Conversations, and Practice; and being brought to the
Bar of Justice, are truly charged and legally proved upon them, and found
guilty, etc.

I forbear to recite their proofs, but by the Title aforesaid it is easy to see
their Insolence, Impudence, and Arrogance: That a dissenting People should thus
Arraign, Try, and Condemn the national Ministry to be contrary to all the
Ministers of Christ, and to agree and concur with all the false Prophets and
Deceivers. This is such a Charge as is worthy observation; and yet if they be
Arraigned, oh! how they take it? Witness their Books against me for Arraigning
them, etc. next Burrow's Works, p. 523. why, they see that the wicked Clergy's
Interest is more prospering than the just freedom of the People: And this I say
unto you (the Parliament) in the Name of the Lord, that whilst that Interest
of the Priesthood is so much favored and defended you can never prosper, nor
the Nations be happy under you; for it is one of the greatest Oppressions this
day of the Nation, the maintaining and upholding of this Ministry by Tithes,
and the very Land groans under the Oppression of this Church and Ministry,
which lies as a heavy burden, both upon Persons and Estates, and Consciences
of many good People, even of your dearest Friends: Their own doings are a
sufficient Testimony of the malice of their Hearts against you, and all good
Men in the Nation; yet nevertheless some of you seem to shut your Eyes, crying
up your Godly Ministers; and thus are you blinded and see not were the Cause
lies of your interruptions; I say it is the favoring of that Interest which
stops the issue of good things, and while you oppress peoples Persons, Estates,
and Consciences to uphold this Ministry and Priesthood aforesaid, the Lord
shall never prosper you, nor make the Nations happy under your charge;
wherefore I do say unto you, it is high time for you to lay aside the Interest
of this oppressing Clergy so much levened of the Whore of Rome; your selves do
know that the Spirit of the Romish Clergy was in the late Bishops, which you
cast out for their wickedness, and the very Spirit of those Bishops is entered
into these Priests, and bears Rule in their Hearts, and thus by succession,
has the Whore of Rome levened the Clergy of England. Therefore clear your
selves; do not any longer Drink the Whores Cup, neither be you carriers of her,
and leave this false Church and Ministry to themselves; for while you maintain
and uphold this Ministry, Church and Worship, you do but cause People to drink
the Whores Cup; and you are but them which carry the Whore, viz. the false
Church, and this is plain dealing to tell you the truth, whether you will
reject it or receive it: Wherefore cast them off, and let them not surk under
your Wings, for one day they will rebel against you, and another day flatter
you; and for a season they will show forth much love and kindness to you in
Hypocrisy; you had better be in a just opposition against them, than in an
unjust peace with them. I know it appears to many of you a thing very hard to
be born; what! to forsake our Godly Ministers think ye? to hear tell of laying
them aside is an amasement to some of your minds; was it not the same
concerning the King and Bishops? Was it not as much terrible to him and his
Lords, and Councils to think of the overthrow of the then called Godly Fathers
and Bishops; but better had he cast them off and saved himself, than to have
perished with them; for I tell you again, that the very Spirit of the old
Idolatrous Bishops is entered into the Hearts of these Men, and there is as
great a measure of Tyranny and Injustice, and Abomination lying upon these, as
once was upon the Bishops; and these are no less free from the abomination than
they were, and these are nigh as ripe for Vengeance, etc. Burrows Epistle, etc.
And the word of the Lord we sounded and did not spare, and caused the deaf to
hear, and the blind to see, and the dread of the Lord went before us and behind
us, and terror took hold on our Enemies. And first of all our mouths were
opened, and and our Spirits filled with indignation against the Priests and
Teachers, and with them and against them we first began to War, as being the
causers of the People to err, and the blind leaders that carried the blind into
the Ditch; and against them as the Fountain of all wickedness abounding in the
Nations, and as being the issue of Profaness, and against them we cried,
showing unto all these People that they were not lawful Ministers of Christ,
but Deceivers and Antichrists; and we spared not publicly, and at all seasons,
to utter forth the Judgments of the Lord against them, and their Ways, and
their Churches, and Worships, and Practices; and this was our first Work we
entered upon, to thresh down the Deceivers and lay them open, that all People
may see their shame and come to turn from them.

Reader I gave you an account of their Rise, and when, and now of their
Progress, and how. These are the Sayings of Edw. Burrow the Quakers great
Prophet; spoken about 1658. by the motion of Edward Burrow's Spirit, and
reprinted by the order and approbation of George Whitehead, Geo. Fox, Josh,
Coal, and others of their Teachers, Anno 1672. And the whole community own,
stand by, and at all turns are ready to defend my Lord chief Justice Burrow's,
who you see, first by a just and lawful Trial has arraigned and condemned the
Clergy by wholesale, and for a crime, if it were true, would deserve it too,
though not from them, viz. being contrary to all the Ministers of Christ, in all
things, and according to all the false Prophets and Diviners in all things; oh
dreadful! You see also their Petition to the Parliament, it needs no comment;
they plead heartily against the Clergy, against their Interest, against their
Tithes; they tell the Parliament they can never prosper, if they do not throw
off the wicked Clergy; leave them to themselves, stand in a just opposition to
them; that their first Work was to make War against the Clergy, as the
Deceivers of the Nation, the Issue of Profaneness, yea, the Fountain of all
Wickedness; and with them, and against them they first began to War; for their
Mouths were filled with indignation against them [I believe them;] and in all
Places, public and private; in Churches, in Markets, on the high Ways, and in
private Meetings; oh how did they lay them open? But Reader give me leave to
insist now largly on this Head, it being the Quakers Masterpiece.

Burrow 's Works 846. Antichrists Government detected; Dedicated to all the
Rulers, etc. Now I come to declare who are true Judges of Heresy and
Heretics; None are able to discern of Heresy, nor to Try and Judge rightly
who are Heretics; none but they [I say] that have the infallible Spirit of God
in them to guide them, and have infallibility and perfect certainty of Judgment
and Knowledge in that case of Heresy: None else, I say, are rightly able to
judge who are Heretics; But such as have the infallible Spirit of Christ, and
are infallible and certain in their judgment, these only, and none else, are
able to judge; they only are competent judges in this case of Heresy, and who
are Heretics. It is but out of Envy, if they have not the infallible Spirit of
God, and infallibility of Judgment to discern by, for no Man can justly judge
another in the matter of Heresy, as a Heretic by their own Thoughts or
Suppositions, for the judgment in that matter must be Just, Equal, Holy, and
True, and only by the Spirit of Jesus Christ which is infallible, and gives
infallibility of judgment and discerning into all Cases and Things: For it was
Christ Jesus and his Apostles and the Saints that had the infallible Spirit of
God, and infallibility of Judgment. The Jews could not judge because they had
not the infallible Spirit of Judgment, nor the certain infallible Knowledge,
nor can the Christians: There Is none can truly discern, nor justly judge what
Heresy is, nor who is a Heretic, but such as are guided by the infallible
Spirit of Christ, and have infallibility of Judgment: So both the Lawmakers
and the Judges of the Law must; [what must they turn Quakers?] be infallible,
etc.

I think I have said enough of their infallibility as it lies in half a page;
in their Book styled the Antichrists Government detected, etc. Dedicated to all
the Rulers in the Christian World, boldly taking upon them the Power making
Laws, or trying any in the case of Heresy [least they themselves should be
tryed] unless they had infallibility of Judgment which Protestant Parliaments
do not pretend too: The next is this, Entitled p. 793.

Persecution impeached as a Traitor against God, etc.

By which the Quakers boldly Impeach all Parliaments and Courts of Judicature.
Thus can they Try, Judge, Arraign, and Condemn all the Protestant Clergy, and
Impeach the Proceedings of all our Courts: But if I Arraign the Quakers, as New
Rome, and Impeach their yearly Meetings, this is accounted by them an
unpardonable Crime, how justly soever: Behold their great presumption. But to
the next.

Burrow 's Works p. 588. A Message to the present Rulers of England, whether
Committee of Safety, Council of Officers, or others, delivered unto them by an
Ambassador from the only Right Heir of the Government, whose Right alone it is
to Rule, and by special Authority from him this is sent unto them.

My Master is a High and Mighty, and Powerful Prince, and very Honorable; Fear
and Subjection belongs to him alone: Something you may and ought to do; but if
to make the Whore the false Church more Naked, and to scourge her more than
some others have done: And indeed my Lord requires something more of you to do,
than others before you could do; and tho some of you, present Rulers, be looked
upon as great Traitors and Tyrants (in cutting off the King's Head, and
extirpating Episcopacy) the Lord does not account as Men; these things must
needs have come to pass for the furtherance of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and
if you were but faithful to what the Lord requires of you, what you have done
to them (in the Murder aforesaid) should not be reckoned an account against
you, neither by God nor good Men. Let all forced maintenance to Ministers, as
Tithes, be speedily taken away; and let just Men, and righteous Men, and meek
Men (i. e. Quakers) have the Power and judgment committed to them, to determine
things between Man and Man; down with all that judge for Rewards, and away with
all hireling Rulers that execute the Law for Money; and as for the Men called
Ministers, the way of their setting up, sending forth, and maintenance, are the
greatest oppression in the Nation; they are the woeful cause of the Nations
groaning, their iniquities cry for vengeance, for they are full, they are full,
and God's Eternal vengeance is their next Reward from the Eternal God: What
shall I say of them but this? The Earth is oppressed by them, the Inhabitants
groan under them, and God is vexed through them, and they are the Men of high
Indignation and fierce Wrath; let this Ministry alone, and join not your selves
to Baal least you perish; neither take part with Antichrist any longer; uphold
not this Ministry against my Lord, and this is from the mouth of my Lord to
you. Reader bear with me, I am now telling the growth and progress of
Quakerism, and how and by what means I need not comment upon it. This was Writ
in 1659. by E. B. but reprinted in 1672. by the order and approbation of (some
words first being left out) Geo. Whitehead and others. See p. 592 to the same
purpose.

SECTION IV.
Their Corrupt Principles, as their Light within, Infallibility, Enthusiasm,
etc. and their pernicious Books proceeding therefrom, etc. and their censorious
condemning others without a parallel.
GENESIS Hist. p. 53. The Quakers did always enveigh against the Liturgy, as
stuffed with the Fopperies of Popish Darkness, superstitious and ill-plac'd
Lessons and Prayers, Ornaments, Gestures, and Bodily actions, and many Rites of
observing Holydays. These the Quakers did vigorously oppose, etc.

Reader as I have given a hint of the Quakers addressing themselves to the
supreme Assembly [i. e. Parliaments] as well to prove the learned Authors
Testimony true, as to let the World see how Quakerism advanced] by their bitter
Letters, and invective seditious Petitions and Books, keeping therein to their
old way of Accusations (as he well observes) concealing their own Crimes, and
how their business was to defame others both Magistrates and. Ministers,
imprecating all Evils upon them from the most High God: I am now come to prove
what he says touching their enveighing against the Liturgy, for where I find
him well informed I am willing to corroborate his Testimony from matter of
Fact, as well as where I see him warp, to correct and set him right, viz.

Smith 's Works p. 161. A general Summons, from the Authority of Truth, to all
Ecclesiastical Courts and Officers. And now, upon what Foundation will your
Building stand? for your work is found contrary to the Law of the Nation, and
contrary to the Spirit of Truth, contrary to the Scriptures, contrary to
Christianity, contrary to Reason, contrary to the Law and the Prophets,
contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, contrary to the King's Mind. Where will you
have a Foundation to build your Work upon? for as it is found contrary to all
these weighty Things, so by their Authority, your Work in cases of Conscience
may well be Questioned. The Law of the Nation may justly question you, the
Spirit of Truth may justly question you, the Scriptures may justly question
you, Christianity may justly question you, Reason may justly question you,
Christ Jesus may justly question you, the King may justly question you, and
what can your Foundation be but the love of Money, printed 1668.

Mark Reader the Impudence of these Quakers, who twit others with their own
Crimes; I am sure every particular may be applied to themselves rightly, and
yet such is their insolent boldness [even whilst Diffenters, and acted as well
contrary to the Laws as all the things by them mentioned] to give out a general
Summons to all the Ecclesiastical Order Established by Law: But if I give them
a Summons this is presumptious, seditious, tumultuary; yea, if I Arraign them,
as New Rome, and print without License, I must be by them indicted, and had I
not had a Church of England Jury I might have been ruined: These are the meek
Men, the righteous Men, the just Men that Burrows, and in him the Quakers
prayed in the last recital of Burrow's Works to the Government, that they might
have the executive part of the Law, and that Cases between Man and Man might be
left to them; but thanks be to God who have given the Nation such a sight of
their Hypocrisy, that hitherto they have not been thought worthy of a place in
the Government, no not so much as Constable, a remembering their
Anti-magistratical principle laid down by their first Founder, as in News
coming up, etc. p. 20. Sing all ye Saints and Rejoice, clap your Hands and be
glad, for the Lord Jehovah will Reign, and the Government shall be taken from
you, pretended Rulers, Judges, and Justices, Lawyers, and Constables; all this
tree must be cut down, and Jesus Christ (in us) will Rule alone, etc. But I
thank God this Tree of Defense is still standing, which preserved me from your
inveterate malice, who for not Licensing my Book (though it be your own daily
practice) Indicted me, as one turbulent and unquiet, practicing and intending
falsely, unlawfully, seditiously, and maliciously, etc. as also to move, stir
up, and cause discords, tumults and miserable slaughters, etc. and all because
I printed unlicensed, Arraigned them as New Rome, etc. But behold they can
Arraign, Try, Summons, and Judge, yea and Condemn Magistrates, Ministers, and
whole Churches by whole sale: Are these the meek Men, the just Men, the
righteous Men, that would so fain have the Administration of the Government,
God forbid, and let all good Protestants and sincere Christians say Amen.

Reader, I must beg pardon for this Digression, it is a fault that sometimes
better Writers fall into. The next I shall recite is a Dialogue or Catechism
between Tradition and Truth. The Terms being interpreted are thus in the
Original, Truth, that is the Quakers, and Tradition, that is the Church of
England; and if I were to recite it all it is worse than Tho. Hicks's Dialogue
between a Quaker and a Christian, for the substance of that is true to my
certain knowledge; but this is so barbarous a Dialogue as none but such that
are void of Charity and the Fear of God would ever have attempted; but the
Quakers they may domineer and insult over their Superiors, yea, Summon,
Arraign, Try, Judge and Condemn the Church of England, and thereby the
Magistrates, Ministers and People; present their seditious Petitions to the
Parliament: Advise and Council them to let the Ministers alone, stand not (say
they) by Baal's Priests, down with all that judge for Money, alias take Money
for their pains and labor, as the Quakers themselves do, yet none must say a
word to them; Oh no, no touch the hem of their Garment, as if they had a
Pattent to commit all manner of reproaches, revilings, scandalous, destructive,
horrible Blasphemies, and all manner of impieties cum privilegio.

Smith 's Works p. 157. A Catechism (by way of Dialogue) to all Priests and
Prelates.

Truth, lay down thy Fundamentals and what they are, that they may be known,
and in their place come to Trial.

Tradition, these be my Foundation principles of my Religion, believing they
are sound, because I find in the Scriptures that the Saints performed them, and
served God in them. I have Churches, Preaching, Praying, Singing, and Bishops,
Ministers, and under them other Officers for order sake.

Truth, these in their places must be examined, and by the Spirit of Truth [i.
e. Quakers] proved whether they be right in the ground, and have their rise
from the Power of God: Open thine Eye and behold thy Ceremonies, and see what
Monsters thou have generated and brought forth from thy Adulterous Womb. -- And
so has the birth of thy Adulterous Womb deceived the Nations.

Tradition, I am reasonably satisfied from what has been said, as to the
Ceremonies belonging to my Worship, but as to my Church, Preaching, Praying,
Singing, Bishops, and Ministers, they must be duly observed.

Truth, I shall try them in order, and if I find them right in the ground,
shall approve them, if not, testify against them; therefore speak plainly what
thy Church is that I may proceed to Trial.

Tradition, my Church is a consecrated Place for my Worship to be performed in,
and by many Ancient Fathers Laws been set by, etc.

Truth, now I shall try thy Church, and if it be not in God it is none of his,
but an adulterated Harlot covered over with the Mystery of Iniquity; therefore
Tradition be silent a little and Truth will show thee thy Error; so be cool and
hear what Truth says, for now thy Church comes to Trial.

Tradition, I know that Praying in my Worship is right, for it is mentioned in
the Scripture, and was practiced very much by the Saints; and I have the Lord's
Prayer, and have made many other Prayers which be useful and comfortable for
all conditions, and on all occasions; and I have put them together in a Book
which I call the Book of Common Prayer, and use it in my Devotion.

Truth, Prayer in the Spirit the Saints practiced, but thou art degenerated and
has formed such Prayers as the Lord has not required, neither does he open
his Ear to them; and that which thou call'st the Lord's Prayer, be thou silent
and make no mention of it, for thou have nothing to do with it; -- Oh thou
Adulterous Tradition! What Monsterous births have thou brought forth? Thy
Common Prayer Book is seen to be conceived in thy Adulterous Womb, and to
branch forth from the Pope.

Tradition, but, what if my Common Prayer Book do not fully agree with the
Scriptures, and the Saints practice, yet there are many good things in it, and
many Scripture sentences which may edify and comfort.

Truth, that which is born of the Flesh is Flesh, and that is against the
Spirit, and can neither edify nor comfort; though good Words and Scripture
sentences may be spoken, for it is not speaking the Words of others that does
make a true Prayer, but in receiving a measure of the same Spirit of Prayer,
which is not in thy Common Prayer Book to be found; therefore it is made of
none effect because thy bowels bring it forth, and the Pope gives Life and
Breath unto it, and from his Loins it draws its Strength, and not from the
power of God.

Tradition, what can I say to be received for truth? my Ceremonies, etc. are
denied, but there can be nothing said against my Bishops and Ministers the
Scriptures speak so plainly of them, etc.

Truth, now Tradition harken what Truth says, and give thine Answer to what is
demanded of thee: Who made thy Archbishops and Lord Bishops, and who gave them
these Names? And who first divided unto them their several Diocesses, and
appointed them to Rule within their own Diocese? And who first made Deans and
Prebends, Doctors, Vicars, and Curates, and who gave them their Names? And who
first set up certain Places for Schools? And who gave them the Names of
Universities? And how came they to be called Christ's College, and Emanuel's
College, John's College, and Jesus's College? And who set up Commencements
and Degrees, that a Man must be made Bachelor of Art, and Master of Art,
before he can be approved to be made a Minister in thy Order? And who first
made that Law which forces and compels the payment of the Tenth part of things
increased, to such a Ministry, and whether are such the Ministers of Christ,
who make use of that Law to force their maintenance? Are these thy Bishops and
Ministers which thou say there can be nothing said against them? Open thine
Eye and behold them, for they are Monsters which from thy adulterous Conception
are brought forth, and they are stamped with thy Image, and all thy
abominations are denied and testified against; this is a Charge against thee.

Tradition, this thing which make such discoveries of my Practices, and with
such boldness reproves me for them, it is of God; for it is not in fear of me
nor my power, which now is Strong and of great Authority.

Truth, that which does discover thee and thy deceitful Practices is the Truth
[i. e. Quakers] of God, which was before thou had a Name, and will be when
thy Name is lost; and it does boldly reprove thee, and is without any fear of
thee or thy power; and has opened thee, and ripped up thy Bowels, and discovered
thy adulterous Womb, and all the false Conceptions that has been conceived
their; and now behold! ye Archbishops, Lord Bishops, Deans, Prebends, Doctors,
Vicars, and Curates, and all Prelaticals; here is the Womb of your Conception
opened, and that made manifest from which you draw your breath, and prolong the
length of your days, with all your Service and Worship which you so much esteem
and promote: Therefore hear and consider ye Bishops, Deans, Prebends, Doctors,
Vicars, and Curates, with all Prelaticals, you must come to the Bar, and if you
will but soberly peruse this Catechism (or Dialogue) you may know and learn
that which all your Universities could never give you the knowledge off, nor
all your Learning and Wisdom could never teach you; so escape for your Lives,
that the stroke may not fall upon you.

Truth. Reader, marvel not too much at the Impudence of this Man, for it is the
Heart of Quakerism: He was a right Quaker and no Mungril, and Eminent Teacher,
and a ready Sail. You see he feared not the Bishops nor their Power; he had no
respect to the Law which Established the Book of Common Prayer; nay, should the
Question be put to Geo. Whitehead whether he would, under his Hand, condemn
this Antichristian piece to be burnt on Tower Hill, he would say no, not for a
World, it is the Marrow of his Religion. I could give Instances of the like
nature out of 100 of their Books, but for brevities sake, and that I may not
stay my Reader too long from something new, I shall only recite 2 or 3 Books
more, that so the Author of the Genesis History may hear his Text fully proved,
viz. that the Quakers enveigh against the Liturgy, and that bitterly too,
together with the Ministry of the Church of England.

A Touchstone, or perfect Trial of all Priests, Bishops, and Ministers.

This Book contains more than 100 Pages in Quarto, printed 1667. by Margaret
Fell, whom George Fox afterward Married, the purport of which is to show them
all the Clergy are false Prophets, Deceivers, etc. which being but a Woman,
though a very proud imperious Dame, I pass her by.

The Innocence and Consciousness of the Quakers, etc. p. 7. As for the purity
of the Church of England it is out of our sight; we can see a great deal of
impurity in it, and as much the Members of it confess themselves; indeed they
confess enough of themselves to cause all wholesome sound understanding People
to shun them, and their Church, and Worship, as Men shun a contagious Disease
or Infection.

I think this is so bold, as well as base, that it need no comment: But if they
look into the Cage, I presume, they will find little cause to boast, especially
if I give them the right Key to open it, and that amongst their Teachers and
Writers; but if I should make a Cage for their Hearers, ir would be much
enlarged every way.

Truth exalted in a Short, but sure Testimony, etc. by W. Penn p. 9.

Come Church of England, whence came your Forms of Prayer and Church
Government? from the Scriptures or the Mass Book and Popish Canons; and what
President do you find for Litanies, Responces, Singing, Organs, Altars,
Bowings, etc. with much more such like dirty Trash, and soul Superstition?
Stand up and answer me you Members of the Church of England: But are they not
the Offspring of the Popish Generation? God is now breathing forth in
Vengeance, to Thunder down and Consume all your fair Buildings and pleasant
Pictures of Babilonish Inventions: But alas poor Souls! are you not at have
mercy upon us miserable sinners; there is no health in us, from seven to
seventy, etc.

The Guide mistaken by W. Penn p. 18. And whilst the idle gormondizing Priests
of England run away with above 1500000 l. a Year, under pretense of being God's
Ministers; and that no sort of People have been so universally through Ages, the
very bane of Soul and Body to the universe, as that abominable Tribe, for whom
the Theater of God's most Dreadful Vengeance wait to act their Eternal Tragedy
upon.

Burrow's Works p. 244. Oh what cruel Injustice and Tyranny in Civil
Government! Oh what abominable Superstition and Idolatries have been in Church
Government! It is a vexation to the Spirit of the Lord to consider it, and the
righteous, Soul has long cried out and mourned under it; and because of this
is the Lord God of Heaven and Earth now Risen to, overturn, overturn Kings and
Princes, Governments and Laws; and he will confound and break down all Tyranny
and Oppression, under which the poor have groaned; and he will change Times,
and Laws, and Government: There shall be no King Ruling but Jesus, nor no
Government of force, but the Government of the Lamb; nor no Law of Effect but
the Law of God, all that which is otherwise shall be ground to powder: The
Kingdom of the most High shall Rule amongst Men; and the Kingdoms of this World
shall be changed, etc.

Sam. Fisher's Works p. 99. I will hold my peace no longer, says the Lord, as
concerning this Evil, which they so profanely commit, and do daily against my
Chosen, but will utterly subvert and overturn them, and bring the Kingdoms and
Dominions, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, into the
Hands of the Holy Ones of the most High, and give unto my Son and his Saints to
Reign over all the Earth, and take all the Rule and Authority that shall stand
up against my Son, in his Saints, and put it down among all the rest, as one of
his greatest Enemies, under his Feet says the Lord, p. 102. And so (says
Fisher) the Quakers are the truest Catholic Church in the World.

Reader, compare these two last Citations with G. Fox's Quotation in this 4th
Section, and you may perceive what principles they were off about 1655. etc.

SECTION V.
The World's wonder, and the Historian's mistake in W. Penn, who Wrote first in
favor of the Protestants made and framed Tests, against the Papists called to
the Parliament for penalties of the violators thereof: But when the late K. J.
II. came to the Crown, a fierce despiser of the Protestants, and an Abbetter of
the Papist; a great stickler for the abolishing and taking away of Tests and
Penal Laws, etc.
GENESIS Hist. p. 43. Now as to what was the Wit and Spirit of W. Penn from his
Youth, what promptness and dexterity in discoursing attended the acuteness of
his Wit; what knowledge of Tongues, and of things, what temper and conversation
of Life he was; I had rather the Quakers should give you an account than I; for
I know well how difficult and troublesome it is to interpose his Judgment of a
matter in which the Judgment of other Men is so various: But certainly though my
Pen were silent of him, his own Writings will speak him forth to be the most
eminent Member among all that Society, etc.



I will and must acknowledge great part of this discourse of W. Penn's Wit,
promptness of Speeeh and readiness, etc. yet since Mr. Croese has appealed to
his Writings to his Writings let him go, and then let the World see how steady
he has been, even like the Weathercock, fast and loose at every turn and
changing as the Moon; vigorous for the Protestant Interest, at least seemingly;
yea, in K. C. II. time so hot for Protestants that he had the applause of many;
but in the late K. J. II. time, he showed the World what he was, and what many
thought him to be all along, even a bitter Enemy to the Church of England, and
consequently to Protestantism: But since an appeal is made to his Writings, I
shall cite an abstract of three which he wrote in K. C. II. time, vigorous for
the Protestant Interest: He gave direction for the choice of Members principled
against Popery; cautioned all against Popery; wrote a Test against Popery, and
what not; but when K. J. came on, he soon tacked about; as by others of his
Books, wrote in favor of the late K. J. I shall make it appear; so that all
that would know W. Penn rightly, must go to his Writings, of which I have 3
times 3 of each sort by me, but these may suffice to show how he looked one way
and rowed another.

A seasonable Caveat against Popery, etc. by W. Penn p. 3. We hope it may not
be too late to militate for Truth, against the dark Suggestions of Papal
Superstition; to vindicate that of Reformation from the quaintest Stratagems,
and most unwearied endeavors of Romish Emissaries; to put both it and us into
their Inquisition; We know they have so far mastered their Ancient fierceness,
and masked their Sanguine Looks, with those more modest and familiar, that
though we need not more Reason than before, yet we need more Skill and Caution,
or else we may too fatally experience the force of that vulgar Proverb; Laugh
in thy Face and cut thy Throat.

They are grown so complaisant, that none seem more exasperated at Persecution
than themselves, whilst the very Fathers of it decrying the fierceness of it
in some Countries, whose Incendiaries they were, and still are; and imputing
all the Blood of poor Protestants to some unwarrantable civil Score; Thereby
abusing the Magistrates with their own Conspiracies; nay, for all their
venerable Esteem for the Popes Infallibility, they have not stuck to censure
his roaring Bulls, though procured by their own means: And all that might express
their new tenderness; that many unacquainted with their practices, are ready to
believe them what they say themselves to be, whose moral is to have two strings
to their Bow; to be ambo dexters, and furnished with meanings to suit the
compass of all occasions p. 14. I stand amazed, how any Man of Sense can be a
Papist, when the only demonstration of his Religion must be his not
understanding it, p. 30. 31. In those frequent Bulls for Massacres, which can
no more be denied than light at Noon day; by which People have been stirred up
upon the promise of forgiveness of Sins, redemption from Purgatory, and Eternal
Salvation, or Dreadful Denunciation of Eternal Damnation, to enterprise that
Work of Murdering so many Hundred Thousands of Men, Women, and Children,
without any Legal Presentment, Trial or Conviction: But the consideration of
these things are out of fashion in England; that many embrace them upon their
present disguises, and not in their true sanguinary Appearances p. 35.

To conclude; If we would not receive a Thief until he has Repented, let the
Papist first recant his voluminous Errors; but above all, let us have good
Testimony of his hearty Sorrow for that Sea of Blood, shed in England, France,
Holland, Ireland, Spain, Italy, Savoy, Switzerland, and Germany, of many
Hundred Thousands of poor Protestants, that for pure Conscience could not
conform to their most exorbitant Practices, as well as new Doctrine imposed
upon them, such inhumane and Barbarous Inventions and Cruelties, as no Age
could ever parallel, and are the only demonstrations of their wicked Wit that
lived in that Age; and that not only upon the Parties themselves but their poor
innocent Babes: For, that English Protestants should so far neglect these
weighty considerations, as to be gulled and cheated out of their Religion
purchased them by their Martyrs, Ancestors, and be persuaded to embrace that
old bloody Apostatized Church again, with all her Slavish as well as Ridiculous
Superstitions, is a crime so offensive to God, and intolerable to Men, as the
time hastens, that the very Stones of the Street will rise up in Judgment
against them p. 38. Question, whether in case they could not be conformed unto,
they would allow a tolleration; were they powerful, whether in case they should
say yes, we ought to believe them, since it is one of their most Sacred maxims,
not to keep Faith with Heretics, as was seen in the case of those in the
Alpine Valleys, J. Hush, etc. and in that they have in all Ages brought so
great a deluge of Blood upon the Europian World. Question, whether it be the
Interest of the English Nation to Subject her self to a Popish Yoke,
considering the incomparable Bloody Massacres of that sort of Men in several
Reigns.

Thus have I undertook, though with much brevity, an enervation of the Romans
Faith, at least a detection of their Craft; their horrid Couzenage, and present
way of Insinuation among the People.

Next see his Book styled Engl. great Int. in the Choice of this new Parliam.
etc. p 4. by W. P. Pray see that you choose sincere Protestants, Men that don't
play the Protestant in design, and are indeed disguised Papists, ready to pull
off their Mask when time serves; you will know such by their laughing at the
Plot, disgracing the Evidence, admiring the Traitors constancy: The contrary
are Men that thank God for this discovery, and in their conversation zealously
direct themselves in an opposition to the Papal Interest, which indeed is a
Combination against good Sense, Reason and Conscience, and to introduce a blind
obedience without, if not against, Conviction; and that principle which
introduces implicit Faith, and blind Obedience in Religion, will also introduce
implicit Faith and blind Obedience in Government; so that it is no more the Law
in the one than the other, but the Will and Power of the Superior that shall be
the Rule and Bound of our Subjection: This is that fatal mischief Popery brings
with it to civil Society, and for which such Societies ought to be aware of it.

One Project for the Good of England, etc. by W. Penn, p. 10. The New Test. I.
A. B. do solemnly and in good Conscience in the sight of God and Men, declare
that King Charles the 2d, is Lawful King of this Realm, and all the Dominions
thereun to belonging; and that neither the Pope nor the Sea of Rome, nor any
else by their Authority, have Right in any Case to depose the King, or dispose
of his Kingdom, or upon any score whatever to absolve his Subjects of their
Obedience, or to give leave to any of them to Plot or Conspire the hurt of the
King's Person, his State or People; and that all such Pretenses and Power, are
False, Pernicious, and Damnable?

And I do further sincerely profess, and in good Conscience declare, that I do
not believe that the Pope is Christ's Vicar, or Peter's Lawful Successor; or
that he, or the Sea of Rome, jointly, or severally, are the Rule of Faith, or
Judge of Controversies, or that they can Absolve Sins; nor do I believe there
is a Purgatory after Death; or that Saints should be Prayed too, or Images in
any sense to be Worshipped: Nor do I believe that there is any
Transubstantiation in the Lord's Supper; or Elements of Bread and Wine, at, or
after the Consecration thereof, by any Person whatsoever. But I do firmly
believe, that the present Communion of the Roman-Catholick-Church is both
Superstitious and Idolatrous. And all this I do Acknowledge, Intend, Profess
and Declare, without any Equivocation, or reservation, or other sense than the
plain and usual signification of these Words; according to the real intention
of the Law maker, and the common Acception of all true Protestants, etc.

This is the Test I offer, large in Matter, because comprehensive of Oaths, and
Test too; yet brief in Words.

The Abuse of this Discrimination should be very Penal; for it is a great Lie
upon a Man's own Conscience, and a Cheat put upon the Government. Your Wisdoms
(i. e. Parliament) can best proportion and direct the Punishment; but it can
scarcely be too severe, as our Case stands.

Reader, There is a Proverb, that a treble Cord is not soon broken; but W. Penn
break all these, and as many more on the same Subject; and yet that is not the
worst on it; but led many thousands into the same Snare, peculiarly the Quakers,
as anon will appear: And thereby, notwithstanding his Wit and Parts, became an
ill Instrument, and the greatest Enemy the Church of England then had: But in
regard his Writing, Pro and Con, say so much, and give such a Demonstration; I
shall say the less, not being willing to stay too long on this Head.

Good Advice to the Church of England, Roman -Catholic, and Protestant
Dissenters; to Abolish the Penal Laws and Tests, etc. p. 39. 42.

It happens now, that God and Caesar are both of a mind; which perhaps does not
always fall out, at least about the Point in hand.

Edward the 6th, succeeded a Prince that promised Virtues, that might more than
balance the Excesses of his Father; and yet by Archbishop Cranmer, was
compelled to Sign a Warrant to burn poor Joan of Kent, a Famous Woman, but
counted an Enthusiast; thus even Protestants begun with Blood, and taught the
Romanists in succeeding Times, how to deal with them. I hope I may conclude,
that the Penal Laws have been a makebate in the great Family of the Kingdom,
setting the Father against the Children, and Brethren against Brethren; and for
this the Church of England has paid a severe Reckoning; if she hope by her
aversion to a general ease, to set up for a Bulwork against Popery. One Year
will show the trick, and mightily deceive her, and the Opportunity will be
lost, and another Bargain driven; I dare assure her, mightily to her
disadvantage; Violence and Tyranny, are no natural Consequencies of Popery,
etc. 2. A Reply to the Answer of the Man of no Name, etc. p. 22. 2. And one
thing I must say, Roman Catholics have been Loyal in England and Holland, so
that it is not necessarily true. The Gentlemen that tore the Kings Declaration
of the Indulgence from him, were high Churchmen; and they opposed his Political
Capacity to his Natural, on purpose to overthrow that Act of Grace; by which
Destination, the late Civil War was made; so that 41 overtook 73, or that
returned to 41, and who knows not that they were such as hardly knew how to
Pray, but out of our Liturgy; that attempted to Exclude the Presumptive Heir to
the Crown, upon the score of Religion.



A Defense of the Duke of Buckingham 's Book, etc. p. 12. Now, though this Man
would think it imprudent in me, and I, that it is none of my business to
vindicate the Persons charged from his Imputation; yet I have so much Justice,
I confess, as not to condemn Parties by Particulars; and Charity as to be
satisfied with their solemn disclaiming of such Practices. For I did never
love, that one Man should have the making of another Man's Faith and
Confession; especially if he were his Adversary. I must tell him also, I cannot
admire his Wisdom, Manners, or Justice, in his Reflections on the Roman
Catholics; after the Assurance that so great an one of their Communion has
given him and his Friends of their Security and Protection; for if they are a
People able to ruin the whole Earth, and lay the Foundations of Eternal
Mischief to Mankind; believe me, England is in an ill pickle: And though I am an
ill Judge, he has in it, put but a scurvy Complement upon the King; let him be
just, and he will find the Excluders almost every Sunday at their Parish
Churches; and if three quarters of them were to pray for their Lives, it may be
they could better read their Clergy than say their Prayers without the public
Liturgy, etc,



3. Animadversions on the Apology of the clamorous Squire, etc. p. 3. But when
he has done all he can, they were not Dissenters under Correction, that in
1680. prosecuted the Roman Catholics and refused them Liberty, but Church of
England Men; and such of them too as would not allow it to some Protestant
Dissenters, for fear that Dissenters should hide themselves amongst them, and
that they therefore must swallow the most severe Tests that could be framed,
Whilst the same W. P. framed the said severe Tests.
to show themselves It seems it was but to show himself no Friend to that
Communion.
not Friends to that Communion (i. e. Papists) and to tell Truth; and I beseech
the Gentleman not to take it amiss that I say the Dissenters were invited into
the share they had in opposition to Popery by Church Men; ay, they were for a
comprehension, to make the Church of England stand broader, the better to
receive the assaults of Rome without hazard, p. 4. I do affirm the excluders
were Conformists, and are yet Communicants of your Church; and the greatest
part of them upon education and constant practice too; and that this is a Truth
and no Slander, read the List, and it is a demonstration; nay, I challenge the
Gentleman to name six Persons of all the excluders that dissent from the
Estalish'd Church; nor is this of yesterday, for if we look back, we shall see
the most celebrated Bishops of our Church barring the succession in the Law,
the 13 and 27 of Eliz, and when that Queen pleaded Conscience in not assenting
to a Law to put our King's great Grandmother, Mary Queen of Scots, to Death,
the same Reverend Bishops undertook to remove the Scruple p. 5. 'Twas the
Gentlemen of that Communion, that impeached the Prerogative in the Declaration
of Indulgence, and set the Political capacity of the King in opposition to his
natural, and to make their business more popular, bestowed that comment upon it
of a design in the Court, to let in Popery and Arbitrary Government, p. 2. Our
Brave King.



4. A persuasive to moderation, submitted to the King, etc. p. 1. Pref. We have
not to do with an insensible Prince, but one that has been touched with our
Infirmities more than any Body, sit to judge our cause by the share he once had
in it.



5. Reasons for the Repeal of the Tests, etc. p. 3. They ought to be taken away
because they are unreasonable and unjust, p. 5. It Is highly necessary that
these Tests be abrogated; this appears in that the King desires it, the Papists
crave it, and the Interest of the whole Nation requires it. We are all then in
prudence to consent thereto. -- We have been Taught who Taught that Doctrine
more than W. P. See the first 3 Books quoted.
to entertain very hard thoughts of their Religion, and as we learnt to speak,
so we stammer'd it out, no Papist, no Popery. Whence sprung this aversion,
mainly I am sure from our apprehension, that Blood and Cruelty attended it. The
Roman Catholics though sure of the King, are willing to concert and accomodate
matters with us, and to deliver us from what we so dreaded, their persecution
upon the most reasonable and equal Terms, of being freed from the danger of
ours; I hope our Established Church will bethink her self, and better consider
of things, than by her stubborn Adhesion to her Laws of severity and force, to
incline us to love Popery when we find it gentle and easy to be entreated, p.
6. 7, 8. The King promised to maintain her, so he does, and will undoubtedly
persevere to do, if she runs not her self into a forfeiture of the Royal Grace.
Let her cease to be angry, and rebuke her Sons very unmannerly sitting in
Judgment upon, and censuring the King's Proceedings: Let her, I say, be Wise,
and know her Duty and Interest; the advice is requisite, she being at this day
tampering to draw the Fanatics into an Association against the King's most
Gracious purpose to them and all his People: It is insinuated that undue and
false returns [of Parliament Men] may be made, etc. But surely there lives not
a Man without the Pale of the Church, we are talking of, so wicked as to think
the King does not detest the Thought of so base a practice; he that whispers a
thing so greatly below the King, will, for ought I know, suggest, that to
morrow his Majesty will return us a House of Commons from Hounslow-Heath:
Discourses of this kind may not be heard but in Bedlam, or Newgate; therefore
adjourning them thither for cure or correction.



6. The great and popular objection against the Repeal of the Penal Laws and
Tests, briefly stated and considered, etc. p. 3. If the consequences that are
imagined to follow the Repeal of the Penal Statutes and Tests, were indeed so
terrible as they are industriously represented, I should readily fall in with
the common jealousy, and help to augment the number of those that are for their
continuance. But when I consider how long our Government was happy without
them; how much of heat and partiality prevailed in their constitution, and how
troublesome and impracticable their Execution are; and that in our present
circumstances they appear a plain barriere to our happiness, p. 11. I own it
may affect the present Ecclesiastical Policy of the Church of England, but I
never took that for Protestancy.



Reader, the reason why I have insisted so long on this Head. beyond my first
intention, is, threefold; 1st. to show W. Penn by his 3 first Books in his
Protestant Dress, and by his last six, with his Mask off in the contrary Dress.
2. That by comparing his last six Books with the Quakers Addresses to the late
K. J. 11. from their Anniversary Synods, you will see they run in one and the
same Channel, issuing from one and the same Fountain; especially when you
consider that from their said yearly Meetings they never made one Address to
his present Majesty, nor wrote one Book in favor of the present Government. 3.
That by both their Addresses a Sample of them you will have by and by, and by
their Books they have jointly and severally born against the Church of England
as with one Shoulder. Thus have I briefly showed what a Writer W. P. has been,
and how he has bestowed his parts even against the Protestant Interest, the
Established Religion, and the common cause of Christianity, and so I conclude
this Head.

SECTION VII.
Their horrid Blasphemies; their Self-exaltations, and vain boastings of their
Learning, etc.
GENESIS Hist. p. 165. About this time came forth a Book called [a Battle-door for
Teachers and Professors to learn singular and plural marked in every page with
the Form Figure of a penny Horn-book: The work was neatly done by John Stubs and
Benja. Furly; but Fox who besides his Engglish Tongue knew none of the
Languages therein [being Thirty in number, as Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Caldee,
Italick, Syriac, Arabic, etc.] was so desirous to seem to be the Author of
this Book; and that what ever it contained of Industry and Praise-worthiness,
had its Original from him; that he even here and there subscribed his Name to
every page, and by him confirmed p. 240. George Fox sent a Letter to John III.
King of Poland, Written originally in English, and sent into Holland, and there
Translated into the German Tongue. This Epistle was so Learnedly done, that it
looked not like the work of a single Person; yet so, as that they left it to
Fox an ignorant Fellow, who Subscribed it only Geo. Fox. And hence it is
apparent, that there is no Mind so humble but is apt to be carried away with
the Air of vain Glory; yea, oftentimes applause is most coveted by those who
most condemn it in others, etc.



Now Reader, though my Learned Author and I differed about W. Penn in some
Points, yet in this we agree in every punctilio, touching the Pride, vain Glory
and Ambition of George Fox, who was an ignorant Fellow, yet would seem to be
Author of a Learned Book containing Thirty Languages; as also of a Learned
Letter sent to John III. King of Poland, in both which [as well as in diverse
cases] he gave out that himself was some great learnt Man, attributing to
himself that which he never had, which doubtless was the occasion of a
discourse rumored about our Country, about the Year 1663. or 1664. That George
Fox had in one nights time 24 Languages given him by Divine Inspiration, and I
did believe it, and diverse others of us for near 20 years; I also spoke to a
Quaker now living and still eminent amongst them, who told me he ever did
believe it until the late divisions. Thus by his counterfeit Miracles, his gift
of Tongues, he still like Simon Magus gave out that he was some great Man; for
thus he wrote in the Introduction, viz. All Languages are to me no more than
Dust, who was before Languages were, etc. and toward the end of the Book thus;
next follow a few words to the whole matter by George Fox, who is before
confusion and many Languages were, etc. This, together with what I elsewhere
have quoted out of his Books and Journals, show that he was willing to be
esteemed a great Man, an old Man, a learned Man, a wise Man, an Angel, one that
see the Heavens open as St. Stephen did, and much more to this purpose: By all
which it appears, that he was a great Deceiver. And thus, Quakerism grew, and
by deceit prevailed in its progress: And since this learned Author has given
such a full proof of Fox's Pride, who being an Ignorant Fellow, as he styles
him, and yet desirous to be taken for the Author of the said Battle-door,
containing Thirty Languages. I will give him a third Instance, viz. Anno 1659.
George Fox puts forth a Book, Entitled A Primmer (in contempt of Learning) for
all the Doctors and Scholars in Europe, etc. wherein are contained 2434 Queries
in this Method, viz. What is a Participle, what is it in it self, and by whom
it came, and out of what Ground? And why are these declined; who was the First
and Author of it, and by whom it came? And why is the Word called Adverb, and
what is an Adverb, the word it self, and who was its rise? And why do you call
the word Conjunction? and who was its rise? and why the word Preposition? and
who was its rise? And who was the Author of the word Interjection? and what are
these two words in themselves, and whether or no these did not come by the Art
of Man? What is a Vowel in it self, and what was the word Vowel? And what is
the word Diphthong, and who was the Author of these, and where are they called
by such Names in Scripture? so who was the Author of these Names in themselves,
and of themselves, and came they not from the Art of Man, yea or nay? Why do
you call the word Masculine, Feminine, Neuter, and Epicene; and what was the
ground of these words in themselves? What are they, and why do they use the
word Declension? and what is in the word it self, and what was its root? And
why the word Comparative, Positive, and Superlative? and what be these words as
they are words? of what Author and Root came they from, and who gave them these
Terms first? who, was the first Rise and Author of them? etc. Thus have I taken
out six entire Paragraphs as they lie in the said Primmer; but I profess I
cannot answer these, why then should I cite more: I cannot tell who spoke these
words first, no more than I can tell who spoke the word [to] first; or spoke
the word [and] first, and who was the first Rise and Author of the word [of]
which to know is as unnecessary, as it is ridiculous to query: Well take a few
more as they lie scattered up and down the said Primmer. What is a Major? What
is a Minor? What is Extraction? What is Geometry? What is Dog-madness? What is
Badger-madness? and what is Wolf madness, etc. nay, what if I add one query;
what was Fox-madness and folly; and whether was not Pride and Ambition the
Author of Fox's Madness, answer G. W. Having thus far proceeded, I shall next
recite a few of Fox's words by way of challenge to the Doctors and Scholars,
viz. These queries are to call you out into the Field; let them come out now to
little Children; little David's are risen, who have the Bags and the Slings, and
the Stones; yea, that profess your selves to be Wise and Learned Men, and
Scholars, and are Novices and Fools; Answer me; draw out your Weapon if you
have any, and Answer me these things; come out of your holes, do not hip nor
skip from them; answer every word in particular, for you have Tongue enough
sometimes, let us see now if it can wag, etc.

Now Reader, this is one way by which they deceived the simple, and thereby
Quakerism had its progress.

Genesis Hist. 112. The Form of the Quakers Confession before the House of Commons
was, I believe with my Heart, and confess with my Mouth the Sacred Scriptures
to be Divine, left us by Men Inspired by God, as an exact rule of our Faith and
Behavior; and I profess to believe in one only God who is the Father, and in
Jesus Christ his Eternal Son, very God, and very Man; and in the Holy Spirit,
one and the same God with the Father and Son, blessed for evermore, etc.

I must confess this Confession, if sincere, is somewhat to the purpose; but if
sincere then there is a vast Change in their Minds, both from their frequent
disputations, as well as their printed Books; and because we cannot well try
them by the first, therefore we will examine their Sincerity by the latter; and
if their Books teach the contrary, then until they first condemn those Books,
we have no ground to believe them sincere in what they say to serve a turn; I
will at this time quote only two of them, viz.

The Sword of the Lord drawn, etc. p. 5. Your imagined God beyond the Stars,
and your carnal Christ is utterly denied and testified against by the Light;
and whereas you [the Priest] say, that Christ is God and Man in one Person, it
is a lie, etc.

Now, if they believe as they write; how can they be sincere in what they say,
as above? for contraries cannot be the same; white is not black, neither is
black white; Men never gathered Grapes of Thorns, nor Figs of Thistles; ye
shall know them [i. e. Deceivers] said Christ by their Fruit; this is an
infallible rule. Again,

News coming up out of the North, etc. p. 14. Your original is carnal, Hebrew,
Greek and Latin; and your Word is carnal; the Letter and the Light is carnal;
the Letter, their original is but Dust, which is but the Letter which is Death;
and their Gospel is Dust; Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, which is but the
Letter, etc.

So then, if the Scriptures, be Dust, Carnal, and Serpents-Meat, how are they
Divine; nay, how were they given forth by Divine Inspiration? What did George
Fox mean? Divine Dust, Divine Food for Serpents; a Divine Carnal Letter. No
sure: Then doubtless these expressions were cast upon the Scriptures by way of
contempt, against such as professed them to be given by Divine Inspiration; and
that they were in earnest the rule of our Faith and Behavior, against which
the Quakers have both Preached and Disputed this 40 years, as I can make appear
by 40 of their Books now by me. One more I shall quote to strengthen what I
say. Howthen can they be sincere in this their Confession? How can they at one
and the same time believe the Scriptures are Death, Dust, Beastly Ware,
Serpents Food, and also that they are Divine and left us by Men Inspired of God
for the rule of our Faith and Practice; I say, how can these contraries be
reconciled; nay, it is impossible. If they shall say in answer to what I now
affirm, that their Minds are really changed and better informed I could be
heartily glad of it; but then let us have a sign of it, and some, ground to
believe them, viz. Let them condemn these Books that Teach contrary to their
Confession; for whilst then I boldly aver, to those who know them and their
Doctrine, and their Books [which they prefer above the Scriptures,] they
cannot, they are not to be believed. The Book I mention to cite is this:

A brief discovery of a three fold Estate of Antichrist, etc. p. 7. 8, 9. The
Priests of the World are 1st. Conjurers, raising dead Doctrines, dead Reasons,
dead Uses, dead Motives, dead Trials out of the Letter which is death; raising
Death out of Death, notable Conjurers. 2. Thieves and Robbers. 3. Antichrists
-- the Priests of Baal cannot show any Scripture example for their Heathenish
ways and Beastial Worships. 4. Witches. 5. Devils, the Serpent is Head in them.
6. Liars, the Commission and call of Baal Priests, come from Oxford and
Cambridge; even the Sir Simons of our days, run to Oxford and Cambridge. 7. A
viperous and serpentive Generation. 8. Blasphemers, living in the Kingdom and
Government of the Prince of the Air, yea, of the Devils; fearful Blasphemers.
9. Scarlet colored Beasts; a well favored Harlot, having a golden Cup in her
Hand full of abomination and filthiness of her Fornication. 10. Babylons
Merchants, selling Beastly ware for a large price; the Letter which is Dust and
Death for filthy lucre sake. 11. Whited Walls, painted Sepulchers, professing
something, possessing nothing but poisoned stuff. 12. Ravening Wolves. 13.
Greedy Dogs; really they are Bloodhounds. 14. Eminent and Ambitious Pharisees,
living in the same Antichristian steps that the Pharisees did that Christ cried
out against; Woe! woe! woe! was their portion then, and woe! woe! woe! is their
portion now; and woe and misery is the portion of the upholders (whether King or
Parliament) of that Treacherous Crew, and Deceitful Generation; wherefore come
from among the Babylonish Merchants, etc.

Oh horrible and unheard of; and in this Book there are the Names of George
Fox, Thomas Lawson, Thomas Aldham, Benjamen Nicolson, John Harrwood, five of
their primitive Teachers and notable Doctors.

Behold the way, manner, and method of the growth and progress of Quakerism;
what, shall this be encouraged? shall this be established in a Christian
Nation, God forbid? Here is contempt cast upon the Scripture, upon the
Ministry, upon the Magistracy, and People; no matter for their confession
whilst these Books stand uncondemned; they keep these Books in their Families,
read them and recommend them, as elsewhere I have observed: Even as Arias kept
his opinion to himself, and yet deceitfully signed as fair a confession to
please the Emperor Constantine; which is as follows. See Hist. Socrates, cap.
38. Viz.

I believe in one God the Father Almighty, and in Jesus Christ his Son; who was
made by him before all Ages, God the Word by whom all things in Heaven and
Earth were made; who came down and was incarnate; who suffered and rose again,
and ascended, and shall come to judge the quick and the dead; and in the Holy
Ghost, the Resurrection of the Flesh, and the Life to come; in one Catholic
Church of God from one end of the World to another; this we believe as God
shall judge us now and in the World to come.

Constantine the Emperor was a good Man, and thought him sincere, and accepted
of it; but the cheat lay here, which afterward was found out he wrote a Paper
of what he really believed, and said he believed as he had written; and the
Quakers have wrote Books that for any to say that Christ is God and Man in one
Person is a lie, and therefore they cannot believe that Christ is very God and
very Man, but believe as they have written. They also have written, that the
Scriptures are Death, Dust, Serpents-meat, Carnal, and Beastly Ware; and though
they have made a confession that the Scriptures are Divine, and left by Men
Inspired of God; and that they are a rule of Faith and Behavior; yet they
believe also that Geo. Fox was divinely Inspired and wrote from the Spirit of
God; so they believe as they have written: If any think I wrong them, let their
Books be laid before them which I have cited, and let them be asked. Come which
do you abide by? which do contain your Faith and Belief? Do you believe as you
have confessed? if you do, at the same time condemn your other Books which
teach the contrary; if you say no, our Books are writ from the Eternal Spirit
of God we cannot condemn them, then condemn your confession, for we will not
have you halt between two opinions; if God be God serve him; if Baal serve him.
This will be the Test, which were it put to them, you would soon see them to be
Quakers still, and not Christians yet: And so I proceed to the next Head.

SECTION VIII.
Their horrid Blasphemies; their pretense to Miracles; their agreement with
Simon Magus, their great Grandfather, who was admired, adored, and worshipped as
well as George Fox.
GENESIS Hist. p. 27. Fox taught that the sick were cured, unclean Spirits cast
out; his Followers who were as Rattles and Cimbals to blaze about his Fame,
disguised the matter thus; that the Woman was possessed with a Devil, who had
troubled her for the space of 32 years, that being brought to him after some
hidious shrieks and out-crys like the bellowing of a Cow, and a most noisome
stink breathed from her Mouth, she was freed of that malignant Spirit.



And to confirm the Quakers pretend to Miracles, see Fox's Journal p. 370.
where one of them by himself is left upon Record, as also many more, but this I
will recite, viz. There was one John Jay being to try a Horse got upon his
back; and the Horse fell a running and cast him down upon his Head, and break
his neck, as the people said. They that were near him took him up dead and
carried him a good way, and laid him on a Tree: I got to him as soon as I
could, and feeling on him concluded he was dead; and as I stood by him pitying
him and his Family; I took hold of his Hair, and his Head turned any way his
Head was so limber; whereupon throwing away my Stick, and my Gloves, I took his
Head in both my Hands, and setting my knees against the Tree I raised his Head,
and perceiving there was nothing out or broken that way, then I put one Hand
under his Chin, and my other behind his Head, and raising his Head two or three
times with all my Strength and brought it in, I soon perceived his Neck began
to grow stiff again, and then he began to rattle in the Throat, and quickly
after to breath; the People were amazed, but I bid them have a good Heart, and
be of good Faith, and carry him into the House; they did so, and set him by the
Fire, but I bid them get him some warm thing to drink and put him to Bed. After
he had been in the House a while, he began to speak, but did not know where he
had been the next day. We passed away, and he with us, about 16 Miles to a
Meeting, etc.

Now this is one of the Miracles directed too, in the third Table or Index,
under the Letter M thus. Miracles wrought by the Power of God.

And amongst the rest this being the chief, and to me seem most remarkable, I
have set it down at large; and whereby it may appear, 1. That it was wrought in
his own Name I, I, I, did so and so, and not as the Apostles did, In the name
of Jesus of Nazareth arise, no, no, Geo. Fox like Simon Magus wrought
counterfeit Miracles in his own Name only.

2. This is said to be done in 1672. and brought to light but in 1694 which is
22 years after it was said to be done; and there let me compare him to Simon
Magus, and see how far they run parallel, read Acts 8. 9, 10. There was a
certain Man called Simon, which before time in the same City used Sorcery, and
bewitched the People of Samaria; giving out that himself was some great one, to
whom they all gave heed from the least to the greatest, saying, this Man is the
great Power of God, etc.

This account the Holy Apostle gives on him, next let us hear what Justin
Martin said of this Simon, viz.

Many adored him as the supreme God; they gave heed to him; they believed and
obeyed what he Taught; they placed their hopes and confidence in him, etc. See
Pools Synopsis of the Critics, p. 14. 62. Erasmus in his paraphrase on that
place, says, viz. A Man there was among the Samaritans called Simon, a
Deceiver of the People, and a Practicer of Delusions; who before Philip came
there, practiced in that City Magick-Art, and by his counterfeit Miracles had
made the Samaritans fond of him, who by means of such falsehood and deceit
vaunted himself before the simple and plain People, boasting that himself was
an excellent Prophet, unto whom the Samaritans, from the highest to the lowest
gave good heed; But nothing had he done in the name of Jesus: And therefore
they as a People astonished at such monsterous sights said, this Fellow is
God's own right hand, who is called Mighty: Many a day had he been with them,
and long had he made them, with his Sorcery, to dote upon him; and therefore
when he had oncegotten himself a name with them of great estimation, many
believed all he Taught.

From whence we may observe, by way of parallel, 1. That this Simon the
Sorcerer was a great while, and many days with the Samaritans; so was George
Fox with the Quakers. 2. Simon Magus wrought counterfeit Miracles in his own
Name only, and never in the Name of Jesus; so did George Fox, and thereby (like
Simon) got himself a great Name of estimation amongst the Quakers. 3. That the
Samaritans adored Simon Magus and called him the power of God; so did the
Quakers, whilst living, witness Josiah Coal's Letter, and others in the first
part recited, and now dead, they have printed him to be the power of God,
saying, Miracles wrought by the power of God. Third Table under the Letter M
and for more of this Nature, see his Journal p. 167, 170, 103, 28, 29, 258,
370. Where he would make us believe he was an Angel; that he saw the Heaven
opened; that he was seen at the Judgment Day; that he cured the Sick, restored
the Lame, and wrought many other Miracles which will complete the parallel.

But this story of John Jay is surely as idle, and unworthy of being esteemed a
Miracle, as any thing can be found in the Popish Legends; for if setting a
Man's Neck aright, that had gone awry by a fall, be a Miracle, then many
Miracles have been wrought in England and elsewhere, for it is very common, and
yet was never called a Miracle until now, that these who published his Journal,
have so called it; and like to this is, that one recovered from Sickness, after
G. Fox had prayed, and if this was a Miracle, many such Miracles are wrought by
Ministers of the Church of England and others.

SECTION IX.
Diverse particulars contracted out of the General History, and branched into
six distinct Heads, where their Anniversary Synods, and their Church
Government, and private Devotions are Treated of; showing the effects to be
disparaging the Scripture, withholding Tithes, refusing to pay Church Rates;
neglecting to read the Bible in their Meetings; refusing to vindicate it from
the aspersions of the Papists; throwing of the Sacraments; allowing Women to
Teach and Vsurp Authority, in their distinct Women's Meetings; omitting private
Duties; censuring and reproaching the Church Liturgy, Magistrates, Ministers,
such as write against them, and for Conscience sake separate from them; their
gross Hypocrisy, in making Legal punishments to be persecutions; in saying and
recording that they suffer great penalties, when they really do not, etc.
GENESIS Hist. p. 50. to 56. They (the Quakers) have likewise Meetings like to
those we call Classes, and Provincial and National Synods or Councils; these
Conventions are celebrated, but so as to allot each Sex, both Men and Women,
their distinct and particular Meetings, other Meetings are appointed every
Month; others every three Months; in which they consider their Provincial
affairs: In these they inspect into, and recognize all Books that are to be
printed, after they have been perused and approved by the Censors appointed for
that purpose. The Acts of these Meetings are put into Registers; they have
Anniversary Synods in every considerable Kingdom, to whom belong the Care and
Administration of all the Affairs of that Kingdom. In England (their
Metropolis) they have a fixed Anniversary Synod on the third day of Penticost,
continuing sittting 4 or 5 days together. They have Delegates also come to this
Synod, from all their Churches, in all Counties or Places where the Quakers
obtain footing; but these must be such as are in the Ministry. At this Meeting
they make a Catalogue of the Sufferers for their Religion, discovering what
their Sufferings were, and for what causes they were inflicted [and by whom;]
when the Synods are dismissed all their Acts and Decisions are enregister'd by
the public Authority of the Synod, which are afterward copyed from the
Records in order to be printed and sent to all the Synods of their Associates
throughout the World. They have no President to their Synod, which place say
they, is supplied by the Holy Ghost; but they have a Clark who marks down every
thing moved by the Assembly. Moreover, it is their custom in their Houses
never to express a Religious Duty with an outward voice; as Praying to God,
craving a Blessing ever they take Meat or go to Bed, till they feel the
impulsion of the Spirit, etc.,



Having contracted the sense of several pages wherein my Author relate the Way,
Manner, and Method of the Quakers Church Government and Family Behavior; now I
shall make it my business to show how Quakerism grows, increases, and makes its
progress in and by these Ways and Methods; and thereby discover not only that
Quakerism tends to root up the Foundations of the Christian Religion,
Instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, who so loved the World, that he laid down
his precious Life for lost Man, but also tends to unhinge the Government both
of Church and State; and in order to make some further discovery hereof, I
shall digest the matter into a few Heads, and speak briefly and distinctly to
each in their place.

1. The Quakers in their Synods have no President; the Holy Ghost supplying
that Office. 2. The Quakers at their Synods make a Catalogue of them which
suffer for their Religion, what they suffer, and by whom. 3. That the Quakers
at their Synods inspect Books to be printed, and recognize the same. 4. About
the Women's distinct Meetings, and their way of Government. 5. The Quakers
custom observed in not Praying to God in their Families, nor craving a
blessing before they Eat. 6. About their Anniversary Synods, particularly that
at London, with some of its Fruits and Effects.
And lastly with some observations upon a passage in the General History p.
110. The Quakers also could not but Love King William, and embrace him as their
most effectual Defender, etc. And so shall conclude these seven particulars.

1. The Quakers have no President in their Synod, which place they say is
supplied by the Holy Ghost, etc.

This is the great Foundation upon which the Church of Rome build their Faith,
touching the Doctrine of infallibility; and of which they mightily boast over
all Protestant Churches: For, though all true Protestants believe that the Holy
Ghost is with, and will continue with his Church to the end of the World,
according to Matthew. 28. yet that thereby any Synod, Council, or Church is
infallible in their Precepts and Councels; that as such, they are to be
indispensably obeyed, as was the Precepts of the inspired Apostles; this they
deny; and none hold it but the Papists and Quakers: And as this vain glorying
of infallibility in the Papists has been refuted, so it will be in the Quakers
also; and in order to it let us examine how, and in what manner the Holy Ghost
is the President of the Quakers Counsels and Synods, etc.

It is written John 5. 23. For the Father judges no man, but has committed
all judgment to the Son v. 27. and has given him Authority to execute judgment
also, because he is the Son of man: And to this agrees that Apostolical saying,
Acts 17. 31. Because he has appointed a day in which he will judge the world
in righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained; whereof he has given
assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead. Now this Text
in St. John the Quakers do not like it as translated, and therefore to bend the
Scripture to serve their design, and to quadrate to their principles, they have
perverted these Scriptures in Josiah Coal's Works p. 93. saying; All Judgment
being committed to the Light that Lights every Man, the Light that is in
every Man, must of necessity be Judge of all controversies, etc. So that, it
plainly appears from hence, as also in my First Chapter in the First Part. That
whereas God Almighty has committed all Judgment to the Son; and has ordained
him to be Judge of quick and dead, because he is the Son of Man. Therefore the
Quakers translate this Prerogative from the Son of God, Christ Jesus, to their
Light, which by their Logic is the Son of Man which I deny; and this Light to
whom they say all Judgment is committed, and which they have in them, must be
Judge of all controversies, and consequently their President, which deserves
the casting Voice. No marvel then that the Quakers are not concerned to
vindicate our Bible against the contempt cast upon it by the Papists, as says
the same Josiah Coal ibid. p. 104. I find the rest of his Book [i. e. A. S. the
Roman Catholick] consists of diverse Arguments, in which he controverts with
Sectaries, and their Bibles and Ministers whose cause I am not engaged in;
therefore it does not concern me to Answer his Charges against them, etc. No,
what neither Sectaries, their Bibles nor Ministers? Surely though he thought
himself not engaged to vindicate the Sectaries, nor their Ministers; yet, if as
they pretend to the Parliament, they do believe the Scriptures to be Divine,
and left us by Men Divinely Inspired; and that they are a rule of Faith and
Behavior, they ought to have vindicated the Bible at least. Well, but some may
say what did this A. S. the Papists call the Bible, that they the Quakers think
themselves thus unconcerned to vindicate. I Answer, it is his 14th Chapter, and
which the same Josiah Coal has printed, as an Abettor and Co-workers with him
in p. 113. to 116 of his Works. The contempt the Papists cast on the Bible, and
which the Quakers are not at all concerned to vindicate is, viz. Protestant
Sectarian Ministers and Preachers, who stand in a Pulpit or Tub, with such a
brazen Faced Book as is their unjust, corrupt, and perverse Bible in their
hand, etc.

Oh the deceit of this People! What do they pretend to own the Bible only for
their own ends, to obtain their Liberty? and when the Papists vilify and
contemn it, and call it a brazen Faced Book, a corrupt and perverse Book, and
they not concerned hereat: Well, I do still hope that some will be concerned to
vindicate the Holy Bible from the contempt of the Papists, calling it a brazen
Faced Book, perverse Book; and from the contempt of the Quakers who call it
Death, Dust, Beastly ware, Carnal, Serpents-meat, etc.

2. That the Quakers at their Synods make Catalogues of Sufferers for their
Religion, and what they Suffer, and by whom, etc.

I have spoken to this Head largely in the 4th Chapter of the first Part, and
therein showed how they boast of their Sufferings; how they Augment and make
them more than they are; yea, put them in their Monuments Sufferers 20 l. when
they are so far from that, that they have gotten 10 l. clear into pocket, as in
the case of Samuel Cater. I have made it appear likewise, as my Author says,
Genesis Hist. p. 137. that they amplify their Sufferings, viz. A scratch, a pinch,
or a blue spot for a grievous Torment and bloody Wound, which may be well
observed in most of the Monuments which these Men have left of their
Sufferings, etc.

3. That the Quakers inspect their Books to be printed after approved by their
Censors, etc.

From whence let it be noted, that if their Books be thus inspected and
approved by their approved Censors then are the whole answerable for the Errors
contained in those Books, and for all the horrible Blasphemies in them. But
their case is still worse; for suppose any one or more of them, be moved as he
pretends to write a Message, Warning or Exhortation to a Nation, People, or
Society, as the Word of the Lord God, their frequent pretense. This Book is
first sent up to London for inspection and approbation, to one of these
Meetings or Synods; where their Light is President, and made infallible Judge,
having all Judgment committed to it in Heaven and in Earth: this Synod thus
Assembled shall afterward vary the Title and change the Matter to make it
harmonize with their design; and when this Writer Dies and leaves 20 or 30
Books thus approved, and thus sent abroad; the surviving Synod shall take these
Books, and again alter them; put in and take out a second time what they
please, then re-print them again: And what is become of their Infallibility
now? They had their President at their first inspection; what, could he not
then see and discern clearly? but that here must be a new inspection? was not
their President [their Light] the same? For, either the Quakers write as they
are moved by the Eternal Spirit of God, or they do not; if they do, then they
are equal with the Apostles Writings, and then the Judgment denounced Rev. 22.
18, 19. If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto them the
plagues that are written in this Book: And if any man shall take away from the
words of the book of this prophesy, God shall take away his part out of the
book of life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are written
in this book, etc. This reward they must expect; Again, if they do not, then
are they most horrible Deluders and great Deceivers when they write thus, this
is the word of the Lord God to you the Inhabitants of Bristol, or the like; and
they believe it not; they do not believe the Author to be so moved and
commissioned; and forasmuch as they served the Works of Edward Burrow, W.
Smith, George Fox, Is. Pennington; so viz. altered, added and diminished to my
certain knowledge: I do thereupon affirm that they are not the Works of Fox,
Burrow, Pennington and Smith, but the Quakers in general, and they are
answerable for their Errors notwithstanding each title assert the same. Thus
has Quakerism been carried on; thus has it grown and taken its progress, by
Cheats Frauds and Hypocrisies.

4. About their Women's Meetings, and their manner and way of their Female
Government.

Having by my Book de Christiana Liberate, etc. not only treated at large on
this head, but also been instrumental thereby, in giving that Image a deadly
blow, insomuch as that in some part of the County of Suffolk, as well as in
diverse other Counties in England, there is not a distinct Woman's Meeting to be
seen nor heard of: But yet since it is mentioned in the Genesis Hist. p. 50. They
have likewise Meetings like those we call Classes and Provincial, and National
Synods, or Councils. These Conventions are celebrated oftener or seldomer as the
number of their Churches is, but so as to allot each Sex, Men and Women,their
distinct and particular Meetings, etc. I say, since the Relation of their
Women's Meetings are here brought to light, which many think are so dead and
dying as that it is hard to find one in many places, and that by way of
commendation as I take it, I shall therefore briefly touch upon the principal
Heads, and Orders, both of its novel, rise, and arbitrary Government; and
chiefly for this reason, because in all the Orders there is not so much as one
Scripture proof mentioned to confirm and to strengthen the same, even like
William Smith's Primmer and Catechism, which contain more than a 100 pages;
yet, in all the Treatise there is not one verse of Scripture quoted, nor that I
remember, one exhortation to read the Scriptures in their Family; and in his
Works in Folio do I find very few Scripures quoted, if any, and them that are
quoted much perverted and abused; but to the matter. Of Women's Meetings see an
abstract of a Letter from G. F. who was the first mover and setter of them up,
viz.

Dear Friends, To whom is my Love:
It would be well, and be of service to have a Woman's Meeting that you may
assist and inform the Men of necessities in what you cannot do your selves, and
so it would do well for the Women to have a distinct Meeting by themselves once
a Month in the County Town, meeting together about the Tenth hour of the day,
and keep a little Stock amongst themselves.

George Fox.


This Letter was wrote about 1670. pursuant to his motion for the Establishment
of a Woman's distinct Meetings; but yet in many places they came on slowly, and
they made but small progress in this Administration of their Female Church
Government, for it met very early with opposition from amongst themselves; and
especially when the observation of it came to be imposed, as a thing necessary,
which many looked upon a thing indifferent; and therefore the Anniversary Synod
confirmed it in all Points by one of their Acts, Anno 1675. A Copy thereof
follows, viz.

London, th. 3d. Month 1675. To all Monthly and Quarterly Meetings and
elsewhere, etc. touching Women's Meetings.
It is our Judgment and Testimony in the word of God's Wisdom, that the Rise
and Practice setting up and establishing Men's and Women's [distinct] Meetings in
the Church of Christ in this our Day and Generation, is according to the Mind
and Counsel of God, and done in the ordering and leading of his Eternal Spirit;
and that it is the duty of all Friends and Brethren, in all places, to be
diligent therein, and to encourage and further each other in that blessed Work;
and particularly that Friends and Brethren in their respective Counties,
encourage their faithful Women in the settlement of the said Meetings; and if
any professing Truth [i.e. Quakerism] shall either directly or indirectly
discountenance or weaken the Hands of either Men or Women in the Work and
Service of the Lord, let such be admonished according to the order of the
Gospel, and if they receive it not but reject it, resist Counsel and persist in
the work of Division; We cannot but look upon them not in the unity of the
Church of Christ and order of the Gospel. Therefore let Friends go on in the
power of God, and in that, work for him, his Truth, and People, and not be
swayed or hindered by them or their opsitions.

Signed by William Penn Stephen Crispe John Burnyet George Whitehead Thomas
Salthouse Alex. Parker, etc.


This new order of George Fox's for Women's distinct Meetings being ratified,
and in all Points confirmed, and special orders (from above) given for the
strict observation of them. There was then but few that in plain words did care
to oppose them, notwitstanding their was not a word of Scripture, neither by
Fox nor their yearly Meeting offered to prove their proceedings Apostolical,
nor to warrant their Precept, nor to show a President since the days of Christ,
or before, that Women should hold a Court or Synod distinct by themselves, have
a Clark, a Book, a Purse, and the management of Church Government once a Month,
to meet in the County Town about the tenth hour, etc. according to the Order
and Institution of George Fox: And notwithstanding there was no Scripture
President nor Divine Authority to confirm this Order of George Fox: Yet you see
by this Anniversary Synod, it was ordained, enacted, and decreed, by, and with
the Assent of the Delegates and Representatives; that whoever discountenanced
them directly or indirectly, was ipso facto to be declared excommunicate, out
of the unity of their Church. I might enlarge, and show the Decree which went
forth from their Anniversary Synod 1677. Signed with 66 Names of the Foxonian
Quakers; condemning John Story, and John Wilkinson and their Party for refusing
subjection to the Decree above mentioned; as likewise another Letter from the
Storian Quakers out of the North, signed by 67 Quakers disdaining and utterly
condemning the Foxonian Quakers, and their Pride and Arrogance, who look upon
them not only to make Laws unscriptural, but when done to condemn such as did
not obey them, and over whom they had no power; but I rather refer to a Book
styled a Testimony against the 66 Judges, etc. and W. Rogers styled The
Christian Quaker distinguished from the Apostate and Innovator, etc. and my
Book aforecited, where both the said Letters are at large, and the controversy
thereabouts more largely handled.

I shall only add a Prophesy delivered in the Name of the Lord, in a Letter to
John Story, one of the opposers of the Women's Meetings before several Witnesses
the first of the first Month 1677. viz.

Oh John Story! what have thou done against the Lord and thy own Soul? Thou
have divided the Heritage of the Lord, and the good Ordinances which Christ
Jesus has set up in his Church, have thou contemned, especially Women's
Preaching, and Women's Meetings; therefore the Lord will throw contempt upon
thee; and if thou do not repent speedily, miserable will be thy end. Oh how
have thou lost thy Place and Dignity which thou had among the Saints in
Light? and now to be numbered amongst the Rebellious: If ever thou find
Mercy with the Lord, go home to the North with speed, and break up the divided
Meetings which thou and John Wilkinson has been Instrumental to divide from the
Body of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Anger of the Lord is chiefly against thee;
and thou art bound with two bonds, for the Church and Brethren have bound thee
on Earth, and thou art surely bound in Heaven; and this is the Testimony of
Jesus to thee; neither shall thou be able to get from under these bonds, till
thou art reconciled to the Brethren [i. e. submit to G. F. etc.] Oh have to the
Work abovesaid, least the wrath of the Lord overtake thee before it be done,
and be reconciled to George Fox, who is God's Friend, and the Servant of the
living God, and great Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ; have away into the
North for thy time is short; and go quickly, thou and thy brother, if possible,
you may bring again to the Body of Jesus Christ those ye have scattered, least
their blood be required at your hands: Arise quickly and be going, for this is
the word of the Lord to thee, viz. That this year shall thou [John Story] dye,
because thou have taught Rebellion against the living God.

Solomon Eccles.


I have recited the more of this Letter of Solomon Eccles for that it shows, 1.
That the Quakers believe that Women's Meetings are the Ordinances of Jesus
Christ. 2. That they pretend to have power to bind and loose. 3. That the only
way to find Mercy was to submit to George Fox, and consequently to obey and
observe his Laws. 4. That this false Prophesy, delivered in the Name of the
Lord, might be from Age to Age continued upon the Quakers, as a brand upon
their pretense to Prophesy; for when the said Solomon delivered this Message by
Letter to John Story, the said John was very ill, and not like to live; yet it
pleased God for the honor of his Name, and that these false pretenders might
be manifest, to give him length of days about 4 years after. 5. That they
accounted George Fox the great Apostle of our Lord Jesus Christ from the First
Instance. it is no marvel then that the Quakers have thrown off and rejected the
Ordinances of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, Instituted by Christ himself;
since Fox their Apostle have ordained Women's Meetings. From the 2d. That they
are one with the Pope, touching the power of the Church. From the 3d. That the
Merits and Satisfaction of Christ, as our Mediator and Intercessor, of his
Death and bitter Passion, are by the Quakers laid aside, if the only way to
find Mercy with God, be to be reconciled to the Quaker Church. From the 4th.
That the Quakers are not zealous for God by their cloaking and excusing this
false Prophesy of Solomon Eccles as well as diverse others of his Idolatrous
Practices; and by their owning him and his Books to the last, and never passing
a public censure upon him and his Books. From the 5th. That it is no marvel
that they are so much concerned to vindicate every little Pamphlet of their own
with great charge and industry; but when the Papists call our Bible a brazen
Faced, corrupt and false Bible; this they say in so many words, they are not
concerned to vindicate, this they leave to the Sectarian and Episcopalians to
do; for alas they have work enough besides; and as to the Bible, though the
Papists call it a brazen Faced Book false and corrupt, yet the Quakers are not
concerned to vindicate the Bible; and indeed how can they against the Papists,
for the Papists would soon reply, what do the Quakers blame us for calling your
Bible a brazen Faced Book, whilst you your selves call it Death, Dust, Beastly
Wares, Serpents Food? How then can you blame us, since we are Cousin Jermains,
and Dear Brethren in the common cause against the Church of England? Good God,
when I consider their deep Hypocrisy in their confession to the Parliament, I
am astonished at their impudence, and so I proceed to the next Head.

5. Moreover, says the Historian p. 55. it is also their custom in their
Houses, never to express a Religious Duty with an outward Voice, as praying to
God, craving his Blessing ever they take Meat, or go to Bed, till they feel the
impulsion of the Spirit.

This also is the fruit of Quakerism; read one of their Books styled A Music
Lecture, etc. p. 25. For where they [i. e. Christians] are, I was in
Performances, in Ordinances, in Family Duties, in Hearing, in Reading, in
Prayers, in Fastings; well, but when I came to bend my Mind to that of God in
me, which is Christ, then I begun to learn to be a Fool, insomuch, that I durst
not give God thanks for the Victuals that were set before me, etc.

Reader, this their practice is so well known in England, as well as in
Holland, that I need not to enlarge upon it; only take up a Lamentation when I
consider how many Thousand Families of Quakers there are in England, that never
prayed to God in their Houses, nor gave thanks for Blessings received with
outward Voice, since they turned Quakers, perhaps 20 or 30 years: What account
then will they be able to give at the great and terrible Day? Who have thus
bewitched the People from the practice of the Primitive Christians, Saints and
Martyrs, and all Protestant Churches to this day, unto the practice of the
Heathen that know no God, read Jeremiah 10. 25. Pour out thy fury upon the
heathen, and upon the families that call not on thy name! But, possibly they will
say, they think of God when they go to Bed, and when they receive the Comforts
of this Life; to which I answer; if that be enough, and that words are useless,
why then do their Teachers speak and pray in their Meetings with an audible
Voice, and sometimes at your own Houses when People are there? Is this their
practice only that they may be seen of Men? a thing I am jealous of; for if
they look upon it their Duty, why not a Duty incumbent upon the hearers also?
But they say in Burrow's Works p. 47. That is no command of God to thee, which
God commanded to others, unless they receive it a new as the Inspired Apostles
did. Thus have they taken away they Key of Knowledge from the People, I mean
the use of the Holy Scripture, which would instruct them better: Nay, this is
not all, but where the Spirit of Quakerism is in its full vigor; if they happen
to be in company with a Man of another Profession, whether Episcopalian,
Presbyterian, Independent, or Baptist, who crave a Blessing upon what they
receive, sits the Quaker with his Hat on, as a Testimony against that laudible
Practice.

6. They have Anniversary Synods in every considerable Kingdom, to whom belong
the Care and Administration of all the Affairs of that Kingdom. In England they
have a fixed Anniversary Synod on the third day of Penticost. Genesis Hist. p. 51.

This may be true, but of how dangerous a consequence both to Church and State
I am not able to determine, but time will further manifest: But the more they
increase and gain upon their People, and believe that they are the only true
Church, and as such, cannot err; that they have power to bind and loose; and
that their Precepts and Prescriptions are of equal Authority to that of the
Apostles, and thereupon ought to be indispensibly obeyed; I say, as this comes
to be received and embraced, the danger of these Anniversary Synods will be
seen more and more, and it may be when it is too late; for they not only already
think themselves capable to teach Judges, Justices, yea, and the Parliament
too. What is their Duty, what they may do, and what they may not do, and the
utmost confines of their Jurisdiction? particularly in the case of Heresy, of
which I have recited some Instances, and can hundreds more; as also by two of
their Anniversary Synods they have virtually, though not verbally, repealed great
part of two Statute Laws that of the 22 of C. II. and that clause of an Act of
Parliament made in the First of K. W. Ill. relating to Tithes by their yearly
Epistles, enregistred by Authority of their Anniversary Synods; I need not here
relate what an Influence their first Epistle had, and how little the Law was
regarded or observed the whole Nation is witness; and as to the last about
Tithes and Churchwarden Rates, which the Parliament took care to preserve in
their old Channel, in the same Law which indulge the Quakers in the exercise of
their persuasion; yet this very Law they Anno 1696. Charged implicitly with
Antichristianism, saying, p. 1. That all due care be taken against that grand
Oppression, and Antichristian Yoke of Tithes; that our Christian Testimony born
and greatly suffered for, be faithfully maintained against them, in all
respects, and against Steeple-house-rates, or Lays; as also against the burden
and imposition of Oaths, etc. Here we see Tithes are Antichristian, and their
Testimony Christian; a perfect Map of their whole Doctrine; the Parliament
Antichristian, the Quakers Christian; the Parliament great Oppressors, the
Quakers Oppressed, though they pay no more than their Neighbors; the Parliament
lay Antichristian Yokes upon the Quakers, the Quakers the only Christian
sufferers, and persecuted People of God; whose sufferings and persecutions are
greater and more unjust, than the sufferings of Christ, his Apostles and
Martyrs; for what was inflicted upon them, was duly executed by a Law; and to
this practice of ours agree that Doctrine of St. Edw. Burrow's, as it is
written in our Gospel, in the Book of our Holy Scriptures, which we at all
times stand ready to vindicate; vulgarly called Ed. Burrow's Works p. 501.
Witnesses we stand against Parliaments, Councels, Judges, Justices, who make
and execute Laws in their own wills over the Consciences of Men; and to such
Laws, Customs, Courts, or Arbitrary Usurped Dominion we cannot yield obedience,
etc. And therefore by this our Anniversary Decree, we Ordain and Enact, that
the Members of all our Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, and all other our
Associates in every Kingdom, Nation and County that adhere to us, and believe
us to be the universal Church of the First born, who cannot err, but are led by
an infallible Spirit; that all and every of our Disciples throw off all these
Antichristian Yokes of grand Oppression; and from henceforth stand faithful
Witnesses against Tithes as Antichristian, against Church Rates, against lawful
Oaths, against carrying Guns; and this, as the Historian says, is to go
through England and Wales, yea all the World over; and all that suffer for
their Stubborness and Antimagistratical Principles, by the same Edict is to be
taken into Record, who it is that suffer, for what cause they suffer, and on
what account. I have not time to set forth the dangerous consequences of these
Anniversary Synods, when they once gain upon the People that they are the only
universal Catholic Church, and as such cannot err; that as G. Whitehead
Teaches, the People are to believe as she believes: I say, on this Doctrine of
Infallibity hangs a load of dangers; the Parliament say one thing, the
Anniversary Synod at Devonshire-house another; they now argue privately, but in
time may dispute the Point publicly: Infallibility sticks at nothing provided
it be for the Holy Church in the Papists Dialect, or for Truth's sake in the
Quakers: They are Terms Synonymous, respecting their Authors, and W. Penns
Books cited declare plainly how vigorous he was for his near Friends and dear
kindred in the late Reign; and the Quakers addressed from their Anniversary
Synods run in the same Channel, and flow from the same Fountain, for K. J. II.
and against the Church of England, there came forth public Addresses Annually,
besides Books every Month in favor of the then Government and against the
Church: But since King William came to the Crown, never a public Anniversary
Address to King W. nor one Book wrote in favor of the present Governments, as
anon will appear. And thus Quakerism, like the Snake in the Grass, creeps on
undiscovered, or at least little notice taken how she secretly Smites, and
privately Stings, and throws out her Poison both at Church and State; She Will
Arraign, Impeach, Try, Judge, Summons, Dialogue, Condemn both Magistrate and
Minister, Ruler and People; yet if she be but touched, Oh how she winches and
giffles up and down! crying she is wronged, she is abused, and all is malice
that is said of her; whilst she takes the liberty to abuse, traduce, stigmatize
and calumniate all other People. This is the Temper of this clamorous Woman;
and though I do solemnly profess, as in the sight of God, Angels and Men, I am
not for Persecution, neither do I desire, nor none need to fear that our King
and Parliament should follow the French King's example in what is of the nature
of Persecution or Cruelty; yet on the other hand, when they perceive the
Ingratitude of this insolent People, they probably may take some measures to
stop the stream of Heresy which spreads like a Leprosy through the Nation:
And forasmuch as something that is praise worthy on the French King's part, in
granting the Ministry of the reformed Churches leave to hold a national Synod,
and for the exemplariness of the French Protestants zeal for God, care of his
Church, subjection to the Laws according to the Evangelical Doctrine of Christ,
his Apostles and Martyrs. I shall set down a few things worthy observation,
from the 28 Synod held at Charenton near Paris the 26 day of December 1644. as
in the 2 Vol. of John Quick's Hist. p. 4. 28. to 437. viz.

The Sessions being opened with Prayer, the Lord Marquis of Clermont, General
Deputy, presented the Writ given forth by His Majesty's Command, for calling
the Synod as follows.

This day being the 12 of February 1644. the King being then at Paris, upon the
most humble Petition of his Subjects of the pretended reformed Religion, to
permit them the calling and holding a national Synod, desiring to gratify, and
treat favorably his said Subjects, has permitted, and does permit them, the
Convocation of a national Synod next to Charenton; but with this condition,
that they treat in it of none other matters but of those which he allowed them;
and that the Commissioner, whom His Majesty shall please to appoint, be present
in the said Synod, as has been accustomed, in witness whereof, His Majesty
has commanded me to issue out this Writ, which he has Signed with his own
Hand, and caused it to be counter-signed by me his Commissioner and Secretary
of State, and of his Command,

Signed in the Original Lewis, and a litt'e lower Phelipeaux.

The Lord Commissioner unto the Synod.
Messieurs,
AS it is a very great honor to me to be Commissionated to assist in your
Synod, and to acquaint you with his Will and Pleasure, so also have I great
deal of joy and satisfaction to behold this illustrious Assembly, chosen out of
all the Provinces of this Kingdom, and that I can tell you by word of Mouth,
which is to assure you of their Majesty's good will unto you, and protection of
you, and of all your Churches; and of the entire execution of the Edicts of
Pacification, so long as you continue your selves within the bounds of your
Duty, Subjection, and Fidelity, which you owe unto their Majesty's, they being
the higher Powers set over you by God, entrusted with the supreme Authority,
and your lot and portion being the honor of obedience unto them; whereunto you
stand obliged by your Birth, the dictates of your Consciences, and the Favors
you daily receive from their Majesty's, and by all kinds of consideration both
general and particular; and observe it I beseech you as a singular mark of
their Majesty's Favor unto you, that there be of your Religion in the Kingdom
Persons of the highest Quality; There be amongst you most Noble and Illustrious
Dukes and Peers, Mareschals of France, Generals of Armies, Magistrates and
Judges of Sovereign Courts; and their Majesty's now this very day, out of their
great confidence they have of your Loyalty and Fidelity have granted you this
Assembly at the very Gates of the Metropolis of this Kingdom, in the very face
and view of all France, and of this infinite People of Paris, vastly different
from you in Manners and Humors, Inclination and Religion, who will be severe
Witnesses and Judges over all your Actions.

And that all things may be done in that Order prescribed me by their
Majesty's, I am in their Names commanded to acquaint you, that all Ministers
who are not Natural born Subjects but Strangers, are to be excluded this Synod,
and that none may assist to Vote in it who has not Letters of Deputation from
his Provincial Synod; and that during the time it be held, you may have no
Communication with Foreigners or other suspected Persons; and forasmuch as
your Assemblies are not by any legal constitution a Body Politic, their
Majesty's have forbidden you to meddle in State Affairs or matters of Justice,
because your Synod has no power to judge of such matters; but only to treat of
Points of Doctrine, and Church Discipline. Moreover their Majesty's do forbid
you to print any Books in any place whatsoever, concerning your Religion, which
are not attested [i. e. licensed] by two manuel Certificates of two Ministers
at the least, under pain of confiscation of the whole Impression; nor may you
denounce any excommunication against any Minister or others, who shall change
their Religion for that of the Roman Catholics, nor treat them reproachfully
neither by Word nor Writing. Moreover, when they speak of the Pope, they are
not to call him Antichrist, nor to treat him disrespectfully; nor shall they
tax the Roman Church with Idolatry, nor the Sacraments, nor Ceremonies thereof
as humane Inventions and Idolatry, etc. Nor to make Collections of Money.


The Moderator's Answer.
We thankfully acknowledge the great Goodness and Mercy of Almighty God, in
answering the Prayers of his poor Churches with his heavenly Blessing, and
their Majesty's condescension in accepting our most humble Petition, presented
by the Lords of our general Deputies, and granting us this privilege of holding
this Synod, and committing the inspection of it unto a Person most Illustrious
for his Virtues, and well deserving that high Place of Dignity and Honor in
the first and chiefest Parliament of the Kingdom: All these and many other
considerations do enforce our Souls with a sweet and pleasing violence, to
break forth into enlarged Praises, and enflamed Thankfulness unto their
Majesty's, yea, and in most ardent Supplications unto our God, for the
preservation of their Sacred Persons, his Benediction upon their Government,
the Glory of their Crowns, under whose comortable shadows the Churches enjoying
a sweet Peace, will never have any other desire or thought than to practice
faithfully, and conscientiously, that most express command of our Lord and
Savior by his Apostle St. Peter, to fear God and honor the King; and that
with a most entire and sincere obedience.

And as we have no design to do it, so we shall never admit any persons to sit
as a Member of our National Synod, who has not a Deputation, etc. nor shall we
hold any correspondency with, nor receive any Letters coming from Foreigners,
nor return any answers to them, unless that my Lord Commissioner, who
represents His Majesty's Person, shall have first perused them; nor will we
debate about matters of State, nor make any Orders in relation to them; nor
shall we set up Provincial Counsels in opposition to His Majesty's Will; nor,
as His Majesty has demanded of us, will we suffer those Canons of our National
Synods, concerning the approbation of Books, that shall be printed on matters
of Religion to be violated nor shall we excommunicate any of those Persons who
quit the Communion of our Churches, for we do not arrogate to our selves any
Jurisdiction over them, from that minute in which they left us; nor shall we
tolerate any Sermons fraught with any injurious and reproachful Language
against the Members of the Church of Rome; nor suffer that Moneys be collected,
etc.


Thus Reader you see, the Protestants ask and the King grants; the King limits
them, sets them bounds; the Protestants promise to obey. 1. Not to admit
Strangers to sit in their Synods. 2. Nor to hold correspondency with
Foreigners. 3. Nor will they debate about State matters. 4. Nor make any
Orders relating to them. 5. Nor print Books unlicens'd. 6. Nor excommunicate
Persons that quit their Society; for they do not arrogate to themselves such a
power, nor conceive themselves the only true Church in the World, like the old
Strumpet and the young Harlot. 7. Nor will they tolerate any Sermons [or
Books] fraught with injurious and reproachful Language; nor will they suffer
Money to be collected, which as it is called the Sinew of War, so it may be
called the Nerve of Heresy. I hope to such as will read this Book, and others
I have wrote, will not stand in need of proof that the Quakers are guilty of
all that the Christians are herein said to be thus innocent of. Having showed
the danger of the Quakers Anniversary Synods, upon their Principle of
Infallibility, read Mat. 22. 21. Tit. 3. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 17. Romans 13. 1,
2, 3. and Tindal's Works (i. e.) The obedience of a Christian Man, etc. p. 111.
viz. For God has made the King in every Realm Judge over all; he that
resists the King resists God; if the Subjects Sin, they must be brought to
the King's Judgment; if the King Sin he must be brought to the Judgment of God,
and as it is to resist the King, so it is to resist his Officers, which are
sent to execute the King's Commandment; for it is written, let every Soul be
subject to the higher Power; here is no Man exempt, but all Souls must obey;
and so I proceed to the next Head.

7. Genesis Hist. p. 110. The Quakers also could not but love him (King William)
and Embrace him as their most Effectual Defender, without the hindrance or fear
of Molestation.

HEre I find my Author as far out proportionably, as in his high Commendation
of William Penn, Sect. 2. For alas! As streams run from a full Fountain, so do
and did the Quakers run to the late K. J. II. for out of the abundance of the
Heart the Mouth speaks. But of this I will not be mine own Judge; but as a
Demonstration thereof, I will recite a few of their words out of some of their
Addresses to the late K. J. II. And 1st.

London, April, 1687. We pray God to bless the King, His Royal Family and
People with Grace and Peace; and that after a long and prosperous Reign here,
he may receive a better Crown amongst the Blessed: Which is the Prayer of, etc.
The second.

Scotland, June, 1687. We cannot but with grateful Hearts both admire and
acknowledge the Providence of God that made the Kings retiring into our Country
(i. e. Scotland, 1679) give a happy turn to his Affairs, to the defeating and
disappointing the designs of his Enemies. -- We do justly conceive our selves
obliged, by a special tie, to praise God for his Goodness, in carrying the King
through, and over all his troubles, since by the same Providence, and at the
same time, by which the Lord began in that more observable manner, to evidence
his care of him, he made him the happy Instrument to deliver us from our
troubles. So that the prosperity of his Affairs, and our peaceable fruition of
the exercise of our Consciences bears the same date the 3d. London, August
1678. We pray God save the King, and deliver him out of all his Enemies Hands;
both Spiritual and Temporal Enemies, Amen.

Mark Reader, here is Address upon Address, and Prayer after Prayer for the
late King James II. which sound his Fame from England to Scotland, and from
thence Eccoed back from Stotland to England, in the highest strain, and most
elegant Style the Quakers could invent, suitable to their singular Dialect. I do
not mention this practice whilst he was King of England, and seated on the
Throne as an Evil in it self, or inconsistent with their Duty, and the Duty of
all his Subjects; for it is my Judgment that we ought to pray for all Kings
which God in his Providence sets over us, without disputing their Titles; and
to obey every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, knowing that there is no
Power but of God, the Powers that be are ordained of God, and who so resist the
Powers, they resist the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves Damnation according to these Scriptures, Romans 13. Tit. 3. 1. 1 Pet.
2 cap. Mat. 22. 21. I say I do not recite these Addresses and Prayers made by
the Quakers to, and for the late King, as an Evil in it self, for I do believe
we ought to pray for all Kings, whether they be Pagan or Christian, Papist or
Protestant, good or bad, Orthodox, or Hetrodox, Protectors or Persecutors, for
such was the practice of all Gods faithful Saints and Servants, from Abraham
downwards to this day, as these Scriptures show in the Margin. Ger. 20. and 47.
7. 10. Exodus 1. 6. to the end cap. 2. 23, 24, 25. cap. 3. 7, 10. 10 Acts 7. 18.
to 35. Psalm 90. 1. Josephus Anti. l. 6. cap. 5. 67, 1. Sam. 8. 22. cap. 9. 16.
17. cap. 15. 1, 9. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. 1 Chronicles. 28. 4. 1 Kings 18. 25. Jer. 33. 20.
Ps. 132. 11. to 14. 2 Samuel 7. 25. cap. 16. 16. Ezr. 6. 3. to 14. Joseph An. 11.
cap. 4. Ezekiel. 19. 10. Exodus 22. 26. 1 Pet. 2. Mat. 22. etc.
But that which disappoints both the Author of this Genesis Hist. my self and
thousands more is, that they should thus heartily pray for, and address
themselves unto the late King, and write so many Books in favor of the then
Government, calling him brave King, etc. God and Caesar are both of a mind, etc.
A sensible Prince, etc. An Instrument in God's hand, etc. and notwithstanding
all this and much more that might be said on the same Subject, yet when King
William, his present Majesty, whom God preserve, came to the Crown, and the
very first Year of His Reign, did, by Law indulge them in the exercise of their
persuasion, and give them all the ease they reasonably could desire, yet they
made not one Address to him, nor one Prayer for him, as they did for the late
King; no, nor yet wrote one Book in favor of the Government, which made me and
others admire at their ingratitude; for, I was so far of the same mind with the
Author of the Genesis Hist. That I thought the Quakers could not but love K. W.
III. and embrace him as their most effectual Defender; but when I came to prove
them, and try them, and measure them by their Fruits, and to consider that in
two years space they made 4 Addresses to the late K. J. II. and that in 4 years
time they had not made one Address to K. W. III. I then altered my mind, and by
reading of their said Addresses, and their Books wrote by W. Penn, I found that
the stream of their Affections did run like a mighty torrent to the late K. J.
II. when there was not the least issuing drop of Affection run to His present
Majesty; and this put me upon writing a Letter to the Quakers, August 1690. p.
2. Now if you would be constant; then, why do you not pray for, and address
your selves to K. William and Q. Mary as heartily, and as publicly as you did
to, and for, K. J. whom you called and said, a Brave King, God and Caesar are
both of a mind, pray Godbless the King and His Royal Family. These and many
more [magnifying Expressions] were published through the Nations: But no
Salutation, no Message, no Prayer for, nor no Address to K. W. and Q. M. as if
you were struck mute at the loss of your brave King, whom you said was of the
same mind with God: What can you say for your selves? Are you like those 1 Samuel
10. 27. viz. The Children of Belial, who said, how shall this Man save us? And
they despised him, and they brought him no presents [no Addresses nor Prayers]
but the King held his peace. Oh you unworthy and ungrateful Persons! Has not
King William granted you the Liberty of your Consciences, and confirmed it by a
Law? What, have you nothing to say for King William? Nay, you are so far from
that, that when His Majesty appointed a Fast, for the prosperity of his Armies,
you not only Preached against the Fast, but also, to weaken the Hearts and
Hands of his Friends, you did vehemently cry down all Wars and Fighting. Is
your zeal for the Protestant cause, and the Protestant interest quite lost and
gone, or is it gone to Rome? You have had several yearly Meetings since this
King's Reign, but not the least public acknowledgment of the special Favor
showed you by the King and Parliament; I will not say but some of your People
may be heartily thankful, yet it plainly appears, that your Leaders and
Teachers [and Anniversary Synods] are of another mind; for had you been as
hearty and zealous for the present Government, as in point of gratitude you
should and ought to have been, your People had not been so divided, and so
confused touching the Protestant interest, as now they are; the sad and evil
Effects of which must, and will be laid at your doors. Consider what is said,
repent and amend your ways, for this Government and the Protestant Interest are
so linked together, that those who are not true to the one cannot be true to
the other, whatever their pretenses are, or may be.

This I wrote, and caused it to be printed and dispersed as a Testimony against
their lukewarmness to the present Government, and their Zeal to, and for the
late Reign as this Section, and Sections 5 6 do make plainly appear.

Obj. But possibly some may object, that these are private Addresses by some
few particulars, and be ready to demand, whether they ever made a public
Anniversary Address, that thereby they might, in all Kingdoms, show their
Loyalty to the late King, etc.

Ans. Yea, that they did, and that it may more evidently appear, that William
Penn's Books mentioned in Section V. VI. run in the same channel, I will write
part of their said Anniversary Address, Anno 1688. viz.

The humble Address of the People called Quakers, from their yearly Meeting,
the 6th. of the Month called June, 1688. viz.
We the Kings peaceable Subjects, from diverse parts of his Dominions, being met
together in this City, after our usual manner to inspect the affairs of our
Christian Society throughout the World, think it our Duty humbly to represent
to him the blessed Effects, the Liberty he has graciously granted his People to
worship God, according to their Consciences, has had both on our Persons and
Estates; for whereas we formerly had long and sorrowful Lists brought to us,
from almost all parts of his Territories, of Prisoners and the spoil of Goods
by violent and ill Men, upon account of Conscence. We bless God, and thank the
King, the Goals are every where clear, except in cases of Tithes, and the
repairs of Parish Churches, and some few about Oaths; and we do in all Humility
lay it before the King to consider the hardships our Friends are yet under for
Conscience sake, in those respects, being in the one chiesly exposed to the
present Anger of the offended Clergy, who have therefore imprisoned some of
them till death, and in the other they are rendered very unprofitable to the
public and themselves; for both in reference to Freedoms in Corporations,
Probats of Wills and Testaments, and Administrations, Answers in Chancery and
Exchequer, Trials of our just Titles and Debts, proceeding in our Trades in the
Custom house, serving the Office of Constables, etc. They are disabled and
great advantages taken against them; unless the King's Favor do interpose; and
as we humbly hope he may relieve us, so we confidently assure our selves he
will ease us what he can.

Now since it has pleased thee, O King, to renew to all thy Subjects by thy
last Declaration, thy gracious Assurances to pursue the Establishment of this
Liberty and Property, upon an unalterable Foundation; and in order to it to
hold a Parliament in Nov. next at farthest; we think our selves deeply engaged
to renew our assurances of Fidelity and Affection, and with God's help, intend
to do our part for the effecting so blessed and glorious a Work; that so it may
be out of the power of any one party to hurt another upon the account of
Conscience: And as we firmly believe that God will never desert this righteous
cause of Liberty, nor the King in maintaining of it; so we hope by God's Grace
to let the World see, we can honestly and heartily appear for Liberty of
Conscience, and be inviolably true to our own Religion, whatever the Folly or
Madness of some Men on that account may suggest to the contrary.

These are the sayings of their Anniversary Synod. Here you see is nothing
wanting but bended knees; here is in all Humility, in all Fidelity, with all
Affection, yea, all, all, all, all Prayers for him; for long Life, for a
prosperous Reign, Laud and Praise in the highest; for his Deliverance, for the
defeating his Enemies [the excluders,] yea, it would be too long to enumerate
them: Besides, Book after Book in favor of the Government; and Letter after
Letter printed and dispersed; a first, a second and a third for the repealing
the Penal Laws and Tests, that so the Papists might sit in Parliament to
Establish them a new Order, even St. George's Order as completely as their
Grandfather Ignatius Loyola had his Order confirmed by the Popes Bulls, October
3d. Anno 1540 as at large set forth in a Discourse concerning the Idolatry of
the Church of Rome, etc. p. 281. But God in his righteous Judgment deserted
their King, their Cause; and will in time more fully discover their Order to be
of the same tendency, and carried on by the same Holy cheats, that Ignatius
Loyola's Order of the Jesuits was. And so much briefly to show how Quakerism
grew, and after what manner it made its progress; and how they bent their
strength against the Protestant Interest, Church of England, and all Orthodox
Religion.

But Reader, did you ever hear of an Anniversary Address to King William? No
such matter: Did you ever see a Book put forth in favor of the present
Government? No such matter; no, no, it is as in my printed Letter 1690. above
recited. No Salutation, no Message, no Prayer for, nor no Address to, King
William III from this their yearly Synod, nor a Book wrote in favor of the
Government; no, in all Humility, no, in all Affection, no public Prayers for
his long and prosperous Reign, no Laud and Praise that his Enemies are
defeated; here is no, no, no, no. Come George Whitehead, and foreman of your
Anniversary Synod; what can you say for your selves? Why are you mute? Why have
you not brought forth one public Anniversary Synodical Address this seven
years? nor public Prayers; or, are you still like those we read on, 1 Samuel 10.
27. But the children of Beliel said, how shall this man save us? and they
despised him, and brought him no presents [no Prayers, no Addresses] but the
King held his peace. But, that I may not leave out one cluster of the Quakers
Vine by which Quakerism has been nourished, I shall now mention a notable
passage, to discover the Quakers aversion to the present Government, viz. The
Widow Whitrow, formerly a Quaker, wrote a Book in favor of the Government about
four years since, but it did so cross the Quakers current, that they made an
Order for the calling it in, and suppressing the same; the which I have,
together with their not addressing His present Majesty, more largely handled in
my Book New Rome unmasked p. 26. to 32.

Obj. Well, but may some say, though it be granted that since His Majesty King
William came to the Crown, the Quakers have made no public address to him,
though it was frequent with them so to do to the late King, which we must
acknowledge do show of what stamp they are; yet Anno 95. they gave out a Paper
they styled Their Ancient Testimony renewed, with respect to the King and
Government; and touching the present Association; where they have these words.

And we believe that the timely discovery and prevention of the late barbarous
Design, and Mischievous Plot against the King and Government, and the sad
Effects it might have had, is an eminent Mercy from Almighty God; for which we,
and the whole Nation have great cause to be humbly thankful to him, and to pray
for the continuance of his Mercies to them and us. From a Meeting of the said
People in London, the 23d. of the first Month called March 1695/6. The recited
Paper was given into the Lords House, where their Bill for their Affirmation,
to pass instead of an Oath, was under the Lords consideration, it having passed
the House of Commons, and I being there, asked one of the Clarks to give me one
of the said Papers, which having perused, I saw clearly their Juggles: For,
first it was not signed by any Body, neither had they once mentioned what King
they meant; and I knowing their reserve and cunning way of insinuating, and yet
to leave a back door to creep out at on occasion, I wrote a Reply to their
Paper, which is as follows, somewhat contracted, viz.

A brief Reply to the Quakers Paper, Entitled The Ancient Testimony of the
People called Quakers, renewed with respect to the King and Government, and
touching the present Association, etc.
By Fra. Bugg, Sen.
Friends,
YOur Paper is not signed, and thereby seems fallacious from the top to the
bottom; for what credit can be given to a Paper not signed, only said to be
given out at a Meeting in London; the King's Proclamations are said to be given
out at His Court at Whitehall, but not without his Name W. Rex; but it seems
the Quakers conceive themselves of that credit, that they need not sign their
Papers, that is below them, or else it must be to leave room for an excuse, or a
back door when time serves; I grant they say they pray for the King, but what
King they do not tell; no, that is a secret; they also say they cannot sign the
Association, and thereby declare the King their rightful and lawful King, for
Conscience sake; and yet they tell you, that their not signing is not in
opposition to his being declared the rightful and lawful King; who says so? no
Body, for there is no Name to it, nor from what Meeting it was given out;
whether Yearly, Quarterly, Monthly, or second-day Meeting; or whether from 2 or
3 Quakers under a Hedge.

Again, you say you cannot sign the Association, in regard you cannot take
revenge for our selves nor others: That Is strange; what, had you not a Quaker
lately Murdered on the Road, between Kingsland and Shoreditch, you know you
had; and did you not prosecute the Murderer? you know you did, and proffered 50
l. reward for the discovery of the Person, and found him, apprehended him, and
had him tried at the Old Bailey, London, where he was condemned, and afterward
hanged in Chains near Stone Bridge, and all this prosecution by Quakers. Can
you revenge your selves of the Blood of a private Person, and can you not sign
the Association to avenge the Blood of your Prince for Conscience sake? what,
are your Consciences so nice, that you can neither say nor do any thing for the
public good? What, can you receive benefit and protection from the Government;
and see your Prince every day ventures his Life to defend you in your Liberty
and Property? and can you not sign the Association, Defend your Prince, and
Assist the Government for Conscience sake: You may yet remember how frequent it
was with you to address the late King James; but you know you never made a
public Address to His present Majesty; no, your Consciences will not allow
you, neither to pray for, address your selves to, nor yet to sign the
Association in defense of His Majesty; nor yet sign your Paper, wherein you
pretend to pay some kind of respect for the Liberty you enjoy: you could tell
Richard Cromwell he should prosper, and that you would be a strength to him, and
stand by him in the day of Trouble; and defend him in his just Government; see
Burrow's Works, etc. You could tell the late King in your Anniversary Address
above mentioned, that you thought your selves deeply engaged to renew your
assurances of Fidelity and Affection; and that by God's help you did intend to
do your parts; but you cannot sign the Association, and thereby, stand by, and
defend King William, nor renew your assurances of Fidelity and Affection for
Conscience sake: What Conscience then is yours, that thus differs from the
Consciences of the Lords and Commons, and all other dutiful Subjects of our
Sovereign Lord the King? Or, has no body any Conscience but you?

Signed in concurrance with the loyal Association this 27th of March, 1696. by
Fra. Bugg, Sen.

This Reply I presented to the Lords on the 28th of March 1696. which was very
well accepted of; and soon after one of the Peers came out and said to this
effect: Mr. Whitehead this Paper of yours will not do, you must be plain, and
declare what King you mean, and also sign your Paper; and if you do so, and
appear plain and sincere, I will do the best I can for you, and possibly your
Bill may pass the House, etc. But this did so startle the Quakers, and made
them so angry with Fra. Bugg, that Gilbert Laytey could not contain himself,
but before several Lords and other Gentlemen, abused me to my Face; as also,
Jacob Franklin and some others, to whom I replied what was needful at that
time, in my own defense, and to the great satisfaction of the Lords and other
Gentlemen present. But, this was not all, but by and by came out a Bishop of
the Church of England and said, Mr. Whitehead, we have considered of your Bill,
but we shall insert a clause for the payment of Tithes; and a power, in case of
neglect of payment, to distrain for any sum not exceeding 10 l. what think you
of that? If you will not accept of it so, it will be thrown out. But, ah poor
George, methinks I see him how he rubbed his Elbow, and scratched his Head, and
looked up as demurely as a Puritan, and said, at least thought, viz. What hard
things are now upon us poor innocent Quakers? that our Papers will not pass
without signing, nor will our meaning pass, but we must declare in plain words
what King we mean; this does indeed pinch us, and forely trouble us; and, which
is still as had, we must have a clause put in to bind us to pay Tithes, and
this will go down but ruggedly with the Friends: What shall I say, or how shall
I come off? If I accept of it on these Terms I shall displease many; if I loose
the Bill, and with it our Money spent to obtain it [tho' when all is done, it is
no less, nor more an Oath then I took my self in the Lord Mayor's Court, upon a
Bill exhibited against me by Thomas Daniel and Elizabeth his Wife, April 9th
1695.] I shall displease others; what shall I do? I am beset round on every
side; without are fears, within are doubts; one sort of Friends will blame me
for accepting of it; thus I A. B. do declare in the presence of Almighty God,
the witness of the Truth of what I say; which the World's people will say it is
equivalent to an Oath, and at the end of it there is such Rider as enjoins us
to pay Tithes etc. and yet this will not do neither, unless we sign our
Association, and mention King William; these things are hard, yet we will
submit to Parliaments for once, etc.

Reader, this is the case, their first Paper dated March 3 1695/6 not signed,
nor King W. named, was thrown out, and poor G W. and his Associates signed
another dated the 3 d day of April 1696. A Copy thereof a Person of Quality
sent me, which Paper was signed, and the King's Name at large in it; that part
of it which answers to the other part already recited I will set down, viz. And
we believe that the timely discovery and prevention of the late barbarous
Design and mischievous Plot against King William and the Government, and the
sad Effects it might have had is an eminent Mercy from Almighty God, etc. At a
Meeting of the said People the 3d of April 96. Signed by many of us on behalf
of our selves, and the rest of our Friends, etc.

Note Reader, that this Paper presented to the King April 8. 1696. dated April
3. 96. was never dispersed among the Quakers, but kept private: But that Paper
dated March 3. 1695/6. wherein the King is not named, and which therefore the
Lords threw out; that Paper was dispersed far and near; so the poor Quakers
still may be to seek what King their Teachers mean, etc.

Reader, I have already put down the Form of the Quakers Oath, I A. B. etc. I
shall now add another clause in the said Act, which will prevent them from
coming into any share of the Government, which they have long waited for; but
thanks be to God Quakerism has by this Act got such a blow, as they will not
easily rub off, viz.

Provided and be it Enacted, that no Quaker, or reputed Quaker shall by virtue
of this Act be qualified or permitted to give evidence in any Criminal Causes;
to serve on any Juries, or bear any Office or place of [Trust] or Profit in the
Government; any thing in this Act contained to the contrary, in any wise
notwithstanding.

And having thus far showed Mr. Croese his mistake of the Quakers loving King
William as their effectual Defender, as well as in some other things in his
General History: I am about leaving him until the next opportunity, hoping when
he considers and sees how Quakerism first rose, and how it has grown, and by
what means and methods it has had its progress, that he will not blame me for
dealing plainly with them, especially when he sees and considers the scurrilous
Names and ignominious Terms they have cast upon the Learned Clergy of this
British Nation, as Robbers, Thieves, Witches, Devils, Antichrists, Bloodhounds,
the Sir Simons of the Age, Monsters, Baal's Priests, Sodomites, and what not,
which might render them and their function odious to the People; as also their
Pamphlets to the Parliaments to leave and forsake them; and so I take my leave
of this learned Historian and bid him farewell.

By this time some may say, you seem to know the distemper of this corrupted
Body of Quakerism; pray let us know a Remedy to stop the gangreen; for many
wise and learned Men have endeavored to apply a Remedy, but have hitherto
missed; yea, sometimes by Corrasives which have been too severe to stop the
running thereof; and sometimes by Lenetives which have taken no place at all.

Ans. I do acknowledge, and experience teaches us, that sometimes the ablest
Physician for want of knowing the Disease has missed, when one not so noted,
has with the help of Herbs, and what is common, wrought a Cure. First then, the
most proper way to Cure this Distemper which lies in the Brain, and affects the
Heart also, is to let George W. and some few of the most eminent Teachers and
Writers amongst the Quakers, be summoned by Authority, and by the same
examined, whether these Books quoted as theirs, be really so or no. Next, if
proved upon them, let them either justify or retract them. Secondly, after
this is done, let them set forth certain Articles of their Faith, and if it be
agreeable to the Christian Religion, then let them condemn all their Books
which teach the contrary: This was the way of the French Protestants; and when
so done, let each Congregation of Quakers have their Teacher, and each Teacher
have their Congregation, and take care of the same, that so the Generation of
Youth be not corrupted and poisoned by sucking in false Notions, and imbibing
false Principles in their young years: This is what pleases all Protestant
Dissenters, both Presbyterians, Independants, and Baptists and for which they
are very thankful to the Government, and in their Meetings pray heartily for
the preservation thereof, as I have heard in all their Societies. And if
nothing less then Anniversary Synods, and General Councels will please these
aspiring Quakers; before they have them, let them ask leave of the Government
to hold them, and how long to continue the sitting thereof; and if the
Government think good to bestow that Favor of them, it would be very proper
that there should be a Commissioner or two, Ordered and Commissioned by His
Majesty to reside in their Council, the doors being open, and free ingress for
their Deputies, and liberty for them to speak freely; and their Acts put into
Writing for preventing confusion; and when this is done, it will be proper to
limit and set them bounds (who of themselves are boundless) and to restrain
them from these things following.

1. That all their Ministers who are not natural born Subjects, but Foreigners,
[whose coming may be to spy out the weaknesses of our Country, to alienate the
King's Subjects from their obedience to their Sovereign] may be excluded out of
their Synod, and have neither place nor voice in their general Counsel.

2. And that during the time granted them by Authority to hold their Synod,
they may have no communication with Foreigners, or other suspected Persons, as
Jesuits, etc.

3. And forasmuch as the Quakers are not by any legal constitution a body
Politic; therefore they should not meddle in State Affairs, viz. to condemn
Acts of Parliaments as Antichristian and Oppressive to the Subject; and thereby
absolve their Disciples from their obedience to their Lawful Magistrates, whom
they ought to obey as the higher Powers, set over them by God, entrusted with
the supreme Authority, and their part is to yield a dutiful subjection and
faithful obedience, as whereunto they stand obliged by the commands of Christ
and his Apostles, and the practice of God's faithful Saints and Servants, holy
Apostles and Martyrs in all Ages, by their Birth as natural born Subjects of
these Realms; by the dictates of their Consciences, and the many Favors they
daily receive in being defended and protected in their Liberty and Property,
and by all kinds of consideration both general and particular, etc.

4. That they print no Books but what are licensed by Commissioners, appointed
by His Majesty for that purpose, under pain of forfeiting the whole impression;
this would be a great means to restore England to its Pristine Glory, which
once it had, when it was famous for extirpating Heresy; whereas of latter
years it is reported by the Historian of the Quakers History, to be a Nurse for
Heresy, etc.

5. That they do not arrogate to themselves the power of excommunicating such
as dissent from them, and conform themselves to the Established Religion, nor
treat them Reproachfully, but that they study to be quiet and mind their own
business.

6. That they be not permitted in their Books and Sermons to call legal
Punishments Persecution; calling the Magistrates Persecutors, thereby rendering
them odious to the common People.

7. That they be not permitted in these Synods to approve of such Books, nor to
teach such Doctrine as call the national Ministry Witches, Devils, Antichrists;
nor the Parliaments, Judges, Justices, and other Magistrates, the Beasts that
carry the Whore, Persecutors of the Saints, nor to impeach their judicial
Proceedings.

8. That they be not permitted to Summons, Try, Judge, Arraign, Condemn, and
Dyalogue the national Ministry, Magistracy and People, and thereby lift up and
extol themselves, as the only Catholic Universal Church of the Firstborn,
which cannot err; and Curse, Damn, and Reprobate all other Christians. This has
been their frequent practice, and a main Pillar of their Heresy; for, when
they gain upon the common People, that the Apostolic Order of the Church of
Christ is reestablished only amongst them; and that all other Societies are
Apostates, Antichrists, Heathens, and Infidels, they then have gained the
point, and will soon claim the Chair, and reach at the Scepter.

9. That they be forbidden to make Collections, and Tax the People, and lay by
Funds as their manner is; for, as Money is said to be the Sinews of War, so may
it be called the Nerve of Heresy; but let each Society of Quakers maintain
their own Teacher, and not have a common Bank at London and Feoffees entrusted
therewith to give 8 10 or 20 l. at a time to their Traveling Teachers, who
range all the World over, bantering all other Ministers who have a settled
maintenance, and are far less chargeable to their Hearers than are the Quakers
Teachers, who come uncalled for, like Flies and Mice eat up the provision of
others, as says the Historian.

10. That they be not permitted to call the Scriptures of the Prophets, Christ
and his Apostles, by those contemptible Names of Death, Dust, Beastly-Ware,
Serpents-Food, and the like.

11. But that they be compelled to condemn those Books of theirs which so
teach; for, thus do they bring the Christian Religion into contempt, in order
to raise Quakerism as the most excellent of all Religions.

12. Let them not be permitted to call the Church of England an Adulterated
Harlot, nor to charge her with Witchcraft and Sorceries; to be an Adulterous
Womb, which brings forth monsterous Births; neither let them be permitted to
call the Book of Common Prayer [which is grounded on the Holy Scriptures,
composed and professed by our Martyred Ancestors, and confirmed by Authority of
King and Parliament] a branch which proceeded from the Pope, and from his Loins
[say they] it draws its Strength: Neither let them be permitted to print and
publish to the Nations, that they have ripped up the Bowels of the Church of
England, and discovered her Adulterous Womb, and all the false Conceptions
conceived by her, and that without any fear of her or her power.

13. Neither let them be permitted to teach Schools, for there they read W.
Smith's Primmer, and Geo. Fox's Primmer, and a certain portion every day of
Geo. Fox's Journal, all which enveigh bitterly against the Church of England,
and all instituted Religion, which tends to instill corrupt Principles, whilst
the Bible and other good Books are laid aside: These things ought to be noted,
and for the Generation of years sake to be guarded against.

14. Upon the whole matter, these sayings contained in the 12 particulars being
great contempt upon the Magistracy and Ministry, upon the King and his People,
and upon the whole Nation: Yet thus do their Books Teach, thus do they print
and publish, even in so many words, if they deny it, I am ready to prove it.
And notwithstanding this, and much more that might be said of the same nature;
yet they are so high and rampant, that when I printed my Book New Rome
Arraigned, etc. and laid open some of these Errors, they indicted me, and
prosecuted me at Law, to my great cost and damage; seized my Books and
prosecuted me with all the aggravations imaginable: And, that it may yet
further appear how tender they are of their own Church, their own Ministers,
their own Writings, and Epistles, I shall recite one of their Anniversary
Injunctions, viz.

From our Yearly Meeting in London 27 of 3d Month 1675. To all our Quarterly
and Monthly Meetings in England, etc.
Concerning Men's and Women's Meetings, it is our Judgment and Testimony in the
Word of God's Wisdom, that the rise and practice, setting up and establishing
of Men's and Women's Meetings in the Churches of Christ in this our Day and
Generation, is according to the Mind and Counsel of God, and done in the
ordering and leading of his Eternal Spirit -- And it is our Sense, Advice,
Admonition and Judgment in the fear of God, and in the Authority of his Power
and Spirit to Friends and Brethren in their several Meetings, that no such
slight and contemptible Names and Expressions, as calling Men's and Women's
Meetings, Courts Sessions, or Synods, that they are Popish Impositions, useless
and burdensome; that faithful Friends Papers which we Testify, have been given
forth by the Spirit and Power of God, are Men's Edicts or Cannons, Elders in the
Service of the Church, Popes and Bishops, with such scornful sayings, be
permitted among them, etc.

Behold what Names and Expressions are contained in the recited 12 particulars,
given by themselves to the Scripture, Bishops and Clergy, Ministry and People;
yet, none must say why do they so, but it must be accounted malicious; and yet,
how tender are these Men of their own blasphemous Books and defamatory Libels;
insomuch, that as I am willing to note some things from the French King, so
would I have some observe the Quakers method in this matter for their example,
and not suffer the Holy Scripture, the Book of Common Prayer, the Christian
Magistracy, and Ministry to be thus contemned, vilifyed, and set at naught by
this irreligious spawn of the Jesuits; and so I conclude this matter, and
subscribe my Name.

Fra. Bugg, Sen.
January the 28th. 1696.
A Supplement to the former History, containing a further correction of the
learned Croese's General History of Quakerism.
GENESIS Hist. p. 62. 'They (the Quakers) condemn no Man till they hear him, etc.
My Author, the Historian, is now so far besides the matter, and gives a
Relation so contrary to their practice, that He and I must part again; for I
may not keep company with him at present, but I must show him his mistakes.
1st. In general, They Summons all Archbishops, Lordbishops, Deans, Prebends,
Doctors, Vicars, Curates, and all Prelaticals, as this Book sets forth at
large, not personally but fictiously; and when this is done, they Arraign, Try,
and Judge them unheard, to be Monsters, Witches, Devils, Antichrists,
Bloodhounds, Conjurers, and false Prophets; but to come closer to matter of
fact, viz. Particularly about the Year 1676. A difference happened between me
and Sam. Cater, and one of their Speakers touching a Fine of 15 l. which I
suffered for him, for that his Name and Habitation was unknown to the Justices
so as to levy a Fine upon his Goods and Chattels; and in regard I thought it
but reasonable, that he should make me restitution; and also finding by their
Books that in the loss of 13550 l. by Fines and Distresses, by an Act of
Parliament made the 22 of King Charles II. Entitled An Act to prevent and
suppress seditious Conventicles, etc. The Preachers, where strangers never lost
50 l. and thereupon (not barely for my own sake, but my Fellow Hearers) I
prosecuted Sam. Cater for restitution of the said 15 l. suffered for him as
aforesaid, in that he did not declare his Name and Habitation, when he saw the
Informers convicting the Meeting, as at large set forth in my Book, The painted
Harlot both Stripped and Whipped, etc. and that Entitled Reason against Railing,
etc. and to which I refer the Reader for further satisfaction. Yet to show that
they condemn Persons unheard, and that their judicial proceedings are Arbitrary
and Partial, as well as Illegal; and therein, like the high Court of Justice,
which would not permit King Charles I. to give his Reasons, nor to be heard in
his just defense, as at large in The History of Independancy, etc. I shall
transcribe some passages of that Transaction, viz. Anno 1676. I went to the
Yearly Meeting in London, and in the Face of their Assembly I proposed this
Question, viz. Whether Friends in the Ministry, where they are strangers, ought
not to tell their Names, and Habitations upon their apparent sight of Informers
coming into the Meeting, taking the Names of Friends in order to convict the
Meeting; that so they may stand in the same capacity, relating to sufferings
with the Hearers; and not the Ministers in one capacity free from Sufferings,
and the Hearers in another capacity i. e. always liable to Sufferings, and not
for themselves only, but also for the Meeting Houses, for the Poor and
Indigent, for Strangers and Foreigners, and for the Preachers, unless they
declare their Names and Places of Abode, etc. This was such an unexpected and
terrifying Question, that it set the Synod on Fire, and startled the most
Eloquent Orator of them all; insomuch, that W. Penn steps upon a Form and
adjourned the Meeting to Horsly-down Meeting House in Southwark, the next day
at 7 in the Morning, where (after some private debate) it terminated thus; that
unless a Magistrate, or a Constable with his Staff came to a Meeting to demand
the Speaker's Name and Habitation, he was at his liberty whether to declare it
or no; upon which, finding which way the Hare run, I came home; and the Month
of September following I gave Sam. Cater a personal Summons to appear at our
Monthly Meeting next following, at Chattirise in the Isle of Ely, where I
demanded Justice against Sam. Cater; but the Meeting refused and rejected my
Reasons; and then I appealed from thence to the Quarterly Meeting as Superior;
but that Meeting also, through the influence of Sam. Cater, refused to do me
right: Then I appealed from thence to the Yearly Meeting Anno 1677. as Superior
to them all; and as a preparatory for my matter, I wrote seven sheets of Paper
to W. Penn, called Speeches and Passages grounded upon an Edict made at the
Yearly Meeting Anno 1675. Whereby the Hearers were obliged neither to forsake,
decline, nor remove their Meetings, like worldly, fearful and Cowardly
Professors; and on that bottom, and for diverse reasons grounded thereupon, I
set forth the reasonableness that the Preachers [who thus advise and enjoin the
Hearers, and exhort them to stand valiant and give up all] should likewise
stand the brunt, and not shrink and turn back like Cowardly Officers, and
become the same worldly and politic Professors they advise us not to be like.
I also wrote a Letter to W. Penn, J. Crook, and R. Barkley, referring the matter
in controversy to them. Thus being prepared, I went to the Yearly Meeting Anno
1677. and after some discourse with W. Penn, to give him his due, he used great
diligence to get me a Meeting, which was at Ed. Man's House in
Bishops-gate-street, June 9th. 1677. and there we came to this Agreement, viz.

Memorandum, That on condition that Friends of the Quarterly Meeting do choose
and elect 10 or 12 Friends to hear and determine the controversy between F. B.
and S. C. relating to the 15 l. Fine, etc. They the said F. B. and S. C. do
hereby promise to stand to their final determination, witness our Hands this
9th. of June 1677.

Fra. Bugg Sam. Cater

Witnesses, Jo. Whitehead, G. Barnadiston, W. Whaley, Jo. Burnyate, Amb. Rigg,
Leo. Fell, and others.


But when the Quarterly Meeting came, which was the 5th. of Sept. 1677. I
called for the written agreement; but Sam. Fulbig with whom it was entrusted,
being Sam. Cater's Creature would not produce it, neither would Sam. Cater
allow, that the Meeting should choose any but themselves. Moreover, the Meeting
resolved against any other Election but themselves, by which I perceived their
design; but, being tired with an endless prosecution, I at last, tho very
unwillingly, submitted to the Meeting, who chose 12 out of themselves to
examine the matter, and to put an end to the controversy, contrary to the
condition of the recited agreement, which only empowered the said Quarterly
Meeting to choose and elect, and not to judge and determine: However, they
pretending they would do us equally Justice; I gave them my Writings which I
had drawn from the Records of Conviction, and Warrant, and other things to set
forth my right to the restitution of the said 15 l. being Fined for my self,
for being at the said Meeting 10 s. besides this 15 l. for Sam. Cater, as by
the Books above quoted I have largely set forth. Well, the 12 Persons took my
Writings, and going up Rob. Letchworth's Chamber, through the Kitchen, one of
the 12 threw all my Writings into the Fire, and burnt them unexamined, and
unheard, or so much as looked on any one passage to demonstrate my right, etc.
And about a quarter of an hour after, they sent for us; and we being come up
the Chamber to them, one of the self-chosen Arbitrators directed his speech to
us, that they had determined the matter, and found Sam. Cater clear, and my
demand unreasonable; and that they had acquitted Sam. Cater, and hoped that I
would be quiet for the time to come, etc. to whom I replied, that they had
given away my right; and that I was able to demonstrate the same if they would
hear me; they replied it was ended, and that they hoped I would now sit down
quiet, and rest satisfied, but they would not give me the Award, and so me
parted; but going home, one -- Dan. a Quaker called me to him, and said,
Francis I am grieved to behold what foul play thou have had to day; wherein
said I? What do thou mean? Why replied -- Dan. I sat in the Kitchen as thy 12
Arbitrators came through the House to go up the Chamber, and I saw one of them
throw all the Papers thou gav'st them in the Meeting to peruse, and did burn
them all without looking on any one of them.

Whereupon I sent the said Arbitrators a large Paper called a Prescript, and
Postscripts with Summons to appear at the next Quarterly Meeting, concluding
them accountable for their actions upon their own Principles, in Ed. Burrow's
Works p. 442. viz. And we believe that all Governors and Rulers ought to be
accountable to the People, and to the next succeeding Rulers for all their
Actions, which may be enquired into upon occasion, etc. My charge to them was
1. In that they did not pursue the Terms of the recited Agreement. 2. That
according to the said Agreement they ought to have chosen Men, and not to
Arbitrate the matter themselves, when by the condition thereof they were only
to choose and elect. 3. That contrary to all rules of Law in that case, they
refused me a Copy of their Award, and thereupon I looked upon my self at
liberty from their Award. 4. In that they burned my Evidences which set forth
my Title to the restitution of the said 15 l. without any examination, and
thereupon condemned me upheard; all which put me upon writing the said
Prescript in Prose, and Postscript in Verse; the latter follows in these words.

1.
In Ages past as I heard tell
Some Men did judgment hate,
And it abhorred, I know full well,
So woeful was their State.
2.
And equity they did pervert
Which made the good Man cry,
Justice and Right do not pervert,
For that is Iniquity.
3.
A parallel you see alas,
As plain, as plain may be,
Which answers, as in a Glass
Face answers Face you see.
4.
Even in a Trial now on foot
Where Justice finds no place,
But will and power bear it out,
This is the very case.
5.
But witty, witty William Penn
Has drawn a fair scrowl,
Against arbitrary force of Men
Which none can back recall.
6.
Where property he vindicates,
And each Man's right maintain,
And partial dealings there he hates,
As nothing worse, so vain
7.
But, why should I or any one
Proceed to Trial then,
If judgment true be fled and gone,
And loathed by such Men?
8.
Surely it is vain for to expect
A full and ample hearing,
When Evidences they reject
As good for naught but fearing.
9.
Yet put on courage once again
And call them to account;
Who gave away what is not your own;
Who chose themselves to mount.
10.
The place of Arbitrators great,
'Twixt those that differ much,
As if resolved to do right,
But it was nothing such.
11.
Wherefore do not conceive I pray
That there is any Treason,
In calling you up to the Bar
Because it is now in season.
12.
But how dare thou or any one,
Thus speak, thus write, or say;
Yea, some may query hereupon,
Saying is their cause I pray.
13.
For any one thus to rebuke
Men who pretend to judge,
Infallibler than ever Luke,
Paul, Peter, James, or Jude.
14.
Let such receive an answer short,
And search the matter well,
If President then they find not
There Is cause enough to tell.
15.
And to be bold for to unfold
Such falsifying tricks,
As Man thereof has not been told,
Nor read the like in Hicks.
16.
So why should I or any other
Such partial dealings hide,
Or such in justice go and smother,
Such things I cannot abide.
17.
Neither could Micah, Paul, nor John
The Scripture witness bear
Silent keep, but must go on,
Saying, House of Jacob hear.
18.
Wherefore let no Man think I pray
That such a fool I am,
As to be scared or fray'd away,
For wrong me no Man can.
19.
As I keep to the truth in which
I preservation have,
And therein trace a constant path
Where none can me bereave.
20.
Of blessings and of peace also,
Whatever some may fear,
Though sufferings great and many too,
I therefore must endure.
21.
Like them of old which practiced not
Soft pillows for to sew,
Who witnessed suffering their lot
From the self-saving crew.
22.
Whereof sometime the leaders they
Great'st polititions be
Though they profess another way
More noble, just and free.
23.
Yet do but look within the Vail
And there you may behold,
Of being valiant some do fail
Which seems to be bold.
24.
Thus false, thus base, and proud
Are these aspiring Judges,
Who for justice cries aloud,
Whilst others they make drudges.
Upon this the said Arbitrators met me at the next Quarterly Meeting, where we
had a large Conference; and to convince my Author that they condemn Persons
unheard, contrary to his relation, I shall cite so much as will demonstrate the
same; and for more of the same nature, I refer him and others to the Books
quoted.

Proceedings at the Quarterly Meeting.
Meeting, We desire thee, Fra. Bugg to give up the matter.

F. B. Nay hold, you have done me wrong by perverting Justice, burning my
Writings, and detaining the Award; all which I shall make appear, if you please
to hear me.


J. W. We have judged for Truth, and so there must be no more of it.


F. B. Is your judgment so infallible, as that you cannot err; if not, why may
not my cause be reheard?


S. Fulbigg, No, no, we will not hear any more of it, we have heard enough of
it already.


F. B. I desire to be heard.


J. Prime, We will not hear thee.


F. B. I desire you to hear me, that is the least you can do.


Pet. Watson, No, no, we will not hear thee, we have heard too much of it
already.


F. B. I desire a Copy of the Award, that the self-chosen Arbitrators made.


P. Watson, No, thou shall not have a Copy of it; what will thou do with a Copy
of it?


F. B. It is but reasonable that I should have a Copy of it, and thereupon I
demand it.


J. Ainsloe, E. Love, R. Smith, Friends let him have a Copy of the Award, it is
indeed but reasonable he should have a Copy of it.


P. Watson, Nay, he shall not have a Copy of it.


F. B. I have something material to offer, and therefore desire to be heard;
and I marvel that you will neither hear me nor give me a Copy of your Award,
this shows your guilty Consciences.


J. Ainsloe, For my part I would have F. B. heard what he can say; really if we
proceed thus, we shall be the most Arbitrary People in the whole World; if you
will not hear him it shall be put to the Vote.


R. Smith, We shall not be like the Israelites unless we hear him: What shall
we not hear the complaint of the oppressed? We ought to hear the complaint of a
Servant, yea, of a Stranger, much more of F. B. who has been so serviceable to
us, and a great sufferer for Truths sake, etc.


But all would not do, they could not be prevailed upon, either to give me a
Copy of their Award, or a full hearing before they condemned me. Whereupon I
drew a Figure of, the proceedings of their Monthly, Quarterly, and Yearly
Meeting, The painted Harlot, etc. p. 28. 29. together with the proceedings of
the High Court of Justice, wherein K. Charles I. was Arraigned, Tried, Judged
and Condemned; and not once suffered to give his reasons for what he had to
say, and to offer against their Arbitrary proceedings, as in The History of
Independancy, etc. On the one hand showing their Affinity, and meek Moses, and
Scripture Judges; on the other hand showing their contrariety; and when I had
so done, I set this motto, and the reason for it, as you may there read at
large.

Here is a Figure pray mark it well,
Another I can make I do you tell;
But this may serve to be a Looking-glass,
To show you plainly how things come to pass.
But if you say, we never did profess
The Scripture for our Rule in any case,
But Judgment we'll give out as we see cause,
Not minding Justice, Equity, or Laws.
Then I do say, another there needs not
To manifest the same, since it is my lot.
Which, for to do, I here declare and tell
The Scripture I must take to do it well;
Because it is, however in my esteem,
The truest standing Record I have seen;
Condemning errors in the Judgment Seat,
But Truth and Justice it maintains complete.
Having proceeded thus far in this old controversy, it will not be amiss to let
the World see how Sam. Cater's case was managed. First by partial Judges, as
above told; and next by lying Lawyers: For, Tho. Rudyard, S. Cater's Lawyer,
thus said in his defense, about the 15 l. I suffered for Sam. Cater as
aforesaid, viz. The Fine of 15 l. was paid in Money voluntarily, before
distress was made, which is a payment that our Testimony was ever against; and
has been oftentimes 3 or 4 times the value of the thing demanded, and charge;
because they could neither pay, nor compound for such spoiling their Goods, etc.

Now this went a great way with many against me, that I should pay the Money
voluntarily before distress was made; and the further in that Geo. Whitehead,
who says in his Preface to his Book styled Judgment Fixed, etc. If I did not
feel the Lord my God laying a real necessity upon me to be publicly concerned
in this controversy, I would rather choose to sit down mute: But the Lord has
laid the necessity, and in discharging my Duty, I neither consult events, nor
fear effects, etc. Now Reader observe, and I will show thee one instance of
many that might be mentioned, by which thou may measure the reality of this
necessity which G. W. pretends God [that cannot lie, nor move any to lye] laid
upon him in such a degree, that he in writing that Book, neither consulted
events nor yet feared effects: For, this T. Rudyard the Lawyer had said in
defense of his Client Sam. Cater, that I Fra. Bugg paid my 15 l. Fine
voluntarily, before distress was made. And Reader this was a lie, as I can
prove by 20 Witnesses still alive; for my Goods were distrained, and carried to
an Inn, viz. the White Heart in our Town; and there lay until I entered my
Appeal, at which time I paid the Money, and took my Goods again; and to the
truth of what I say, and to prove G. Whitehead's lying necessity, I may recite
a Certificate under the Man and Woman's hand, who at that time kept the House,
viz.

Memorandum, and that we who subscribe our Names do testify, that the Goods of
F. B. which were distrained for the Fine of 15l. 10 s. [the 10 s. being for my
own offense, and the 15 l. for Sam. Cater] by virtue of a Warrant from Tho.
Shelly Esquire; late deceased, was after they were distrained, carried to the White
Heart, and afterward the said F. Bugg came and paid down his Money, and took
Home his Goods; this my Wife, and I [who was then Constable] can testify;
Witness our Hands the 6th of Sept. 1691.

Peter and Judith Maxey.

Thus is it manifest that Sam's Lawyer told an absolute lie, in saying I paid
my Money voluntarily, before distress was made of my Goods; and as manifest
that God never laid a necessity upon G. Whitehead to vindicate the said
Rudyard, as he did in the recited Book i. e. Judgment Fixed, etc. p. 219 220.
of which I have taken notice in my Book Entitled New Rome unmasked, etc. p.
33. to 36. And so I shall leave poor Sam's Lawyer with the same motto I set
upon him in Painted Harlot, etc. p. 50. viz.

A Lawyer and a Friend, can he be found
Professing Truth, I say, on English ground;
Who truth will speak upon occasion free,
From lying words, and base partiality:
If not, the woe was nor pronounced in vain,

Since to such Lawyers it does appertain;
Who can pervert and wrest an honest Cause,
Their refuge being lies, and not our Laws.
Having done with this Lawyer's lies, and Whitehead's vindication of him,
saying, where is now thy lying Lawyer? Art not thou herein manifest to be the
lying Defamer, etc. and much more to that purpose. I say, having briefly passed
over Rudyard the Lawyer, and Whitehead the Forger; let me now answer an
Objection.

Obj. But possibly some may say that Sam. Cater has wrote a Narrative of this
controversy, which though it be fully answered, yet it will not be amiss to say
something to invalidate it if you can, etc.

Ans. I have always stood ready to maintain what I write; and have been enabled
to confute my Adversaries; and to make this appear, as I already have, so I
shall still give 2 or 3 demonstrations thereof. And First of Sam Cater's not
owning his said Narrative, attested by credible witnesses, one whereof is still
alive, viz.

1. Demon. Memorandum, that Sept. 30. 1683. Fra. Bugg went to Samuel Cater and
showed him his Narrative styled The Lib. of an Apost. cons. etc. and asked him
if he would own it; Sam. replied, what he had wrote, he had wrote; still Fra.
Bugg pressed him whether he would own it, showing him his Name to it: Well,
said he, if my Name be to it, none will question but I wrote it. But still Fra.
Bugg pressed whether he would own the printing and publishing of it; but Sam.
would not confess to that. Then Fra. Bugg offered on the penalty of 100 l. to
prove his said Narrative false, if he would come to the Test, that also he
evaded; to this we subscribe our Names.

Gab. Ellington
Philip Craniss



Reader, bear with me insisting so long on this Head; for when Sam. Cater dies,
possibly his Works may be reprinted; and then his Narrative may come forth
anew; and therefore it is proper to invalidate it.

2. Demon. F. B. 's Proposition.
Whereas there is a Book published by S. C. and others Entitled The Lib. of an
Apost. conf. etc. These are therefore to signify, that I Fra. Bugg offer to
prove the said Book false in Fact, on the penalty of 100 l. on condition
nevertheless, that if I do make evident proof thereof, that he the said Sam. be
recorded out of the Unity.

F. Bugg.
Sept. 23. 1683.


This I gave to Jos. Banks and others of his Creatures; and not long after
Friends belonging to our own Meeting, in Mildenhal, gave me the following
Certificate, who knew both of us, and the Nature of the controversy depending,
viz.

At a public Meeting at Mildenhal, the 21 of October, 1683.
Whereas there is a Book put forth by Sa. Cater and others, wherein our ancient
Friend Fra. Bugg is called, and often termed Informer; and we knowing what an
Informer is, according to common acceptance, and that he is clear of their
practice; and not only so, but one of the greatest Sufferers by Informers in
all these parts; and also in Remembrance of his labor of love, and great
exercises for the Truth's sake. We can do no less than signify our dislike
thereunto, and testify against the said treatment, as not being of a Christian
tendency. And whereas it is in the said Book signified, that F. Bugg is not fit
to treat on Christian Liberty; this we do say, that hitherto we have looked
upon him a Man as fitly qualifyed to treat with any Magistrate on that Point,
as any Man belonging to our Meeting; and his endeavors have proved as
successful; and to this day, though much is said, yet we cannot see any thing
proved to the contrary; and this we signify not to promote controversy,
subscribed by us.

Thomas Bird, Sarah Bird, John Thrift, Elizabeth Thrift, William Rolf, Eliz.
Rolf, Jos. Ellington, Rach. Ellington, Will. Belslam, Marg. Belslam, Rob.
Suckerman, Frances Suckerman, Will. Hawkins, John Kitson, John Harvy, John
Poel, Will. Tailor, Margaret Huttly, Anne Hible, Ka. Hanslip, Frances Folks,
Dorcas Abbott, Eliz. Root, Sarah Bird, Joseph Mason, Jane Mason, Sarah Holton,
Jos. Testall.


But these Testimonies proved so fatal to the design of the Quakers, which was
to lay wast my Reputation, both as a Man and Christian, that it made them rage
and fret, and call me Beast, Dog, Wolf, Enemy of all Righteousness, Child of
the Devil, Devil Incarnate, Apostate, and what not, which made me conclude the
Painted Harlot with this motto.

To the Painted Harlot.
I smile to see thee storm, thy rage
A speedy downfall does presage:
The day is come that will discover,
Thy nakedness to every Lover.
Thy pious Frauds, thy curious Trade
Of merchandising Souls does fade;
The mountain Stone has broke thy Toes;
Thy vitals now must feel its blows.
Thy Georges both must be brought down,
And to the Truth must vail their Crowns;
For they have long abused Men,
By Tongue, by Writing, and by Pen.
But now their day of Troubles come,
And they must reap what they have sown;
Even so let all Imposers fall,
Who Brethrens Consciences would enthral.
What Is writ for Conscience, Liberty
Confounds all sorts of Popery.
May skilful Archers every hour
Shoot Truth's Arrows from their Tower,
Against thy persecuting Power.
Genesis Hist. As for their Ministers maintenance, this is their method, they
order Stipends to be taken, etc.

Here the Author of the Genesis Hist. and I meet again, and both agree in opinion;
yet some amongst them [and of the honester sort] complain of this private
method, and of their Bank, and their Pursemongers; and some again have the
Impudence to deny what the Historian says, pretending they take no Money for
Preaching; and on that Foot Banter the National Ministry, as Hirelings, etc.
But to confirm what the said Historian suggests, I may recite some Proofs; one
is a Letter which I received from one still eminent amongst them, viz.

Dear Friend,
I understand that there is a new controversy lately risen, about the Money
thou once told me was gathered amongst Friends, for the Relief of J. C.
Friends, here are much concerned about it; knowing that Friends gave it freely;
expecting nothing again; I suppose they did not make the Common Bankers their
Executors: The Doners will must be fulfilled in all things, and not the common
Pursemongers; some Friends have a Testimony against Common Bankers: I have been
examined by the Law Professors, whether we had a Common Purse or Bank, I
answered we had none; this This a Lie.
gave so much satisfaction, that Friends in this Town have been quiet ever
since. The Magistrates look upon Common Bankers to be as bad as those that
hoard up Arms and Ammunition; And well they may.
and not without Reason, for Money Answers all things; If Friends would put
away this Dagon, and take Money only for their present necessities, things
would soon be better with them: God will not bless those that break his
Commandments, by hoarding up Common Banks, and quarrelling with those that do
not bring in Money fast enough; To furnish S. Cat. and other Rich Preachers
with 10 l. at a time.
to them I have observed, that it has been frequent with some to reckon those
that brought in most Money into their Common Bank to be the best Christians. I
have heard something concerning this controversy now on foot; about a Maid that
was choosing a Husband for her self; and also it is expected she should give up
her concerns in that affair to some of our Preachers, which was never practiced
until of late, amongst any that profess true Religion. It is that which has
made the Jesuits to be abhorred amongst some of the honestest of the Papists
themselves; so that they would not let them come into their Houses. If the Maid
be a wise Woman, and of Age to dispose of her self, she will not let any of our
Preachers meddle wi^h her concerns, of choosing a Husband for her; that is none
of their business; they should only meddle with their own business, and let
honest Friends make their choice themselves; we have no Law nor Custom among
us for such as defame lawful Marriages, or obstruct lawful Marriages. The
Church of England is honester upon that account than we. They make such as
obstruct or defame Marriages, either to make good their charge, or to make
sufficient satisfaction to the Parties wronged, etc.


Again, see W. Rogers second scourge for G. Whitehead, who has been many years
acquainted with their private way of raising Money and hoarding up Common
Banks, which indeed is as bad as hoarding up Arms and Ammunition; for, as Money
is said to be the Sinews of War, so have I often said it is the Nerve of
Heresy. For, this Dagon Money, raised by the Common Bankers amongst the
Quakers, has an ill tendency many ways. Well, let us hear W. Rogers opinion
thereof, and Ellwoods answer thereto.

And yet when she Rome's Sister is but called,
She winches like touched Horses that are gaul'd:
Confusion her attends, next follows woe,
For thus she whirls, but God knows whether she will go:
Who when they wanted money to proceed
The Church her cash, then did supply her need;
And therefore when her cash was emptied, she
Craved money to supply her ministry;
And when that practice was disliked by some,
She seemed like some whose downfal's near to come.
This Church will fall, her load will be her guile,
If you, O Flock, keep Purse-strings fast a while:
When that Spring fails, by her you will not be prized;
Usurpers then over you you will see despised.
And woes may long attend such prating Preachers,
As for preferment turned deceitful Teachers.
Fox is termed Head, yet Whitehead steered the course,
Till both was scorned, and they grew worse and worse.
Thus Reader, you see Testimony after Testimony against their raising Money for
their Teachers in a clandestine way, pretending they do all things free,
without Money, or without Reward. Now hear Tho. Ellwoods Answer, by his Book
styled Rogero Mastix, where instead of denying matter of plain Fact, he
confesses all what is said, and laid to their charge, viz.

But that Christ's Ministers should be supplied
With necessaries by his Church, his Bride,
Is such a known and certain truth as none
Perhaps has ever opposed but thee alone.
That it is the Churches duty to supply
The needful wants of all her Ministry;
And truth it is too plain to be denied;
Christ's Church should for Christ's Ministers provide.
What carps thou at then [William] would thy muse
Plead that St. Paul did not this privilege use;
That what was lacking to him privately,
The Macedonian Brethren did supply.
Thus it appeared the Apostle did partake
Of that Provision that the Church did make;
Christ's Ministers to furnish, and their need
Supply when they want money to proceed.
Pretend thou can not that this Stock is given
To such as have no need thereof, but even
Thy flurt at Richardson for taking pay,
For what as Clark he writes, do much bewray
Thy folly and injustice, is it not fit
Who works for others should be paid for it;
And that by them who him to work desire,
The labourer is worthy of his hire.
Thus has Ellwood confessed the whole matter, and tells us it is too plain to be
denied, as indeed it is. Thus you see, they confess their Ministers take Money;
their Clarks take Money. Why then do they so bitterly enveigh against the
Clergy for taking Money; and pretend that their Ministers take none? But if Mr.
Mead would open his Books of Accounts, we should see how many Thousand Pounds
their Speakers have in a Year, besides their private Quarters, who comes like
Flies and Mice uncalled, or unsent for; and so live on the Provision of others:
And this I may say, that their Ministry has cost me as much in 4 Weeks, as the
public Ministry has cost me in 4 Years; and yet, these are the free Preachers,
free Writers, and free People if you will believe them. But, having been more
large on this Head in my Book, Battering Rams against new Rome: etc. And that
Entitled New Rome unmasked, etc. I shall conclude this Head; since they are
first charged to preach for Money, write for Money, contrary to their
pretenses; and that T. Ellwood [whether at unawares or no, I will not here
determine] has confessed to be matter of fact, and thereby puts the thing out
of doubt, etc.

I find the Author of the Genesis Hist. p. 63. treat about their Marriages; and
also, a few days after a Child is born, of their calling the Midwife. Of the
first he seems only to speak by way of commendation, not mentioning so much as
one of their Orders; and as to the latter, as if he were wholly a stranger to
them; there being no such matter as calling the Midwife or Neighbors on such
an account. However, that he may the better be informed, I shall show several
of their Forms for Marriages, which are at large treated on in my Book,
Innocence vindicated, and Envy rebuked, etc.

The First Order for Marriage, by George Fox printed by Tho. Symons the 7 of
the 11th. month, 1659. Somewhat abstracted, viz. And if any Friends go together
in the power of the Lord, after the thing has been made known between
themselves, and laid before able Friends, and nothing appear to the contrary,
they may declare it in the end of the next general Meeting, or as they are
moved, they may declare it in the midtime of the Market, on the Market day, in
the next Market Town, or they may not, as their freedom is: And if they are
moved, they may declare it to the next Magistrate if they will, or they may
not; then after, in an Assembly not less than 12, they may speak their
Testimony; and then a Certificate may be given of the Day, Month, and Year, and
Recorded; but that nothing be Recorded for money in these things, but freely a
free; People, serve one another in love, etc.

A Second Order for Marriage by George Fox Anno 1662. -- And when they take one
another in Marriage, let not less than a dozen Friends and Relations be
present, according to your former Order; having first acquainted your Men's
Meeting, and that it be Recorded in a Book, etc.

A Third Order for Marriage, Anno 1667. That as any are moved of the Lord, and
in his Light called to take a Brother or Sister in Marriage, let it be made
known to the Children of Light; and being by the Light made manifest to be of
God, let them be joined together in the presence of many Witnesses; and a
Record in Writing. witnessing the Day, Place, and Year, Subscribed by Witnesses.

A Fourth Order for Marriage. At a Quarterly Meeting in Hadenham in the Isle of
Ely, 1st of the 10th. Month 1675. viz. It is ordered and agreed upon at this
Quarterly Meeting, that no Friends for time to come, may permit or suffer
marriages without the consent of Friends at two Men's and Women's Meetings, and
the Man and Woman to come both to the said Meetings to receive the answer of
Friends; that so no disorderly and indirect proceedings may be carried on any
more, contrary to the unity of Friends, etc.

From whence several things are observable. First their alteration in Judgment
about taking money for Recording, at first none, now 50 l. per Ann. if they say
there is more work, there is more Persons to do it; so that, if it was criminal
at first, it is criminal still. Secondly, at first they might publish at the
market-cross, or they might not as their Light bids them; but now they are not
permitted so to do, but must come to their men's and women's distinct Meetings in
manner and Form. All liberty is taken away, and imposition and forms erected
amongst them, which in others they condemned: But, it was but whilst they
could graft themselves into a Government; for I. A. took his Wife according to
the 3 former Orders, but transgressing this last, he was excommunicated, or
declared out of their unity for nonconformity; I shall show that, and then
conclude this Head.

At a Quarterly Meeting in Hadenham the 4th of the 7th month, 1678. We at this
Quarterly meeting having the business of John Ainsloe's taking his Wife
contrary to the Order of Friends, brought before us, and Friends having several
times spoke to him about it, and he not giving Friends satisfaction, we do
testify that we have no union with him in this his so doing, etc.

Here is Liberty given, and Liberty taken away: an Order that nothing should be
paid in money for Recording marriages, etc. and now common. They formerly cried
out against Forms, and now impose Forms, and enjoin a conformity to them; and
for nonsubmission Record out of the unity, which is all they yet can do; when
they can do more look for it, they will do more; and this time will manifest.

A Postscript by way of Dialogue.
READER, by the First Part of this Book I have set forth the Quakers claim to
their Title, to be the true Church of the First Born; and from their Books have
proved the contrary; as also cleared the Magistracy from the Odium of
Persecution: And by the second part I have Historically treated of the Rise,
Growth, and Progress of Quakerism; showing not so much the Names and Handicraft
Professions of that People, the Places of their abode, with some other
particulars thereabout; the same being excellently well done by the Author of
the General History of the Quakers, but how and by what means Quakerisme has
advanced; and therein have modestly corrected the said Historian, and showed
him his mistakes in many things; as also corroborated and strengthened him
wherein he is right; and now I am come, for diversion's sake by way of
Dialogue, to handle some points relating to both Parts, in which I shall
suggest nothing, but what I stand ready to make appear: And this familiar
Discourse between Thomas a Preacher, and Benjamen their Clark, I shall
endeavor further to illustrate the matter in hand, viz.

Teacher, Friend Benjamen how do thee do? I am glad to see thee; prithee let
us smoke a Pipe and drink a Glass, and have a little serious Discourse about
the affairs of Truth; and let us be free, for who can argue these points better
than we?


Clark Friend Thomas with all my Heart; let us go to Jacob Francklins, for
there is a glass of good Claret, known by all, and many of the World's People
come thithet which is a demonstration. I know you travel from East to West,
from North to South, and from one Nation to another, like our Grandfather
Ignatius Loyola.


Teacher, Drawer, bring us a Bottle of good Claret, and 2 or 3 Pipes. I profess
Benjamen I am glad to see thee; and how goes things relating to Truth.


Clark, Pretty well here away; only here are some Apostate Quakers that are
like thorns in our sides, who hinder the progress of Truth, and seem to follow
the steps of Luther and others, who you know were great Enemies to our elder
Sister Rome. However, there is but few that go from us prove Champions for the
cause of others against us; yet I must confess G. Keith has done us more hurt
than any that ever went from us; for, he does charge us boldly, without fear of
us or our power, with these Four things. 1. To deny Faith in Christ, as he dyed
outwardy, Suffering without the Gates of Jerusalem to our Salvation. 2.
Justification and Sanctification by the Blood of Christ outwardly shed. 3. The
Resurrection of the Body that dyed. 4. And that we deny Christ's coming
outwardly in his glorified Body, to Judge both the quick and the dead; and the
general day of Judgment, as in his Narrative p. 14. And I perceive the Apostate
Christians are generally pleased with this his Work, both Episcopalians,
Presbyterians, Independants, and Baptists; for, they all acknowledge and
confess to all these Points, though in some things they differ each from others;
and to be plain with you, I fear there is too much truth in what G. Keith says;
pray how is it in Barbados, Merryland, East and West Jersy, Pensilvania,
Burmodoes, Antego, Mevis, Holland, and other parts where you Travel, holding
forth Truth.


Teacher, I do acknowledge that our Friend Barkly in his Anarchy p. 16. says,
I find Professors make but small boasting of any Proselites they get from us; I
hear little of their proving Champions for the Principles of others against us,
etc. But to be plain, they so far prevail, that I find G. Whitehead the
cunningest Writer we have [except Friend Penn, and Ellwood] is hardly able to
encounter them; and to be free with you, G. Keith has proved such a Champion
for them, and against us, as that the City and Country, as well as parts beyond
the Sea, ring of his same, for he has lighted such a candle as we cannot blow
out, nor extinguish the light thereof, for both he and others produce matter of
Fact from our Books, which none of us, if we would speak truth, can deny; so
that, to deal freely, I am of your mind; I fear there is too much truth in
their Allegations against us on those four Heads, which are such four
Fundamentals held by the Apostate Christians, and so proved by the Letter,
which they call the word of God, that I know not what to think of these things.


Clark, Pray what think you of George Fox's Miracles, mentioned in his Journal;
some talk strangely of them, especially Fra. Bugg; and this I observe, that
whereas the Miracle wrought by the Apostles in the Name of Jesus of Nazareth
was a means to convert the Jews to the Christian Faith, and to confirm the
believing Gentiles. But, these of G. Fox's, in regard he wrought them in his
own Name only, they seem to be a means to shake the Faith and Confidence that
some well wishers to us had of our Religion; nay, and to be plain, many amongst
us begin to doubt of them, and to think them too like the Popish Legend, and
the counterfeit Miracles of Simon Magus, that Sorcerer; and I my self am almost
at a stand about them, and diverse others of his assertions touching himself,
which before our adversaries quoted them, I did not take so much notice of.


Teacher; Friend Benjamen you are in the right of it; for, betwixt You and I,
Christ never wrought Miracles in a corner, and published them 20 or 30 years
after they are said to be done, but in the face of the World, before multitudes
of mixed People, Friends and Enemies; witness that of Cand in Gallilee, where he
turned Water into Wine; likewise his feeding many Thousands with a few barley
Loves, and a few small Fishes. He healed all manner of Diseases, whether the
Disease were present or absent; and some of his Miracles he wrought on the
Sabbath day, which the Pharasees, his great Enemies, found fault with him for,
though they could not deny matter of Fact. Likewise his Followers, who preached
in his Name the Resurrection of the dead; they likewise wrought Miracles,
saying, in the Name of Jesus of Nazareth rise up and walk; and he (the Cripple)
walked, and leaped, and praised God.


Clark, Ah, these were Miracles indeed: But this Fra. Bugg makes the World
believe that G. Fox's Miracles are mere shams, lying wonders, and delusions:
and I must tell thee, I fear so too; and to be free, some Friends (though they
dare not say it openly) think so as well as I; and for my part I do not like
them at all.


Teacher, Like them, who can? I was at a Friend's House not long since, where I
heard an eminent Friend say, that since some had wrote so much against the
Journal and Miracles, etc. she had a mind to see it; and I asked her how she
liked it; she said, she did not like it at all; and indeed, if we consider a
few things, who can like it? For, 1. His Miracles were done in a corner no body
knows where no^ when, otherwise than by his own relation. 2. Never published
till many years after they are said to be done. 3. They were wrought in his own
Name only, and not in the Name of Jesus of Nazareth. 4. Here is not one Cripple
that ever he cured, nor one dead Person that ever he raised; nor one blind that
ever he gave sight too, to come forth and avouch that he was cured, was raised,
was blind and now he sees: and to be very plain, I do believe there never was
any thing of a Miracle at all, but only an Artifice to hold the people in
admiration of G. Fox, and to confirm them in the belief that we are the only
true Catholic Church of the Firstborn; and that the Apostolic order thereof,
as well as Miracles, are restored and re-established amongst us. But, let us
have a care that no body hear us; for if this discourse were known to G. W. I
should loose my place, and you might be in danger to loose yours.


Clark, But pray what think you of his pretense to discerning, who said he knew
who were Saints, who were Devils, and who were Apostates without speaking ever
a word. Again, W. Penn said, none need to furnish him with discerning or
judgment; Christ has furnished us already, and does on all occasions.


Teacher, Oh Friend, I have been a Quaker more than 20 years, and am ashamed to
hear of such vain boasting: For indeed, if we were always thus furnished with
discerning and judgment on all occasions, so that we knew who were Saints,
Devils, and Apostates without speaking ever a word, how came it to pass that
Sam. Cater in his Narrative p. 18. 19. was so mistaken; that Geo. Fox was so
mistaken in Thomas Murford, Ste. Crispe, Tho. Rudyard, Ezekiel Woolly, etc. And
how came it to pass that G. Whitehead was so mistaken in Christopher Atkinson,
Tho. Leacock, W. Warwick, etc.


Clark, But if this Journal be so erroneous, so stuffed with false and
counterfeit Miracles, so thick larded with Antichristian, as well as
Antiscriptural Principles, why do our Friends thus run a whoring after it, as
to have it taught in Schools, and placed in all Quarterly Meetings in England
and Wales, and parts beyond the Seas. Why is it sent to the University to be
reserved to posterity in their Library? and to be free, I think our Friends run
a whoring after it, as much as the revolting Israelites did after the golden
Calf, etc.


Teacher, Come Friend Benjamen, I will Answer you by what I have heard in my
Travels. 1. By teaching our Youth it; they are the more weaned from the
Professors Religion which is founded on the Letter. 2. For that it is sent to
all Quarterly and Monthly Meetings; it has this service, namely, to prove the
antiquity of our Religion, and to show how it was confirmed by Miracles. 3. And
its being received into the Library in Oxford, it is to show our Errors, and to
expose us as may be seen by a Letter sent from the Library Keeper to Fra. Bugg,
which is as follows, viz.

Mr. Bugg,
You must needs think it strange to receive a Letter from a Man so utterly
unknown to you; yet the same motive which made you to publish your useful
Books, I mean the public Good, causes me to become a Petitioner to you, in the
behalf of the public Library of Oxford, in which place I have the honor of
being a Servant to our Universary. I have seen your Book called The Quakers set
in their true Light, etc. At the end of which is a Catalogue of 15 Books more,
all written by you. The Quakers have already presented us with Fox's Journal,
Barkly's Works, etc. I am satisfied it would be extremely well taken if you
would be pleased to send us your own Works, which are so capable of instructing
those, who are desirous of hearing what can be alleged on both sides: Here
they will be for ever preserved; and your Donation shall be particularly
Registered among the other Benefactors by Sir, your unknown, but humble
Servant, etc.

H. W.
Bodlejan Library, April 6 1696.


Clark, Come Brother, it grew late; if thee wilt answer me a few Questions
Briefly, do, and we will part for this Time, and wait another Opportunity for a
little more Familiar Discourse about Truth's Affairs. And,

First. Why did our Brother, G. Whitehead, send a Paper to Turners-hall, April
29. 1697. called a Protestation against George Keith's Advertisement; and not
come and defend our Books.


Teach. Why? You need not ask the Reason why? For George Keith called us forth
to clear our selves from those four Fundamental Errors; which both he, you, and
I know, we can no way clear our selves; but by a Retractation: And you know, we
no sooner Retract, then let fall our Infallibility; And this thee may assure
thy self, G. Whitehead will never do.


Clark. But Secondly, why then do he call George Keith's, a Usurped, Arbitrary,
and Irregular Proceeding. Cannot we be content either to meet him, and clear
our selves; or if we think that impossible (as indeed I fear it is) then to lie
contented under his Charge without Noise; besides, it is known well enough by
the world's People, how we have Summoned all the Clergy, from the Bishops, to
the lowest Order: We have Arraigned, Tried, and at the Bar of Justice,
Condemned all the Clergy, as contrary to all the Ministers of Christ, and to
Agree and Concur with all the false Prophets, Deceivers; and Heretics, in both
their Call, Maintenance, and Doctrine; nay, moreover, we have Impeached the
Proceedings of all Courts of Judicatures; we have called the Church of England,
the Whore, and the Parliament, the Beast that carry her. Moreover, we have
Diologu'd the Prelates, and Church, and Common Prayer; and told them we have
discovered their Deceitful Practices, and ripped up her Bowels, and Discovered
her (the Churches) Adulterous Womb, and all her false Conceptions. p. 39.
Saying, behold the Archbishops, Lordbishops, Deans, Prebends, Doctors, Vicars,
and Curates, and all Prelaticals. Here is the Womb of your Conceptions opened;
from which you draw your Breath, and prolong your Days; open your Eyes, and
behold them, for they are Monsters. As for your Common Prayer, the Pope gives
Life to it, and from his Loins it draws its Strength.


Teach. My Dear Friend Ben. we must part; you ask me such home Questions, that
I must Answer Affirmatively; that it is ten thousand times more tolerable for
George Keith to call us out, than for us thus to Summons, Arraign, Try, Judge,
and Condemn all the Protestant Clergy, unsent too, unheard behind their Backs,
in this Clandestine, Obscure, Arbitrary, Pernicious, and Scandalous Manner, fit
to raise the Mobb, to Invade their Property, raise Tumults, cause Divisions,
like Turbulent and Seditious Incendiaries; as if we were about to erect the
Star-chamber-court; and to Enact another Writ, de haeretico; comburendo: And
instead of the six bloody Articles, six hundred, for really Brother, I must
needs say; that if the Church of England, her Bishops, Pastors, and Teachers,
be according to all the false Prophets, in all things, and contrary to all the
Ministers of Christ. It Is high time to Arraign, Try, and Judge them, and all
that Adhere to them.


Clark. Thirdly, but good dear Brother Thomas; since we are thus closs in
Argument, and very free one with another; what do you think of our Brother
Whitehead, so often boasting of our being Recognized by Law; as that therefore
they may not be Convicted of Error, nor their pernicious Principles be
Condemned; for though they are Indulged in the Exercise of their Persuasion:
Yet I do not think our Books, which hold the Errors Complained of, are
Recognized. If so, then we are in a better Station then the Church Established;
for thee know how we Write against both Priests and People; we Summon,
Arraign, Try, and Condemn them, as I said before; pray Answer me Cordially; do
you think this is good Arguing? that because the Government have tolerated us,
that therefore none may Write against us, that none may Challenge us. I am
persuaded, that the Episcopolians, are much kinder to us, then we should be to
them, had we the Swaying of the Scepter.


Teach. Very true, dear Brother; for if you look into the 227 page of our
deceased Brother Hubberthorn's Works; there you shall find in Answer to the
Baptists, who professed solemnly, that if they were in their Hands, they would
give the Members of the Church of England Liberty of Conscience. In Answer to
whom here our Brother Hubborthorn, an Eminent, and early Writer and Preacher,
viz. It seems then, there is not so much difference betwixt them, (i. e. the
Church of England) and you, [the Baptists] who will make them Antichristian,
and you Christian. What Confusion is here? You will not tolerate Popery, nor
such as Worship a false God, nor any that speak Contemptuously of the Lord
Jesus Christ, nor any that deny the holy Scriptures to be the Word of God; and
yet you are not against the tolerating Episcopacy Presbytetry, or any stinted
form: Why will you not tolerate Popery, as well as Episcopacy? Have not the
Professors of Episcopacy, Murdered and Slain, and do Labor to Murder and Slay
the People of God, as well as the Papists; and will you tolerate the Common
Prayer among the Episcopacy, and not the Mass Book among the Papists; seeing
that the Mass was the Substance, out of which the Common Prayer was Extracted.
Here is nothing but Partiality to tolerate one Thing, and not another of the
same kind, etc. Now Brother, you see how we are against Episcopacy, even as
much as against Popery, and should tolerate the one, as soon as the other. And
to be plain, I think the Episcopal are kinder to us than we deserve.


Clark. But say G. Whitehead, we do not believe the Civil Authority, or any
concerned therein, will Countenance, or Permit such an Usurped Authority, or
Pernicious President, as G. Keith has Assumed, or Attempted in this Case. We
presume the said G. Keith, can produce no Legal Commission, and.c Now Friend
Thomas, how came G. Whitehead to be thus Unbelieving, and Presumptuous; for I
am told the Lord Mayor, (with the Concurrence of the Bishop of London) gave G.
Keith leave, and sent his Marshal to keep the Peace; and that one of the
Sheriffs was their also; and that the World's People (for so we call all but
our selves) were well satisfied, and glad of the Opportunity, to hear the gross
Errors, and vile Heresies of our Brethren laid open, and exposed to public
Notice.


Teach. I must again answer on the Affirmative, that our Brother Whitehead was
first Unbelieving, and secondly, very Presumptive, and thereby Reflected on the
Wisdom and Conduct of the Civil Magistrate, Arroganely signifying and
suggesting, that the Magistrates are more ready to Recognize, Help, and Assist
us; who have Arraigned, Tried, and Condemned them all, who have Impeached their
Proceedings, in their Courts of Judicature; who have Dialogu'd the Bishops,
Pastors, and Teachers, who say, the Common Prayer is a Branch, Sprung from the
Pope, that the Pope gives Life and Breath to it; and that from the Popes Loins
it draws its Strength; that the Church of England is the Whore, and the
Parliament the Beast that carry her. That the Bishops and Ministers are
Monsters, which from the Adulterous Womb of the Church are brought forth, that
we have ripped up the Bowels (of the Church) and discovered her Adulterous Womb.
Saying, p. 39. And now behold ye Archbishops, Lord-bishops, Deans, Prebends,
Doctors, Vicars, and Curates, and all Prelaticals. Here is the Womb of your
Conception opened, etc. Now Brother Ben. all these things considered, what
reason had our dear Brother in Iniquity, G. Whitehead, to presume, (had not he
been Impudent, as well as Presumptuous) That the Government should so far
tolerate us, and not Assist G. Keith, who hold all the Essential Points of the
Christian Faith, that the Men of the World hold, viz. First, That Faith in our
Lord Jesus Christ, as he Suffered, and rose again from the Dead, is necessary
to our Salvation. Secondly, That Justification, and Sanctification; is by Faith
in the Blood of Christ outwardly shed, being applied by Faith and the Operation
of his Holy Spirit in us. Thirdly, That after Death, there will be a
Resurrection of the Body that dies. Fourthly, And that Christ will come
without us in his Glorified Body, at the Day of Judgment, to Judge both the
Quick and the Dead, and whose Principles lead him to submit to Authority;
witness, his keeping the Fast, appointed by King William, April 28. 1697. When
our Brethrens Shops were open in Submission to the Commandment of our great
Apostle G. Fox. I say all these things considered, I cannot but marvel at our
Brother Whitehead's Presumption, not to say Impudence, really Brother Ben. I am
persuaded we loose Ground, and I fear we are going downwards, and that our fall
will be speedy, unless we sincerely Retract our Scandalous Books, and Erroneous
Writings; and though our Brother Whitehead, neither consult Events, nor fear
Effects, I think it will stand us in hand to look about us.

So that we have little reason to boast of being Recognized Protestants, by
such as we account Christians, and whom we would not tolerate no more then we
would Tolera Papists, or such as Worship false Gods, as this Book of ours Teach.


Clark. Fifthly, Well, come, it is not very late, and since we are entered into
Discourse, let us talk freely, I will warrant thee, that John Pennyman, George
Keith, Francis Bugg, and Thomas Crisp, before they left us, have had many an
Hours Discourse of this Kind, pray then what think you of G. Whitehead; is he
not very bold to send out the Quakers Protestation against the meeting
appointed by G. Keith. And therein to be so Presumptuous, as to suggest, that
G. Keith had not License of the Civil Authority, as if he knew the Lord Mayors
Place, and Power better than himself.


Teach. I Answer, G. Whitehead, was not only Bold but Impudent. But what shall
I say, I have of late seen his Books, and considered them, and it is like him
every way; I remember I saw a Friend that was lately in the North, and saw his
House where he was born, not worth Fifty Shillings: I Discoursed another, that
said he came among us a poor Boy on foot, and lived upon Alms; yet lately
Riding out of Town, he had Been. Antrobus to ride before him, and Tho. Kent, one
of our Ministers, worth many Hundreds of Pounds, rod behind him, carrying his
Portmantel, and he in State in the mdidle, like some Peer; which answers the
Old Proverb; set a Beggar on Horseback, and he knows not how to Ride. Again,
for us that account the Church of England, the Whore of Babylon, and
Antichristians, Summon the Bishops, Dialogue the Clergy, Arraign, Try, and
Condemn the Protestants; and declare in our Books, that it is as Laudable to
tolerate Popery, as Episcopacy: And after all this, to presume that the
Government thus Condemned, will so stand by us, Assist us, and Defend us, as
not to have our Errors exposed, this is such Presumption, and manifest
Impudence, that I presume has not a Parallel.


Clark. Well, but I have heard, that in Scotland, as well as in France; that
the Government do not permit the Presbyterians to hold a Synod, unless they
have a Commissioner Recide therein; but I confess, we are above that. First, we
scorn to ask the World's People leave; for we once a Year, in Whitson-Week hold
a Synod, keep our Doors Locked, or else a good Guard to keep out the World's
People, and when we are met, we consider what Laws the Worldly Magistrates have
made, which suit not with our Light within. And if we find any for paying
Tithes, or Repairing Churches, or the like; them we give warning to all our
Associates, through the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Berwick upon Tweed; not to pay to them, but Testify against them, as a Grand,
viz. a great Oppression; and not only so, but which is ten times worse, an
Antichristian Yoke; and thereby Absolve our Disciples from their Obedience to
the Laws of the Land. And if the King himself give forth a Proclamation to keep
a Fast, we matter it no more than we do their Law for Tyth's; they being both
against the Commandment of George Fox, our great Apostle, see part the first,
p. 12. Now the Question is, whether this be not great Impudence.


Teach. Answer, yea; and if I do answer, I must say yea, but it is like all our
Proceedings. For First, our Books teach, that George Fox was Glorified at
Lancaster Assize, 1664. That none knew him, nor his Name, that he was before
Languages were, part the first, p. 38. That he see the Heavens opened; that he
was in the Paradise of God, so filled with Power, having on his Leather
Bretches, that the World's People did fly before him; that in Beverly Church,
he was like an Angel, and spoke the Wonderful things of God: The Voice of God
came to a Trooper, and bid him go to G. Fox for Direction; F. Howgill said of
him, that he spoke with Authority, and not like the Scribes; Jos. Cole, said
his Kingdom was Established in Righteousness, and of the Increase thereof,
there shall be no end. Sol. Eccles, said of him, the World was made by him,
John Audland, said, Dear and Precious one, in whom my Life is bound up, and my
Strength in thee stands. Then he went through the City of Litchfield baresoot,
crying, woe! woe! to the Bloody City of Litchfiield; I saw in the Street a Pole
of Blood, etc. and a hundred Lies, Stories, and Fables, and pretended Miracles
in his Journal, etc. And for us to think that the Government will be against
the Discovery of these, and the like Errors; no, let us not be mistaken, I am
truly Brother Ben. afraid that G. Keith, Francis Bugg, Thomas Crisp, and others
follow us up so to the Heels, as at last we shall be forced either to Retract
our Errors, or do worse, and then we shall go down faster then we got up: And
so fare thee well, till I see the next Volume of G. Fox. I must go hence, it is
late.


The Conclusion.
Christian Reader,
I think the Friends have spoke more truth in a corner in two or three hours
time, than all their Leaders have Preached this 20 years. But say some, if
these things be so in very deed, how came they to obtain so many and frequent
Favors of the Government? I Answer, because the Parliament do not know them,
no more than Constantius knew the Hypocrisy of the Arrians, who at length,
through their subtle delusions, and fair pretenses, prevailed and got the Pulpit
and the Orthodox banished; and I have heard some fear the like consequence
respecting the Quakers: But, let such be satisfied that Quakerism is at the
height and begins to tumble; and our Governors, both of Church and State,
begin to see them. I remember that in 1693. They were very fair to obtain a
Bill for their solemn Affirmation to go for an Oath; but when I delivered in my
sheet, showing their Principles, in two hours time it was thrown out, and, as
Col. Goldwell told me, there was not a Man appeared for them; and when I came
to London, March 1696. some worthy Members of the Commons House chid me for not
coming sooner, saying they wanted matter of Fact; adding that the Quakers
frequent and unwearied Solicitation prevailed with too many worthy Gentlemen,
who understand not their undermining Principles. However much good may their
obtained Bill do 'em, since the 10 l. clause is in, and they barred from any
place of Trust, so much as of being Constable: And whereas their judgment is,
whatever is more than yea, yea, and nay, nay, comes of evil, and is Swearing,
yet now they must call God to witness, etc. which is indeed not less nor more
than an Oath; and this pleases some of them that could Swear before, but some
it displeases who say, the Act do them no good; for whatever is more than yea,
yea, nay, nay, is swearing. Well, but may some say, have not the Quakers
Merrited the favor bestowed on them, yea by the rule of contraries, for the
Quakers have Recognized the Parliament Antichrists, the Beast that carry the
Whore; and that it is as commendable to give Liberty of Conscience to the
Papists, nay to a People that worship false Gods, graven Images, etc. as to
tolerate Episcopacy, the false Church, whose Bowels they have ripped up;
adding, that the Common Prayer Book is Popery, and from the Loins of the Pope
received its Strength, etc. And the Parliament have, as they pretend and often
boast, Recognized them Protestant Dissenters, give them their Liberty without
any restraint; but how? not knowing them nor their Principles, but, as
Constantius was; are mistaken in them, whose Books and Carriages are of two
sorts. I remember the last Whitsuntide in Northcoat's Shop in George-yard
Lombard Street, W. Mead the great Quaker, asked me, if I broke Bread with the
Church of England, I said yea; what, said he, do thou lick up thy old Vomit?
I Will warrant you he said no such word to the Worthy Members of the House of
Commons, nor to the Bishops of the Church; no, no, as their Books carry two
different Faces; so do their Carrage; and if it be Criminal to conceal Treason
against my natural Prince, what is it to conceal these Impostors? who
undervalue the Death and Sufferings of Christ; condemn his Laws, despise his
Ordinances, revile his Magistrates, and reproach his Ministers, which I hope
this Book fully sets forth; and which I stand ready to prove out of their Books
upon G. W.'s Proposition to the Parliament, as cited by me, in the First Part
p. 123. And until they do so meet, and if proved upon them, then Retract them,
they are not to be believed, though in their Meetings they like the Magitians in
Moses's time may make the likeness of the same Confession and Profession that
G, Keith and others do, as well as in their late Books; yet while their other
Books, which teach the contrary, stand uncondemned, the Quakers are Quakers
still, and their Principles diametrically opposite to all Christians, Saints
and Martyrs in all Ages; and they ought to be guarded against, as Enemies to
Church and State.

May 5. 97. F. E.

A Short Map of Quakerism.
Reader,
HAving since the foregoing was Printed off, seen a Book, Entitled, Some
Seasonable Reflections upon the Quakers Protestation against the Proceedings at
Turners-hall, April 29. 1697. etc. Wrote by an Ingenious Hand. Wherein the said
Author marvels, (as well he may) that the Quakers should Accuse G. Keith for
Invading of Property; who themselves hold it no Sin to Invade the Properties of
others; as in the Case of Tyth's; which are as much the Property's of the
Clergy (Confirmed by Act of Parliament) as any Man's Estate in England; nay,
not only so, but (as the Author well observes) in other things, from several
Particulars which G. Fox, etc. sent to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, Printed, 1659. p. 8. 32. Particular, viz. Let all those Fines that
belong to Lords of Manors be given to the Poor, for Lords have enough.
Particular 29. Let all those Abby-lands, Gleab-lands that is given to the
Priests, be given to the Poor of the Nation; let all the Abby's,
Steeple Houses, and Whitehall, be for Almshouses, for the Blind and the Lame
to be there. And in the fore mentioned Address to the Parliament, 1659.
Subscribed by above 7000 Quakers, p. 59. 63, and 65. They require that the Late
King, (as these Rebels Styled him) his Rents, Parks, and Houses should be Sold,
and all the Colleges and Lands, and the very Bells out of the Churches, except
one in a Town, to give notice of Fire, etc. This was no Invading of Property in
them; but for G. Keith, or any others, to Detect their Errors; this is
Incroaching upon their Properties, as Englishmen, yea forsooth Persecution:
But says Edward Borough, in his Word of Advice to the Soldiers, p. 2. Give
the Priests Blood to drink; for they are worthy, Slay Baal, turn the Hirelings
out of the Kingdom, etc. Here was no design of Persecution, or hurting any
Man's Property, or of Reviling, and Blemishing the Reputation of Freeborn
Englishmen, and exposing them to the Fury of the Mob, to the Scorn, Contempt,
and Rage of the mixed Multitude, who are Unmeet to Judge of Religious
Controversies, as these Meek Lambs, the Quakers urge against G. Keith in their
Protestation, etc. And that they are not changed, see their last Yearly
Epistle, 1696. Wherein they Exhort their Disciples, not to be moved at the
Objections against their Doctors; But to hold up the Holy Testimony of Truth,
which has made us, say they, a People to God, and Preserved us unto this Day:
And that in all the parts of it; for Truth is one, and changes not; and what it
convinced us of to be Evil in the beginning, it Reproves still, etc. i. e. The
Church of England, and all the Magistrates, Kings, Lords, and Commons, to be
Serpents, Devils, and Scarlet-colored Beasts, etc. For Truth is one (say they)
and changes not, i. e. Quak. who are, and always have been in the Truth, have
not changed at all since the beginning. So that it is plain, that as they are
the same still, so have they made themselves answerable; for all that have been
said by them since their beginning. And therefore in order to draw a perfect
Map of Quakerism, I shall consider.

1. Who the Quakers Account False Ministers. 2. How they pass Sentence on them
as such. 3. And particularly, what bitter Enemies they are against Episcopacy.
4. Who the Quakers account true Ministers, and the true Church, the Bride, the
Lamb's Wife.
And first, who they account False Ministers.

1. Such as Sprinkle Infants, and tell People it is an Ordinance of Christ.
George Fox's Primer, p. 84. 2. Such as Preach Christ without, and bid People
believe in him, as he is in Heaven above. W. Smith's Primmer, p. 8. 3. All that
do study the Scriptures, and Preach out of them, etc. Readiness Errand to
Damascus, etc. p. 7. 4. All that either Receive, or Pay Tyth's, etc. Thomas
Ellwood's Antidote, p. 78.
I could give a hundred Instances of the like Nature, by these Primmers and
Books they Teach their Children, and Inculcate these horrible Principles into
their Disciples, viz. That all that Baptize with Water, all that Preach out of
the Scriptures, all that Preach Christ without, as he is in Heaven above at
God's right Hand, making Intercession for us: As our for ever Blessed and
Adored Advocate. In short, all that Pay, or Receive Tyth's: And thus have they
Sentenced, not only the Ministers of the Church of England. But Presbyterians,
Independents, and Baptists, and the Deceased Martyr's, and Christians in all
Ages, and they are the same still, they are not changed; and by this they shall
be proved to be the same, in that, 1st. They so Profess to be, in all the Parts
of Quakerism, and 2ly. In that they refuse to Retract and Condemn these their
Antichristian Principles. Again, Thirdly, How they, i. e. the Quakers pass
Sentence on them as such, see their Book. A Brief Discovery of a Threefold
Estate of Antichrist, etc. p. 7. 8, 9, 10. In Manner and Form; thus stand their
Superscription, viz.

Of the False Ministry.
1. The Priests of the World are Conjurers, Raising dead Doctrine, dead Uses,
dead Motives, dead Reasons out of the Letter which is Death; raising Death out
of Death, notatable Conjurers! 2. Thieves, and Robbers. 3. Antichrists, the
Priests of Baal, who cannot show any Scripture for their Heathenish Ways, and
Beastial Worships. 4. Witches, and blind Guides, who Bewitch poor Creatures. 5.
Devils, the Serpent is Head in them: 6. Liars, the Commission and Call of
Baal's Priests, come from Oxford and Cambridge; these are not Ministers of
Christ, but Stewards of the Devils Magazine, Dissemblers, and Liars, a
Vaporous, and Serpentine Generation; going about to Strangle the Child Jesus,
holding a Worm-eaten Beastly-form: 7. Blasphemers, yea, of the Devil. 8.
Scarlet-colored Beasts, a Harlot full of Abominations, and Filthiness. 9.
Babylon's Merchants, Selling Beastly Wares for a large Price; the Letter which
is Dust and Death, the day is coming when these Idol Merchants shall cry, etc.
10. Whited Walls, Painted Sepulchers, professing something, possessing nothing
but Poisoned Stuff. 11. Ravening Wolves, evermore Persecuting the pure Truth
that the Saints live in, Ringleaders of that Wicked Design. 12. Greedy Dogs,
really they are Bloodhounds, still hunting and gasping after their Prey, like
the Mouth of Hell. Barking and Raging like Sodomites. 13. Eminent and Ambitious
Pharisees, living in the same Antichristian Steps that the Pharisees did, of
the Devil; wear Gowns, woe! woe! woe! was the Portion of those Pharisees then; and
woe! woe! woe! is their Portion now; and Woe and Misery is the Portion of the
Upholders (whether King or Parliament) of that Treacherous Crew, and Deceitful
Generation.
Reader, I have showed how the Quakers Arraign, Try, Judge, and Condemn the
Clergy. And now I have fairly Recited their Sentence of Condemnation,
Pronounced by an Eminent Quaker, Thomas Lawson, and Witnessed too in York
castle, by three other of their then Principal Speakers, viz. Thomas Aldam,
Benjamin Nicholson, and John Harwood: In which is a Letter, Wrote by Ja. Nailer
to George Fox, and George Fox's Blasphemy; and too much of that Nature: But
least these five should not give Sentence sufficient, pray hear what my Lord
Chief Justice, W. Penn says, who though he came in late, yet he drives the Nail
to the Head, in his Witty Windy Wordy Book, Styled, The Guide Mistaken, etc. p.
18. And whilst the Idle Gormandizing Priests of England, run away with above
1500000 l. a Year, under pretense of being God's Ministers; and that no sort of
People have been so Universally, through all Ages, the Bane of Soul and Body of
the Universe; as that abominable Tribe; for whom the Theater of God's most
dreadful Vengeance, is reserved to Act their Eternal Tragedy upon, etc.

The next Head I am upon, is to show, what Enemies the Quakers were, and still
are to Episcopacy: But having showed already out of their Famous Smith's Works,
how they Dialogue their Clergy, rip up the Bowels of Episcopacy, charge the
Book of Divine Service Established by Law, and Confirmed by His Present
Majesty's Royal Declaration) to spring from the Pope, etc. And many other
Quaker Testimonies I have Cited; so that it seems needless; yet that I may
leave nothing without Presedent, or Proof, see Edward Burrough's Works, p. 618.
619. In Answer to the Baptists Declaration, Printed about the Year 1659. which
also was Answered by Richard Hubberthorn, as in the Dialogue: But in regard
that this Burrough's was a Prophet among them of the first Form; even one of
their three Worthy's: A Son of Thunder, one of whom it is Written in the Volumn
of the Commendatory Epistles prefixed to his Works. That he Burrows was endued
with the Almighty Power of God, and his Works Printed by the Approbation of G.
Whitehead, G. Fox, and others of their Chief Leaders, Anno 1672. when
Episcopacy was Settled by Law, and even when they Flocked to the Parliament
every day; begging Favors; yet then was this Re-printing: And the like may be
noted of Richard Hubberthorn's Answer to the Baptists Recited Declaration;
well, to the Matter.

In Answer (say E. B.) to the Baptists Declaration: Whereas (you Baptists)
speak of the Public Ministers of the Nation; that you will not destroy them,
but stand by them and preserve them from Violence and Injury, etc. To which
(says Burrows) I answer, what are you (Baptists) about to make a League, and a
Covenant with Antichrist? Have you been opposing them in Words, and are you now
Recanting of what you have have done, when you are sensible of a Danger upon
you? And will you now bind your selves to stand by them, and preserve them from
all Injury, and even as they are Ministers too: But let me ask you (say this
Innocent Quaker) do you look upon them as Ministers of Christ, or of
Antichrist? If Ministers of Christ, wherefore do you oppose them? Oh ye
Hippocrites! But if they are Ministers of Antichrist; then how is it that you
will stand by them, and preserve them as such: Is not this a League with Hell
and Death, etc.

I think this very Testimony from this Great Prophet of theirs Printed, 1659.
and Reprinted in 1672. by Whitehead, and the Chief Quakers Approbation: (and at
the same time too, when the Quakers were seeking Favor; was such a piece of
Impudence, as Arius never had. But to proceed to my 4th, and last Head
proposed, viz. Who are in the Quakers Account True, and Orthodox Preachers
since; all that Baptize with Water, all that Study the Scriptures, and Preach
out of them; all that Preach Christ without, as he is in Heaven above; all that
take, Receive, or pay Tyth's, are false Ministers, Witches, Devils, etc. In a
word, all not Quakers, for so they affirm, The Quakers Challenge, etc. p. ^.
Come Protestants, Presbyterians, Independents, and Baptists, the Quakers deny
you all, p. 3. The Quakers are in the Truth, and none but they, etc. And
therefore it is highly necessary to know who they account true Preachers; which
are these that follow, viz.

1. Such as Teach that the Name of Christ belong to every Member of the Body,
as well as to him that Suffered at Jerusalem; that his Body was but a Vail, a
Garment, etc. and which they can never call Christ; that his Person was no more
to his Disciples, then another Person, but for the sake of the Spirit, Frame
and Temper that dwelt in him, his Disciples loved him; that Christ is not God
and Man in one Person. For Proof hereof, see Is. Pennington's Question to
Professors, etc. p. 20. to 33. Will Bayly's Works, p. 300. 307. The Sword of
the Lord Drawn, etc. p. 5.

2. Such as deny the Blessed Trinity, see W. Penn's Sandy Foundation, etc. p.
15. to 20. and W. Penn's Christian Quaker, and his Dev. Testimony, p. 98.

3. Such as Teach that the Scriptures are Dust, Death, Serpents Food; that the
Sacraments are Dust, that Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, are Serpents Meat,
Dust, and Beastly Ware; and such as propose it doubtful, whether Moses, or
Hermes was the 1st. Penman of the Scripture; and whether some of it was not
spoke by the Grand Imposter; some by Wicked Men, some by Wise Men, ill Applied,
some by Good Men, ill Expressed, some by False Prophets, and yet True, some by
True Prophets, and yet False; for Proof, see The Quakers Refuge Fixed, etc. p.
17. News coming out of the North, etc. p. 14. David's Enemies Discovered, etc.
p. 7.

4. Such as Teach that the Scriptures are not the Word of God, and that so to
Affirm is Blasphemy. See G. Fox's Book, Styled Firebrands, etc. 2 part, p. 159.
Printed, 1678. and his Great Mist. etc. p. 240. Printed 1659.

5. Such who Teach that the Quakers Writings are the Word of God, given forth
by the Eternal Spirit of God; that we may as well burn the Scriptures as their
Books, Papers, and Queries: That if ever we own the Prophets, Christ, or the
Apostles, we will own their Books; that what is spoken from the Spirit of Truth
in any, is of as great Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and
greater for Proof. See Truth's Defense, etc. p. 2. 104, 107. Fox's his Answer
to the Westmorland Petitioners, etc. p. 3. both Printed, 1653. likewise G.
Whitehead's Serious Apology, etc. p. 49.

A Brief Discovery, etc. p. 8. Several Papers given forth for spreading Truth,
etc. p. 40.

6. Such as Teach that Water Baptism is no Ordinance of God, but an Institution
of the Whore of Rome. And that the Practice of it is Idolatry, and that such
are bewitched to accept of those two Institutions of Christ, Baptism, and the
Lord's Supper: For Proof, News coming up out of the North, etc. p. 34. 35. A
Music Lecture, p. 25. Burrough's Works, p. 51. 518. William Smith's Primmer,
p. 36.

7. Such as Teach that the Quakers Sufferings are greater, and more unjust than
the Sufferings of Christ, his Apostles, and all the Marters since: That the
Sufferings Inflicted upon Christ, his Apostles, and Martyrs, were chiefly done
by a Law, and in a great part by the due Execution of a Law, see Burrough's
Works, p. 273. Behold Reader, not only how they Magnify their Sufferings, the
Blasphemy of their Doctors: But the horrible Lie, far exceeding that of
Mahomet's Journey to Heaven, as at large in that Learned Treatise, Wrote by Dr.
Prideaux, Archdeacon of Suffolk, Entitled, The Nature of an Imposture, in the
Life of Mahomet, etc. Printed, 1697. Sold by W. Rogers, at the Sun in
Fleetstreet, London.

8. Such as Teach, and leave it upon Record to Posterity that they Suffer 20 l.
at a time for Preaching; when they not only not suffer a penny, but get ten
pound clear by the Bargain, as in this Book at large showed in the Instance of
that Self magnifying Teacher of theirs, Samuel Cater of Little Port, in the
Isle of Ely: See The lamentable Cry of Oppression, etc. p. 40. to the end,
Hadenham old Records, etc.

9. Such as Teach that the very Christ of God is within us, his Sufferings
within us; that his offering himself as a Sacrifice, is within us; and by the
scope of their Ancient Testimony, deny him that was nailed to the Cross,
Pierced, etc. to be Christ, which their Light never was, etc. See Burrough's
Works, etc. p. 149. W. Smith's Primmer, p. 8. 9. and his Catechism, p. 57. to
60.

10. Such as Teach that the Quakers have a a Spirit given them beyond all the
Forefathers, and thereby know who are Saints, who are Devils, and who are
Apostates, without speaking ever a word; and that none need to give the Quakers
Discerning, or Judgment; for Christ, i. e. their Light does furnish them at all
times, and on all occasions, see G. Fox's Great Mist. p. 89. Judas and the
Jews, etc. p. 58.

11. Such as Teach (and that truly too) that the Quakers are raised contrary to
all Men, (yea, ever since Noah's Flood) and that they have given their Power
only to God, and that they cannot seek (that is a grand Lie, the Parliament can
bear me witness) to outward Authority. But stand Witness against Parliaments
(that is true), Judges, Justices, and to such Laws, Customs, Courts, etc. they
cannot yield Obedidience; that the Quakers Kingdom is from above, and that they
reject the Beasts Authority (i. e. the Parliament) and the Dragons Power: And
that the Quakers are gathered up into the Life which the Holy Men of God lived
in. That they (i. e. Quakers) are fallen from the World, and it is Ways and
Nature. That even the Father (oh dreadful Blasphemy!) bears Witness of them,
and therefore their Witness is true (Alluding, as in many other Cases to
Equalize themselves to Christ, John 5. 32. There is another that bears
witness of me, and I know the witness which he witnesses of me is true) that
Teach saying, What have you (the public Ministry) lost the Lord to be your
Strength, that you must flee for Help to Men? Must they make Laws to Establish
you, and set you up? Is not this the Whore that Rode upon the Beast? and that
the Beast (meaning the Parliament) carry her, Again, to the Parliament, viz.
You do but cause People to drink of the Whores Cup, and you are but them that
do carry the Whore, viz. the False Church: And this is plain Dealing to tell
you the Truth; for proof, see Burrough's Works, p. 50. 53, 501, 522, 507. 521.

12. Such as Teach that the public Ministry are Witches, Devils, Wolves,
Antichrists, Sodomites, etc. The very bane of Soul and Body of the Universe:
That the Dissenting Ministers are an Ill-bred Pedantick Crew, the bane of
Religion, and pest of the World, the old Incendiaries to Mischief, and best to
be spared of Mankind, against whom the boiling Vengeance of an Irritated God is
ready to be poured out; that they should give them (i. e. the Clergy) Blood to
drink; for they are worthy: Turn the Hirelings out of the Kingdom; that it is as
warrantable to tolerate Popery, as Episcopacy; that tolerating Episcopacy, is
making a League with Hell: That all Kings and Emperors have sprung up in the
Night of Apostasy; that the Kings are Spiritual Egyptians, that such as dote
on an Earthly King are Traitors; that it is a nasty and dirty thing to mention a
House of Lords, that all those Fines which belongs to Lords of Manors, should
be given to the Poor; that all Abby-lands, Gleab-lands, that is given to the
Priests, be given to the Poor of the Nation (Judas was kind to the Poor) that
all the great Houses, Abbeys, Steeple Houses, the Kings Rents, Parks, and
Houses should be Sold, and all Colledg-lands, and Bells out of the Churches,
except one in a Town, to give notice of Fire: That to take away the Priests
Hour glass, if you be moved to it, is owned by the Eternal Power. For proof of
this Doctrine, and five hundred times as much of the same Nature, Read these
Quotations, for this is but a short Map of Quakerisme, viz. G. Fox 's Great
Mist. p. 5. 30. to 40. A Serious Apol. etc. p. 156. A Brief Discovery, etc. p.
7. 8. Several Papers given forth by G. Fox, etc. p. 8. 9, 12, 16, 18. G. Fox's
59 Particulars sent to the Parliament, Printed, 1659. p. 8. 59, 63, 65.
Burrough's Advice to the Soldiers, p. 2. The Guide Mistaken, by W. Penn, etc.
p. 18.

Reader, I have in this little Map, given thee a hint of the Doctrines of the
Quaker Church: I think they are so abominable Erroneous, Blasphemous, and
Uncharitable, that they need no Comment; and as to the Quaker Church, their
Bride, and their Lambs Wife; if you still ask me for a Description of her; I
tell you they are a broken divided Sect; who adhear to the Teachers of this
Doctrine; though in their Meetings before the World's People; they sometimes talk
a little otherwise, but search their Books, especially their old ones (and they
are not changed) and this is the perfect Figure, nay, plain Words of their
Doctrine. But if any one, or more will Condemn their Recited Errors publicly
under their Hands; they thenceforth are not of their Church, but ought to be
taken in as Protestants, even as G. Keith and his Friends have done, whom I
neither Interrogate nor Accuse. And now if after all, their deluded Disciples,
will not be so noble, as to search, and after searching to to Renounce them,
and their Errors, but will still remain willingly Ignorant; it is a great sign
that God has given them up to strong Delusion.

Reader, the design of the Recited Book, Entitled, Some Reflections upon the
Quakers Protestation, etc. And all that is Wrote against them, is only to bring
them to a through Conviction of their Errors; and to such an Acknowledgment, and
Confession of them, as is Indispensible to a true Conviction; there is nothing
more desired of them than to Retract, and disown what is proved to be Faulty in
their Writings, and such Faults too, as are either Destructive to the Faith, or
Scandalous (and so Sinful) to the Reputation of their Neighbors, in giving
False and Uncharitable Representations of them: And this they are obliged to do
by all the Rulers of Christianity; it being the smallest Satisfaction they can
make, to repair (so far at least) the Injuries that are thereby done to the
Christian Doctrine, and the Good Name of those they have Wrongfully Traduced;
they are the Aggressors, they have Attacked our Religion in all the Parts of
it, our Bishops, and Clergy, and our whole Constitution; and we require no
greater Amends for all that they have done against us, then to say that they
are sorry for it, and though they should refuse us, even this Justice, and
reasonable Security for the future; yet we press for no Persecution against
them, for no Fines, or Imprisonment; but only that we should not be obliged to
acknowledge them as true Protestants; and that we may have Liberty to Justify
our Selves and Reliligion, against the Calumnies with which they have loaded
both: And if this be refused us, the Cry of Persecution will run on our side:
Is it no Persecution of the Tongue for the Quakers to Represent our Bishops and
Clergy, as the most odious of Mankind.

We grant their is a Toleration, but it is only for Religious Worship, but with
all caution, that the Doors be open; so as any may go in and see what they do;
but not to hold General Councels, with their Doors Locked up, or a Guard of
three or four Stout Men to keep all out, but whom they will admit; and their
Business is Government, that is plain, which is no way within the Act of
Parliament; for there is a Clause in the Act, p, 307. Be it Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That if any Assembly of Persons, Dissenting from the
Church of England, shall be had in any Place for Religious Worship with the
Doors locked, bard Mark, though they do not always Bolt and Bar, yet have they 3
or 4 lusty Fellows to keep Guard during their Convocation.
or bolted, during any time of such Meeting together, they shall not receive
any benefit from this Law; but be liable to all the Pains and Penalties of all
the aforesaid Laws, etc. which Prohibit all Convocations, etc. without the
King's License; much more to Enact, Promulgate, or Decree any Orders or
Constitutions whatsoever.

Now if the Bishops and Clergy of England, though Recognized and Established by
Law, would incur a Praemunire; so much as to meet consult, and debate, though
concerning only their own Order and Spiritual Jurisdiction, without the King's
License. How then have the Quakers this Authority to hold their yearly
Convocation without control; and with their Doors either locked and barred, or
a Guard at them; and when there, not only to make Laws for their People to
observe, but to Repeal, if not Verbally, yet Vertually the Laws of the Land.

And further, If when the Clergy do meet in Council, Convocation, or Synod; the
King may have his Commissioners present to Inspect and even to Regulate their
Proceedings, That nothing may be their Transacted prejudicial to the
Government: How much more reasonable is it to have the Quakers Synods
Inspected, who have given such demonstration of their Antimagistratical
Principles. If Christian Emperors and Princes have had their Ambassadors and
Ministers present in general Councils; If the Hugonots in France have
submitted, nay desired and requested to have the Kings Commissioners present in
their Synods, which by His Majesty's Grace and Favor they have been suffered
to hold: If the Presbyterians in Scotland, though now Established as the National
Religion, have a Commissioner present in their general Assemblies, why should
the Quakers not be obliged to receive a Commissioner from the Government to
recide in their Anniversary Synods. If at their beginning they were too
Inconsiderable for the notice of the Government; they are now become a numerous
and wealthy People; and in all respects worthy not to be neglected; especially
if their Principles be as their Writings set forth: And their not meeting G.
Keith, and others who have in like manner challenged them, is not the least
demonstration of their Guilt.

The Postscript to the Map.
Being told that the Quakers had Answered my Book The Qua. Set, I went
yesterday to their Booksellers Shop, in White-hart court for one, but found it
not; but seeing G. Whitehead's Antidote against the venom of the Snake, etc. I
found two Passages, which being Replied to, may indifferently serve for an
Answer to the Book. For, no Charge can be undenyably true upon them: Why?
Because they can deny any Charge how true soever it be. Again, if they will not
Determine a Point in Controversy, being proved out of their most Authentic
Authors; unless we can produce the Original Manuscript Copy, which is
impossible for us to do; then farewell all Answering Books: Behold the Quakers
run, and are ready to give up their Cause, the Passages are these. viz.

The Author of the Snake, etc. said, That Mr. John Pennyman, was an Ancient,
Worthy, and most Sincere Gentleman (as indeed none that know him, can with any
Color of Justice say the contrary) who had been invegled with their False Show
and Pretense, to Piety, till he discovered their Gross Immoralities; which
being complained of, though the Fact could not be denied; yet they could not
Sensure any, that remained in their Unity, for which Reason he at last left
them:

G. W's. Antidote, 252. Answer, as his Character of John Pennyman, is in the
Superlative Degree, appears Flattery, and his Scandalous Story's on his behalf;
and reason of leaving us, appears neither True, nor Impartial: I never had any
undeniable Proof of the Matter of Fact heard from John Pennyman, etc.

Reply, Well done George, thou art in the right on it; for I never knew any
Matter of Evil Fact Charged on the Quakers, and their Errors; but thou have had
the Impudence to deny it, at least as Stated, or in some other Sophistical
manner: So that it is Morally Impossible to prove Matter of Fact against the
Quakers undenyably True. Why? because they have a Face of Brass, to deny any
Matter of Fact against them; how true soever it be, of which this Antidote is
not the least Instance; and for which Reason, I could wish the Author of the
Snake may not trouble himself to Reply:

Again, 2dly, p. 254. G. Whitehead, has Cited a Passage in the Snake, etc. viz.
Quakers Registring their Sufferings for the Truth (as they call it) would make
them exceed all the Ten Persecutions, and to be more Undescerving than the
Sufferings of Christ himself, or the Apostles, etc. To which G. Whitehead
Answers. These are False Suggestions, we have no such hopes he (i. e. Snake)
Cites Edward Burrough's Unfairly, and Partially in this Point: And yet the
Comparison of the Quakers Sufferings, as Greater, and more Unjust than in the
Days of Christ, and his Apostles, or any time since, is a mistake. And whether
it was so first Verbally Stated by Edward Burrough's, or some time since; I
shall not Determine, unless I see the Original Copy, etc.

Reply, I do positively Affirm, and before any Ten Ministers of the Protestant
Churches, viz. Episcopal, Presbyterian Independent, or Baptists, will prove
that the from Recited Authors Charge is undeniably true Matter of Fact. But
what then, G. W. still complains of Evil Suggestions, of Unfair, and Partial
Citations; though poor Heart he is so Stung with this Snake, that he is forced to
acknowledge a Mistake, some where, but dust not determine where; oh horrible!
what, a Book Wrote in 1657. by one of their Inspired Prophets, as the Word of
the Lord, and dispersed 15 Years up and down the Nations, and then Reprinted,
by thy own Approbation, dear George, with thine, and G. Fox's Epistles of
Recommendations. And now to tell us of a Mistake, but know not where, and to
call for Original Manuscripts, Wrote 40 Years since; is such a piece of
Fallible Infallibility; that had I room, I should farther enlarge upon it.

Francis Bugg. Sen.
May 13. 1697.
BOOKS Wrote by Fra. Bugg. Sen.

1. DE Christianae Liberate, etc. in 8vo. bound. 2. The Painted Harlot, both
Stripped and Whipped, etc. 3. Reason against Railing, etc. 4. Innocence
Vindicated, and Envy Rebuked, etc. 5. The Quakers Detected, and their Errors
Confuted. 6. A Let to the Quakers, showing their Frequent Addresses to K. J.
2. 7. Battering Rams against New Rome, etc. 8. One Blow more against New Rome
etc. 9. New Rome Unmasked, and her Foundation shaken, etc. 10. New Rome
Arraigned, and out of her own Mouth Condemned, etc. 11. A Sheet delivered to
the Parliament. Dec. 1693. Entitled, Something in Answer to the Quakers
Allegation, etc. 12. Quakerism Withering, and Christianity Reviving, etc. 13.
Quakerism Annotonized, etc. 14. A Sheet Entit. The Quakers Yearly Meeting
Impeached, etc. 15. A second Summons to the City Abel, by way of Metaphor, to
deliver up Sheba the Son of Bichri, 2 Samuel 20. i. e. G. Whitehead, etc. 16. The
Quakers set in their true Light, etc. 17. A Brief History of the Rise, Growth,
and Progress of Quakerism. 18. The Picture of Quakerism drawn to the Life, etc.
FINIS.

