A brief Answer to two Papers procured from Friends in Maryland, the one
concerning Thomas Budds favoring John Lynam, etc. the other concerning his
owning George Keith's Principles and Doctrines.
WHereas there is two Papers procured from Friends in Maryland, on purpose to
defame me, I think fit to give a true relation of the whole matter, and leave
it to the Consideration of all Impartial Friends of Truth: The matter then is
this, as follows, viz.

About twelve Years ago John ^ary and his Wife came to Burlington, and show a
Letter from G. F. directed to him and three other Friends, in which they were
advised by G. F. to vi^it Friends in West Jarsey, and Friends not knowing of
the differences betwixt them and Friends in Maryland, they were kindly
received, and her Testimony owned. When they went back Robert Stacy and my self
took the opportunity of going in their Boat to the Meeting at West-River, where
some of Rob. Stacy's old Acquaintance came to visit us, and much frequented our
company, viz. John Lynam and his Wife, Edw. Serson, and others, all of them
being strangers to me. Now I found Friends to carry it very straightly to us, but
not one of them did in the least inform me the reason of their strait carriage
all the time of the Meeting, or that John Lynam and his Wife, etc. were out of
unity with Friends, but observed that they were suffered to speak in their
Meetings; and what information I had of the matter it was from some of the
abovesaid Persons that much frequented our company, and who no doubt would
make the best of their own Cause, which I had not favored, had Friends
discha^ged their duty to me, by giving me an account of their being out of
Unity, etc. for when I came to have a right ^nformation concerning them, I writ
to Friends my sense thereof, and did also write a Letter to John Lynam, etc.
advi-sing them to be reconciled to their Brethen; and the next time that I was
at the Meeting at West-River, which was about two years ago, where I publicly
declared against that Contentious Spirit in J. L. and his Wife, etc. declaring
it (as they say in their Paper) to be a killing Spirit, which I still own,
believing that J. L. and the rest, (having so many years continued in that
contentious Spirit) had lost their condition, and were thereby become very
unfit to preach so frequently as they now do. But it is very strange that
Copies should be given out of the Meeting-Book, to let People know the hurt
they say I received by a few days accompanying with the said Persons, when at
the same time they own their Ministry, and John Lynam is one of the 28 Judges
against G. K. and his Friends, although a stranger to the Differences. But the
reason of the reviving of these old matters is to insinuate into People that I
having once been mistaken, so as to favor such bad Spirits as John Lynam and
the rest, I might also be mistaken in my Friend G. Keith. To which I say, That
it was not suddenly that I joined with G.K. but after diligent search and
enquiry into the matter, and earnest Supplication to the Lord, that he would
guide me aright, I was drawn forth to join with G. K. in his Christian
Testimony, and witness Peace and Satisfaction from the Lord therein. And
notwithstanding the 28 Judges say, that G. K. is fallen from the High Places of
Israel, as a man slain in his High Places, and become Treacherous to the Spouse
of his Youth, and as a man without the fear of God before his Eyes; G. K. is a
living man, and it is the Glory of God, Prosperity of Truth, and Salvation of
Souls that he travails for; and these things are Slanders and Lies writ on
purpose, by prejudiced men against him, to slay him in his Reputation, and
lessen Peoples Love to him and his powerful Gospel Ministry, and to hide their
own Ignorance, Error and Unbelief in those Fundamental Principles of Christian
Doctrine, which are the Foundation Cause of the present Difference and
Separation.

The other Paper, which they also recommend to Friends, (signed by Henry
Hosier, John Frue and Charles Hollesworth) says, viz. Understanding that
Thomas Budd is one with George Keith, owning his Principles, which for some
Years past he by his own mouth declared and cautioned several to beware of,
saying, there were dangerous Doctrines that would break forth among us before
long by George Keith.

Answer; I do freely acknowledge that I am one with G. K. in his present
Christian Testimony, and own his sound Christian Principles; but that he does
hold any dangerous Doctrines, or that dangerous Doctrines are broken forth
amongst us who are joined with G. K. remains for them to tell wherein; if they
had known of any dangerous Doctrines among us, it had been more Christian in
them to have writ to us and told wherein we were in an Error, than to have sent
Papers privately abroad, insinuating as if there were dangerous Doctrines
broken forth among us; by which it appears, they are either ignorant of the
Doctrines and Principles we own, or unbelievers therein, and for their better
In^ormation, I recommend to their perusal the Sheet called. An Account of the
Sincere Christian Faith of some of the faithful People called Quakers in
Pennsilvania, etc. wherein I hope will be found no dangerous Doctrines. But
that dangerous Doctrines are held by them that we meet apart from, will easily
appear by a few things mentioned, that are well known to be true, viz. The
Fitzwater said to me, in the presence of diverse Witnesss, That he did not own
any Man Christ Jesus as Mediator in H^a^en without him, but the Grace of God
within him; and though I complained against him to Friends of the Ministry at
their Meeting at Burlington, yet they dealt not with him, nor so much as blamed
him, which manifests they are one with him in his Unbelief. And the Act of
their Monthly Meeting may witness what dangerous Doctrines they hold, viz. That
the Light is sufficient to Salvation without any thing else, viz. without the
Man Christ Jesus, and without the Faith of his Death, Resurrection, Ascension
and Mediation, which is that something else we hold to be necessary to make a
man a true Christian, as well as to believe in the Light within.

And whereas they say, That I said after a mysterious manner, That a Star would
fall, cautioning all to beware of the Times that were coming. In answer, I say,
that several Stars are fallen, and many apostatized from the Faith, witness W.
Stockdale, who said, That to preach Faith in Christ within, and in Christ
without was to preach two Christ; and Arthur Cook put G. K. to prove by
Scripture, that we were to believe in Christ within and in Christ without. And
in opposition to G. K's affirming the necessity of the Faith of Christ without,
as well as in Christ within, Tho Lloyd said, That Christ within did all and
argued some hours, That we might be Christians good enough without all Faith of
Christ as he dyed for our sins, rose again, etc R. Young said, That he never
read in all the Scriptures of Christ without, but that Christ was separated
from his Body in the Cloud, etc. Also, witness some here called Quakers at
Philadelphia hiring men to fight, and signing Commi^sion so to do, and
furnishing the Indians with Powder and Lead to go to war with other Indians,
and some called Ministers among them being worldly Judges and have sentenced to
Death, etc. and their Persecution by fining and Imprisoning of some of their
Brethren for asserting the ancient Principles of Truth and faithful Friends,
which they are apostatized from.

Thomas Budd.

Printed in the Year 1692.


