A Testimony and Caution to such as do make a Profession of Truth, who are in
scorn called Quakers, and more especially such who profess to be Ministers of
the Gospel of Peace, That they should not be concerned in Worldly Government.
WE have for a long time been deeply sensible of the great hurt that many,
professing the same Truth with us, (called in scorn Quakers) have received, and
do remain under in these Parts, as to their Souls inward state in the growth
and prosperity of Truth, and the work and effect of it upon them, so that to
our certain Observation diverse are come to a great loss and decay thereby, as
to their inward state in the Truth, by their meddling with Worldly Government,
in the several parts of it, and respective Offices thereunto belonging; as some
being Judges, wherein they are or may be concerned to pass Sentence of Corporal
Punishment upon some, as not only of an Eye for an Eye, but of Life for Life;
the which, although proper and necessary to be executed by Worldly Rulers and
Judges, yet seeing Christ has forbid it unto his Followers, Mat. 5.38, 39. it
is not proper for such as profess to follow Christ, according to the most
perfect and clear Gospel Dispensations and Ministration professed by us; and as
it does not become any of our Profession to receive or undertake the Office of
a Worldly Judge, to judge in a matter of Life and Death, or any degree of
corporal Punishment, so it is our Judgment and Persuasion, that those of our
Profession of the faithful People (called in scorn Quakers) should not meddle
or be concerned with any other part or office of any worldly Rule or
Government, as to be Justice, Sheriff or Constable, or Jury-man in any Criminal
Causes, or to choose or be chosen so to sit in an Assembly or Provincial Council
to make Laws against Criminal Offenders, extending either to the taking away of
Life or any other corporal punishment. And for this our Persuasion, we give
these following Reasons.

1st. Because Christ has expressly forbid it to his Followers, To take an Eye
for an Eye, or a Tooth for a Tooth, nor to resist Evil; for the same Reason,
not to take Life for Life, or Limb for Limb, or to use any Corporal Punishment
toward any.

2dly. Because Paul said, in behalf of himself and all good Christians,
according to that clear Gospel Dispensation that they were come unto, 2 Cor.
10.4. The Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal. Ephesians. 2.12. And we wrestle
not against Flesh and Blood.

3dly. Because Christ our Leader and Example said, He came not to destroy men's
Lives, but to save them, Luke 9.56. And when the Woman taken in Adultery was
brought before him, though by the Law she deserved Death, yet he did not
condemn her, but said, to her, Go, sin no more, John 8.11. And when some of his
Disciples asked him, Will thou that we command Fire to come down from Heaven to
consume them? Luke 9.54. he turned, and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not
what manner of Spirit ye are of; and these concerning whom some of the
Disciples spoke, were Samaritains, that belonged to a Village, who would not
receive Christ into their Village, which was a great breach of Humanity and
humane Society, and by his words it appears, that to call for fire from
Heaven to destroy the Life of Man, or kindle a fire upon Earth to do it,
belongs not to the perfect Gospel Spirit or State, but is of the Law.

4thly. Because Christ has expressly forbidden his Disciples To exercise
Lordship, or to lord it over their Brethren, Luke 22.25, 26. And he said unto
them, The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, and they that
exercise Authority upon them are called Benefactors; but ye shall not be so,
etc. And since Christ has allowed and appointed in his Church a spiritual Rule
and Authority, that some are to have over others, by the Power of his Spirit in
them, that place Luke 22.25. cannot be understood to forbid amongst his
Disciples and Followers, a spiritual Government and Rule in his Church; and
therefore what he forbids is Worldly Government among his Followers, according
to the World, 1 Timothy 3.5. and 5.17. Heb. 13.7.17. 2 Cor. 10.8.

5thly. From these and other places of Scripture, our Friends from the
beginning have solemnly declared against all use of the carnal Sword, or of any
carnal Weapon to hurt the Body of any man, or take away the Life of any man or
men in any ease, whether offensive or defensive; and for our part we do see it
very clearly and plainly, that the use of the Sword, or o^ some carnal or
bodily Weapons, is so necessary to the Worldly Magistrate to punish such as
deserve it, as the executive part of his Office cannot in an ordinary way (and
without Miracles) be done without it; and Practice does sufficiently confirm it
in this part of the World, where some professing the same Principle with us
against the use of the carnal Sword, or other carnal Weapons, yet because of
their Office (some being Judges, etc.) have passed Sentence of Death, and other
corporal Punishment upon Offenders; and they could do no less to answer the
Trust of the Office they had taken unto them; and all rational men will judge,
that a pair of Stocks, Whipping Post and Gallows, are carnal Weapons, as really
as Sword or Gun, and so is a Constables Staff, when used, as has been by some,
to beat and knock down the Bodies of some obstinate Persons etc. and if Bodily
Violence may be used by a Constable with his Staff against one, if that one get
Ten to rescue him from the Constable and his Assistance, this does necessarily
engage into a carnal way of Fighting in the pursuance of Justice against
Offenders; for it is not the number being great or small that makes a thing to
be right or wrong: If it be a transgression of Christ's Command to raise 1000
men with Clubs, Swords and Guns to subdue and bring under 1000 men that are
unjust Pursuers and Invaders of other men's Properties and Liberties, it is by
the same Reason to raise ten or five. And if any Invasion by Gods permission,
should happen by French or Indians against the Inhabitants in these parts, if
any of us be Magistrates at that time, they cannot discharge the trust and duty
that belongs to them, as such, without raising force of Arms against them;
which would be a plain contradiction to the former Testimony of our Friends;
and to use any Violence to the Body of man, by any Bodily Force, is a
Contradiction to that great and Gospel Promise, They shall beat their Swords
into Plo^ Shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks, Isa. 2.4. Mich. 4.3.
And, as for those Reasons we judge it altogether improper for any who are
sincere to their Profession, (who are in scorn called Quakers) to be any manner
of way concerned in any part of Office-bearing in worldly Government or
Execution of Justice, that touches the Body or Life of Man, by any corporal
Punishment, so more especially to such it is most improper and unbecoming, and
^ and hurtful, who profess to be Ministers of the p^^ect Jesus, who became our
Example to suffer all thing patiently, and not to do violence to any man, to
have a hand or part in the inflicting any corporal Punishment upon any for any
Offense or Crime whatsoever; for how improper and unsavory is it for one and
the same man to day to sit on the Beach, bearing the Office of a Judge, and to
pass sentence on an Offender, to take an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a
Tooth, Limb for Limb, Life for Life, etc. and to morrow to stand up and preach
Christ's words, Mat. 5.38, 39. Ye have heard that it has been said, an Eye for
an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth, but I say unto you, Resist not Evil? for
scarcely in any other Protestant Profession of Christianity is it allowed for
Ministers of the Gospel to be Judges in secular matters.

But to prevent all occasion of mistakes or offense, we do solemnly declare our
persuasion, That we really believe, and are persuaded, that Magistracy and
Worldly Government is an Ordinance of God, and every Magistrate, lawfully
called to his Office, is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute Wrath upon
him that does evil, and that he bears not the Sword in vain, the which Sword
is the Sword of Justice, that ought to be drawn to punish Offenders with
corporal Punishment, greater or smaller, according to the nature of the
Offense, Knowing (Tim. 1.9.) that the Law is not made for a Righteous Man, but
for the Lawless and Disobedient, etc. And also, we^d sincerely believe and
declare, according to our sincere Faith and Persuasion, That every one
professing Christianity ought to be subject to all lawful Commands of the
Magistrate, as all such are that neither contradict any of the Laws of God,
testified and recorded in the holy Scriptures, nor incroach upon the true
Liberty of Conscience in things pertaining to the Worship of God; and that this
Subjection to the Magistrate, and his Commands ought to be given by all
Christians, from the highest to the lowest degree in the Truth, not only for
Wrath, but for Conscience sake; and that it is well consistent with the highest
degree and growth in Christianty, to give all due subjection to the Magistrate
in all lawful things, whether the Magistrate be Heathen or Christian, so
called, or by any other Name. Yet notwithstanding, we judge that the bearing
Office in any Worldly Government of Magistracy, does not belong to the perfect
and clear Dispensation and Ministration of the Spirit, under the clear Gospel
Day of Christ that is dawned amongst us, after the long dark Night of Apostasy.
And before the dark Night of Apostasy began, the clear Gospel and perfect Day
of Christ, and clear Gospel Dispensation and Ministration of the S^i^ of Christ
did shine in great Glory from the time immediately after Christ's Ascension and
giving the holy Ghost, during which time of the clear Gospel and perfect Day of
Christ, we find not that any sincere Christians did bear the Office of a
Magistrate under Kings or Princes of this World, until the Night of Apostasy
came upon the generality of Professors of Christianity, the which Night came
gradually upon them, and not all at once; and in this Night of Darkness there
has been a great Mixture of Truth and Error, as well as of Law and Gospel,
that has had place among the general sort of Professors, and many or most that
have been called Christians, that have had a measure of sincerity and
integrity, have been more of a legal or Law Spirit than of a Gospel Spirit, and
have been rather under the first Ministration of the Spirit than under the
second, in great part. And Wars, even in case of Defense, and Worldly
Government belong to the first Ministration of the Spirit, that is of the Law,
common to pious Gentiles, and many called Christians, but are not proper, nor
belonging to the second Ministration of the Spirit, that brings to perfection
in the Christian Life and Virtues; Therefore we caution and exhort all, who
have the perfect Life and State of Christianity, and the Virtues ^^, as their
mark and aim before them, not to meddle with Worldly Government or Magistracy,
or to act in it by way of Force and Rule, but rather to leave it to others, to
whom it is more proper; and yet to be subject to all lawful Commands of all
Magistrates actively; and if they command unlawful things, to be passive, and
not to resist, but patiently to suffer whatever may be inflicted upon them, and
pray for all men, for Kings, and all that are in Authority, that we may live a
godly and quiet Life under them.

Object. 1. But if any say, It is better for honest good virtuous men ( called
Quakers) to rule over their Brethren and others, who may be expected, that they
will rule well, and administer Justice impartially, and mix Mercy with Justice
in cases that may allow, than by their refusing to bear the Office in Worldly
Government, to give up the Government to others, that may do very unjust
things, and persecute, yea, exercise great Cruelty over the People.

To this we answer, first, Men ought not to do evil that good may come of it,
seeing Christ has commanded his Disciples, Not to exercise Lordship or Worldly
Authority over men; they must regard his Commandment, hoping that all will be
turned unto good to them that fear and love God.

2dly, There may be found men that are more fitted and qualified for Worldly
Government, to administer Justice in partially, than the People called Quakers,
because they may be more knowing and expert in the Laws, and may be men of a
just Principle, in whom the just Principle of Truth may in good measure rule,
though they be not of our Profession, nor of our Faith or Persuasion in many
things; for there are just men that may be found, and have been found amongst
those called Heathens or Gentiles, and why not much rather amongst the lower
Professions in Christendom, who though they are not come clearly to the second
Ministration of the Spirit, yet may be under the first Ministration thereof,
and may be both just men, and better skilled in the Laws than them called
Quakers, and therefore more qualified for bearing Office in Worldly Government.
And as concerning Persecution and Cruelty, there is a hand of God in suffering
those things, when they come, either for the sins of the People, or to try
their Faith and Patience, and for the exercise of their Christian Virtues; and
if Persecution and Cruelty be used or Injustice done to any, it is more
tolerable that others be the Instruments of it, than any called Quakers; for if
any called Quakers do any unjust thing, it is a great Reflection upon the whole
Profession; but if none of them have any Office in the Government, and any
thing be done amiss therein, they will not be chargeable with it. But we hope
none will construe our sense or intention, as if we desired Persecution to come
either upon us, or any others; for we do judge and esteem, that outward peace,
quiet and freedom from Persecution is a great mercy and blessing of God, which
we desire to bless God for, and all his other Mercies; and our Prayer to God is
that none may abuse their outward Liberty, but that it may be blessed to them,
and that they may use it to Gods Glory, and their Souls peace and prosperity in
the Truth.

Object. 2. And if any further Objections be made against this Position, we may
conclude they are such as can be made against that position, That under the
pure Gospel Dispensation we are not to war nor fight with carnal Weapons; which
our Friends have plainly witnessed against; nor will this position give any
just cause of Offense to superior Magistrates, but rather it will give them
great Satisfaction, to find us a people that are no wise ambitious of Worldly
Government, and wholly principled to be subject to their Authority in all
things, either actively or passively: By this means all occasions of jealousy
or distrust will be removed from them, after they have good trial of us, by
finding us constant to our Principle, that they can be in no danger by us, of
being guilty of any Plots or Conspiracies against the Government; and it can
give as little cause of offense to inferior Magistrates, because men commonly
desire places of Office in Magistracy and Government, and if all of our
Profession refuse such Places and Offices, this will the more oblige them, by
their having the more ready opportunity to have their minds answered.

Object. 3. But if any further object, What if one that is a Magistrate be
convinced and persuaded to be of our Way, must he leave off being a Magistrate?

To this it is easily answered, If he be really convinced and persuaded by the
Spirit of God to be of our way, the same. Spirit that has convinced him of the
Truth of our Way in other things, will convince him of the Truth of it in that
also; and if so, he will freely and willingly desire to lay down his former
Power as a Magistrate, to receive greater Power and Honor to be a Disciple and
Follower of Christ, who said, My Kingdom is not of this World; and as his
Kingdom is not of this World, so nor will ours be, if we be faithful Followers
of him. Nor is this to unchristian all others who are Magistrates, or may not
be of our mind in this case; for we distinguish betwixt the first and second
Ministration of the Spirit, and betwixt the present Christianity that many
have, as it is partly Legal and partly Evangelical. And to such who aim to
arrive to this degree, it may be said, If thou will be perfect leave the
Worldly Government, and follow Christ, in order to attain the desired
Perfection; for as there are higher and lower degrees in Christianity, so it
may be more tolerable or excusable to one in his lower degree, that Teeth no
further, and is not convinced of any further discovery, than to another that
sees further, and has a further and clearer Discovery. And far be it from us
to judge men no Christians, that see nor equally into all things pertaining
either to the Christian Faith or Practice, provided they hold the Head, and
build on the true Foundation, which is Christ Jesus, and have Faith in him, by
the help of his Spirit in us, as he dyed for our Sins and rose again for our
Justification, who is at the right Hand of God, and also makes Intercession
for us, and hold the most necessary and Fundamental Principles of Christian
Doctrine, and obey the Commands of Christ in so far as they are convinced of
them, we ought in Charity to allow them to be our Christian Brethren in
general, (yet not of our particular Fellowship or Society) though in some things
we differ from them, having further discoveries of Light into spiritual things
and mysteries, as particularly in the case of Swearing, and Fighting, or using
the outward Weapon in Self-defence, and in the case of Paying Tithes to uphold
a Worldly Ministry. It is generally confessed by the People called Quakers,
that to Swear or pay Tithes are short of Christian Perfection, and ought not to
be done, and yet they are more Charitable than to judge, that no man is in any
degree a Christian that does Swear or pay Tithes, or contribute to a Worldly
Ministry, because there are many yet see not the evil of those things, and yet
in other things are conscientious, and endeavor to walk in faithfulness to
what they know. And as Charity ought to be extended unto them who Swear and pay
Tithes, if they see no further, and do not wilfully shut their Eyes against a
further discovery, so the like Charity may be extended to them who may be
concerned in Wars or Government, if they do not see into it, that it belongs
not to the Perfect Dispensation of Christianity.

Given forth at the Monthly Meeting of the Christian People, called Quakers,
at the House of Phillip James, the 28th of the 12th Month, 1692. And ordered to
go forth in the Name and by the Appointment of the said Meeting.

Postscript.
IT is well known that the despised People of God, called Quakers, have been
great Sufferers for their Testimony against Swearing in any case, some by long
and close Imprisonments, and others by incurring the Sentence of Praemunire, to
the loosing their Estates, and remaining Prisoners during Life, and others have
sustained great losses and damages for want of taking of Oaths in Courts of
Judicature, etc. whereby they could not clear the Titles of their Lands, nor
prove their Debts, and thereby have lost them; and many Books have been writ
and published by the said People against Swearing in any case, particularly
that called, A Treatise of Oaths, containing several weighty Reasons why the
People called Quakers refuse to Swear, and those confirmed by numerous
Testimonies out of Gentiles, Jews and Christians, both Fathers, Doctors and
Martyrs. Presented to the King and Parliament in the Year 1675. and subscribed
on the behalf of the rest of our Friends, by George Whitehead, and twelve more.
Now we being, and desiring to remain in Unity with our faithful Friends, and
with their living and faithful Christian Testimony against Swearing in any
case, do hold ourselves obliged to maintain and stand up for the said
Testimony, according to Mat. 5.54. But I say unto you, Swear not at all. and
James 5.22. Above all things, my Brethren, Swear not. Therefore we declare unto
all People, that we cannot for Conscience fake take an Oath, or tender it to
any other, neither in the form as used in England, by kissing the Bible, nor
are we free in our Conscience to take that manner of Attestation as used here
in Pennsilvania, when administered in their Courts, etc. viz. Thou shall
solemnly declare in the Presence of God and this Court, etc. because to say, I
do solemnly declare in the Presence of God, is a calling upon God to be Witness
to the truth of the Testimony given, which we look upon to be no less than a
presumptuous Tempting of God to summon him as a Witness, not only to our
Terrene, but Trivial Businesses, as W.P. etc. has expressly said in that
before-cited Treatise, page 17. with which we do cordially agree. But to the
grief of our Souls we may say, such Darkness, Ignorance and Apostasy possesses
the hearts of many of those called Quakers here in Pennsilvania, that they are
frequently found in the aforesaid Practices, and do frequently use Arguments in
the defense thereof; therefore we can do no less than to give forth this our
Christian Testimony against Swearing and Fighting in any case, as above, hoping
the Lord will be with us, and preserve us, and enable us to stand faithful in
the aforesaid Testimony, whatever Trials, Sufferings, Losses and Temptations
may attend us for the same.

Thomas Budd. John Heart.

THE END.

