A true Copy of three Judgments given forth by a Party of Men, called Quakers
at Philadelphia, against George Keith and his Friends. With two Answers to the
said Judgments.
The First Judgment.
AT a Monthly Meeting in Philadelphia, the 26th of 11 Mon. 1691. Thomas
Fitzwater charged George Keith for denying the sufficiency of the Light, which
G. Keith denying, T. Fitzwater insisted that he could prove the same, and being
examined concerning his Proof thereof, several Friends present stood up, and
said, They heard the said George Keith say, That he did not believe the Light
was sufficient without something else, namely, Thomas Prichard, William
Harwood, Benjamin Chambers, William Southbe, and several others. And after the
matter in Debate had been thoroughly heard, the aforesaid Credible Evidences
giving their Testimonies as abovesaid, the Meeting saw no reason to give
Judgment against Tho. Fitzwater in this particular abovementioned; but ^h^
said Thomas very readily left the matter to this Meeting and condemned the rash
Spirit that he spoke those words in, although the Charge in it self was true.

This is a Copy of what passed at a Monthly Meeting in Philadelphia, the 26 of
3 Month. 1692. A. M.

The Second Jud^ment.
WE being prevented in our Meetings of late, to proceed orderly in business,
by reason of a Turbulent and unsubdued Spirit, which has much disquieted us,
but having respite at this time, have considered seriously and duly of a
Charge exhibited several Months past by George Keith against William Stockdale,
many if not most of (...) being present at several Meetings, where the
Allegations of each side were heard; and as the Friends then present concluded
on a Judgment in this matter, but were prevented of publishing the same, by
reason of George Keith's unruly behavior, and extreme Passion, which abruptly
broke up the said Meeting, we declare our concurrent sense as follows, That
whereas Proof was made by two Witnesses, That William Stockdale should say,
that Genesis Keith's preaching Christ without, and Christ within was preaching two
Christ's, which W. Stockdale denied the words so spoken; and alleged that Geo.
Keith called him an Ignorant Heathen, and gave him several villifying
Expressions. Our Judgment is, That William Stockdale is reproveable, and
blameworthy ^or uttering the said words, they being an Offense to many sound
and tender Friends, and that he condemn the same. And as for G. Keith's manner
of proceeding against him, we cannot own the same to be pursuant to Gospel
Order, the said G. Keith having not alone dealt with him in private before he
had further prosecuted his Complaint; neither can we hold him excuseable for
his undecent expressions to W. Stockdale, he being elder in Truth and in Years.

Given forth by the Meeting of Public Friends, at Philadelphia, the 4th of 4th
Month, 1692. A True Copy, by Samuel Jenings.

The Third Judgment, and Condemnation, against G. K.
To the several Monthly and Quarterly Meetings in Pennsilvania, East and
West-Jarsey, and elsewhere, as there may be occasion.
BEloved Friends, In tender Love, and with Spirits bowed down before the Lord,
is this our Salutation unto you, earnestly de^^ing your growth and daily
preservation in the ancient (...), and in the simplicity of the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ; and ^or hope and breathings are, that no insinuations or
wiles of the Enemy shall prevail to turn you aside from, our stedfastness, or
to cause you so esteem lightly of the rock and way of Gods Salvation unto you,
but that you be kept in the light and life, which was and is the j^^t man's
path, to the end of on days, Amen.

Now, dear Friends, it is with sorrow of Spirits and grief of Souls, that we
signify unto you the tedious Exercise and vexatious Perplexity we have met
with in our late Friend George Keith, for several Months past; With mourning
and lamentation do we say, How is this Mighty Man fallen! how is his Shield
vilely cast away, as though he had not known the Oil of the holy Ointment! How
shall it be told in G^^^ and published in the Streets of A^kelon? Will not the
daughters of the Philestians rejoice? Will not the daughters of the
Uncircumcised Triumph, when they hear that he is fallen upon the soaring
Mountains, and from the high Places of Israel! Oh! how are we distressed for
thee, thou as a man slain in thy high places! Whilst thou walked in the Counsel
of God, and were little in thine own Eyes, thy Bow did abide in strength, thy
Sword returned not empty; from the sat of the Enemies of God thy Bow turned not
back; His Enemies were then vile unto thee, and his Followers honorable in thy
esteem. Oh! how lovely were thou in that day, when his Beauty was upon thee,
and when his Comeliness covered thee! Why should his Ornaments exalt thee, which
were given to humble thee before him! and how thou art fallen from thy first
Love, and are become Treacherous to the Spouse of thy Youth! Consider where
thou art fallen, and Repent, and do thy first Works.

But so it has happen^d Friends, lest any Flesh should glory, but become
Silent before the Lord, that this once Eminent Man and Instrument of Renown in
the Hand of the Lord, whilst he kept his first Habitation, and knew the
Government of Truth over his own Spirit, and witnessed the same to be a Bridle
to his Tongue, was then serviceable both in Pen and Speech to the Churches of
Christ; But now, and of late, it is too obvious and apparent, that being
degenerated from the lowly meek and peaceable Spirit of Christ Jesus, and grown
cool in Charity and love toward his Brethren, that he is Gone into a Spirit of
Enmity, Wrath, Self-Exaltation, Contention and Janglings; and as a Person
without the fear of God before his Eyes, and without regard to his Christian
Brethren, and letting loose the Reins to an Extravagant Tongue, he has broken
out into many Ungodly Speeches, Railing Accusations and Passionate Threatenings
toward many of his Brethren and Elders, and that upon slender Occasions; and
when some in Christian Duty have laid before him his unsavory words and
unchristian-frame, he has treated them with such vile words and abusive
language, such as a Person of common civility would loath. It has been too
frequent with him, and that in a transport of Heat and Passion, to call some of
his Brethren in the Ministry, and other Elders, and that upon small
Provocations, if any, Fools, Ignorant Heathens, Infidels, Silly Souls, Liars,
Heretics, Rotten Ranters, Muggletonians, and other Names of that ^ famous
strain, thereby to our grief ^oaming out his own Shame. And further, his Anger
and Envy, being Cruel against us, and not contenting himself with his Harshness
against Persons, but he proceeded in bitterness of Spirit to charge our Meeting
with being come together to cloak Heresy and Deceit, and publishing openly
several times, That there were more Doctrines of Devils and Damnable Heresies
among the Quakers, than among any Profession among the Protestants. He has
long objected against our Discipline, even soon after his coming among us, and
having prepared a Draught of his own, and the same not finding the expected
Reception, he seemed disgusted since: He has often quarreled with us about
Confessions, declaring, That he knew none given forth by the body of Friends to
his Satisfaction; and often charged most of us of being unsound in the Faith.
We have offered in several Meetings for his satisfaction, and to prevent strife
among us, and for preserving the Peace of the Church to deliver a Confession of
our Christian Faith in the words of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the
Author of the Christian Faith, and in the word of the Apostles and Disciples,
his faithful Followers; or we would declare our belief in Testimonies of our
ancient Friends and faithful Brethren, who were generally received by us; or we
would concur and agree upon a Confession, and have it transmitted to the
Approbation of the Yearly Meeting here, or the Yearly Meeting at London; y^a,
it was offered unto him at the same time, that a Confession concerning the
(...) matter in Controversi^ should ^e given out of a Book of his own, but al^
wa^ slighted a^ insufficient: The Lord knows the trouble which we have ^ad with
this (...) Member, and the openness of our hearts and well wishes toward him,
notwithstanding his rage and violence against (...), and of the endeavors of
many in this place to have gained upon him by a friendly converse, and by other
means not inconsiderable to a ^^otherly freedom; but one labor hither to seems
to be a^ water spil^ upon the ground: And (...) Meeting having Tenderly and
Orderly dealt wit^ (...) for his abusive Language and ^^sorderly Behavior, he
has (...) slighted (...) Applications of g^i^ing him to a sense of his ill
Treatment^ a^^ Miscarriages, but in (...) m^^ner said to the Friends appointed
by the Meeting to admonish him (...) Judgment of the meeting under his (...);
and has of late set up a separate Meeting (...), where he has, like an open
Opposer, not only reviled several Friends, by exposing their Religions
Reputations in mix^ Auditories of some hundreds, endeavoring to render them
and Friends here, by the Press and otherways, a scorn to the Profane, and the
Song of the Drunkards, but he has traduced and villified our worthy traveling
Friends J D. and T. W. in their Powerful and savoury Ministry, whose service is
not only here, but in most Meetings in England, Scotland and Ireland well known
to have a seal in the hearts of many thousands of the Israel of God: he has
has also within a few weeks appeared in opposition as it were, to the Body of
Friends, by putting on his Hat when our well received and recommended Friend J.
Dickenson was at Prayer, and that in a Meeting of near a thousand Friends and
others, and so going out of the Meeting, to the great disquiet thereof, and to
the drawing some scores into the same Opposition with him, by his ill Example;
and he thus persisting in his repeated oppositions, hard speeches and continued
separation, and laboring, like an unwearied Adversary, to widen the Breach
made by him, and so abusing some of the neighboring Meetings by being as yet
under that cover of being owned by us, We are hereby brought under a Religious
constraint, and to prevent other Meetings of being further injured by him, to
give forth this Testimony, strained as it were from us by his many and violent
Provocations, viz. That we cannot own him in such ungodly Speeches and
disorderly Behavior, or in his separate Meetings, and that we disown the same,
as proceeding from a wrong Spirit, which brings into Disorder inwardly and le^d
into distraction and confusion outwardly, and until he condemn and decline the
same, we cannot receive him in his public Ministry, and would have him cease
to offer his Gift, as such, among us, or elsewhere among Friends, till he be
reconciled to his offended Brethren,. And as to those few of our Brethren in
the Gift of the Ministry who a^e gone out with G. Keith, into his uncharitable
and dividing Spirit, the miserable effects whereof many of u^ have sufficiently
known in Old England, and other parts) our Judgment is, That whilst they
continue such, they become unqualified to the Work of the Gospel, as
degenerating thereby from the Guidance of Gods blessed and peaceable Spirit in
their hearts (from whence proceeds the effectual New Testament Ministry) and
being turned from the peaceable Fruits thereof, are gone to Vncharity and
Contention. And now, all you who have walked in fellowship and communion with
us, and are drawn aside through inconsideration, o^ otherwise, into this (...)
of Separation and Prejudice against our Meetings orderly established, and
wherein we have been often and mutually refresh't together, we cannot but in
the fear of God, and in love to your Souls, admonish you also of the Insecurity
of your present estate, and that therein we cannot have Unity with you, and
unless you return from under that Spirit, Dryness and Barrenness from the Lord
will be your Reward. And so ^ear Friends, we exhort you all to behave your
selves in the Spirit of meekness and peace^ble Truth, upon all occasions, but
more especially upon any discourse or conference with any of them who are
discontented among you, or started aside from you; and avoid all Heats and
Contentions in matters of Faith and Worship; and let not the Salt of the
Covenant be wanting in your words and actions, for thereby the Savor o^ your
Conversation will reach the Witness of God in them. The Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you all, Amen.

Given forth by the Meeting of Public Friends in Philadelphia, the 20th of the
4th Month, 1692. Samuel Jenings, John Delavall, William Yardly, Joseph
Kerckbridge, Walter Faucet, Hugh Roberts, Robert Owen, William Walker, John
Lynam, George Gray, John Symcock, Griffith Owen, John Bown, Henry Wil^is, Paul
Saunders, John Blunston, William Cooper, Thomas Tha^kray, William Byles, Thomas
Lloyd, John Williford, Nicholas VValln, William Watson, George Maris, Thomas
Ducket, Joshua Fearne, Evan Morris, Richard Walter.


Here follows Two Answers to the said Judgments.
To all faithful Friends in Pennsilvania, East and West-Jarsey, and to all
every where else in all parts of the World, to whose hands this may come, The
Salutation of Love.
WE in behalf of our selves, and many Brethren, who are falsely called the
Separate Meeting at Philadelphia, having taken into our serious and weighty
Consideration, three several Papers given forth by them of the opposite side,
who have oppos^d us, and continue to oppose us in our present Testimony to the
Truth of Christ, and his blessed Gospel and Doctrine, viz. The first given
forth by the Monthly Meeting of the opposite side, the 20 of 3d Month, 1^92*
wherein they clear T. Fitzwater of his falsely accusing G. K. for denying the
sufficiency of the Light, saying expressly in their said Paper, That fo^r
credible VVitnesses giving their Testimony, that they heard G. K. say, he did
not believe the Light was sufficient without somewhat else; the meeting saw no
reason to give Judgment against T. Fitzwater in t^is particular, the said
Thomas condemning the rash spirit that he spoke these words in, though the
Charge in it self was true. And G. K. having both at a Quarterly and Monthly
Meeting proceeding, sufficiently proved, and which was confessed by T. Lloyd,
as the Mouth of these Meetings, that by that somewhat else, G. K. had
frequently declared he did not mean humane Learning, nor the Scriptures, nor
outward preaching (although the Scriptures, and outward (...) ar^ Instrumental,
in Gods ordinary way of working, together with (...) inward operation of the
spirit to men's salvation) as absolutely necessary, but the Man Christ Jesus,
and what he did and suffered for us on Earth, and what he now does for (...) in
Heaven, and the fullness that dwells in him. By which it plainly appears,
the said Monthly Meeting has excluded the Man Christ Jesus, our blessed
Mediator and Savior, from having any (...) concern in our Salvation, and
therefore we do unanimously, and with one heart judge and condemn their false
Judgment, in claming Tho Fitzwater, that has this tendency, not only to
condemn G. K. for his (...) Christian Doctrine, (...) is a plain denial of the
Man Christ Jesus, and the great Merits, and Va^^s and (...) of his Sufferings,
Death, Resurrection, (...) Asse^^^on, and his Mediation for us in Heaven; a^
which are somewhat else th^n the People called Quakers commonly understand by
the ^^ght, to wit, the Light in every man's Conscience. And by this rash and
inconsiderate Act of their Monthly Meeting, proceeding from great Ignorance,
Error and Unbelief in them, they have sufficiently declared themselves to be no
true Believers in the Man Christ Jesus, and therefore (...) Christians; and for
this cause we cannot own them to be our Christian (...), nor join with them in
any Religious Worship, until the^ condemn themselves for the said Act, and
give us some evidence of their un^^^^^ Repentanos and sincere Faith, by their
open Confession and Declara^^^^ of the Truth of Christ, which now they have
denied.

The second Paper is given forth by a Meeting of these called Friends of the
Ministry, signed by Sam. Jenings, as ^ l^^k of the said Mee^ing, wherein they
give too partial and defective Judgment against William Stockdale, not blaming
him for any Offense to God, or Christ, nor convicting him for his sin of
Blasphemy, whereof he was guilty, in charging G.K. for preaching Two Christ's,
because he preached Faith in Christ within, and in Christ without us, wherein
he plainly denied Faith in Christ without us, that we judge Blasphemy against
the Son of Man. Also, the said Meeting has falsely judged and blamed G. K. for
calling W. S. An Ignorant Heathen; for seeing he denied Faith in Christ without
us, we judge it was his proper Name, and he was not worthy to be accounted in
the Truth, having discovered his so great Ignorance and Unbelief in one of the
great Fundamentals of the Christian Faith. Also, they falsely accuse G. K. for
not giving W. S. Gospel Order, whereas upon due examination, we find, that he
had given him sufficient Gospel Order.

The third Paper is signed by Samuel Jenings, John Simcock, Thomas Lloyd, and
others, in Number 28, all pretended Preachers, wherein they have passed a most
false Judgment against G. K. for his sound Christian Doctrine, and Godly Zeal,
in sharply reproving gross Antichristian Errors, that he had detected them
guilty of, partly by the Open Confession of some, and partly by the Co^^i^a^ce
of others, and seeking to cloak and cover and defend the Guilty; and the said
three Papers, and the matter contained in them being sufficiently answered in a
late Book, called, The Plea of the Innocent, etc. which we having read and well
considered, do approve of, and allow to be given forth by our unanimous Consent
and Approbation, the particular things, in matter of Fact, therein contained,
being all known to some of us, and the most principal to most of us: And we of
this Meeting deliver it as our unanimous Judgment, that all these who have
given judgment in the said three Papers abovementioned, have given a false
judgment in them against the Truth, and against G. K. and his Friends joined
with him in this Testimony. And we do declare against their false Judgment, and
say, That G. K. and other Friends of the Ministry joined with him in this
Testimony, ought not to forbear the Exercise o^ their Ministerial Gift that God
has given them, notwithstanding the ^^l^e Judgment of false Brethren, that
have joined together in a Faction against him, and his faithful Brethren, but
that he and his faithful Brethren of the Ministry ought to be encouraged and
received by all faithful Friends every where, in the use and exercise of their
Ministerial Gifts, which we are persuaded they still have, and the use and
exercise thereof will tend to the Glory of God, the Prosperity of Truth, and
Salvation of Souls. And we also deliver it as our unanimous Judgment, that all
these 28 Persons that have signed that false Judgment against G.K. and his
Friends, ought not to be owned nor countenanced in their preaching or praying,
but denied, and all others that justify them, until they condemn themselves
for their said false and rash Judgment against G. K. and his Brethren; and
until they give some public and open Confession and Declaration that they are
sound in the Faith of Christ, they having given sufficient cause to us, to
conclude, That at present they have not the sound Faith of Christ. And though we
have just cause to blame them for condemning us without all Hearing and Trial,
yet they have no cause to blame us, because we have often ^ought and requested a
Meeting with them to have things of Difference fairly debated and tried, but
could never obtain it; and they having new made public their false Judgment
against us, in three several Papers, we are concerned, for the Defense of
Truth, and our Rep^tation, both as Men and Christians, to give forth this
public Testimony against them, and to recommend it to all faith^u^ Friends to
consider and examine by the Spirit of Truth; and let both their public Papers
and ours be impartially weighed in the Balance of Truth, in order to which we
are willing that all their papers be printed as well as ours, that have been
published on both sides, that so the impartial Readers may have a fair
Opportunity to judge of both.

Given forth at our Meeting at the House of Phillip James in Philadelphia the
3^ o^ 5th month, 1692. in behalf of many of our Brethren both in Town and
Country, who are one with us in this Testimony, though not now present. Richard
D^ngworth, Joan Wells, Phillip James, Henry Furnis, James S^attick, James
Choper, sen. William Davis, Robert Wallis, James Poulter, Nicholas Fierce,
Thomas Budd, Jo^n Barclay, William Bradford, James C^^per, jun. John Po^tus,
John M' C^^^^, James Chick, John Bartram, Abel Noble, Joseph Walker, Thomus
Paschall, Richard H^^liard, William Watte, Anthony St^^ges, Ralph Ward, Thomas
P^^^t, Jo^n G^a^^^^^, Peter Chamberlain,


An Expostulation with Samuel Jenings, Thomas Lloyd, and the rest of the
twenty eight Unjust Judges and Signers of the Paper of Condemnation against G.
K. and his Friends. And Complain for a Public Hearing and Trial before all
Impartial People.
WHereas Samuel Jenings, Thomas Lloyd, and others being in Number 28 have
published a Paper against G. K. the rest of his Brethren wh^ are joined with
him in this Testimony for the Lord Jesus, against whom they prophecy, That
Dryness and Barrenness from the Lord, will be their Reward. We having read and
considered the said Judgment, do testify against it, as an unjust and
unrighteous Act; but that which aggravates the Crime against them is, that they
say, This Meeting having tenderly and orderly dealt with him, etc. when they
know in their Consciences, they dealt 10. with G. K. n^r never sent for him to
their said Meeting, but tried and judged him altogether in his absence, wherein
they have done worse than the Baptists did in the case of Tho. Hicks; for when
Friends appealed to the People called Baptists ^o^^^^^ice against T. Hicks,
they took their time and appointed a Meeting, and 3 or 4 days before the said
Meeting sent Letters to G. W. and W. P's Houses to give them notice to be at
the Meeting, but they being so far from home that the^ could not have timely
notice, it was reckoned great Injustice for them ^o proceed and try Friends and
T. H^cks in their absence; and upon Complaint they give another Meeting: But T.
Lloyd, S. Jenings, and the rest are so far short of the Justice of the
Baptists, that they never so much as acquainted G. K. of their Meeting^ or
intent to proceed against him, nor never sent for him that we can understand,
only W Byles came to G.K's house and asked for him, his Wife told, he was from
home, and she expected him the next Morning, but they told nothing of their
business with him, but in all haste proceeded to judge him in his absence
before he came home. Is this your orderly dealing with him? Is this your
Justice? Is this your Christ an tenderness? your Charity, and your bearing with
him in a Christian Spirit? for shame cease thus proceeding, or you will ^e a
stink in the Nostrils of the Nations where it shall be told* What! pretend to
Christianity, and fall short of Heathen Justice! John 7.50, 51 Acts 25.16, 17
Did the Baptists do unfair in proceeding to try Friends in their absence? Then
much more you: for they gave some Notice before of their intending to Try Tho.
Hicks, but you never so much as told G. K. of your so Meeting: Wherefore allow
us so much Justice as the Baptists did to have another Meeting publicly to try
G. K. where all People may be present, that are willing to come, and whereof G.
K. may have timely notice, and liberty to plead his own Cause, and let all
Impartial People judge; and through Gods Assistance we shall make it appear,
that your said Judgment is unjust, and G. K. not worthy of Condemnation. Was
there ever such an Act done in any Christian Society before, to condemn a man
without ever hearing of him, or suffering him to speak for himself? Surely its
far short of any worldly Court, where the party shall have timely notice to
prepare for his his Trya^ and liberty to plead his own cause in the face of the
Country, and where his Accusers are not allowed to sit and give Judgment
against him: But so it is, that these Unjust and Unrighteous Judges have
proceeded to try, judge, and publish their Judgment against G. K. without ever
hearing of him, when its well known the most of them were his great Opposers:
They might be sure this way to condemn him, when only a Faction of them get
together, and accuse him, and he nor any for him be present to speak for him.
But that which still hightens the Crime of Tho. Lloyd, Sam Jenings, and the
rest of the 28 Unjust Judges, is, that they of the Ministry should give such a
false Judgment, and then impose it on all the Meetings in these 3 Provinces,
when most of the Friends thereof are great strangers to the Matter in
Controversy, not knowing which Party is in the Right, but they must take said
Judgment upon Trust from them, without enquiring into the Cause and Verity
thereof; and where they think their said Judgment will not readily be swallowed
down, they will follow it from Meeting to Meeting, clothed with their
Magistratical Robes, and if any Friends show their dislike of having it imposed
on them without their own consent, and consideration of the matter, presently
threaten to bind them to the good Behavior, and to the Peace, and call out for
a Constable, thereby endeavoring to trample us down by their Magistratical
Power and Authority, as Samuel Jenings, Sam. Richardson, Thomas Lloyd, John
Delavall and Anthony Morris did lately at a Monthly Meeting near Frankford, as
is well known to many. Oh! (...) whither do you think these things will run?
will it not give People just cause to say, ^he Qua^ers are turned Persecutors?
But our Trust and Confidence is in the Lord alone, who hitherto has pleaded the
Cause of the Innocent, and carried his People through all the Powers and
Oppositions that have hitherto (...) up against them in all Ages, and we doubt
not but he will do the same for us, as we keep faithful to him, and to the
Guidance of his holy Spirit, Light and Life in our hearts. But are these your
Proceedings Christian, or Protestant-like^? or do they not ra^^er relish of
Rank P^pery, for the ^erg^ o^ them o^ the Ministry to impose their (...) the
People without (...) enquiring (...) the matter? Is (...) Obedience? Is not
this believing as the Church believes, in order to bring^ in Ignorance the
Mother of Devotian? Oh! who but ignorants and blind men, but can see these
things? And yet now will ye stand in them, O ye Unjust Judges! will ye not be
willing to answer our just Complaint for a Hearing? Will you come short of the
Justice of the Baptists, who admitted of another Meeting for a Hearing? But
perhaps you will say, The Act of that Meeting was Infallible, being made up of
such a Body of the Ministry, (as Arthur Cook said lately in the House of G. ^.
That a Yearly Meeting could not Err) But we desire to hope, that some of you
will better consider of it, and answer our just Complaint, and no lurk in holes
and corners, but come openly and defend your selves, and repent of the Error
and false Doctrine you have run into, and let a time and place be appointed and
agreed on by both Parties for a Public Hearing: If you have Truth and Justice
on your side, come forth and let it appear before the World, and say not that
such and such things are false, but prove them to be so; and bring things to
the Light, and let not Christ's words be fullfilled on you, viz. You hate the
Light because your deeds are Evil, etc. Say not, that we are bold and daring
thus to Challenge you; for its not wr^t in a presumptuous Spirit as relying on
our own Strength or Parts, but on the Lord alone, on whom is our Dependence,
and who knows the Innocence of our Cause, and therefore we are not afraid to
bring it to the Test, but willing to appear openly, as hitherto we have done in
Print, and not as your Practice is to report false things secretly abroad,
which we know not whom to fasten upon; but what we publish in Print remains to
be the Authors, whether true or false; if false, why don't you refute it, the
Press is free and open for you, a^ for any? But the matter in (...) Printed
Books is true, and stands over your Heads, and which you will never be able to
R^^^te.

But next, let us enquire, what have you condemned G. K. (...) some of you say,
Partly for matter of Doctrine, and partly for hard Words; But as for Doctrine
you have not mentioned what it is; and as for the hard Names you mention, it is
made appear in The Plea of the Innocent, etc. that they were justly given by G.
K. to them that deserved the same: But have his Opposers given no hard Names,
no unjust and false Reflections? yea, many. But why only then must G. K. be
condemned, and not they also who have given hard words and false Names to G.
K.? When G. K. complained against them for not giving Judgment against W.
Stockdale's Blasphemy Samuel Jenings could excuse it, by bringing the Example
and Practice of worldly Courts, saying, George, thou have reviled thy Brethren,
and in Courts we allow of Discount. So that according to S. Jenings, W.
Stockdale's Blasphemy must be discounted against G. K's Reviling his Brethren,
as they account it, but can never prove. But if Discount be allowable in this
case, why are not G. K's hard words discounted against those that have been
given to him, so far as they will reach? And that it may appear what hard Names
have been given, we think fit here to mention, viz.

They say G. K. has called them, 1. Fools, 2. Ignorant Heathens, 3. Infidells,
4. Silly Souls, 5. Liars, 6. Heretics, 7. Rotten Ranters, 8. Muggletonians.


They of the other side have called G. K. 1. Brat of Babylon, 2. Accuser of the
Brethren, 3. Apostate, 4. Worse than Profane, 5. A Troubler of the Church, 6.
A Person that no one could have Difference with, but he was in danger of the
Life of his Soul, 7. A Preacher of two Christ's, 8. A Teller of an Old St
Andrews Story. 9. Pope, 10. Father Confessor, 11. Liar, 12. Devil, 13
Muggletonian, 14. Compared him to a Wolf Tiger, etc. 15 One that always
endeavored to keep down the Power of Truth. 16. A more vexatious Adversary
than Hicks, Faldo, Scanderet, or the worst of Enemies. 17. One that is fallen
upon the soaring Mountains, etc. 18. (...) a man slain. 19. Become Treacherous
to the Spouse of his Youth. 20. Fallen (...) his first Love. 21. Gone into a
Spirit of Enmity, Wrath, Self-Exaltation, Contention, etc. 22. Foaming out his
own Shame. 23. A Person without the Fear of God before his Eyes. 24. Leting
loose the Reins to an Extravagant Tongue^ 25. Broken out into many Ungodly
Speeches, Rattling Accusations, Pa^^onate Threatenings, being Cruel, etc. like
an Unwearied Adversary. With many more that can be proved.


Now let the Impartial Reader judge, which have exceeded in hard Words? and
whether they are not very partial to pass by all that has been said against G.
K. and condemn him for what he has spoke in i^s right-place, as is made appear
in the Book called, The Plea of the Innocent. And yet when G. K. was the
Complainer for many Months, for Justice to be done to Truth, they could plead
for Discount, and put Blasphemy against Christ Jesus, in the Balance against
Reflections upon themselves, and yet now will not disount for hard words. And
also they have judged a whole Meeting without ever admonishing of them. If this
be not Partiality, Injustice and Unrighteous Judgment, tell us what is. And
clear your selves of these things, if you can.

Signed by us, in behalf of the rest of our Friends by order of our Meeting,
the 18th of the 5 Month, 1692. Thomas Budd, Richard Hilliard, John Ha^t, Thomas
Paschall, William Bradford, James Cooper, Elizabeth Keith.


THE END.
Books to be Sold by William Bradford in Philadelphia. 1692.
The Christian Faith of the People called Quakers in Rhode Island. 4 d.

A Catechism for Children and Youth, and such others as need to be instructed
in the first Principles of the Christian Religion. By G. K. Pr. 6 d.

A Testimony concerning the Resurrection of the Dead, Day of Judgment, and
Christ's last Coming and Appearing without u^. By G. K. 3 d.

Truth and Innocence defended, against Calumny and Defamation, in a late Report
concerning the Revolution of Humane Souls, etc. G. K. 5 d.

Some Causes and Reasons of the late Separation that has come to pass here at
Philadelphia. Showing, That G. K's Opposers were the Cause of the said Breach
and Separation, and most properly are the separate Meeting. Together with an
account of the sincere Christian Faith of G. K. and his Friends. Price 9 d.

The Plea of the Innocent, against the False Judgment of the Guilty, being a
Vindication of G Keith and his Friends, from the false Judgment, Calumnies and
Defamations of S. Jenings, J. Simcock, T. Lloyd and others, being in Number
Twenty Eight. Price 6 d.

A Vision concerning Separation among Friends in Old England. By G. F.

A faithful Warning and Exhortation to Friends to beware of seducing Spirits.
By S. Crisp. 6 d.

A^ Appeal from the Twenty Eight Judges, to the Spirit of Truth and true
Judgment in all faithful Friends, called Quakers.

A true Copy of three Judgments given forth by a Party of men, called Quakers
at Philadelphia, against G. Keith, etc. With two Answers to the same.

New Husbandry to New England, or an Experienced way to raise Quick Hedges and
Clover Grass; and the way to make Syder.

Note, That in some of Printed Copies of the Appeal from the twenty eight
Judges, etc. there happened an Error in the Postscript, which pray amend, viz.
line 1. for Anthony Morris read Sam. Richardson.

And whereas it is reported, That the Printer being a favourer of G. K. he will
not print for any other, which is the reason that the other Party appear not in
Print as well as G K. These are to signify, that the Printer has not yet
refused to print any thing for either Party; and also signifies that he does
not refuse, but is Willing and ready to print any thing for the future that G.
K's Opposers shall bring to him.


