THE Watch-man's Voice, Giving Warning to all Men OF THE Dreadful Day of the
Lord, Which he apprehends to be at hand; That they may take a due Care to save
their Souls and Lives that they Perish not therein, and that their Blood may
not be required at his hand.

Written by DIGBY BULL, M. A. and late Rector of Sheldon in Warwickshire.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR; And are to be Sold by J. Whitlock near
Stationers' Hall. 1695.

JOEL ii. 1. Blow ye the Trumpet in Zion, and sound an Alarm in my Holy
Mountain; let all the Inhabitants of the Land tremble; for the Day of the Lord
comes, for it is nigh at hand.


I Being set up as a Spiritual Watchman over you, though unworthy of so high and
sacred a Calling, do conceive that it is my duty to give Warning, whenever I
shall apprehend that any great Danger is at hand, or that any great Evil is
ready to light upon us; And also that it is your duty to hearken to the voice
of your Spiritual Watchman, and to take warning by him.

And now I conceive that it is high time, or more than time, that I give you
Warning; That I give you Warning, That I apprehend that the Enemy is at hand;
That the days of Darkness are coming upon us; That the Romish Religion, like a
violent Flood, is ready to overflow us; And that that great Stream, if we have
not a very great care, is like to carry us to Destruction and Perdition in the
end. I conceive that all the humane Power that can be used at this time is not
able to stop it, and that nothing but a general Repentance and Reformation of
our Lives can prevent and turn away this Judgment of God from us, which we by
our Sins and great Wickedness have brought upon our selves. And because such a
general Repentance and Reformation of our Lives is now, alas, to be despaired
of, therefore I have thought good to make choice of these words of the Prophet,
for the Subject of my ensuing Discourse, that from them I might warn you of
this Judgment which I apprehend and am fully persuaded is coming upon us; That
we may prepare our selves against it, and may be able through Divine Assistance,
in some measure to stand in the Evil Day, and not be carried away with the
violence of Temptation to the ruin of both Body and Soul in the end.

But before I proceed to these words of the Text, perhaps it may not be amiss
to premise this to you; viz. That I have not made choice of these words,
thereby intending to blow up any sparks of Rebellion, or to give any
encouragement to rise up against Government. It is not my Province nor my
desire to sound any Classicum for the Field, but to give Exhortations and some
Instructions for the Closet, and for a Spiritual Preparation against this Day
of the Lord; and to dissuade Men from taking up and meddling with any carnal
Weapons at this time. I have always born a Loyal Mind, and never entertained
any Rebellious Thoughts, so far as I am conscious to my self; and, through Divine
help, Loyal I intend to be in the blackest of Times. And I would have no one to
entertain any Prejudice and Jealousy against me; for I am in Charity with all
the World, as I hope, and thirst after no ones Blood and Destruction; and my
Office and desire is to be a Messenger of Peace hereby to all Men without any
exception, that will hearken to my Voice and take Warning by me. I am sensible
that the sacred Scriptures do strictly enjoin Obedience to Superiors and
Governors, and do sharply threaten all such as do rise up against their Lawful
Rulers; and I would have all others to be so too. The great Reason that any may
be apt to think that there is at some times to rise up against Authority and
Lawful Government, will by no means tolerate and make it Lawful so to do; but
those that do so are like to be sharply punished in the end for such a work.
Our Lord has told us, Matt. 26.52. That all they that take the Sword, shall
perish with the Sword; And this was spoken when Peter had drawn his Sword to
defend his Lord and Master, and to save his Life, John 18.26. And if our
blessed Lord would not suffer him to use his Sword upon this account to save
his life, but bid him put it up into its place again; we may be sure that we
ought at no time to rise up against Government. If those then that should take
up the Sword were like to perish with it, we may well expect the same now. And
St. Paul does tell us, Romans 13.2. That they that resist the Power, resist the
Ordinance of God; and that they that resist, shall receive to themselves
damnation; And I would not have this to be any of our portion. And if this was
true Doctrine in Nero's time, we may be sure that it is so in ours. And says
St. John, Rev. 13.9, 10. If any man have an ear, let him hear: He that leads
into Captivity, shall go into Captivity: He that kills with the Sword, must
be killed with the Sword: And so I fear it will be now. He that shall
unlawfully and unjustly use this Weapon, must expect to have it returned upon
himself, and to have his own blood spilt with it, if he use it in an
unrighteous way to the shedding of the blood of others. From these places we
may see what those are to expect that rise up against their Lawful Authority
and Government. And we may see that we are commanded to be Subject to Kings,
and all in Authority, and that there is no such Exception annexed to such
Commands, that any time or circumstances will exempt Men from their Obedience
to them. Romans 13.1. says St. Paul, Let every soul be subject unto the Higher
Powers; for there is no Power but of God; the Powers that be, are ordained of
God. We are to be Subject and Obedient to these in all things that are good and
lawful, because they are ordained of God, and in so doing we are subject in a
remoter degree to God himself. From these and other places we may see how
clearly our subjection to Kings and Governors is set down; and that we cannot
resist and rise up against them without transgressing the Divine Commands of
Almighty God.

It is not to promote any sin and wickedness, or any disorder in the Nation,
but to exhort us all to a general Repentance and amendment of our sinful lives,
and to implore help and assistance against the Evil Time; which I am convinced
is coming upon us, that I have made choice of these words of the Prophet Joel:
That we all from hence may be warned to call all our Sins and Iniquities to
mind, and to be deeply humbled for them, and for the manifold and great
Provocations and Transgressions of the whole Kingdom; That we may make our
hearty and earnest Addresses to Almighty God, that he of his great Goodness,
and for the sake of our dear Lord and Savior would be pleased freely to pardon
and forgive us our great Wickedness, that makes such a great separation and
distance between us and our God; That we may call for, and seek to procure a
supernatural Assistance from above to keep us from being born away with such a
black Stream and Tide of Wickedness as is now ready to break in upon us; That
we may all be awakened out of our carnal and vain Security, and prepare for
such an extraordinary coming of Almighty God among us; That every one may make
clean his own Door against this signal Approach, that no Wickedness, which is
so loathsome to God, may be found thereat; That Warning may be given, and such a
Preparation made, do I purpose, by God's help, to say something upon these
words of the Prophet, wherein this Warning was to be given to the Jews of the
Day of the Lord being at hand to them.

Blow ye the Trumpet in Zion, and sound an Alarm in my holy Mountain; Let all
the Inhabitants of the Land Tremble; for the Day of the Lord comes, for it is
nigh at hand.

In these words we may observe these three Particulars.

First, That the Trumpet was to be blown and an Alarm to be sounded in God's
Church and among his People: Blow ye the Trumpet in Zion, and sound an Alarm in
my holy Mountain.

Secondly, That all were to hearken to, and regard the sound thereof, and to be
moved to fear and trembling upon it: Let all the Inhabitants of the Land
Tremble. And

Thirdly, The Reason of it, because a great Visit and Judgment of God upon them
was then at hand: for the Day of the Lord comes, for it is nigh at hand. I
purpose to say something to every one of these Particulars, but to begin with
the last first.

I. For the Day of the Lord comes, for it is nigh at hand.

I intend not to trouble my self nor you with any deep Inquiry what Day of the
Lord this was, which the Prophet here declared to be coming and nigh at hand.
The Day of the Lord, as it is a day and season of Terror and to be prepared
for, does signify several Days and Times.

1. The Day of the Lord does point at the great and final Day of Judgment, when
our Lord and Savior shall come in a most glorious manner to judge the whole
World, and to reward every one according to his works; when the Heavens shall
be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat; when the Earth and
the Works that are therein shall be burnt up, as St. Peter says, 2 Pet. 3.10.
And when all sinners, that repent not of their wickedness, shall be given up to
that everlasting Fire, that was prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matt.
25.41. This is the most eminent and dreadful Day of the Lord of all.

2. The Day of the Lord in the Scriptures does often respect some Temporal
Judgment and Calamity that God does bring, or is bringing upon a Land or
Nation, for the great sin and wickedness thereof: And such does this Day of the
Lord here seem to be.

3. The Day of the Lord may be referred to particular Men, though the Scripture
does not seem often to use, the Day of the Lord, with respect to single Persons
only. When God does send some great Judgment and Calamity upon single Persons,
it may be looked upon as a Day of the Lord's wrath to them: And the day of
their Death may well be accounted as such; And indeed a terrible day of the
wrath of God will it be to them, if they be surprised and snatched away in
their sins without Repentance. We may see what a miserable case the Fool in the
Parable was in, who was snatched away in the midst of his Jollity, when he was
singing Requiems to his Soul, and promising himself great joy and happiness to
come; Luke 12.20. But God said unto him, Thou fool, this night thy Soul shall
be required of thee; then whose shall those things be, which thou have
provided? Like a Dream and a Vapor will all such Worldly confidence and trust
leave Men, and into this Fool's Paradise will such be brought; The things
wherein they trust, like the Morning Cloud, will soon vanish away; and they
from their high confidence will drop into the Pit of Destruction.

We read of the Rich Man, Luke 16.22 -- That he died and was buried; and
immediately after it follows, That in Hell he lift up his eyes, being in
Torments --. We may see that the day of Death, especially to sinners that die
without Repentance, may well be looked upon as a day of the Lord, and a
dreadful one too to them.

But here the words of the Prophet do seem to respect some temporal and public
Judgment and Calamity of God upon the Jewish Land and Nation, and are to be
ranked in the second place. But what kind of Judgment and Calamity this was,
which the Prophet here gives this Warning of, is not agreed. Some do conceive
that this day of the Lord here in the Text was a sore and grievous Famine and
Calamity brought upon the Jews by Locusts, Catterpillers, and the like
Creatures; And some places in this Prophecy of Joel, do seem to give testimony
this way. Joel 1.4. says the Prophet; That which the Palmer-worm has left,
has the Locust eaten; and that which the Locust has left, has the
Canker-worm eaten; and that which the Canker-worm has left, has the
Catterpiller eaten. And v. 18. How do the Beasts groan? The Herds of Cattle are
perplexed, because they have no Pasture -- And Joel 2.25. And I will restore to
you the years that the Locust has eaten, the Canker-worm, and the
Catterpiller, and the Palmer-worm, my great Army, which I sent among you. These
and such places do give countenance to this Interpretation, that this day of
the Lord was a sore judgment of Famine upon the Land of the Jews, occasioned by
Locusts, Catterpillers, and such Creatures, and that by Famine and other ways
they were sorely afflicted by them. And we may see in the Book of Exodus, chap.
10. That Locusts were one of the great Plagues and Judgments that God sent upon
the Egyptians. And with a plague of Locusts does God threaten to scourge his
People the Jews, if they should revolt and fall from him to Idolatry, Deuteronomy.
28.38, 42.

Again some do conceive that this day of the Lord might be some great
Destruction and Waste, that was to be brought upon them by the Armies of the
Assyrians, and Chaldeans, etc. that they were to be plagued and scourged by
them: And some places in this Prophecy do agree herewith. Joel 1.6. For a
Nation is come up upon my land, strong and without number; whose teeth are as
the teeth of a lion; and he has the cheekteeth of a great lion. And Joel 2.2.
A great people and a strong, there has not been ever the like. And v. 17.
Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach, that the
heathen should rule over them. And v. 20. But I will remove far off from you
the northern Army, and will drive him into a land barren and desolate --. These
places make it probable that this Day of the Lord was a Judgment and
Destruction upon their Land by the Assyrians and Chaldeans. And it seems
probable to me, that both the Captivity of the ten Tribes, and also of the
Kingdom of Judah were hereby threatened, if they were not the chief things here
intended by this day of the Lord; the Prophet Joel, as most affirm, living
before them both. And this was a very sore and terrible day of the Lord to them
indeed, when they were invaded and domineered over by foreign Armies; when they
were driven from their own Habitations, and rooted out of their own Land, and
their whole Polity and Government was destroyed; when they were driven from
Jerusalem, their beloved City, and the City of the great King, the Lord of
Hosts, and their magnificent Worship at the Temple was quite extinguished, and
the Temple it self burnt down and destroyed; when they were carried away like
Slaves into a strange Land, from whence the greater Part of them never returned
again; and the other Part underwent a Servitude of seventy Years, before they
returned and came back into their own Land again: This was a very sore and
terrible day of the Lord to them indeed.

And some do refer this Prophecy of Joel to all the Miseries and Destructions
that were brought upon them by the Chaldeans. Persians, Grecians, Syrians, and
Romans. And it seems clear to me, that the Prophet's great and terrible Day of
the Lord, Joel 2.31. is to be understood of that dreadful destruction of the
Jewish Nation by the Romans about 38 or 39 years after the Death of our
Savior, when they were most miserably destroyed, when Sword and Famine both
raged horribly among them. The great effusion of the Spirit was to be before
this day, as we may see here in Joel 2.28 --. And this S. Peter tells us was
fulfilled upon the day of Pentecost, and afterward, Acts 2.16 --. which makes
it more than probable, that by this terrrible day was meant that heavy
destruction by the Romans.

From hence then I shall farther show, that God does often threaten and inflict
very sore and terrible Judgments and Calamities upon Cities and Nations for the
great Wickedness of them, when it is grown ripe for such a temporal Punishment.

First, We may see, that God does often threaten to send very terrible and
grievous Judgments and Destructions upon Cities and Nations for the great
Wickedness and Provocations of the Inhabitants of them, when they are guilty of
such. With Sword, Famine, and Pestilence, evil and noisome Beasts, and the
removing of his Word and Gospel, and other such Plagues and Judgments does God
threaten those that abuse his Mercies, and rebel against him and the light of
his Word, and wax bold and presumptuous in Sin and Wickedness. Moses has spent
the greatest part of Deuteronomy. 28. in telling the Jews what plagues and judgments
of God should light upon them, if they should forsake God, and fall to Idolatry
and such grievous Wickedness; how they should be cursed every way till they
were consumed. Deuteronomy. 28.20 -- The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation,
and rebuke, in all that thou set thine hand unto for to do, until thou be
destroyed, and until thou perish quickly, because of the wickedness of thy
doings whereby thou have forsaken me. The Lord shall make the pestilence cleave
unto thee, until he have consumed thee from off the land whether thou go to
possess it. The Lord shall smite thee with a consumption, and with a fever, and
with an inflammation, and with an extreme burning, and with the sword, and with
blasting, and with mildew, and they shall pursue thee until thou perish. And
much more to this purpose, as you may see there. The Prophet Samuel tells them
after, that if they went on in Wickedness, they should be consumed. 1 Samuel
12.23. But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and
your King. And the Prophets do often warn the Jews and others, that a day of
the Lord's Vengeance was coming upon them in their days. Isa. 13.6. says the
Prophet, concerning the Burden of Babylon; Howl ye, for the day of the Lord is
at hand; it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty. And says God to the
Prophet Ezekiel, 14.13. Son of man, when a land sins against me by
trespassing grievously, then will I stretch out my hand upon it, and will break
the staff of the bread thereof, and will send famine upon it, and will cut off
man and Beast from it: And Sword and Pestilence are threatened too, as we may
see in the following Verses. And, Ezekiel. 30.2 --. Son of man, prophecy and say,
thus says the Lord, Howl ye, woe worth the day: For the day is near, even the
day of the Lord is near, a cloudy day, it shall be the time of the beathen. And
the sword shall come upon Egypt, and great pain shall be in Ethiopia, when the
slain shall fall in Egypt, and they shall take away her multitude, and her
foundations shall be broken down. And says the Prophet Zephaniah, 1.7, 8. Hold
thy peace at the presence of the Lord God; for the day of the Lord is at hand;
for the Lord has prepared a sacrifice, he has bid his guests. And it shall
come to pass in the day of the Lord's sacrifice, that I will punish the
Princes, and the Kings children, and all such as are clothed with strange
apparel. And v. 14. The great day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hastes
greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord; the mighty man shall cry there
bitterly. And says the Prophet Zechariah, 14.1 -- Behold the day of the Lord
comes, and thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee. For I will gather
all Nations against Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the
houses rifled, and the Women ravished, -- Then shall the Lord go forth, and
sight against those Nations, as when he fought in the day of battle. By these,
and such places, we may see that God has often threatened to bring a Day of
Vengeance and Wrath upon the Jews and others, and to visit them with some
Judgment or other, for their Wickedness, when it was grown great.

We may see that such Judgments and Plagues, and Calamities are not merely
casual, and come not upon Men by blind Chance; that they are not the Effects of
an inevitable Fate, farther than Men make them so themselves; and that they are
not to be ascribed to such Causes as worldly and carnal Men are too ready to
ascribe them: But that they are the Orderings and Disposals of divine
Providence; and the Rods and Scourges of the Just and Righteous Governor of
all the World, who has said that Vengeance belongs unto him, and that he
will recompense, Heb. 10.30. And this the Prophet shows, Amos 3.6. Shall a
trumpet be blown in the city, and the people not be afraid? shall there be evil
in a city, and the Lord has not done it? And says God to Solomon, 1 Kings
9.8, 9. And at this house which is high, every one that passes by it shall be
astonished, and shall hiss, and they shall say, why has the Lord done thus
unto this land, and to this house? And they shall answer, Because they forsook
the Lord their God, who brought forth their fathers out of the land of Egypt,
and have taken hold upon other Gods, and have worshipped them, and served them;
therefore has the Lord brought upon them all this evil. And says our Lord,
Luke 13.2 -- Suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the
Galileans, because they suffered such things? I tell you, nay; but except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. And says he by S. John, Rev. 2.5. to the
Church of Ephesus; Remember therefore from whence thou art saln, and repent,
and do the first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove
thy candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. By these and other places
we may see, that such Judgments and Miseries do not arise merely after a casual
manner; but are really Judgments and Decrees in the Grand Court above, and are
overruled and ordered by a divine Hand, and do not depend merely upon the Will
and pleasure of Men, even when they are the chief Actors in them.

But farther, (that we may be the more awaked out of our carnal Security and
vain Confidence) we may see that the judgments of God, and these plagues that
are threatened are very terrible and dreadful; and that such Days of Vengeance
will come upon men, especially the Wicked among them, when they think little of
them, and in an astonishing manner will surprise them.

1. We may see that the judgments and plagues that are threatened for Sin and
Wickedness, are set out in a very dreadful manner so as to move us to fear, and
to give us just cause to tremble at the apprehension of them. Moses tells the
Jews, that they should be reduced to so great Want, and oppressed with so sore
a Famine by their Enemies, that they should eat the Fruit of their own Bodies,
even their own Children. Deuteronomy. 28.53. -- And thou shall eat the fruit of thine
own body, the flesh of thy sons, and of thy daughters, (which the Lord thy God
has given thee) in the siege, and in the straitness wherewith thine Enemies
shall distress thee. So that the man that is tender among you, and very
delicate, his eye shall be evil toward his brother, and toward the wife of his
bosom, and toward the remnant of his children which he shall leave: So that he
will not give to any of them of the flesh of his children whom he shall eat;
because he has nothing left him in the siege --. With this miserable and
terrible Famine by their Enemies does he threaten them. And he shows what
dismal Fear and Trembling God would send upon them, v. 65 -- But the Lord shall
give thee a trembling heart, and failing of eyes and sorrow of mind. And thy
life shall hang in doubt before thee, and thou shall fear day and night, and
shall have none assurance of thy life. In the morning thou shall say would God
it were even; and at even thou shall say would God it were morning, for the
fear of thine heart, wherewith thou shall fear; and for the sight of thine
eyes, which thou shall see In this sad and perplexed Condition, and in this
shadow of Death, were they to abide, expecting every hour that their Life would
be taken from them. And says the Prophet Isaiah 13.9 -- Behold the Day of the
Lord comes, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the Land desolate,
and he shall destroy the Sinners thereof out of it. For the Stars of Heaven,
and the Constellations thereof shall not give their light: The Sun shall be
darkened in his going forth, and the Moon shall not cause her light to shine.
And I will punish the World for their Evil, and the Wicked for their Iniquity
--. And v. 13. Therefore I will shake the Heavens, and the Earth shall remove
out of her place in the warth of the Lord of Hosts, in the day of his fierce
anger. In this dreadful Equipage is the day of the Lord's Anger set forth, as
if all the works of Nature should be disordered thereat; as if the Heavens and
the Earth should be shaken and quake and tremble thereat; and all the glorious
Lights above should be put out and extinguished. And the Prophet Joel here does
show, that this was to be a very frightful and terrible Day of the Lord. Joel
2.2, 3. For the Day of the Lord comes -- A day of darkness, and of gloominess,
a day of clouds, and of thick darkness as the Morning spread upon the
Mountains: A great People and a strong, there has not been ever the like,
neither shall be any more after it, even to the years of many generations. A
fire devoureth before them, and behind them a flame burns; the Land is as the
Garden of Eden before them; and behind them, a desolate Wilderness, yea and
nothing shall escape them. Such a black and dismal Day was this to be; and such
wast and destruction were these Armies of the Lord of Hosts to make, That the
Land, which they found fruitful like the Garden of Eden, and filled with all
plenty and store, they would make and leave like a barren and desolate
Wilderness, spoiling and consuming all before them. And v. 5, 6. Like the noise
of Chariots on the tops of Mountains shall they leap; like the noise of a flame
of fire, that devoureth the stubble; as a strong People set in Battle array.
Before their face the People shall be much pained, all faces shall gather
blackness. And v. 10, 11. The Earth shall quake before them, the Heavens shall
tremble, the Sun and the Moon shall be dark, and the Stars shall withdraw their
shining. And the Lord shall utter his voice before his Army, for his Camp is
very great; for he is strong that executes his word; for the day of the Lord
is great and very terrible, and who can abide it? Thus dreadful and astonishing
does the Prophet show this day of the Lord here to be. And says the Prophet
Amos 5.18 -- Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord; to what end is it for
you? The day of the Lord is darkness, and not light. As if a man did flee from
a Lion, and a Bear met him; or went into the house, and leaned his hand on the
wall, and a Serpent bit him. Shall not the day of the Lord be darkness, and not
light? even very dark, and no brightness in it? Woe and sorrow is like to be to
such as would have such a day of the Lord hastened; for such days are like to
be surrounded with darkness, and will look dismal every way; and the flying
from one danger and mischief, will be the making haste to another, as the
Prophet here shows The Prophet Zephaniah also shows how terrible such a day
of the Lord's Anger is like to be, in what he says of such a day. Zeph. 1.15
-- That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, and a day of
wastness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and
thick darkness; a day of the trumpet and alarm against the fenced Cities, and
against the high Towers. And I will bring distress upon men, that they shall
walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the Lord, and their blood
shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as the dung. Such a terrible day
were they threatened with, for their sin against Almighty God. And says the
Prophet Malachy concerning the day that he warned them of; Mal. 4.1. For behold
the day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud, yea and all that
do wickedly shall be stubble; and the day that comes shall burn them up, says
the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch. By these,
and such like places, we may see how dreadful and terrible such days of
Vengeance are like to be, when God comes in wrath to visit the Earth or any
part thereof, for the great iniquity of it, that we may be the more sensible
beforehand of the Terror of such a day when we apprehend it to be coming upon
us, and may take the greater care for our own security at such a time.

And in such days of Vengeance and public Judgments, the Rich are like to be
equally involved in misery and destruction with the Poor and Needy; and their
Wealth will then stand them in no stead, but rather add to their Misery. For
Riches profit not in the day of wrath; as Solomon says, Prove. 11.4. And so
says the Prophet Zephaniah 1.18. Neither their Silver nor their Gold shall be
able to deliver them in the day of the Lord's wrath; but the whole Land shall
be devoured by the fire of his jealousy; for he shall make even a speedy
riddance of all them that dwell in the Land. And says the Prophet Ezekiel
7.19. They shall cast their Silver in the streets, and their Gold shall be
removed; their Silver and their Gold shall not be able to deliver them in the
day of the wrath of the Lord -- The Riches of the Rich will not then be able to
ward off the direful Blow, when God comes to strike in anger; And the great and
mighty Men cannot escape the lash of his Rod. The great and mighty Man will
then find no more protection and security than the mean Man, but the mighty Man
shall then cry bitterly, as says the Prophet; Zeph. 1.14. There is nothing but
Righteousness that will deliver Men.

Again 2. We may see that such days of Vengeance will take Men unawares, and
surprise them, when they think themselves secure, and are not apprehensive of
them, if they do not watch and prepare for them, but proceed on in a sinful
course of life. Our blessed Savior tells the Jews that his coming should be
like the Lightning, Matthew 24.27. For as the lightning comes out of the East,
and shines even unto the West; so shall the coming of the Son of Man be. This
may have some respect to the last day of Judgment; but our Savior has also
confined it to his coming to revenge himself upon the obstinate Jews and his
crucifiers. Ver. 34. Verily I say unto you, this generation shall not pass,
till all these things be fulfilled. That generation, to wit, some of them, were
to see these things fulfilled; and St. John, as is related, did outlive this
destruction of the Jewish Nation; and so it is probable did many others.
Christ's coming in Vengeance upon them, we may see, was to be surprising like
Lightning. And v. 42, says he; Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour your
Lord does come. And v. 44. Therefore be ye also ready; for in such an hour as
you think not, the Son of man comes. And v. 48. But and if that evil Servant
shall say in his heart, my Lord delayeth his coming; And shall begin to smite
his fellow servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken; The Lord of that
servant shall come in a day when he looks not for him, and in an hour that he
is not aware of: And shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with
the hypocrites; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. In this
unexpected manner are Men, especially the Wicked, like to be surprised
whenever the Lord shall come to visit the Inhabitants of the Earth in an
extraordinary manner with some Judgment for their Wickedness. And more places
we may see to this purpose. Matthew. 25.13. says our Savior, Watch therefore,
for ye know neither the day nor the hour, wherein the Son of man comes: And to
this purpose in several other places. And says St. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2, 3. For
your selves know perfectly, that the day of the Lord so comes as a thief in
the night. For when they shall say, peace and safety, then sudden destruction
comes upon them, as travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not
escape. And says our Lord by St. John, Rev. 3.3. to the Church in Sardis.
Remember therefore how thou have received, and heard, and hold fast, and
repent: If therefore thou shall not watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and
thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee. In this surprising manner,
like a Thief in the Night, does our Lord threaten to take such as do not repent
and mind the works of righteousness, when he comes to visit the Inhabitants of
the World with his Judgments. And by these, and such places we may see, that
God's Judgments and Plagues, that he brings upon Men for their great
wickedness, will strangely surprise them in a vain security, when they think
not of such, but fancy that they are out of Harm's way, and safe enough. And
this will make such Judgments the more dreadful and terrible, when they light
upon Men in such an unguarded manner and so unprepared for them. This will make
every blow to fall heavy, and to wound deep, when we have lifted up no hand
toward Heaven to ward it off, by our Prayers and Supplications to Almighty God
to have mercy upon us, and in Judgment to remember Mercy, and not to shut up
his bowels of compassion toward us. Such dreadful Surprises are like to
confound Men's understandings, and to damp and quell all their Spirits and
Courage, and to make them like blind and distracted Men, that have no power to
use the common prudence and strength that God has endowed them withal.
Surprisals do betray the succors that Reason offers, and make Men's hearts
to fail them, and recoil back upon them, and turn all into confusion and
disorder without and within too. These fill Men's minds full of horror and
amazement, and make their Faces to gather blackness, and set their Limbs a
tottering and quaking. And this farther shows how dreadful and astonishing
these Judgments of God will be, when they surprise Men in this manner, when
they are careless and secure, and do not prepare themselves against them, by
clearing their hands of all wickedness, and by calling upon God for pardon, and
mercy, and help.

Secondly, We may see, as for matter of Fact, that God has often sent great
and dreadful Judgments upon the Inhabitants of the World for their great Sin
and Wickedness, when they have been ripe for Judgment. We may see that God has
often brought the days of Vengeance upon them, when they have in a manner
totally revolted from him, and become rebellious against the Light. And we may
see that the Wicked and Unrighteous have been surprised with such Judgments
when they thought not of them, or believed them not, and have been swept away
with the Beesom of Destruction, when they expected it not. For the great
wickedness thereof did God destroy the old World, and swept them away with a
prodigious Flood of Water. Genesis 6.5 -- And God saw that the wickedness of Man
was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart
was only evil continually. And it repented the Lord that he had made Man on the
earth, and it grieved him at his heart. And the Lord said, I will destroy man,
whom I have created, from the face of the earth -- And Genesis 7.21. And all flesh
died, that moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast, and
of every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth, and every man. This heavy
judgment did God send upon them for their Wickedness, when they were so wholly
given up to it; and made this total riddance of all Mankind, but Noah and his
Family. And with this Deluge of Water were they all surprised, when they
expected it not, as our Lord shows, Matt. 24.37 -- But as the days of Noe
were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. For as in the days that
were before the flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in
marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark, and knew not until the
flood came and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of man
be. In this unexpected manner were they all wrapped up in destruction before they
were well sensible of it. In a prodigious manner with Fire and Brimstone from
Heaven, did God destroy the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah -- for the grievous
Sin and Wickedness of them. Genesis 28.20. And the Lord said because the cry of
Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is very grievous. And Genesis
19.13. For we will destroy this place, because the cry of them is waxen great
before the face of the Lord, and the Lord has sent us to destroy it. And v.
24, 25. Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire from
the Lord out of heaven. And he overthrew those cities, and all the plain and
all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground.

In this astonishing manner did God destroy these Cities for their egregious
Wickedness, and consume them with the Fire of his Wrath: And the very Ground
where these Cities stood is turned into that Lake which is called the Dead-Sea,
or the Sea of the Plain. And in this terrible Destruction were all these
Sinners surprised, and thought not of it, till the Flame was all about them,
and had seized upon them. Luke 17.28, 29. Likewise also as it was in the days
of Lot, they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they
builded: But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and
brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. Here our Lord does show how they
were surprised with this Fire from Heaven when they thought not of such a
thing, but were busy in pursuing their Sins and worldly Concerns. For their
wickedness did God send sundry Judgments and Plagues upon the Egyptians, as we
may see in the Book of Exodus: And at the last in a surprising manner
overwhelmed them in the Red Sea. Exodus 14.23. And the Egyptians pursued, and
went in after them to the midst of the Red Sea, even all Pharaoh 's Horses and
his Chariots, and his Horsemen. And v. 27. And Moses stretched forth his hand
over the Sea, and the Sea returned to his strength when the morning appeared;
and the Egyptians fled against it; and the Lord overthrew the Egyptians in the
midst of the Sea. This surprising destruction swallowed them up at the last.
For the great wickedness and high provocations of the Inhabitants of the Land
of Canaan did God bring a heavy Judgment upon them, to destroy and root them
out of their own Land by the Children of Israel. God delivered the Kingdoms of
Sihon and Og to Moses, and he Destroyed the Inhabitants thereof: Numb. 21. And
Joshua destroyed 31 Kings on the other side Jordan; Joshua 6 --. And we may see
that this heavy judgment of the Sword came upon them to their utter ruin, for
their great wickedness and abominations. Genesis 15.16 says God to Abraham
concerning his Posterity; But in the fourth generation they shall come hither
again; for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full; Hereby intimating,
that when their Iniquity was full ripe for Judgment, they were to but cut off
for it. And says Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.12. For all that do these things, are an
abomination unto the Lord: and because of these abominations, the Lord thy God
does drive them out from before thee. It is clear that they were driven out and
destroyed for their great wickedness and abominable practices. And we may see
that God's own People the Jews were often scourged by other Nations, and sold
into their hands for their own wickedness and for revolting from God. Judges
2.13, 14. And they forsook the Lord; and served Baal and Ashtaroth. And the
anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he delivered them into the hands
of spoilers, that spoiled them; and he sold them into the hands of their Enemis
round about, so that they could not any longer stand before their Enemies. And
we may read that God did often punish and afflict them with the neighboring
Nations for their wickedness toward him: With the Mesopotamians, and Moabites,
and others, Judges 3. with the Canaanites, Judge. 4. with the Midianites and
others, Judge. 6. with the Philistines and Ammonites, Judge. 10. With these and
others did God often scourge them, and afterward let the Assyrians and
Chaldeans carry them away Captive out of their own Land, for their Rebellion
toward God and backsliding from him; and one part of them returned no more,
and the other was kept in Captivity for the space of seventy Years, as we may
see in the end of 2 Kings, and 2 Chronicles. And, as our blessed Lord had told
them, when they were fallen to great wickedness again, That except they
repented, they should perish as the Galileans did; so, for want of their
repentance and amendment, did God send a most heavy Judgment upon them about 38
or 39 Years after our Savior's Death, and the Romans did destroy and root them
out of their own Land in the end. The Sword of the Enemy without, and Famine
and Pestilence and intestine Broils within, did make most miserable havoc of
them. The Famine was so sharp in Jerusalem, that they eat their own Children
through extreme hunger, as Moses long before had told them: And the slaughter
of the Jews of all sorts that died first and last in the compass of a few
Years, by Sword, Famine and Pestilence, was so great, that there perished above
fourteen hundred Thousand Persons, as it is reported. By these, and the like
Examples, we may see that God has often sent very sore and heavy Judgments and
Calamities upon the Inhabitants of the World for their great Sin and Rebellion
against him.

And now as for our selves, we can plead no exemption from such Judgments of
God: We have no cause to believe, that our Age and our Nation should be free
from the Scourges of Divine Providence, and the Lashes of God's Rod, when
others have smarted so sorely under it, and been punished in this dreadful
manner, if we commit Sin and Wickedness as they have done. When our sins grow
clamorous toward Heaven, and ascend up like the Cry of Sodom, and call for
Judgment upon us, we may well expect that God will hear the cry of them, and be
moved to wrath, and come down in vengeance upon us. We are to know that our
condition is the same with others; and that these menaces and threatenings of
Judgments and Calamities to others, are to be such to us, when our sins and
transgressions grow great, as theirs did, and wax ripe for punishment: And
these Judgments and Plagues that have fallen upon others, are to be Warnings to
us, what we are to expect, if we become great transgressors like them, as the
Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 10.5-11. Now all these things happened unto them for
Examples: and they are written for our Admonition upon whom the ends of the
World are come. And the 2 Pet. 2.6. And if we do but seriously mind how black
and dark our Land is grown with all kind of wickedness, and how little Light
appears in it; how bold and daring Sin and Profaneness is grown, and what high
Affronts and Provocations are offered against Heaven; we may well conclude that
the righteous God above will not always keep silence, but that his patience and
forbearance will be tired out, and that he will come in wrath to revenge
himself, and to still such Clamors and hideous cries that will not let him
rest; and to ease himself of his Adversaries, and to vindicate his Honor and
Worship and Dread here among Men. We may see that the unprofitable Husbandmen
were to be destroyed, and the Vineyard to be let out to such Husbandmen as
should render the Fruits thereof; Mat. 21.41. And if we observe how little the
blessed word of God is regarded, how some have not patience enough to hear it;
and that others lay it but little to heart, and let it have but little
influence upon their lives to lead them accordingly; we may justly fear that
God will not suffer his blessed Word to be so slighted and contemned by us, but
will remove our Candlestick, and his blessed Word and Light from us, and leave
us to grope in the dark a while, that we may know the better how to value such
a Mercy, when we have suffered a while for want of it. And if we do not repent,
but proceed on in wickedness and add new sins to our old ones; if besides our
former transgressions and provocations, we fall to that gross Idolatry which is
in the Roman Church, which God declares he so much detests and abhors, we may
well expect that the Beesom of Destruction will sweep us away in the end; and
that the Sword or some other Instrument of Divine Vengeance will cut us off at
the last. And what Judgments soever befall us, we are to know that the hand of
God is therein, and that he suffers them to light upon us for our sin and
wickedness. And that Men may be prepared against such dreadful Judgments of
God, and not surprised with them; that they may repent, and provide for their
escape and security at such a time, is Warning usually given; and so we see it
is here.

II. Here we see that Warning was to be given in the Church and among his
People, that this dreadful Day of the Lord was coming and nigh at hand to them.
Blow ye the Trumpet in Zion, and sound an Alarm in my holy Mountain -- for the
Day of the Lord comes, for it is nigh at hand.

Here the Prophet uses Metaphorical Expressions alluding to the Camp and
Military Affairs, as I conceive, when he bids the Trumpet to be blown and an
Alarm to be sounded. The Trumpet indeed was used among the Israelites for other
purposes besides Martial Affairs, viz. to assemble the Congregation for the
worship of God, and for Consultations, etc. But here the Prophet having joined
the Alarm with it, he seems to allude to Martial and Military Affairs, when
the Trumpet is blown, and an Alarm is sounded at the sudden and unexpected
approach of an Enemy, that they might put themselves into as good a posture of
defense as is possible for the reception of them, that they might be able to
stand valiantly against them, and not be overcome by such a sudden Assault, and
be beaten and routed by them. And so here the Prophet shows, that as the
Trumpet is to be blown and a loud Alarm to be founded at the unexpected coming
of an Enemy; so was Proclamation to be made, and Warning to be given at the
approach and coming of this dreadful Day of the Lord. And this was to be done
in Zion, that is, in Jerusalem, the chief City of the Jews; for Zion was a part
of this Renowned City; and in God's Holy Mountain, that is, where the Sacred
Temple of his Worship stood, or rather in the Land of Judea, where God's
peculiar People dwelt, which seems here to me to be called God's Holy Mountain.

From hence I shall endeavor to show how God does usually give Warning to all,
but especially to such as will hearken to his voice and take Warning, when such
a Day of Judgment and Tribulation and Destruction is coming upon Men, that they
may prepare for it, and for their own safety and security in it.

Such is the wonderful Love of God to Mankind, that he desires not the death of
sinner, but is earnest with them to persuade them to repent and be saved. Ezekiel.
33.11. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, but that the wicked should turn from his way and live: Turn ye, turn ye
from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel? So unwilling is he
that any should perish, and so earnestly and passionately as it were, does he
desire that all should be saved. And as God is unwilling that any should perish
at other times; so is he also unwilling that any should perish when he comes to
sweep with the Beesom of Destruction, and brings some dreadful day of darkness
upon Men, which he is forced to do by their great wickedness. If any sinner
will repent and return from the error of his ways at the proclaiming and
denouncing of such Judgments as God is determined to bring upon that place,
(such is the love of God to Mankind) he shall have Warning, that he may repent
and be saved, and not be swallowed up with destruction, but that his Soul may
be wrapped up in the bundle of Life. God does bear long with sinners before he
comes in wrath to avenge himself upon them, and gives them space to repent
before he comes to cut them off. He deals with all Nations as he says he did
with mysterious Jezebel; Rev. 2.21. And I gave her space to repent of her
Fornication, and she repented not. And that Men may repent and turn at last to
God, when he is coming in Judgment upon them, he does usually give Warning of
his coming, and does send his Heralds before to declare and denounce his open
War against them, that they may come to terms of Peace at the last, and accept
of his Overtures of Mercy, before he draws his Sword and makes ready his Arrows
against them; That his Proceedings may appear to be just, and equal, and
merciful, to all the World; and that such as will, may then take Warning, and
provide for their escape and Salvation. This I have in part showed already,
That God does usually give Warning before he comes in Judgment and brings a
dark and gloomy Day upon a Land and Nation. All those threatenings of such
dreadful Days of the Lord by the Prophets, which I have mentioned, do prove
this, that God does usually give Warning before he strikes in wrath, and
stretches out his direful Hand upon us. And this also we may see in many
remarkable Instances, that the People and Servants of God have notice and
warning at such a time, and such to whom Warning will do good, and usually all
others. When God destroyed the old World with that dreadful Flood of Water,
Noah had Warning hereof, and was instructed how to provide for his escape from
this Judgment, by preparing an Ark for himself and his Family. Genesis 6.13, 14.
And God said unto Noah, the end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth
is filled with violence through them; and behold I will destroy them with the
earth. Make thee an Ark of Gopher Wood; Rooms shall thou make in the Ark, and
shall pitch it within and without with Pitch. This warning and direction did
God give Noah for his escape. And Warning was given of this dismal Day 120
Years before it came, as we may gather from Genesis 6.3. And the Lord said, my
Spirit shall not always strive with Man, for that he also is Flesh; yet his
days shall be an hundred and twenty years. These Years were to be allowed him
before he was to be cut off with the Waters of a Flood, as seems most probable.
And in this time there is no question but Noah (and other good Men perhaps too)
did preach Repentance to the old World, and warn them of this Judgment that was
coming upon them. And by his Preaching and making an Ark before them were they
warned to repent and prepare for their escape that they might not perish. And
as much as this we may gather from the sacred Scriptures. Noah was a preacher
of Righteousness, as St. Peter shows, 2 Pet. 2.5. And says he of Christ, 1
Pet. 3.19, 20. By which also he went and preached unto the Spirits in Prison,
which some time were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in
the days of Noah, while the Ark was a preparing. Christ by his Spirit in Noah,
and other ways, did preach Repentance to them, and warn them, as we may
conclude, when God's Long-suffering waited for their Conversion in the days of
Noah. And says the Apostle, Heb. 11.7. By faith Noah being warned of God of
things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an Ark for the saving of his
House, by the which he condemned the World -- Noah had warning of this
Destruction, and took warning and prepared against it: And by his preaching and
building an Ark were others warned of it; but being hardened in their
wickedness, they believed it not, and did not prepare against it, but were
still surprised therein. When God was about to destroy Sodom, he sent his
Angels to warn Lot of this dreadful Judgment of Fire from Heaven, that he might
provide for his escape, that he might not be consumed in it. Genesis 19.12, 13.
And the men said unto Lot, have thou here any besides? Son in law, and thy Sons
and thy Daughters, and whatsoever thou have in the City, bring them out of this
place. For we will destroy this place, because the cry of them is waxen great
before the face of the Lord, and the Lord has sent us to destroy it. And v.
15. And when the morning arose, then the Angels hastened Lot, saying, arise,
take thy Wife, and thy two Daughters, which are here, lest thou be consumed in
the iniquity of the City. Here we see that the Angels of God give Lot warning
of this terrible Judgment that God was bringing upon them, that he might
provide for his escape, and not perish therein. And Lot seems to be sent as a
preacher of Righteousness and Repentance among them before this heavy
destruction came upon them; and it is probable that he let them know that their
sinful deeds were like to bring the curse of God upon them. For he, as St.
Peter says, 2 Pet. 2.7. was vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked.
And he warned his Sons in law of this Judgment; but they heeded not his
warning, but looked upon it as vain and idle talk. Genesis 19.14. And Lot went
out, and spoke unto his Sons in law which married his Daughters, and said, up,
get ye out of this place; for the Lord will destroy this City; but he seemed as
one that mocked unto his Sons in law. We may see that the Servants of God and
others had warning of this most dreadful Judgment upon Sodom --, that they
might prepare against it; and righteous Lot, we see, took warning and provided
for his escape: And if there had been any other Person in Sodom, that would
have repented, and have turned from his wickedness to God, upon warning of this
Judgment, I doubt not but that he should have had warning, that he might have
been saved and preserved from this Judgment. But such are the ways of those
that are hardened in their wickedness, and have sold themselves to work evil,
that no warning of Judgment will work upon them, as we see it would not upon
Lot's Sons in law. And says Abraham in the Parable concerning the Rich Man's
Brethren, Luke 16.31. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead. And if the contemners of God's
Word will not be persuaded to repent by one rising from the dead, and warning
them of the fearful Judgments of God in another World, which he has been an
eye witness of; we may be sure that the temporal Judgments of this Life, though
dreadful enough, will not be able to work upon them, but that they will be
surprised still with them, after they have had fair warning, as Lot's Sons in
law were. When God destroyed the Inhabitants of the Land of Canaan, they seem
to have had warning of it by the Armies of the Israelites approaching toward
them, and abiding near them, and by that fear that God sent upon them. And we
may see that Rahab the Harlot, that feared God, took warning hereat, and made
preparation that she might escape this Judgment of God upon them. Joshua 2.9 --
And she said unto the men, I know that the Lord has given you the Land, and
that your terror is fallen upon us, and that all the Inhabitants of the Land
faint because of you; for we have heard how the Lord dried up the water of the
Red Sea, when ye came out of Egypt, and what you did unto the two Kings of the
Amorites. And upon her hiding of the Spies says she, v. 12. Now therefore I
pray you, swear unto me by the Lord, since I have showed you kindness, that ye
will also show kindness unto my Father's house, and give me a true token: And
that ye will save alive my Father, and my Mother, and my Brethren -- And says
the Apostle, Heb. 11.31. By faith the Harlot Rahab perished not with them that
believed not, when she had received the Spies with peace. The Harlot Rahab
shows, that they had warning of this Judgment of God upon them, and she took
warning and escaped. When God was determined to destroy the Ninevites, if they
had not repented, he sends the Prophet Jonah to warn them that the Judgment of
God was coming upon them, that they might repent and amend, and so prevent
their ruin and destruction. Jonah 3.1 -- And the word of the Lord came unto
Jonah the second time, saying; Arise go unto Nineveh that great City, and
preach unto it the preaching that I bid thee. So Jonah arose, and went unto
Nineveh according to the word of the Lord. And v. 4. And Jonah began to enter
into the City a days journey, and he cried, and said, Yet forty days and
Nineveh shall be overthrown. This warning did God give them of their
approaching ruin and destruction, that they might prepare against it, and by a
general Repentance and Reformation prevent it. And here we may see that the
Ninevites took warning and repented and turned from their evil ways, and so
prevented this Judgment of God from coming upon them after it was denounced
against them; Jonah 3.5 --. And if the old World, and the Inhabitants of Sodom
would have done so, there is no doubt but that they might have prevented the
heavy Judgments of God that befell them. God sufficiently declared his
proneness to Mercy in the matter of Sodom, when he told Abraham, Genesis 18.32.
That if he found but ten righteous Men in Sodom, he would spare the whole City
for their sakes. Again we may see that the Jews had warning of that Judgment
and Destruction that came upon them after our Savior's death, by the Romans.
Our Savior warned them of it when he was with them, Luke 13.1 -- and told
them, that they should perish as the Galileans had done, if they repented not.
And in several places we may see that he warned his Disciples of it. Matthew.
24-32 -- Now learn a Parable of the Fig Tree, when his branch is tender, and
puts forth leaves, ye know that Summer is nigh; so likewise ye, when ye
shall see all these things, know that it is near, even at the doors. Verily I
say unto you, this generation shall not pass, till all these things be
fulfilled. And the fiery Sword that hung over them some time before, and such
signal Acts of Providence did warn them, that what our Savior had foretold was
coming upon them. And by these, and some Divine Admonition which the Christians
had, as some conceive, at the withdrawing of the Roman Armies from Jerusalem,
the Christians took warning, and fled all from thence beyond Jordan, and were
preserved; and there were no Christians in Jerusalem when Titus came against
it, and besieged it, as is reported. By these, and such Examples, we may see
that God does give notice and warning to his People and Servants, and such as
will take warning, and usually to all others, when he is bringing any Judgment
and Destruction upon a place, that they may repent and provide for their
Security at such a dreadful time. And righteous Men do take Warning and are
preserved, using the Means that God orders for their preservation; and some
do repent at such a time, and so avoid the Judgment that is coming upon them:
But some will take no warning, but still proceed on in Wickedness, and after
all the Warning that is given them, will still, through their unbelief, be
surprised with Destruction, before they are well sensible that it is coming
upon them.

And as for our selves, besides what I have said before, Archbishop Usher, that
Reverend Prelate, has long since told us what a dreadful Time is coming upon
us; and the great preparations that are made for War, and the Noises of Guns
that are heard, and the several Attempts that have been made, and other
Occurrences, wherein there seems to me to be something of the Finger of God, do
admonish and warn us, that Misery and Destruction are ready to come upon us,
and call us all to a speedy and deep Repentance. And by all these let us be
awaked out of our Carnal Security and Vain Confidence, that we may not be
surprised like blind Fools, but may be wise betimes and provide for our own
Preservation and Salvation, that we perish not. And

III. We have here the Duty which the Prophet exhorted them to, upon the coming
of this Day of the Lord upon them, briefly in these Words; Let all the
inhabitants of the land tremble. And this Duty he more largely insisteth on in
this Chapter. And here we see that the Exhortation is general, and all are to
be concerned and moved to fear and trembling at the coming of this Day.

From hence I shall endeavor to show something of the Duty which we are to set
upon, when such a dreadful Day of the Lord is apprehended to be coming and near
at hand. And here the Prophet lays the Foundation of such a Duty, viz. to be
moved to Fear and Trembling, and this will set us to Repentance and Amendment,
and to cry mightily to Almighty God for Pardon, and Mercy, and Help. This is
one of the first Principles in Wisdom's School. Psalm. 111.10. The fear of the
Lord (says the Psalmist) is the beginning of Wisdom. The fearing of God's
great and dreadful Majesty, who is a Consuming Fire, Heb. 12.29. and the
trembling at his terrible judgments and punishments that are threatened against
Sinners, is commonly the first thing that moves them to break off their Sins
and Wickedness, and to set upon a righteous Course of Life. When Men are
stricken to the Heart with a sense of God's Wrath, then will they cry out with
great earnestness like the Jailor, Acts 16.30. Sirs, what must I do to be
saved? And with such a sense are Men to be touched, when a dreadful Day of
Judgment is apprehended to be coming upon us; and then they will be ready to do
what they well can for their own preservation, that they may escape God's fiery
Indignation. And what we are further to do hereupon at such a time, we are
taught by the Prophet Joel, and other places of Scripture; And

First, We are, at the apprehension and approach of such a dreadful Day, to
fast, and use some abstinence from our ordinary Food; and to refrain from such
pleasures, and delights, and recreations, which may be lawful at any other
time; and to withdraw our Hearts and Minds from too great an Intensness upon
worldly Cares and earthly Concerns. This is our Duty at other Times, but more
especially when we are to atone and appease an incensed and angry God, and to
turn away his Wrath from us; and such is our Work when a day of Vengeance is
coming upon us. And this Duty of Fasting is here enjoined by the Prophet Joel.
Joel 1.14. Sanctify ye a fast; call a solemn assembly; gather the elders, and
all the inhabitants of the land into the house of the Lord your God -- And Joel
2.12. Therefore also now, says the Lord, turn ye even to me with all your
heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning. This is here
plainly prescribed and commanded by the Prophet, that a Fast should be
sanctified and set apart upon this very Occasion of the coming of this dreadful
Day of the Lord upon them; that they should curb and restrain themselves
herein, and deny themselves something in the ordinary Refreshment of their
usual Food. And we may see that it has been a common practice with Men to
fast, and deny themselves the ordinary Refreshment of Eating and Drinking, when
they would intercede with Almighty God to avert and turn away his Wrath, and
procure his Favor; and that a good success has often attended it. When the
Israelites would obtain Help of God against the Benjamites, by whom they had
been twice beaten and a great number of them slain, they fasted, and after had
good Success against them. Jud. 20.2^. When Ahab was threatened with evil from
the Lord by the Prophet Elijah, he fasted and humbled himself before God, and
obtained a procrastination of the Evil till after his days, 1 King. 21.27 --
When Haman had procured of King Ahasuerus to have the Jews destroyed, they
fasted, and mourned, and wept, seeking to prevent and avoid this destruction
that was decreed against them; and after did obtain Favor and Help in this
Matter. Esther. 4. And when the Ninevites were threatened with Destruction from
God by the Prophet Jonah, they used very great fasting -- Jonah 3.5 -- So the
people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth,
from the greatest of them even to the least of them -- And by their Fasting and
Repentance, etc. they obtained a Revocation of this Judgment after it was
denounced against them by the Prophet, and it was not executed upon them. By
these, and other Examples we may see that this has been the usual practice of
Men, when they would turn away some Judgment, and obtain Mercy at God's hand,
to fast and use other austerities toward themselves, as to cover themselves
with Sackcloth, and to lie down in Dust and Ashes, or to cover themselves with
them, and to humble themselves greatly before Almighty God. And then are we to
withdraw our minds from our pleasures, and delights, and recreations, as not
suiting well with a time of Mourning and Fasting. And this the Prophet shows
here. Joel 2.16. Let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the bride out
of her closet. And says God by the Prophet Isaiah, complaining of the Fasts of
the Jews. Isa. 58.3. Behold in the day of your fast you find pleasure, and
exact all your labors. And the Instruments of Music were not brought before
King Darius, when he fasted for Daniel. Dan. 6.18. And then are Men also to
withdraw their Hearts and Minds a little from their Worldy Concerns and Earthly
Matters, and not to be too much taken up with them. Luke 21.34 -- And take heed
to your selves (says our Lord) lest at any time your hearts be overcharged
with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come
upon you unawares: For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the
face of the whole earth. By these, and such places, we see that we are to fast,
and to refrain from our pleasures and delights, and to take our Hearts off from
too great an Intensness upon worldly Concerns and mundane Affairs, when we
apprehend a dreadful Day of the Lord to be coming upon us: And now especially
does it behove us so to do, and to fast frequently upon this account.

Secondly, When such a dreadful Day is drawing near, and at hand, we are to
afflict our Minds as well as our Bodies, and to mourn, and weep, and bewail our
own sinfulness and vileness, and our great transgressions and provocations,
which we have committed toward Almighty God. We are then to lay aside all high
and proud thoughts and vain conceits of our selves, and to call all our sins
and evil ways to mind, and to be deeply humbled for them: We are then to be
truly sorrowful and grieved at our very hearts, that we have so ungratefully
broken the sacred Commands of Almighty God, and have made so light of them: We
are then to repent of our sins and forsake them, and to undo them as much as we
can; and to clear our hands and our hearts of all filthiness and vileness, and
to make satisfaction for all the Injuries and Wrongs that we have done to
others. This we are to do at all times, but more especially when God comes down
to Judge the Inhabitants of the Earth in such an eminent and remarkable manner,
and to make a discrimination, and to put a difference between the Righteous and
the Wicked: Then are we in a more especial manner to prepare for such a coming
of Almighty God among us, and to purify and make clean our selves for such a
Lustration and Visit, and to take care that our Habitations and Doors may be
cleansed from all sin and filthiness, and so distinguished from all the rest of
the sinful World; that when the destroying Angel is sent forth, he may see it,
and pass over our Dwellings, that we may escape the Lash of his Rod, and the
Stroke of his Blow, when he comes to punish and destroy. And

1. We may see that this is enjoined by several places in the sacred Word of
God, that we are then to mourn and weep, and to repent and turn from our sins
and evil ways, when a dreadful Day of the Lord is coming upon us; and that if
we do so, we may then hope to find Mercy. And this the Prophet Joel here
shows; Joel 2.12 -- Therefore also now, says the Lord, Turn ye even to me
with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning: And
rent your heart and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God; for he
is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents
him of the evil. This is the Course that we are to take at such a time, to
mourn and weep, and to be heartily sorry for our misdoings, and to turn from
them to God; and then we are like to atone and appease him, because he is
gracious and prone to mercy. And says God by the Prophet Isaiah 1.16. Wash ye,
make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to
do evil, learn to do well -- And v. 19, 20. If ye be willing and obedient, ye
shall eat the good of the land. But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be
devoured with the sword; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. And Isa.
55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and
let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God,
for he will abundantly pardon. And as at other times, so also at the coming of
his Judgments will he show mercy when this Course is taken, and Men forsake
their Sins and sinful Deeds and Ways. And God complains of the Jews by his
Prophet, that they fasted for Strife and Wickedness; and tells them that the
Fast that he had chosen, was to loose the bands of Wickedness, and to undo
their sinful Deeds. Isa. 58.4. Behold ye fast for strife, and debate, and to
smite with the fist of wickedness: Ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make
your voice to be heard on high. Is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day for
a man to afflict his soul? is it to bow down his Head as a bul-rush, and to
spread sackcloth and ashes under him? Will thou call this a fast, and an
acceptable day to the Lord? Is not this the fast that I have chosen? To loose
the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go
free, and that ye break every yoke? Here we see that an outward show of
Fasting, and Humiliation, and Sorrow, so long as Sin and Wickedness are lodged
and remain in the Heart, and we turn not from our evil Ways, will not please
God, nor appease him toward us, and turn away his wrath from us: But we see
that the Fast that he has chosen, and which will please him, is to undo all
our wicked acts, and to repent of them, and utterly to forsake them, and to
have no more to do with them; and to make satisfaction for the Injustice and
Unrighteousness, and Injuries, which we have done to others. And says the
Prophet Jeremiah 4.1. If thou will return, O Israel, says the Lord, return
unto me; and if thou will put away thine abominations out of my sight, Then
shall thou not remove. And v. 4 Circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take
away the fore-skins of your heart, ye men of Judah and inhabitants of
Jerusalem, lest my fury come forth like fire, and burn that none can quench it;
because of the evil of your doings. Their Abominations, their idolatrous and
sinful Practices were to be put away and laid aside, and they were to return to
God in Sincerity and Truth; and then they were not to remove and be carried
away Captive by their Enemies. And they were to Circumcise their Heart, and to
take away all Superfluity of Naughtiness and Wickedness from thence, if they
would have God's Fury to be averted and kept from breaking out upon them: And
so are we to do when our Case and Condition is parallel with theirs. And v. 14.
O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved: How
long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? Jerusalem's Heart is to be
washed from wickedness, that she might be saved: And so are others to do, that
at any time expect and desire to be saved and delivered. And those that forsake
their Sins shall find Mercy, as the wise Man shows; Prove. 28.13. He that
covers his sins shall not prosper; but whosoever confesses and forsakes them,
shall have mercy. There is no way to procure Mercy but this. And our Lord told
the Jews, as I have showed, That they should perish as the Galileans had done,
if they did not repent of, and amend their sinful doings. Luke 13.3, 5. And
this is the Direction that S. James gives to procure the Favor of God, and to
obtain his Help and Mercy; To be afflicted, and to mourn for our Sins, and to
purify our Hands and Hearts from all things that are sinful and evil. Jam. 4.8
-- Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you: Cleanse your hands, ye
sinners; and purify your hearts, ye double-minded: Be afflicted, and mourn,
and weep; let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy to heaviness.
Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up. And this
Course are we then especially to take, when a dreadful Day of Judgment is
coming upon us, and we would turn away the Wrath of God from us: Then are we to
weep and mourn, and afflict our selves; to call our sins and evil doings to
mind, and to be truly humbled for them, and to repent of them, and to be
grieved and sore vexed that we have committed them; That we have been so
foolish and unwise as to slight Wisdom's Voice, and to err and wander so far
from the paths of Life and Happiness: And that we have been so ungrateful and
unthankful to Almighty God our great Creator, as to transgress the just and
righteous Laws that he has set before us, and not to hearken to the Voice of
his Word: Then are we to grow quite out of love with our sins, and to loath and
abhor them, and to shut our Hands and Hearts clear of them, and to resolve
firmly to have no more to do with them: Then we are to wish with all our Heart
and Soul that we had never committed them, and to unravel and undo them again
as much as we can, by making Restitution of all that we have unjustly taken or
gotten, and satisfaction for all the Injuries and Wrongs that we have done; and
to repair and make good again all the Breaches that we have any ways made among
Mortals and the rest of Mankind by our Sins and Transgressions, either in their
Souls, Bodies, Goods, or good Name, so far as it is possible for us to do.

2. We may see that this also has been the practice of Men, when they would
turn away God's anger, and obtain his favor and mercy, To mourn and weep and
humble themselves before God, and to repent of their sins and to turn from
them. When Ahab heard the Evil that Elijah was sent to denounce against him and
his House, he humbled himself greatly before God, and did thereby obtain so
much favor and mercy from God, as to have it deferred and prolonged till after
his days. 1 Kings 12.19 See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me? (says
God to the Prophet) because he humbles himself before me, I will not bring the
evil in his days, but in his Son's days will I bring the evil upon his House:
So taking was his Humiliation with God. When the Children of Israel were
distressed by the Philistines and Ammonites, they humbled themselves before
God, and confessed and turned from their sins and evil ways; and he had pity
upon them, and sent them deliverance. Judges 10.15, 16. And the Children of
Israel said unto the Lord, we have sinned, do thou unto us whatsoever seems
good unto thee, deliver us only, we pray thee, this day. And they put away the
strange Gods from among them, and served the Lord; and his soul was grieved for
the misery of Israel. And afterward did he send them deliverance, as we may see
in the next Chapter. And we may see that the Ninevites turned from their sinful
and evil ways, and the wickedness that they had been guilty of, when they
sought to turn away God's Judgment from them, which the Prophet Jonah had
denounced against them; and that for this reason especially, God repented and
did not bring that destruction upon them, which he had threatened against them.
Jonah 3.8 -- But let man and beast be covered with Sackcloth (says the King)
and cry mightily unto God; yea let them turn every one from his evil way, and
from the violence that is in their hands. Who can tell if God will turn, and
repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? And God saw
their works, that they turned from their evil way; and God repented of the
evil, that he had said, that he would do unto them, and he did it not. The
repenting and turning from the evil of their ways, was the great reason that
moved God to repent and turn from the evil that he intended to bring upon them.
And these Examples are to instruct us, what we are to do in such a case; That
we are then likewise to mourn and weep, and to be truly humbled and sorrowful
for all our sins and transgressions of God's most righteous Laws and
Commandments; and to repent and forsake our sins and iniquities, and to undo
them as much as we can, by making restitution and satisfaction for all the
evils and wrongs that we have done to others; and firmly to resolve, that,
through God's blessed help and assistance, we will no more commit the like, but
walk in his fear and in obedience to his sacred Commandments.

Thirdly, We are at such a time to set more earnestly upon the works of
Righteousness, and Piety, and Mercy. We are indeed at other times, but then
especially when we apprehend a dreadful Day of the Lord to be coming upon us,
not only to cease to do Evil, but to learn to do Well, and to set more
vigoriously upon a righteous and holy Life, carefully observing all the
Commands of God; and are to be then more zealous and abounding in the works of
Piety, and Charity, and Mercy. We are then to be more frequent and fervent at
our Devotions and Services to Almighty God; we are then to be more watchful
over our selves, that we transgress not in any particular, and more strictly to
observe all the Rules of Justice; And we are then to be more liberal and
open-handed to the Needy and Necessitous, and more ready and forward to forgive
all others that have injured and wronged us, that we may have the greater hope
to find Mercy at God's hand at such a time. We are at such a time to live like
those, that believe that they shall shortly die and be brought to Judgment,
because we are at such a time to expect to be judged by Almighty God, and to be
dealt with according to our works and deserts. That a careful setting upon a
righteous and pious course of life in every respect, is our duty at such a time
when a dreadful Day is apprehended to be near, will appear,

1. By several places of Scripture, where it is prescribed upon the like
occasions, or showed to be so. This the Prophet Isaiah prescribes to the Jews,
that they might not be devoured by the Sword. Isa. 1.17. Cease to do evil,
learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless,
plead for the widow. And v. 19. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the
good of the land; But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the
Sword -- And that such works of Charity and Mercy are to be showed at such a
time, we may see by what God says by the Prophet Isaiah concerning the Fast
that he had chosen. Isa. 58.6 -- Is not this the Fast that I have chosen? to
loose the bands of wickedness -- Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and
that thou bring the poor that are cast out, to thy house? when thou see the
naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine own
flesh? Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall
spring forth speedily, and thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the
glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward. This course is to be taken when we
keep a Fast to the Lord and would procure his favor; then are we in an
especial manner to show our selves merciful and kind to our poor and needy
Brethren, and not to hide our selves from them, and to grow hard-hearted
toward them. And v. 10. And if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and
satisfy the afflicted soul; then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy
darkness be as the noon day. Such a lightsom time is the merciful Man like to
find; and has good grounds to hope that he shall find some comfort when the
dark and gloomy Day shall come. And this is the Counsel of the Prophet Daniel
to King Nebuchadnezzar, when he told him, that this Judgment should come upon
him; That he should be driven from Men, and have his dwelling with the Beasts
of the Field, Dan. 4.27. Wherefore, O King, let my counsel be acceptable unto
thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing
mercy to the poor; if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity. This Counsel
does the Prophet give him to avert the Judgment as much as might be, and to
prolong his own Tranquillity and Happiness; viz. To set upon a righteous course
of Life, and to show himself merciful and kind to the Poor. And this is the
direction of the Prophet Zephaniah, which he gives for a preparation against
the day of the Lord's Anger. Zeph. 2.3. Seek ye the Lord all ye meek of the
earth, which have wrought his judgments; seek righteousness, seek meekness; it
may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lord's anger. And our blessed Savior
in Matthew. 24. where he forewarns his Disciples of that judgment and destruction
that was to come upon the Jews, tells them that those should be blessed and
happy, that should then be found employed in their Master's service, and in the
works of Righteousness. Matthew. 24.45 -- Who then is a faithful and wise
Servant, whom his Lord has made ruler over his household, to give them meat in
due season? Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord, when he comes shall find
so doing. Verily I say unto you, that he shall make him ruler over all his
goods. The Servant that is well employed in his Master's Charge, shall be
blessed when his Lord comes: But the wicked Servant is then to be cut off, and
to have his portion with the Hypocrites, as it there follows. And says St.
Peter, 1 Pet. 4.7 -- But the end of all things is at hand; be ye therefore
sober, and watch unto prayer. And above all things have fervent Charity among
your selves; for Charity shall cover the multitude of sins. This Advice does he
give upon the apprehension of the end of all things being at hand, that is, the
Day of the Lord being near at hand; That upon this consideration they were to
be more sober, and temperate, and diligent in their Prayers and Services to
Almighty God; and above all to have fervent Charity and Love among themselves,
because this would cover a multitude of Sins, and qualify them most and make
them fit for Mercy at such a time. By these, and such places, we may see, that
it is our duty to set earnestly upon the works of Righteousness, when we
apprehend a dreadful Day of the Lord to be drawing near, because such a course
is then prescribed upon such occasions: That we are then to grow more Temperate
and Holy, to be more frequent and fervent in our Devotions and Services to
Almighty God; and are then more strictly to mind all the Rules of Justice and
Uprightness; and are then to be more liberal and bountiful to our poor and
needy Brethren; and prone and forward to forgive all the injuries and wrongs
that have been done to us by any others. This is highly requisite, that we
should at such a time be full of mercy and kindness to others, because we are
then in an extraordinary manner seeking for mercy and pardon at God's hand; and
we can have no ground to hope to find mercy at his hand, if we are cruel and
hard hearted, and will show none our selves to others. Matthew. 6.14, 15. says
our Lord; For, if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will
also forgive you; But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your
Father forgive your trespasses.

2. We may see, that the Righteous shall never be forsaken, and that it is
Righteousness that does deliver Men at all times of difficulty and danger; and
this does farther show, that it is our duty and our wisdom too to set earnestly
upon all the works of righteousness, that we may be delivered at such a time of
danger, when a dreadful Day is apprehended to be coming upon us. This we may
see by several places of Scripture, that Righteousness will avail much at such
a time, and that the Righteous may then expect to be delivered. Remember, I
pray thee (says Eliphaz to Job 4.7.) who ever perished being innocent? or
where were the righteous cut off? Hereby showing that it was very observable
how they were delivered, and not cut off like the wicked. And says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 37.25. I have been young, and now am old, yet have I not seen
the righteous forsaken. And v. 27 -- Depart from evil, and do good, and dwell
for evermore. For the Lord loves judgment, and forsakes not his Saints; they
are preserved for ever. And Solomon shows in several places, that
Righteousness will deliver the Righteous from death, when the riches of the
Rich will not profit them. Prove. 10.2. Treasures of wickedness profit nothing;
but righteousness delivers from death. And Prove. 11.4. Riches profit not in
the day of wrath: but righteousness delivers from death. And Prove. 11.6. The
righteousness of the upright shall deliver them: but transgressors shall be
taken in their own naughtiness. By these, and such like places, does the Wise
Man show, that the Righteous shall be delivered in the time of anguish and
distress upon the account of his righteousness. And God does show by the
Prophet Ezekiel, that Men shall deliver themselves by their righteousness, when
a day of wrath and destruction is coming upon Men. Ezekiel. 14.13 -- And says the
Prophet Isaiah, 33.15 -- He that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly;
he that despises the gain of oppressions, that shakes his hands from holding
of bribes, that stops his ears from hearing of blood, and shuts his eyes
from seeing evil; He shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the
munition of rocks, bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure. So
securely is such a Righteous Man like to live, and to be set out of the reach
of danger; and in the fiery day of Vengeance he is like to be safe and secure.
And says our Lord, Matthew. 5.7. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain
mercy. And in the gloomy Day, and in time of danger, there is no question but
that they shall find Mercy. By these, and such places, we may see, That
righteous Men shall be delivered at such times of need and danger, and in such
Days of vengeance, upon the account of their righteousness; and this farther
shows it to be our duty and our wisdom at such a time to set more earnestly
upon a pious and righteous course of Life; and especially then to abound more
in the works of Charity and Mercy, when we are in a more extraordinary way and
manner to sue for mercy at God's hand.

3. We may see that righteous Men have been delivered when God has brought a
dark and dreadful Day upon Men; and that they have been saved and delivered for
their Righteousness sake, when others have been destroyed, because they were
not Righteous, but Wicked: And this will farther show that it is our Duty, and
will be a great Encouragement to us, to set then earnestly upon all the works
of Righteousness at the apprehension of a dreadful Day coming upon us, that we
may then escape and find Mercy. This God shows to be the Reason why Noah was to
be saved from perishing with the Inhabitants of the Old World, because he was
righteous before God. Genesis 7.1. And the Lord said unto Noah, come thou and all
thy house into the ark; for thee have I seen righteous before me in this
generation. This was the Reason why he was to be saved by the Ark, when the
rest of the World were to be destroyed by a Flood of Waters, because God saw
him to be righteous. When God destroyed Sodom, all the righteous Men were to be
preserved; and if there had been fifty Righteous, yea, if there had been but
ten righteous Men therein, they and the whole City too had been spared for
their Righteousness sake. Genesis 18.23 --. And we may see that righteous Lot was
delivered at that time; and that he was delivered because he was a just and
righteous Man, S. Peter shows, 2 Pet. 2.6 -- And turning the cities of Sodom
and Gomorrah into ashes, condemned them with an overthrow, making them an
ensample unto those that after should live ungodly: And delivered just Lot
vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked: (for that righteous man
dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day
to day with their unlawful deeds.) The Lord knows how to deliver the godly
out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be
punished. Here we may see that Lot was delivered, because he was a just and
righteous Man; and that pious and godly Men from this Example, and that of
Noah, are to be encouraged that God will deliver them from Temptations, and
Trials, and Dangers: But that the Unjust must expect to be reserved to the Day
of Judgment to be punished for their Unrighteousness. When the Israelites were
to be consumed and to have their Carkases fall in the Wilderness, and not to
come into the Land of Canaan, because they murmured and sinned against God,
Joshua and Caleb were then delivered from this Sentence, because they were
righteous, and wholly followed God. Number 14.20 -- and Number. 32.10 -- And the
Lord's anger was kindled the same time (says Moses) and he swear, saying;
Surely none of the men that came up out of Egypt, from twenty years old and
upwards, shall see the land which I swear unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto
Jacob, because they have not wholly followed me; save Caleb the son of
Jephunneh the Kenezite, and Joshua the son of Nun; for they have wholly
followed the Lord. By the Works of Righteousness did the Harlot Rahab escape
Destruction, and perished not, when Jericho was taken and destroyed, when she
concealed the Spies and sent them away in peace, because she believed them to
be the Servants of God. By faith (says the Apostle Heb. 11:31) the harlot
Rahab perished not with them that believed not, when she had received the spies
with peace. And says S. James 2.25. Likewise also, was not Rahab the harlot
justified by works, when she had received the messengers, and had sent them out
another way? By Works was she justified, and by her works of Piety and Mercy
was she saved from this Destruction, and perished not with the Inhabitants of
Jericho. By these and such Examples we may see, that righteous Men have been
delivered in the Days of Vengeance for their Righteousness sake, when others
have perished; and this may serve as a farther Argument to show, that it then
behooves us especially to set earnestly upon the works of Righteousness
whenever we apprehend such a terrible Day of the Lord to be coming upon us.
And what it is that is Good, and God requires, the Prophet shows; Micah 6.8.
He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?
These are the things that are Good, and which God requires of us at all times,
but especially at such a time; That we should be just and upright in all our
dealings with others, and do as we would be done by; and rather wrong our
selves, than overreach and deceive another: That we should be so far from
grudging at charitable Works like the Miser, that we should love them, and take
delight in all acts of Mercy and Goodness, and cheerfully communicate to all
the Needs and Necessities of others, and be joyful and glad when we can relieve
and succor them in their Miseries and Wants: That we should be prone and
forward to forgive all others that have done any Harm or Hurt to us, and
contentedly to pass by all the Injuries and Wrongs that have been done to us by
others, without seeking any Revenge, and with Good to overcome all the Evil and
Malice that is offered to us by any. That we should walk humbly before God, in
a deep Sense of our own Unworthiness and Vileness, and of God's great Goodness
and Mercy to us, and the continual Dependence that we have upon him, and of his
dreadful and glorious Majesty. These are the things which God requires of us;
and such works of Righteousness, and Mercy, and Kindness, are we especially to
set upon, when a dark Day is apprehended to be near at hand. And then are we to
be more frequent and zealous at all our Services and Devotions to Almighty God.

But Fourthly, Then are we also more particularly to cry mightily to Almighty
God upon this very account of his Day of Wrath being coming upon us: Then are
we to make our earnest addresses to Almighty God in this very Respect, and to
make Supplications to him, that he would have mercy upon us, and deal with us
according to his great Love and Goodness, and not according to our Sins and
Iniquities: That for his own Name sake, and for his dear Son Christ Jesus sake,
he would be pleased to avert and turn away his Judgments and Wrath from us, if
it may consist with his Divine Will and Pleasure; and if not, that we may be
covered and preserved in the Day of Wrath, and sheltered under the Wings of his
good Providence, and find Mercy and Salvation in that day. And

1. That we are to cry and make great Supplications to Almighty God, and to
seek to atone him, and turn away his Wrath from us at such a time by earnest
Prayers, we may see by several places of Scripture. Our own Nature and Reason
will dictate this to us, and so do the sacred Scriptures. This the Prophet Joel
prescribes here. 1.14. Sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly, gather the
elders, and all the Inhabitants of the land into the house of the Lord your
God, and cry unto the Lord. And Joel 2.17. Let the priests, the ministers of
the Lord weep between the porch and the altar, and let them say, spare thy
people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach, that the heathen
should rule over them; wherefore should they say among the people where is
their God? The Prophet here does give command to cry and pray to God upon this
very account; and does here give direction in what form and manner the Priests
were to address themselves to God, wherein the People also were to join; viz.
To entreat Almighty God to spare them, who were his peculiar People, and not to
suffer them to be made a Reproach by the Heathen, and to be domineered over by
them, and to have them to ask others in scorn and derision, where their God and
Savior was, in whom they trusted. And this divine Direction of the Prophet
seems to me to be no less adapted and fitted for us at this day, than it was
for the Jews in the Prophet Joel's time. And this was David's Resolution, to
have Recourse to God, and to call upon him in all Distress and Danger. 2 Samuel
22.4. I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised; so shall I be
saved from mine enemies. And Psalm. 55.16. As for me, I will call upon God, and
the Lord shall save me. Evening and morning, and at noon will I pray, and cry
aloud; and he shall hear my voice. And Psalm. 86.7. In the day of my trouble I
will call upon thee; for thou will answer me. This is the Psalmist's Resolution
to make his earnest addresses to Almighty God, and hereby he hoped for Mercy
and Help in the needful time of Trouble and Distress. And this is God's Command
by the Psalmist, that we should call upon him at such a time; and if we do it
as we ought, he has promised that he will hear us and deliver us. Psalm. 50.15.
And call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. We are humbly to sue for mercy at such a time, before we are to
expect it; and after we have received it, not to forget to return Almighty God
his due laud and praise for the same. And Solomon in his prayer in 1 Kings 8.
does show that it is our Duty in all Distresses to make Supplications to God in
an extraordinary manner, when he there requesteth that he would hear such
prayers and supplications that are made to him by his people in their
afflictions and distresses; and does show that they are like to be heard and
relieved when they seek and cry to God with all their Hearts. And says God by
his Prophet Jeremiah, 29.12 -- Then shall ye call upon me, and ye. shall go and
pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you. And ye shall seek me and find me,
when ye shall search for me with all your heart. And I will be found of you,
says the Lord, and I will turn away your captivity -- And it is our blessed
Lord's Command to his Disciples, when he foretold them of that Judgment and
Destruction that was coming upon the Jewish Nation, to be constant and fervent
at their prayers to Almighty God, that they might obtain Mercy then and be
saved, and not perish with the Wicked Luke 21.36. Watch ye therefore, and pray
always that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall
come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man. By Watchfulness and Constancy
and Earnestness at Prayer to Almighty God, are we to prepare our selves, that
we may be accounted worthy of Mercy, and to escape the Judgments of God, and to
stand before the Son of God, whenever he shall come in an extraordinary and
eminent manner to Judge and Punish the Inhabitants of the World for their great
Wickedness. By these and such places we may see that it is our Duty, whenever
we apprehend a Day of the Lord's Wrath to be coming upon us, to cry mightily to
Almighty God, and to make Supplications to him, for Pardon, and Mercy, and
Help, and Protection, at such a Time, when a Day of Wrath and Revenge is coming
upon Men.

2. We may see that this has been the practice of several Persons at such
times of anguish and distress, to cry to Almighty God, and to supplicate his
Divine Majesty for mercy and succor; and that they have often prevailed
hereby; and this will farther show it to be our duty at such a time, and a
persuasive to it, to call upon God in a more earnest and extraordinary manner,
for the averting of such Judgments as we have just cause to believe do hang
over us, and are ready to fall upon us; and for the procuring of Mercy for our
selves. When the Fire of the Lord consumed the People, Moses prayed unto the
Lord, and the Fire was stopped. Numb. 11.1 -- And when the people complained, it
displeased the Lord; and the Lord heard it, and his anger was kindled, and the
fire of the Lord burnt among them, and consumed them that were in the uttermost
parts of the Camp. And the people cried unto Moses; and when Moses prayed unto
the Lord, the fire was quenched. When the Children of Israel were sold into the
hand of the Mesopotamians for their sin and wickedness which they did in the
sight of God, in forgetting him, and serving other Gods; in their misery they
cried to God, and he sent them a deliverer. Judes 3.9. And when the Children of
Israel cried unto the Lord, the Lord raised up a deliverer to the Children of
Israel, who delivered them, even Othniel the Son of Kenaz Caleb 's younger
Brother. In their distress did God hear them, notwithstanding their former
backsliding, and had respect to their Prayer; and this may be an encouragement
to us sinners to do the like. When the Children of Israel cried unto the Lord,
when they were oppressed and afflicted by Eglon King of Moab, he heard their
cry, and showed them mercy, and delivered them out of his hand. Judge. 3.15. But
when the Children of Israel cried unto the Lord, the Lord raised them up a
deliverer Ehud the Son of Gera a Benjamite --. When the Children of Israel were
sold into the hand of Jabin the Canaanite, for the evil which they did in the
sight of the Lord, they cried unto the Lord in their distress, and he delivered
them. Judge. 4.3. And the Children of Israel cried unto the Lord; for he had
nine hundred Chariots of Iron, and twenty years he mightily oppressed the
Children of Israel. And God did then deliver them out of his hand by Deborah
and Barak, as we may there see afterward. And several other times did God
deliver them, when they returned and sought him, and cried and made
Supplications to him, notwitstanding they had often revolted from him. When
King Abijah and Judah were beset on both sides with their Enemies the
Israelites, they cried unto the Lord in their distress, and he heard their cry
and delivered them. 2 Chronicles. 1.14 -- And when Judah looked back, behold the
battle was before and behind; and they cried unto the Lord, and the Priests
sounded with the Trumpets. Then the men of Judah gave a shout; and as the men
of Judah shouted, it came to pass that God smote Jeroboam and all Israel before
Abijah and Judah. When Zerah the Ethiopian came out against Asa King of Judah
with an Host of a thousand thousand, he cried unto the Lord for help and
succor, and obtained help from him. 2 Chronicles. 14.11 -- And Asa cried unto the
Lord his God, and said, Lord, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with
many, or with them that have no power. Help us, O Lord our God, for we rest on
thee, and in thy Name we go against this multitude: O Lord thou art our God,
let not Man prevail against thee. So the Lord smote the Ethiopians before Asa,
and before Judal^ and the Ethiopians fled. When Jehoshaphat prayed unto the
Lord for help against his Enemies the Moabites and Ammonites and they of Mount
Seir, the Lord wrought a great deliverance for him and the Jews, and set their
Enemies to destroy themselves, and left them nothing to do, but to gather the
Spoil, and return God thanks for the great Salvation that he granted them. 2 Chronicles. 20.3 -- When Sennacherib King of Assyria sent to Hezekiah, and was
coming against Jerusalem with his Army, Hezekiah and Isaiah prayed unto the
Lord, and obtained help and succor from him against their Enemies, and God
sent an Angel to destroy them. 2 Chronicles. 32.20 -- For this cause Hezekiah the
King, and the Prophet Isaiah the Son of Amoz, prayed and cried to Heaven. And
the Lord sent an Angel which cut off all the Mighty men of Valor, and the
Leaders, and Captains in the Camp of the King of Assyria: so he returned with
shame of face to his own Land. And when he was come into the House of his God,
they that came forth of his own bowels, slew him there with the Sword. And the
Angel of the Lord slew an hundred fourscore and five thousand; as it is in 2
Kings 19.35. And this was the command of the King of Nineveh, when the Prophet
had proclaimed the Judgment of God against them, That they should cry mightily
to God. Jonah 3.8. But let man and beast be covered with Sackcloth, and cry
mightily to God --. And we see that they did obtain pardon and mercy. By these
and many more Examples we may see how men have cried to Almighty God in their
distress, and when they lay under the apprehensions of great dangers and
miseries, and have obtained mercy and help from him: And these do farther teach
us to do the like, and show it to be our duty to supplicate his Divine Majesty
and Goodness in an extraordinary manner, whenever we apprehend a dreadful Day
of Vengeance to be coming upon us.

But to qualify us for such a calling upon Almighty God, and to make way for
an access of our Prayers to him, we must first clear our hands and our hearts
from all Sin and Wickedness, and set upon a Righteous and Holy Life, as I have
showed; otherwise we may expect that God will not hear our Prayers, when we cry
to him in the day of Trouble. We must first make satisfaction to our Brother
for all the injuries that we have done him, before we can offer any Sacrifice
or Prayer to God to atone him and procure his favor and mercy. Matthew. 5.23 --
Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the Altar (says our Savior) and there
remembrest that thy Brother hath-ought against thee, leave there thy gift
before the Altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then
come and offer thy gift. This is the course that our blessed Lord has
appointed to be taken. And the Psalmist shows, that so long as our hearts are
inclined to wickedness, the Lord will not hear us. Psalm. 66.18. If I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me: And no more will he hear us,
except we withdraw our hearts from it. And says Job of the Hypocrite; Job
27.9. Will God hear his cry, when trouble comes upon him? Hereby intimating to
us, that there is no likelihood that God will then hear him. And says Wisdom;
Prove. 1.24 --. Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my
hand, and no man regarded: But ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would
none of my reproof: I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your
fear comes: When your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes
as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish comes upon you. Then shall they call
upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not
find me; for that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord
--. And so may we expect to be dealt with, if we do not now hearken to Wisdom's
voice, and follow her blessed Instructions, and amend and set upon a pious and
holy Life. If we will now stop our Ears at her Charming, and cast the fear of
God behind our backs, we may justly expect, that he will laugh at our Calamity,
and mock when our fear comes. And God declares to the Jews, that he would not
hear their Prayers, because they were defiled and polluted with blood and
wickedness, and had not cleansed themselves. Isa. 1.15. And when ye spread
forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; yea when ye make many
prayers, I will not hear; your hands are full of blood. Wash ye, make you clean
--. This is to be done first, or else our Prayers are not like to be heard. And
says God to the Prophet Jeremiah, 11.10, 11. They are turned back to the
iniquities of their forefathers, which refused to hear my words; and they went
after other Gods, to serve them: the house of Israel and the house of Judah
have broken my covenant which I made with their fathers. Therefore thus says
the Lord, behold I will bring evil upon them, which they shall not be able to
escape; and though they shall cry unto me, I will not hearken unto them. And
says the Man that was born blind; John 9.31. We know that God hears not
sinners. By these and such places we may see, that there is an absolute
necessity for Men to leave their Sins and become Righteous, before they are in
any fit capacity to address themselves to Almighty God, and to pray to him for
mercy and help in the needful time of trouble.

It is needful also at such a time that we place our trust and confidence in
Almighty God, and do not make any Idols to our selves, that God may not say to
us, as he did to the Jews, Judge. 10.13, 14. Ye have forsaken me, and served
other gods, wherefore I will deliver you no more. Go, and cry unto the gods
which ye have chosen, let them deliver you in the time of your tribulation. It
behooves us to make no Idols nor false Gods to our selves, lest we have this
return to our Prayers, when we cry to God in the needful time of Trouble. And
we are to make no Idol of our Wealth, nor to place our trust and confidence
therein; we are are not to confide in, and to rely upon an Arm of Flesh, and
make mortal Man our hope and confidence, and so to rob God of his Glory, in not
making him, as we ought, the only Rock of our defense.

These things seem to be branches of our duty, and highly necessary for us to
set upon and practice whenever we apprehend a dark and dismal Day of Wrath
and Vengeance to be coming upon us.

And now to draw to a Conclusion; Seeing we have no reason to expect that we
should be exempted from the Judgments of God, if we do wickedly; but must look
to be dealt with as others have been, if we are as sinful as they were; and are
to look upon the threatenings of Judgments in the word of God, as Threatenings
and Menaces against our selves, when our case is the same with theirs, against
whom they were threatened: And seeing our Sins and Iniquities do appear to be
very great, and we are now actually warned that the Judgments of God do now
hang over our heads, and are ready to come upon us, let us lay these things to
heart, and mind the things that belong to our Peace, before it be too late: Let
us not be like Solomon's Fool ( Prove. 17.16.) that had a price in his hand to
get Wisdom, but no heart to it: But let us make a good use of our time while we
have it, while the long-suffering of God waits for our repentance and
amendment: Let the great Terror and dreadfulness of the Judgments of God awake
us out of our careless and vain security, That we may take such a course for
our Peace and Safety as is prescribed in the Word of God, while his great
Goodness does yet afford us some time for it; and let us speedily and seriously
set our selves to the practice of these things that I have showed to be
enjoined by that sacred Word at such a time: Let us turn to God with Fasting,
and Weeping, and Mourning, and call to mind and repent of all the sinful deeds
that we have done; and resolve through Divine help, never to commit such any
more; and make satisfaction for all the injuries and wrongs that we have done
to others: Let us cease to do evil, and learn to do well, and set more strictly
upon a righteous and pious course of Life, and take pleasure and delight in the
works of Mercy and Goodness, and show our selves merciful to others, when we
are in a more extraordinary manner seeking for Mercy at God's hand: Let us be
constant and earnest at our Prayers to Almighty God for pardon and mercy, for
help and succor in all our necessities and distresses; and that we may be
accounted worthy to escape the things that shall come to pass, and to stand
before the Son of God whenever he shall come to punish the Inhabitants of the
World for their great Sin and Iniquity: Let us seek the Lord while he may be
found (as says the Prophet Isaiah 55.6.) and call upon him while he is near,
before he shuts up his Mercy in displeasure, and stops his Ears at our Cry: Let
us put to our helping hand to keep off all public Judgments from our Land and
Nation, by the innocence and uprightness of our Lives; by begging pardon for
our own, and the transgressions of the whole Nation; and by our earnest Prayers
for the Peace and Prosperity of our Church and Kingdom. Pray for the peace of
Jerusalem (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 122.6.) they shall prosper that love thee.
And so let us pray for the peace and good of our Church and Nation, that they
may not become a prey to our Enemies and be totally swallowed up by them. If we
could all-amend, and a general repentance were effected, our Peace and
Happiness would then, I hope, be secure, and we need not fear the evil
Machinations of Men against us, nor any Judgment of God coming upon us: For we
may see that the Ninevites obtained Mercy by Repentance after the Judgment was
denounced against them. And the Prophet Joel here shows, that if the course
were taken that he prescribes, there was hope to obtain Mercy at God's hand;
Joel 2.18. Then will the Lord be jealous for his Land and pity his People: And
so we may conclude that he would deal with us, if we would take such a course.
But so long as our Sins cry to Heaven against us, and we persist in them, we
can have no security of Peace and Prosperity. And therefore let us set
earnestly upon a Righteous and Holy Life, and live like those that expect
shortly to die and to be called to Judgment, that we may do what we can to
prepare for our own safety and security against such a dreadful Day of
Darkness; and may endeavor to keep off all public Judgments, that we may be
instrumental in procuring a Blessing and not a Curse upon our Land and Nation.

Such as are not better instructed may exercise themselves in reading these
Chapters, and meditating upon them, and learning what good Instructions they
can from them. Isaiah LVIII. Jeremiah IV. Joel II. Jonah III. Matthew X, and
XXIV. Mark XIII. Luke XII, and XVII, and XXI. 2 Peter III. Revelation II, and
III.

And in the Book of Common Prayer they may find a great deal of good Matter for
their Prayers even against such a great Day of Judgment; to which they may add
these two Prayers that follow.

For Repentance.
ALmighty God, and most merciful Father; we miserable Sinners do here humbly
acknowledge before Thee, That we are unworthy of the least of all thy Mercies.
We confess, O Lord, in the bitterness of our Souls, that we have grievously
sinned against Thee; that all Orders of Men amongst us, have transgressed thy
Righteous Laws; that we have hitherto rendered both thy Mercies and thy
Judgments ineffectual to our Amendment. It is of thy mere Mercy, O Lord, that
we are not consumed; for which our Souls do magnify and bless thy Name. O God,
who have hitherto spared us, to the end, that thy Goodness might lead us to
Repentance; let it be thy good pleasure, to give unto us all that Godly Sorrow,
which works Repentance to Salvation, not to be repented of; that thou may
turn from thy heavy displeasure against us; and may rejoice over us to do us
good, through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ our Lord, and only
Savior. Amen.

For Peace and Unity.
O Lord God, our only hope in time of need; Save and deliver us, we humbly
beseech thee, from all those Dangers that threaten us; Give Peace in our days,
O Lord, if it be thy will, and prevent the effusion of Christian blood in our
Land; Reconcile all our Dissentions, and heal all our Breaches; Preserve that
Holy Religion we profess, together with our Laws and Ancient Government; Unite
us all in unfeigned and universal Charity one toward another, and in one and
the same Holy Worship and Communion; That with one heart and one mouth we may
glorify thy Holy Name, and show forth thy Praise from generation to
generation: And this we beg for the sake of Jesus Christ thy Beloved, in whom
thou art well pleased; to whom with Thee and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and
Glory, now and evermore. Amen.

In these Papers I come as a Messenger of Peace among all my dear Countrymen;
and therefore I request that I may find a kind reception among them, and that
they would seriously lay to heart what I have here written, that I may do them
some good Service at this great juncture of time, for the Preservation of their
Lives and Souls when they are in so great Danger.

FINIS.

