A Modest Defense Of my Book, Entitled, Quakerism Exposed: AS ALSO, Of my
Broad Sheet; with a Scheme of the Quakers Yearly Synod; and other Books,
presented Anno 1699. to the PARLIAMENT. AND G. Whitehead's Inside Turned
Outward, by Reprinting his Ancient Book Ishmael, etc. entirely; showing thereby
the Quakers Ancient Testimony of Contempt of the Holy Scriptures, and Blasphemy
against the Blessed Trinity; and they tell us they are not changed. By FRANCIS
BVGG.

There shall be false Teachers amongst you, who shall bring in Damnable
Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. ii. 1. LONDON: Printed
by R. Janeway, Jun. for the Author; and sold by J. Robinson, at the Golden Lion
in St. Paul's Churchyard; H. Rhodes, at the Star at the Corner of Bride-Lane,
Fleetstreet; Chapter Broom at the Gun in Ludgate Street; and J. Marshall at the
Bible in Grace Church Street, 1700.

To the Right Honorable the High Court of Parliament, Humbly Dedicated, etc.
Right Honorable,
WHereas the Quakers, for many Years, have presented their Books and Papers to
the Parliament under many fair Shows, whilst the Tendency of their Doctrine is
to Subvert Christianity; and I being sensible thereof, think it my Duty to God
and my Country, both as a Christian, and Freeborn Englishman, to discover the
same; and therefore to obviate some Objections, I do most humbly beg Leave to
Apologize for my self in this Affair, since by many Books of the Quakers I have
been represented as an indigent Person, a Mercenary Agent, one that is prompt
on by other, a Judas, etc. and thereupon I am greatly desirous to acquaint your
Honors, that I am no such manner of Person: And as a Demonstration thereof, I
have somewhat to offer in my own Defense, which is briefly this.

I came of a good Yeoman Family, and have lived in good Repute all my Days,
having had a competent Estate of near a Hundred Pound a Year, besides Stock;
and that whilst I was a Quaker, I was of good Repute and Esteem amongst them; I
entertained their Teachers with no little Charge, I put Clothes on the Backs of
some, and Money in the Purses of others: I was Register to their Monthly and
Quarterly Meeting about Sixteen or Eighteen Years together, to which I rode
Fifteen or Sixteen Miles every Month, and all this freely, as themselves know,
if they would speak: I was Prisoner for the Cause of Quakerism Three Years and
Four Months, and for Meetings I suffered by Fines and Distresses more than One
Hundred Pound; and when we built a Meeting House, (for before Meeting were at
my House) I gave 20 l. toward it; and to that Day all freely, without any
Retribution; all which considered, might abate the edge of their Defamations,
and lead them to keep to the Matter in Controversy: And since (upon a sight of
their Errors) I left them, I have been Useful, but never Mercenary; I have born
all Town-Offices, as Overseer, Constable, and Churchwarden; I have been often
an Assessor, and sometimes Collector of His Majesty's Taxes, served on Juries
of Life and Death, as well as Nisi Prius; in all which places I have discharged
my Trust free from any Accusation.

And since I have more narrowly looked into their Principles, and found them to
be Pernicious to both Church and State, I have first used all private Means to
Reclaim them: But when they persisted therein, and would justify, excuse, and
defend all things, whether agreeable to the Scriptures of the Prophets and
Apostles, or in Contradiction to them, I have thought it my Duty to discover
their Pernicious Ways, and therein I have proceeded upon a Principle of
Justice, and can with good Conscience say, that from first to last, no
Clergyman in the Kingdom ever asked or desired me to write one Book, Page or
Line, against the Quakers, nor have any one Man (Clergy or Laity) seen this
Book till printed; though I do grant, that by my Constancy of Writing for more
than Twenty Years together, and by the Charge of Printing, together with other
Losses incident to Tradesmen, I have been reduced; and I am not ashamed to
acknowledge, that the Gentry, the Justices of Peace, the Clergy, and some
Protestant Dissenters, have extended their Bounty toward my Support; and
which, the Quakers themselves do to their own People: And if this be Cause
sufficient to render me a Judas, or Mercenary, they have many Mercenary Judas's
among themselves.

I have read in the Book of Esther, That when Haman designed the Destruction of
the Jewish Church, then in Captivity, how Queen Esther appeared in the Defense
thereof, saying, Esther 3.6, 14, 16. I will go in to the King, which is not
according to Law, and if I Perish, I Perish. And it is in the remaining Story
of Esther in the Greek and Latin Copies, Cap. 13. Mordecai appeals to God thus,
Thou know, O Lord, that it was neither of Malice, nor Presumption, nor of
any Desire of Glory that I did this, etc.

And when I came to understand the Pride and Cruelty of George Fox and his
Accomplices, which was equal to that of Haman, who in Oliver Cromwell's time
(as by their Books appear) were for Slaying and Banishing all the Clergy in the
Kingdom, and how averse they ever were against Liberty of Conscience (as
elsewhere I have showed) as also what Enemies they were to the Holy Scriptures
and Ordinances of our Savior, namely, Baptism and the Lord's Supper, damning
the Ever-blessed Trinity to the Pit of Hell, and diverse other Blasphemies, too
many here to relate; I was stirred in my Spirit to appear in Defense of our
Holy Religion, which their Doctrine tends to overthrow; saying with Queen
Esther, If I Perish, I Perish; and can appeal to God, as Mordecai did, saying,
Thou know, O Lord, that it was neither of Malice, nor of Presumption, nor
any Desire of Glory, that I did this, etc. And who knows but for such a time as
this, I was delivered from them by the good Hand of Providence.

And (Right Honorable) that which is chiefly defir'd by me, is, (and that in
Concurrence with many Thousands of good Christians) that the Quakers may be
examined, whether what I object against them be so or no; and if found true
upon them, that they may then be obliged to Retract and Condemn what is
Erroneous, as well as Dangerous; and this is no Persecution: Nor do I know of
any who desire any Alteration of the Act of Toleration.

I have likewise read the Story of Bell and the Dragon, wherein the Fraud of
the Priests of Bell is set forth; who pretended (as our Quakers do) that they
served in the Temple freely; and that their God Eat up all the Provision set
before him: But upon Examination it was found far otherwise. Even so I make
this offer, and that on the Terms of Daniel's Proposition, to make it appear
(notwithstanding the Quakers Loud Clamours against the Clergy, for their
Tithes, and other Dues, set apart by Law for their Maintenance, whilst they
Serve at the Altar) that Ten of the Quakers Teachers have received more Gifts
than Fifty of our Episcopal Divines, Rectors of Parishes, in the Counties of
Suffolk and Norfolk; only by strewing a few Ashes on the Floor, or something
Equivolent. But as the Priests of Bell, were too powerful for Daniel, without
Assistance from the Government; even so are the Quakers for me. I can only
discover the Riddle, and propose a Method to try them by; but cannot bring the
Matter about to bring proof thereof, without Assistance from the Government.
But as Daniel by his threefold Medicine, Pitch, Fat, Hair, boiled together, by
God's Blessing, burst in sunder the Babylonians Dragon, their other Idol-God;
even so have I been Instrument l, with the help of Pen, and Ink, Paper, well
pressed together, and applied Warm, with God's Blessing, Burst in sunder the
Quakers great Idol, their Darkness within, (which they call Light). So that
their Infallibility is flown one way, and their Sinless Perfection another;
their Spiritual Discerning they pretend to [so as to know who are Saints, and
who are Devils, and who are Apostates, without speaking a Word] this way, and
their Miracles that way. And if to bring this to pass, I have sometimes taken
the freedom of the Prophet Elijah, 1 King. 18. who speaking to the Prophets of
Baal, in a Holy Derision of them and their Idol Gods; said, Ver. 27. And it
came to pass at Noon, that Elijah mocked them and said, Cry aloud, for he is a
God, either he is Talking, or he is Pursuing, or he is in a Journey, or
peradventure he Sleeps, and must be Awaked, etc. if then I have taken such
freedom, with the false Quaker Prophets, and their Dumb Idols, which can
neither See, Hear nor Understand, much less discern who are Saints, who are
Devils, or who are Apostates, without speak-ever a Word; or if I have with the
Woman of Tekoah, 2 Samuel 14. by way of Metaphor, brought about a Form of Speech,
with design to get the Quakers examined, whether what have been Objected
against them, be true or not; I hope it is Pardonable, since in all Ages in the
World, the same Cause leads to the same thing. For I do Believe, (and not
without Ground) That as there never was a People, since Simon the Sorcerer,
pretended to such High Prophetical Seize; so likewise there never was a
Sect of Falser Prophets since the time of Elijah, nor that ever held such
Blasphemous Principles as their Books set forth: And they say they are the same
still, their Principles the same, and not changed.

Be not deceived (I beseech you) by the Quakers, who appear like the Pharisees,
Fair and Beautiful even like Painted Sepulchers; Remember the Subtilty of the
Gibionites, Josh. 9. how they by their Dissimulation deceived good Joshua, and
all the Princes of the Congregation of Israel: The Quakers tell you they own
the Scriptures to be given by Divine Inspiration; but mean not one word of it,
like other Christians; for so they own their own Books.

They tell you they own a Scripture Trinity, but mean not a word of it: This is
a Matter (Right Honorable) of great weight; and your Honors will find it as
difficult a thing, to gain the true meaning of the Quakers, touching the Divine
Authority of the Holy Scriptures, and their Belief of a Scripture Trinity, as
Constantius the Emperor found it, in the Examination of Arius the Heretic, to
get his true meaning, touching the Faith of one Substance: For the Quakers (as
did Arius) mean as they have written; but how? Namely, in their own Books; I
mean of that sort they read in their Meetings, and keep close among themselves;
one of which I have herein Reprinted. In these sorts of Books they deny the
Scriptures to be the Written Word of God; For it is (say they) a Rotten
Foundation, Dust, Death, and Serpents Meat. In like manner they dissemble the
Doctrine of the Trinity, when they pretend to own it; whilst in their Books
they Damn it to the Pit and Lake. All this, and much more, I offer to make
appear, who am, with all Submission,

Right Honorable, Your Honors most Humble and most Obedient Servant, Fran.
Bugg.

A PREFACE, By Way of PARABLE.
THere was an Island, very Populous, and well Situated, the Air good, and the
People generally of a sound Constitution, and governed by wholesome Laws, and
professed the most Reformed Religion of any Nation round about them: But so it
fell out, that in the North Part of this Island, Anno 1650. there arose a great
Sea Monster Viz. Geo. ^^x, alias (...) Magus.
, of a Luciferian Pride, who pretended, that he, and all that received,
embraced, and had the same Spirit that moved him, were equal to God: That he
was the Eternal Judge of the World, and knew who were Saints, who were Devils,
and who were Apostates, without speaking ever a Word; and he having betrothed
himself to a young Harlot i. e. The ^^nters.
, she conceived, and brought forth her Young; to whom she drew out her Breasts,
and gave them Suck, and they multiplied exceedingly, and many of them became
fiery flying Serpents Such of (...) Pro^^^ts, as ^^^re him ^^^h Di^^^e
Attri^^^es.
, and spread themselves like Locusts, all over the Island; some entering the
Churches, where they stung both Men, Women, and Children; others entered into
the Marketplaces, Barns, Orchards, and private Chambers; like the Frogs in
Egypt, poisoning the Air, and infecting much People.

Upon this, the Physicians, both Conformists and Nonconformists were extremely
allarmed, not well knowing what to do, or what Course to take, to stop the
Gangrene of this Pestilential Disease, and to heal the People, who were bitten
by these Serpents; but as wise Physicians, they took their Christian
Dispensatory i. e. The Holy Scriptures.
, and turned over to this Chapter, and that Verse, and made excellent Receipts,
which were sold at reasonable Rates at every Booksellers Shop, and prepared
many Antidotes against the Venom of this dangerous Infection: But these wounded
People being intoxicated by the Venom of these Scorpions, they refused all
these Christian Offers; but the Physicians (as in Duty bound) resolved to apply
their Medicines to the grieved part of this wounded and bewitched People, who
like the Samaritans of old, said, That this Monster was the Power of God G.
Fox's Journal, 3d Index, under the Letter M.
; that he wrought Miracles; that he had Power to bind and loose whom he
pleased; and cried out, who is able to make War with the Beast: But
notwithstanding the Power and Prevalency of this Dragon, they applied (as
aforesaid) their Medicines very warm, and withal giving them some Physic to
purge away the Dregs of their Distemper; which as soon as they had done, and
before they could finish their Prayers for a Blessing upon their Endeavors,
these diseased People grew into a raging Fit, and raved at the Physicians like
mad Men, saying, We are perfect, and free from Sin, sound, and have no need of
any Physician; for as they did not think themselves obliged to ask Forgiveness
of Sin to God, nor acknowledge their Errors to Man, so they resolved to use
none of their Medicines, and therefore bad them be gone, calling them by these
Names following, viz. The Idle Gormondizing Priests of England, The Guide
mistaken, etc. by W. Penn, p. 18.
no sort of People have been so universally through Ages the very Bane of Soul
and Body of the Universe, as that Abominable Tribe, for whom the Theater of
God's most dreadful Vengeance is reserved to act their Eternal Tragedy upon.
With this the Gentlemen were amazed, and looking one upon another, said, Good
Lord, may it please thee to forgive our Enemies, Persecuters and Slanderers,
and to turn their Hearts: Grant us, O Lord, to love our Enemies, and by the
Example of thy Martyr Stephen, to pray for our Persecuters, etc. And when this
Prayer was ended, they judging it their Duty to do Good against Evil, they
again tried another Expedient, thinking their Distemper lay in their Brain, and
being somewhat Lunatic, was the Cause of those violent and abusive Words.
Well, they gave them some Pills, advised them to be still, and take some Rest;
but before this Physic could work, they fell into another Convulsion Fit, and
raved as much as ever; (yea, all of them, except some few, who were not
wilfully ignorant, who, by the Blessing of God upon their Endeavors, came to
their Senses, and remain so to this Day, as Monuments of God's Mercy, praising
his Great and Glorious Name, and returning their Thanks to the Physicians who
labor in the Word and Doctrine,) calling the Physician, (methinks I hear them
still) Baal's Priests, Conjurers, Thieves, Robbers, Blind Guides, Devils,
Serpents, the Sir-Symons of the Age, a Viperous and Serpentine Generation,
Witches, Bloodhounds, Merchants of Babylon, Dogs, Sodomites Is this from a
Christian Spirit? See their Brief Discovery, etc. p. 7, 8.
, we (said this Intoxicated People in their mad Zeal) have nothing for them but
Woes and Plagues, who have made drunk the Nations, and laid them to sleep on
downy Beds of Sin-pleasing Principles, whilst they have cut their Purses, and
picked their Pockets; Tophet 's prepared for them, to act their Eternal Tragedy
upon; whose Scenes will be renewed, Direful, Anguishing Woes, of an Eternal
Irreconcilable Justice, etc. And in excuse for these dreadful Thunderbolts, W.
Penn thus says, That had these Expressions been Ten Thousand times more
significant, earnest, and sharp, against that cursed bitter Stock of Hirelings,
they had been but enough, and I would then say not enough; but that the
Reverence I bear to the Holy Spirit (i. e. in the Quakers) would oblige me to
acquiesce in whatever he should utter, through any Servant or Prophet of the
Lord W. Penn 's Ser. Apol. p. 156.
, etc.

At this the Gentlemen stood amazed, thinking with themselves that all the
Furies of Hell could not help them with more dreadful Curses, much less Ten
Thousand times more sharp, and so they left them, as fit only for Bedlam. Upon
this there was some dissenting Physicians Dr. Owen, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Faldo, and
others.
in this Island, who also had good Skill of this Malady, with which this People
were infected by the Venom of the Scorpions above-noted, and in great Pity to
them, they searched diligently into their Christian Dispensatory, and found
therein diverse Receipts, and of the most proper Medicines, they applied both
Corrosive and Lenitive, but nothing took place, (except only upon a few, who
were not willingly Ignorant, and of an obstinate Temper) but the Treatment they
had for them was much of the same Nature of the above-noted; for they called
them, An ill-bred Pedantick Crew Is this from a Christian Spirit?
, the Bane of Religion, and Pest of the World, the old Incendiaries to
Mischief, and best to be spared of Mankind, against whom the boiling Vengeance
of an irritated God is ready to be poured out Quakerism a new Nickname, etc. p.
165.
, etc.

Whoever read this Book, and my former Books, will find this Parable unfolded.

Thus, Reader, you see here is nothing but Plagues, and Woes, Hell and
Damnation, both for the Conformists, and Nonconformists, for all their Love,
Care and Pains; are these mad People then to be dealt with, as a Man would deal
with any other well-disposed People? I think not: If then you find me in some
Cases to deal roughly with them, marvel not; it is for their Good, since the
way (as one of themselves say) to recover the Deceived is to discover the *
Deceivers: And this Witness it true, as St. Paul said touching the Cretians,
Tit. 1.12, 13. so may I (and that for the same Reason) say of the Quakers, viz.
one of themselves, even a Prophet of their own said, The Cretians were always
Liars, evil Beasts, Slow-Bellies, this witness is true, ( said St. Paul)
wherefore Rebuke them sharply, etc. that is, (as in the Dutch Annotations)
Severely or Cuttingly, a Similitude taken from Physicians, who cut off the dead
Flesh, etc. Then not softly, with smooth Words, sewing Pillows under their
Armholes, as some did in former Ages; and for which they were sharply reproved;
no, no, they must be launched, and the Wound laid open A Desperate Wound must
have a Desperate Cure.
, and searched to the bottom, and then we may hope of a Cure; and this Doctrine
of St. Paul, that able Physician, has seemed proper to me ever since I have
practiced; for the Quakers, like the Cretians were always Dissemblers with God
and Man; they were always Liars; they were always evil Beasts, and
Slow-Bellies; and for the Truth of this, St. Paul (touching the Cretians)
produces a Prophet, or a Poet of their own, who gave that Witness; and
notwithstanding they were always Liars, yet St. Paul said of this Evidence of
their own Poet, this Witness it true; therefore rebuke them sharply, Severely
or Cuttingly, in order to cut off the dead Flesh; and in like manner I shall
produce a Prophetess of their own, who also is a Poet, and a Writer, and
Defender of their Way, and in their Unity, which stands principally in Lying,
and Dissembling; and when she does write in the Defense of the Quakers, she is
as great a Liar as the rest; yet in this Case her Witness is true, as St. Paul
said of the Cretian Poet.

Wherefore I shall briefly recite some Passages out of some Letters, writ by
her to my self, and to Mr. Crisp; as also out of a printed broad Sheet, all
wrote by Anne Docwra, of Cambridge, one in their Unity, as above-noted, which
Letters we have still by us, as well as her printed Paper, and which are more
at large recited in my Book, The Christian Ministry of the Church of England
vindicated, etc. p. 2. and my Pilgrim's Progress, etc. 2d Ed. p. 54, 121, 129.
and her Witness in this Case is true, viz.

I. I have (said she) given witness against Geo. Whitehead's Book, Judgment
fixed, etc. we have (continues she) Knights of the Post amongst us, etc. This
Witness is true.

II. That the honest Quakers (for some such there are amongst them) have
suspected G. Whitehead (by his Craft and Subtilty, in defending or excusing
what he must know to be erroneous amongst them) to be a Jesuit, at least like
them. This Witness is true.

III. That their Second-Day Meeting put Names to their Certificates, and
Passages into their Books, without either Consent or Knowledge of the Parties
or Authors. This Witness is true.

IV. That the Quakers separate Meetings for Government (with Doors shut) are
dangerous to the Peace of the Nation. This Witness is true.

V. That the Magistrates look upon Common Bankers ( i. e. the Quakers Fund) to
be as bad as Arms and Ammunition, and not (said she) without Reason, for Money
answers all things. If Friends (said she) would put away this Dagon, and take
Money only for their present Necessity, things would soon be better. This
Witness is true.

VI. That the Quakers Distinct Men's Meetings (touching their Government within
the Government, and opposite to it) serve to little Purpose, but to shelter
great Bellies, and to protect the Proud and Vicious. This Witness is true.

VII. That their Teachers, G. Whitehead, Sam. Cater, etc. are the most
confident Liars, and wicked Forgers, that ever she met with. This Witness is
true.

VIII. That their Second-Day Meeting both added to, and altered the Sense of
her Letters, to make Lies seem true; of which Forgery she suspected G.
Whitehead to be Guilty; for (continue she) Sam. Cater is not Sophister great
enough. This Witness is true.

IX. I had (said she) a sharp Conference with Sam. Cater, for his Clamouring
against Francis Bugg and John Ainsloe, in his abuseful Narrative, herein (said
she) he (Sam. Cater) have used my Name in Print, to justify him in his
Conscious Pamphlet with Francis Bugg: I (said she) laid it before him smartly;
he is very bold, (continues she) and the most confident Liar that ever I met
with. This Witness is true.

X. That G. W. forged a Certificate in's Judgment Fixed. This witness is true.

Thus much from a Prophetess of their own, one in their Unity, and that have
wrote many Books in Defense of Quakerism; one in 1699. by which Evidence we may
know that the Quakers, like the Cretians, were always Liars, evil Beasts, slow
Bellies; but not only so, but Liars, Forgers; and, to speak Comparatively,
Knights of the Post, Jesuits, and dangerous to the Government; Slanderers to
their honest Friends, whilst they protected the proud Blasphemers, and Vicious
Hypocrites; and as St. Paul said, the Evidence which a Prophet of the Cretians
said was true, (who said, and said truly, that the Cretians were always Liars,
etc.) why? Because he knew the Truth thereof; and as to the Evidence which this
Propheress, Anne Docwra, has given of the Quakers, I say it is true; why?
Because I know it to be so in the Cases now recited: But further, to confirm
it, I shall recite an Abstract of a Letter sent me, dated January the 19th,
1699. from Robert Sandiland, who formerly was one of their Teachers: But upon
Conviction of his Errors, and the gross Hypocrisies of the Quakers, he has left
them, (as many others have done) and Retracted not only his Errors, which he
(with my self, G. Keith, Tho. Crisp, and diverse others) held, but also his
uncharitable Language to me, and others, though much, of what his Books
contained, was, as Anne Docwra says, foisted in as his, yet none of his; and I
am apt to think the same Person, G. W. was the Forger in his Book; for which
horrible Practice he (I fear) has a large Account to give. Now follows R. S.'s
Letter somewhat abstracted.

Loving Friend, Francis Bugg.
AS concerning my Book, printed 1683. Entitled, Righteous Judgment, etc.
whatsoever it herein, inconsistent, (or any other of my Books) with the sound
Christian Faith and Doctrine, I do now wholly Disown, and Retract; together
with all Harsh and Uncharitable Expressions on thee, or any others, named in my
Book; and particularly these Verses, p. 97. viz.

Team, Rogers, Pennyman, Bullock and Bugg,
Dark Devil, driven dungy God's desperately Lugg;
That are tied to the Tail of their separate Schism,
Papists, Libertinism, Heathenism, Judaism, Atheism.
I do say, and affirm, that though these Verses were put into my Book as mine,
yet I assure thee that they were none of my making, I did not compose oneword
of them; but they were made by another Hand, and put into my Book, together
with the whole Ninth Chapter, which was likewise done by another Hand, and put
also into my said Book, (as mine) whilst I was in the Country; and after I had
left it with the Second-Day-Meeting for the Press, and they did with it what
they pleased, as thou know they use to Read and Correct all Books brought
before them; and G. W. I suppose may remember who it was that writ that whole
Ninth Chapter Yea, and I guess that it was G. W. himself.
, from p. 91, to 100. -- Blessed be God, that their gross Errors in the
Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, are now sufficiently Detected; and
there is nothing remains now for them to do, but either openly and freely to
Retract (and Condemn) them, or else to be exposed, and liable to all the ill
Effects and Consequences, which must unavoidably attend their obstinate
persisting in their Errors. --

Robert Sandilands.

But to show the horrid Cheats, wicked Forgeries, and deep Hypocrisies of this
their Second-Day Meeting, will exceed the bounds of a Preface; and therefore
for a complete System of this their black Art in their dark Divinity, I refer
my Reader to my Pilg. Prog. etc. 2d Edit. p. 149, to p. 170.

And that I may not leave a Stone unturned that may discover the pious Frauds
of this Painted Harlot, I shall recite a brief Abstract of W. Mucklow's Book,
Entitled, The Spirit of the Hat, etc. he being a Man of Note amongst them, and
may be called in St. Paul's Sense a Prophet of their own, and whose Evidence in
this Case is true; yea, I know it to be so: For the Quakers were always Liars,
evil Beasts, Slow-Bellies, whilst yet they pretend to Infallibility, and also
that their Books are given forth from the Immediate Eternal Spirit of God.

1. That the Foxonian Unity is to yield Obedience to the Body, though no
Conviction inwardly of the Truth of the thing commanded; saying, who is able to
make War with us? These are the high swelling Words of proud Babel. This
Witness is true.

2. That G. Fox, etc. was of an Antichristian Spirit. This Witness is true.

3. That their Ministers (in their Meetings for Government, conjoined together
to subvert our Laws and Liberty. This Witness is true.

4. That G. Fox was lifted up with Luciferian Pride, saying, he had Power to
bind and loose whom he please. This Witness is true.

5. That Sol. Eccles, one of their Prophets and Teachers, adored G. Fox with
Divine Attributes. This Witness is true.

6. That their People bowed down on their Knees to G. Fox for Absolution; [in
particular, John Fretwell, Christopher Gilborn, James Naylor, which was
Idolatry.] This Witness is true.

7. That G. Fox's Luciferian Pride was manifest, when he gave out a Paper, That
his Marriage with Margaret Fell, Widow, was a Figure of the Marriage between
Christ and his Church, and that his said Marriage was above the State of Adam
in his Innocence, in the State of the second Adam that never fell. This Witness
is true.

8. That great Pains had been taken by Sam. Newton and John Bolton, to bring to
light the unheard of Practices, and Beastly Wantonness, and filthy Uncleanness
of their Teachers. This Witness is true.

9. That John Bolton had a Confession in writing of one or two of the Females
concerned in their Debauched Actions; showing also that many eminent ones in
their Ministry resorted to them daily, giving them these Appellations, Innocent
Lasses, and Daughters of Sion. This Witness is true.

10. That the Quakers represent such as discover these their Abominations,
Envious, Malicious, Distracted, Bad, Dirty and Factious Spirits, who are gone
from Truth, etc. This Witness is true.

Therefore says St. Paul, rebuke them Sharply, Severely, or Cuttingly; who,
notwithstanding their high Pretenses to Meekness, Charity, Self-Denial,
Temperance, and other Graces of the Spirit, yet are found to be Liars, evil
Beasts, Slow Bellies, great Forgers, gross Hypocrites, and proud Blasphemers.
Read over the 20 Instances, and R. Saudiland's Letter of Retractation; together
with what else you find in this and my other Books; for to them I refer for
further Demonstrations of the Deceitfulness of these vain Pretenders, and high
Boasters.

If they tell you this Book of W. Mucklow's is answered, and again complain
that I take no Notice thereof, as Jos. Wyeth does of the Author of The Snake in
the Grass, etc. in his Anguis Flagillatus, etc. to them I thus reply, that
their pretended Answers are in Reality no Answers, otherwise than mock Answers
to abuse the World, and to blind their Proselytes, and to paint over the Poison
of their foul Opinions; and this is easy to discern by any that will be at the
Pains to read what is wrote on both sides; and by considering their way and
manner of answering Books. See G. W.'s Truth and Innocence vindicated, etc. in
these three Instances, viz.

I. Their Way of Transposing. II. Their Way of Adding Words. III. Their leaving
Out Words.
Of their Transposing Words.
First, As to Transposing, G. Fox having taught in his Great Mystery, etc.
saying, p. 213. You cannot know Scripture, but by the same Degree of the Spirit
that the Prophets and Apostles had, etc. this was objected against the Quakers;
as Pride in them that so thought, and false Doctrine in them that so teach; see
A Brief Discovery, etc. p. 8. to which G. Whitehead replied in his Truth and
Innocence, etc. p. 19. These Words, says he, should be Transposed, it should
run thus: Thou can not know Scripture but by a Degree of the same Spirit the
Prophets and Apostles had. Now by thus Transposing Words we may read Acts 12.2.
That James slew Herod with the Sword; and so overthrow the Divine Authority of
the Holy Scriptures, whether Doctrinal or Historical. Now whether G. W.'s
Method of Transposing the Words of their Prophets, was not to cover and
palliate their Errors, let the wise in Heart judge.

Their Way of Adding Words.
Secondly, Again, their Way of Adding Words. A Brief Discovery, etc. p. 26. the
Clergy having objected to the Quakers, a Blasphemous Position out of Burrough's
Works, p. 273. viz. The Sufferings (says Buroughs) of the People of God (i. e.
Quakers) in this Age, is a Greater Suffering, and more Unjust, than in the Days
of Christ, his Apostles, (and Martyrs) or any time since -- What was done to
Christ or his Apostles was Chiefly done by a Law, and in Great Part by the Due
Execution of a Law, etc. To this G. Whitehead, the Quakers Soderer, replies;
see his Truth and Innocence, etc. p. 44. not once mentioning the Page in the
said Brief Discovery, on purpose (no doubt) to lead his Reader from the Sight
and Scent of their Blasphemy; and that which confirms me therein is, that he
dropped the latter part of the Quotation, viz. What was done to Christ or his
Apostles, was Chiefly done by a Law, and in Great part by the Due Execution of
a Law. No, this was so apparently Blasphemous, that as hardy as he (G. W.) is,
he was ashamed to recite it; but whilst he blames others for splitting
Sentences, Mangling and Curtailing, he is a profound Practitioner of it; but in
p. 46. ibid. being loath to let it pass wholly unspoken to, he there says,
Instead of [Due Execution] it should rather have been said [by a Regular and
Judicial Procedure.] But how far this mends the Matter, let all true Christians
judge; viz. whether the Proceedings of the Jews against our Savior when they
Scourged him, Spit upon him, Platted a Crown of Thorns upon his Head, Smote him
with the Palms of their Hands; when Herod and his Men of War set him at naught,
and mocked him, and the like Indignities, which were not then, nor now, done to
the greatest Malefactors: I say, was this A Regular and Judicial Procedure
against our Blessed Savior, as G. Whitehead, (he being expert in Law Terms)
grants it to be in favor of his Brother Buroughs? Again, George, one Question
more; were the Jews Nailing his Innocent Hands and Feet (in whose Mouth never
was Guile, nor sinful Thought in his Breast) to the Cross, and the Soldiers
piercing his Side with a Spear, so that his Precious Blood Which the Quakers
say is no better than the Blood of another Saint.
streamed out at five Places; I say, was this A Regular or Judicial Procedure?
Answer in your next. Again, A Regular and Judicial Procedure, supposes a
Transgression of some Law: And Borough says expressly, that he not only
suffered by a Law, but in a great part by the Due Execution of a Law, as above.
Again, and George, since you grant that all the Indignities, and cruel
Sufferings our Savior underwent, (for the Salvation of Mankind) was by A
Regular or Judicial Procedure, which presupposes a Law, and that Law
transgressed; therefore be plain for once, and tell us what Law it was by which
he was (for the Transgression thereof) Regularly and Judicially proceeded
against; and consequently therefore Condemned, Crucified, and Slain by the
Jews; if you cannot do this, then condemn both your Truth and Innocence as
Blasphemy.

Of their Leaving out Words.
Thirdly, G. Fox having taught in his Book, Readiness Errand to Damascus, etc. p.
8. saying, HE that Has the same Spirit that raised Jesus Christ, is Equal with
God; this being urged against the Quakers as Blasphemy by the Norfolk Clergy in
their Book aforesaid, i. e. A Brief Discovery, etc. p. 6. the Quakers Painter,
G. Whitehead, says, in his Truth and Innocence, etc. p. 9. We (says George)
deny the Words as there printed, (though not until near 40 Years after printed)
therefore the Words [He that hath] should be left out.

Now, George, may not the London Jews by the same Art, and with as much Truth
and Innocence, defend their deceased Brethren the Jews in their Blasphemy
against Jesus Christ, in the Days of his Flesh, who said, John 8.48. Say we not
well, that thou art a Samaritan, and have a Devil? But then, by G. W.'s Rule of
Arguing, the London Jews may now say, The Words [and have a Devil] should be
left out; they only meant, that he was the compassionate Samaritan, mentioned
Luke 10.33. Would this do, George? No sure, theirs was plain Blasphemy, and
Fox's is as plain Blasphemy, who said he was equal to God, as aforesaid.

Thus, Reader, have I showed thee the Quakers way of answering Books, viz.
First, by Transposing Words; by which, if allowed, I have proved, that James
slew Herod. Secondly, That by their Adding Words they likewise may excuse any
Blasphemy, as Whitehead here does his Brother Buroughs, who said, first, that
the Quakers Sufferings are greater than Christ's, and all his Apostles and
Martyrs under the Heathen Emperors, and Bloody Massacres to this Day. Secondly,
That the Sufferings of the Quakers are more unjust than all the forementioned.
Thirdly, That what was done to Christ, his Apostles and Martyrs, was chiefly
done by a Law. Fourthly, and in great part by the Due Execution of a Law: But
says Whitehead, It should rather have been said [by a Regular or Judicial
Procedure;] and truly this is so far from clearing Edw. Buroughs and his
Brethren (for they are all of one Mind, being lead into these Blasphemies by
their Darkness within, which they call Light) that it rather confirms what he
Blasphemously said, than otherwise: And no great Marvel, for the Quakers in
Print deny that Person which suffered upon the Cross to be properly the Son of
God See W. Penn's Serious Apol. p. 146. For a Confutation of Penn's Doctrine,
read John 14.28. yea, the whole Chapter.
; and the Jews being of the same Faith, they said, as in John 19.7. We have a
Law, and by our Law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.
Thus do both Jews and Quakers agree in their Fundamentals, the Quakers deny him
properly to be the Son of God, and the Jews put him to Death, because he said
he was the Son of God; and both Jews and Quakers herein resist the Testimony of
God himself, the Glorious Angels, the Holy Apostles, and Army of Martyrs; yea,
all Christian Churches to this Day; and because my self and others urge that
they may be examined touching these their Blasphemous Books, therefore they cry
out Persecution, Persecution, Fr. Bugg would raise the Monster of Persecution;
with this they make a Noise, and raise a Dust, but fear no such thing; they
only fear being examined about their Blasphemous Books, and obliged by
Authority to Retract them, and then down goes their beloved Darling
Infallibility.

And what remains now, but to follow the Pious Example of good King Against the
Blasphemy of Senacherib, King of Syria.
Hezekiah, 2 Kin. 19.14. And Hezekiah received the Letter of the Hand of the
Messengers, and read it; and Hezekiah went into the House of the Lord, and
spread it before the Lord, and prayed, etc. And therefore that God may give a
Blessing to our Labor; and for his Name Sake Rebuke this Spirit of Blasphemy,
which have entered this our Island; and if it be his Holy Will, to convince the
Gainsayers of his Sacred Word and Ordinances. For as St. Paul Teaches, 1 Cor.
9.10. He that ploweth plows in Hope, and he that thresheth in Hope, shall be
partaker of his Hope, especially if he faint not; and though to Plow, and
Thresh, and Beat Clods, be hard Work; yet it is a necessary Work to Prepare the
Field. For the Seedsmen who are ordained thereunto, not that the Plowmen or the
Sowers have wherewith to Glory; for Paul may plant, and Apolo water, but it is
God alone that gives the increase: And to him (not unto us) belong the Glory.
And though it has been my work to Plow and Break the Clods, which is hard Labor;
and to thresh the Mountains, that the Fields may be prepared, and fitted for
the Master's use; yet I can say, according to the discretion God has given me,
I have not desired to break the Bruised Reed, nor to quench the Smoking Flax,
by being harsh to the weak, or severe to the tender; but have cut down the
Lofty Weeds, and hewed down the Tall Ceders, who stood in opposition to the way
and work of God, which he is bringing to pass in the Earth: And therefore I
shall conclude in the Prayers of our Church, beseeching God of his Great Mercy
to give his Blessing to my weak Endeavors; And say,

We Sinners do beseech to thee to hear us, (O Lord) and that it may please thee
to Rule and Govern thy Holy Church Universal in the Right Way.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen, in the true Worshipping of
thee, in Righteousness and Holiness of Life thy Servant William our most
Gracious King and Go-,vernuor.

That it may please thee to Rule his Heart in thy Faith, Fear and Love; and
that he may evermore have Affiance in thee, and ever seek thy Honor and Glory.

That it may please thee to be his Defender and Keeper, giving him the Victory
over all his Enemies.

That it may please thee to Illuminate all Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of
thy Church, with true Knowledge and Understanding of thy Word; and that by
their Preaching and Living they may set it forth and show it accordingly.

That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Council, and all the
Nobility, with Grace, Wisdom, and Understanding.

That it may please thee to Bless and Keep the Magistrates, giving them Grace
to execute Justice, and to maintain Truth.

That it may please thee to give to all thy People Increase of Grace, to hear
meekly thy Word, and to receive it with pure Affection, and to bring forth the
Fruits of the Spirit.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of Truth, all such as have Erred
and are Deceived.

That it may please thee to Strengthen such as do stand, and to Comfort and
Help the weak Hearted, and Raise up them that Fall, and finally, to beat down
Satan under our Feet.

That it may please thee to Defend and Provide for the Fatherless Children and
Widows, and all that be Desolate and oppressed.

That it may please thee to forgive our Enemies, Persecutors and Slanderers,
and to turn their Hearts.

That it may please thee to give us [and all Men] true Repentance; to forgive
us all our Sins, Negligences and Ignorances, and to endue us with the Grace of
thy Holy Spirit, to amend our Lives according to thy Holy Word.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, World without End. Amen.

ERRATA.
PArt 1. Page 1. line 13. for of God, read for God, p. 8. l. 1. f. derided, r.
divided. p. 21. l. 14. r. does blind. p. 32. l. 12. f. 45. r. 35. p. II. p. 12.
l. 16. f. third, r. second part. p. III. p. 13. l. 32. f. unwilling r. willing.
p. 26. l. 12. on this del. p. 15. l. 7. f. K. C. II. r. K. C. I. in Cutting off
his Head; for that (say they) was a remarkable Record of the Righteous Judgment
of God. See their Book, West Answering to North, p. 97.


George Whitehead TURNED TOPSIE-TURVY. PART I.
I Find in a Book wrote by W. Penn, entitled, A Key, etc. [and presented to
the Parliament, 1699. to obviate the Objections against the Quakers in several
Books then presented to both Houses of Parliament by the Norfolk Clergy.] this
Passage to the Reader in his Epistle, i. e. It is very Unfair, as well as
Indiscreet, in any, to Oppose and Calumniate what they do not Understand. It
has been (says he) our Unhappiness, far more than all our Adversaries have been
able to say against us, that hitherto we remain Unknown by those who yet stick
not to condemn us, etc.

This indeed, if true, might Apologize for them; but it is so far from that,
that were their Principles, and the Danger of them, fully known, it would
operate more against them, that all their Adversaries (as they account them)
have yet said against them, for want of knowing them so fully, as by their
Fruits in time possibly may be manifest: But whose Fault is it that they are no
better known? Is it not their own? By their two-fac'd Practice, and double
Meanings in all they say or write, their Books being of two sorts, contrary
each to other, suitable to their Titles and Directions, one sort to the World's
People; whether to the Parliament, Bishops, Judges, Justices, Priests, and
Professors, in many of which they will pretend to own the Scriptures, yea, and a
Scripture-Trinity too, tolerably well; but their other sort of Books to their
Disciples, directed with these and the like Titles, viz. This is only to go
amongst Friends. Again, This is only to go among Friends, and not otherwise.
Again, Written only for Friends that can read it. In which they tell you, the
Scriptures are Death, Dust, Serpents Meat, Beastly Ware, a Rotten Foundation, a
Dead Letter, the Husk, etc. and that such as tell People that the Scriptures
are the written Word of God, are no Ministers of Christ; that the Scriptures
are not a Means to bring People to the Knowledge of God, and to work Faith in
them; and that the Trinity of Persons is for the Lake, and the Pit: But
notwithstanding all this, and ten times more that I could recite, First, Of
their acknowledging to the World's People, as above, the Excellency of the Holy
Scripture, and that it is of Divine Authority, and the best Book extant in the
World, in direct Opposition to their Doctrine they teach to their poor deluded
and willingly ignorant Disciples; yet they frequently call their own Books The
Word of God, as in many Instances I could show: Nay, I have one Book of theirs
by me, wrote by Christopher Tailor, one of their ancient and approved Teachers,
bearing this Title, Certain Papers, which is the Word of the Lord; and in p. 2,
3, 16. of that Book it is said, To you all this is the Eternal Word of God: Nay,
further, Geo. Whitehead preferrs them to be of greater Authority than the
Bible. Thus do they, to their Disciples, contemn, villifie, and set at naught
the Sacred Word of God, whilst they extol their own Pamphlets, as The Word of
the Lord; yea, The Eternal Word of God; and as such, of greater Authority than
the Holy Scriptures: How then is it possible for such as are not Conversant
with their Books to know them?

Indeed, to understand Quakerism rightly, is the Business of an Age, I have had
more than Forty Years Experience of them, and yet I do not know the Depth of
their Deceit and Hypocrisy; I mean, of their Leaders; for amongst their
Hearers I do believe there are many honest (though miserably deluded) amongst
them; I my self in my young Years was carried away with their Dissimulation,
and a great Zeal I had, though I must confess it was without true Scripture
Knowledge: But some Years before I left them, I saw them both to walk and act
contrary to their Pretensions, (a large Account thereof I have given in my
Pilgrim's Progress) insomuch, that I wrote four Books against their Hypocrisies
whilst with them, in hopes of a Reformation amongst them; but still, the more I
came to examine into their Principles, and to observe their Practices, the more
cause I found to leave them, and to this Day I have kept on Ripping and
Stripping this well-favoured Harlot, who calls her self the only true Church of
Christ, and that out of her there is no Salvation; as in Josiah Coole's Book,
The Whore unvailed, etc. p. 12, 16, 18, 28, 31, 41, 50. where also she asserts
their Infallibility; and that there is no Tares in their Church; that their
Light is Judge of all Controversies, all Power in Heaven and Earth being
committed to it, and Miracles thereby wrought: And that she agree with the
Papists, that our Bible is a brazen-faced Book, an unjust, corrupt and perverse
Bible, else she would not have printed it after them, without a Word of
Reproof; and the more I came to study this Point, the more cause I found to
discover, and lay bare her Nakedness to the view of the Nations; and my Labor
has not been in vain, but have prospered, notwithstanding G. W.'s Enchanting
Demureness, and hardy Boldness, to defend himself and Brethren from my several
and repeated Charges of diverse Kinds, though, like the Magicians of old, Exodus
8.7. he has done much Hurt: But this Book of his I am now Reprinting will be
like ver. 18. I know and am persuaded there is a Finger of God's Divine
Providence that has attended those who have denied themselves, and have
faithfully managed this Controversy of God's Glory, and the Good of Souls, and
are content to become as the Offscouring of all things for his Name sake.

But why do they still complain they are not known? I do think if they look
into my Books they may see themselves as in a Glass, and so may others,
especially in New Rome Unmasked, etc. New Rome Arraigned, etc. The Picture of
Quakerism drawn to the Life, etc. my Pilgrim's Progress, etc. and Quakerism
Exposed; I say, these especially, though I think there is none that I have writ
but give some Discovery, mote or less; but if all these be wanting, read The
Snake in the Grass, and the Defense of it, and then I cannot think any thing is
lacking to make the Quakers Known, and Understood: But if after all G. W. can
with his Juggles and Paint blind the Eyes of some that are dim-sighted, let
them look well into his own Book, i. e. Ishmael and his Mother cast out, etc.
which I herewith Reprint, [that so he may not say I leave out the foregoing or
subsequent Words, his old and usual Policy to blind his ignorant Followers,]
and I am persuaded they may see and know Quakerism to be the most horrible
Heresy that ever the World knew.

Indeed when the Norfolk Clergy presented their Books to the Parliament, of the
vile Heresies, Seditions, and Blasphemous Principles of the Quakers, I thought
it almost impossible for the Quakers to withstand the Force of the Quotations
taken out of their Books; but rather that they would have blushed, repented,
and have begged of God and the Nation Forgiveness, for the Hurt they have done
to Christianity, and Scandal they have brought upon the Protestant Reliligion,
both at home and abroad; but behold, G. W. like the Inchanters of old, Exodus 8.
with his cunning Craft, whereby he lies in wait to deceive, (as St. Peter well
describes such;) as if he had eaten Shame, and drank after it, [whose Face is
like Brass, and his Forehead like Case-hardned Steel] he ventures to defend,
vindicate, or excuse every Error, every Blasphemy, every Seditious and
Treasonable Principle objected against them, the like of which was never
broached before in England. And why not? For by the Method he has taken (if
allowed) he may do it: Nay, this I dare undertake, allowing me his Method, to
vindicate or excuse all the Blasphemous Heresies and Treasons that ever was
wrote since the Days of William the Conqueror; and thereupon it came into my
Heart to Reprint one of his Books herewith, viz. Ishmael and his Mother cast
out, etc. Verbatim, except the Postscript, to which no Hand is set, to avoid
his future Cavils; and possibly hereafter may Reprint his Truth defending the
Quakers, etc. and Truths Defense, if I see Cause: And though I shall not answer
every Particular in his Truth and Innocence vindicated, yet I shall give some
brief Hints of his Method, in defending the Quakers and himself from the
Quotations taken out of their Books by the Norfolk Clergy, which I am sure they
did with great Care and Fidelity, and that to my Knowledge, viz. P. 6. These
Words [whom John said he was not] we disown in that place -- his Intention
ought to be considered. P. 9. We deny the Words as there printed, [He that
hath] should be lest out. P. 11. We know they intended. P. 19. The Words should
be transposed. P. 25. They wanting due Points, -- there wanted this
Parenthesis. P. 29. He means Spiritually, and not Literally. P. 30. He meant
Earthly Persecuting Kings. P. 45. His Words should run thus. P. 46. It should
rather have been. P. 52. Here I take him to mean. P. 63. Not warrantable
Expressions. P. 55. He means -- I know his Intent was not. P. 59. He means not
derided. P. 61. Was never so intended. P. 62. The Words should be transposed.
P. 67. It was directly intended, etc. I say, give me but this Allowance, and I
dare engage to defend and excuse all the Treasonable Words, Blasphemous
Expressions, and Heretical Principles that ever was wrote by Pen; yet this is
the Method that G. W. has taken, to excuse all the Blasphemies and Seditious
Principles quoted by the Norfolk Clergy, out of the Quakers Books, instead of
condemning them to the Flames, as he ought to have done, had he had the tenth
part of that Sincerity he often pretends to: Nay, moreover when some of the
Quotations were so apparently Seditious, as that they struck at the very
Constitution of our English Government, viz. That a Parliament chosen by most
Voices could not act for God, nor the Good of his People, and wrote by a
Prophet too, enough to raise the Mob; insomuch, as Whitehead did not dare to
recite the said Quotation, yet had he the Impudence to justify his Brother
Fox, p. 33. viz. Certainly he (Fox) had an honest intent in what he writ on
this Subject: Yet nevertheless in the same Page, and p. 64. his Heart so smote
him, that he cried out, I would not (says Whitehead) be understood in any wise
to oppose the Peoples just Rights of Elections; not understood! No, I believe
it; that is, though he owns Fox's Seditious Doctrine, though he defends and
justifies it, saying, Certainly he had an honest Intent in what he writ on this
Subject, yet he would not be understood so. The English of which is this, that
though both Fox himself, and the rest of their leading Gang, own this Doctrine as
their Ancient Testimony, from which (as themselves say) they have not deviated
in any one Point, only for some Politic Reasons he would not be So Understood;
that is, he would not be understood to be what he really is; else why should he
justify that in his Brother Fox which he disowns in himself? Indeed he makes
an Apology for Fox, that they were wrote occasionally in the Commonwealths Day;
what then? I grant they were first wrote in 1659. but then they were Reprinted
by the Quakers as one of their Ancient Testimonies Seven Years after, viz.
1665. and has gone among the Friends ever since, as the Word of the Lord, wrote
by a Prophet of the most high, namely, Geo. Fox, Jun. But George, if it was so
certainly honestly writ, why did thou not recite it, that others might have
been Judges of it? Well, but since thou have not, I shall; viz. A Brief
Discovery of some of the Blasphemous and Seditious Principles and Practices of
the Quakers, etc. p. 17. Geo. Fox, Jun. in his Works, Reprinted 1665. p. 87,
88. intitles his Epistles, A few plain Words to be considered by those of the
Army, or others, that would have a Parliament chosen by the Voices of the
People, etc. wherein is showed unto them according to the Scriptures of Truth,
that a Parliament so chosen are not like to govern for God, or the Good of his
People. Consider these things (says he) which I declare unto you; which in
waiting upon the Lord, he by his Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding opened in
me concerning the choosing of Parliaments by the Voices of the People. And p.
89. he says, You are not like to see your Desires fulfilled by a Parliament
chosen by the Voices of the People; -- Now if you believe these Scriptures,
John 15.19. Matthew. 7.13. Romans 9.27. Then may you see, that a Parliament that is
chosen by most Voices, are not like to act for God and the Good of his People,
And p. 91. And likewise the choosing of Parliament Men according to the Custom
of England, which is called its Birthright, stands in respect of Person, and
not in Equality; for the Rich; Covetous, Oppressing Men, who oppress the Poor,
they have the only Power to choose Lawmakers, and they will choose, to be sure,
such as will uphold them in their Oppression. And p. 92, 93. And we see the
People have been in great Blindness, in contending for Parliaments so chosen.
P. 149. Again, It is God's proper Right to give Laws unto Man: -- Now in this
Particular also Man have set himself in the Seat of God, and so have
dishonored the one Lawgiver, by setting up many Lawgivers. P. 150. Now mark
and consider these things, seeing that the Righteous are fewer in number than
the Unrighteous; and that the Lawmakers are chosen by the most Voices, and that
of the Richest People outwardly, how are the Righteous like to be preserved in
outward Freedom by the Laws that are so made? P. 159. And I must deal plainly
with you (says he) in the Sight of God, who has made Me a Prophet to This
Nation.

Well, George, I have recited it, and do averr it was fairly quoted out of your
Prophet Fox's Works, Reprinted by your Approbation, 1665. and it is not length
of Time, or change of Governments, that can abate the Force of a Prophecy of a
divinely inspired Prophet: No, George, if God Almighty did inspire this your
Prophet, and reveal to him from Heaven, his Holy Habitation, That a Parliament
chosen by most Voices could not, or were never like, to Act or Govern for God
or his People; then it is of Force, and you ought to stand by it in the Face of
all Unbelievers; but on the contrary, if you do now see that Fox was an
Impostor, (as I conceive that to be your Case) and that he was never so moved
of God, but instigated by a deluding Spirit: then no marvel you dare not recite
it, but, as in p. 69. make this guilty Excuse, viz. We are only defensive, and
not under a necessity of reciting the Clergies whole Quotations: But whether
only defensive, we shall consider by and by. But, George, if this Excuse of
yours was your Prudence, lest such as you present your Books to should see your
old Seditious Principles; and which is still worse, that you should have the
Face to Reprint and Defend them; then, George, I would willingly know where
your Honesty and Sincerity is you so often boast of. But enough of this, I
shall proceed to another of your Juggles, as bad as this, in p. 29. viz. As to
what these Men (i. e. the Norfolk Clergy) quote against us, p. 16. to prove us
Antimonarchial, they are very broken in their Quotations with their many
senseless Dashes, like the Snake in the Grass, Second Edition, p. 220. But
varying in the Citation of the same Passage, these Men (i. e. the Clergy) have
the Words, [Are not all these Elders, that dote so much of an Earthly King?]
But the Snake, has it, [Are not all these Christians, that will dote so much,
etc.] An excellent Critic: Here George is at his old Work, even splitting a
Hair, if possible, and all to amuse his Reader, and to put a Vail, if possible,
over the Quakers most manifest Antimonarchial and Treasonable Principles,
especially since of late in their Yearly Meeting, and other their late Prints,
they have reasserted all these their Ancient Seditious Prinples, and tell us
they are the same still, and not changed, as in the Postscript to their Ishmael
herewith Reprinted I shall show; which, if so, they do indeed, as to
themselves, make void the Act of Indemnity, which otherwise would have blotted
out these their old Sins: But since they say their Principles are now no
otherwise than they were in the beginning, I think it is highly reasonable that
they should be examined thereabout: And this I think ought to be the Desire of
every true English Freeholder.

But come, George, as to the varying of these Men, one said, Are not all these
Elders, etc. the other, Are not all these Christians, etc. What harm is in all
this, especially since the Words of your Fox, in his Book, styled, Several
Papers given forth, etc. to the Presbyterians, 1659. are, And are not all these
Elders, Christians, that will dote so much of an Earthly King, Traitors against
Christ? Now what if the Clergy took only the Word Elders, and the Author of the
Snake in the Grass took the Word Christians, since one is enough to show your
Meaning; though Fox (as his manner usually was) put in more than enough, what
harm is in all this pray? But if you had looked in p. 80. of my Pilgrim's
Progress, etc. there you would have found that I have put it even as Fox did,
viz. And are not all these Elders Christians, that will dote so much of an
Earthly King, Traitors against Christ? Oh, George, if I would go thorough this
Book of thine, I could show abundance of these thy Shuffles, and Legerdemain,
used on purpose to deceive thy Readers. But now to the Clergymen's Quotation,
which I say is fairly taken, and carries the Force and Meaning of your great
Apostle Fox; neither do the Norfolk Clergy, nor the Author of the Book,
excellently entitled, The Snake in the Grass, vary one tittle in the Relation
of Fox's Doctrine; but if you think it do, I will now add Christian to Elder,
and then let the Reader see how it helps your Cause, and whether one of those
Words had not been enough to express your Sense; but a Man near drowning will
lay hold of any Twig; and your Infallible Cause being Infallibly sinking, you
are forced to make use of such Trifles, instead of reciting their Quotation,
and then refuting it, as all fair Controvertists would do: And if not able so
to do, then you ought to confess fairly, and acknowledge your Errors, and
condemn your Apostle's Seditious Doctrine.

Now to the Quotation, A brief Discovery of some of the Blasphemous and
Seditious Principles and Practices of the Quakers, p. 16. G. Fox in his Book,
Several Papers given forth, etc. to Presbyterians, etc. just before the
Restoration, writ Anno 1659. and printed the beginning of 1660. he has these
Passages; Friends, To all you that desire an Earthly King in England, etc.
whether Presbyterians, or others: -- Did the Elders of old in the Days of
Christ, or the Apostles, cry up any King but Christ, to have any King to rule
over them but Christ? And does not the Priests and Presbyterians cry for an
Earthly King, and will have Caesar? -- And do they not in this crucify Jesus?
-- Are not all these Elders Christians, that will dote so much of an Earthly
King, Traitors against Christ? -- Do you read that there were any Kings since
the Days of the Apostles, but among the Apostate Christians -- for Christ is
King alone -- I say, that is the false Church that does not live -- upon the
Head of the Kings: -- They that be true Elders -- never go about to set up an
Earthly King over them to Rule -- Herod the King was mad at the Child Jesus --
there is the Fruit of Earthly Kings -- and has not this been witnessed in
England? etc. Ignorant and foolish People, that would have a King; and what
Work Joshua made with the Kings; how he brought them out of the Cave, a fit
Place for them -- and all these Novices Christians, that are crying up Earthly
Kings -- And we know that these Kings are the Spiritual Egyptians, got up since
the Days of the Apostles.

Come, smooth George, with all thy Puritanical Sincerity, why did thou not
recite this whole Quotation? But it seems thou art not under a necessity to be
plain-hearted: What! it seems this is too plain, and too manifest: What! to be
absolutely against all Kings, and Kingly Government, and thy Paint not able to
cover it? But, George, thou also say, p. 69. Let their Books and ours be
compared to clear our Innocence from these Adversaries Calumnies. Ah, George,
this is still worse; what! to add Hypocrisy to Treason! Thou know, George,
in thy Conscience, if thou have any, or if it be not quite seared, that at West
Dereham Conference your Friends had an Opportunity, were pressed to it, but
could not be prevailed with; nay, though there then were near Twenty of your
eminent Teachers, and about an Hundred of your Hearers, yet not one of them
could be prevailed with, either to compare your Books; nay, nor to own them;
and vindicate the Doctrine contained in them; how then have thou now the
Impudence to say, Let their Books and ours be compared, as above? Wherefore in
your next be plain, whether you have not deviated in any one Point from what
you were in the beginning, and whether you resolve to justify your Friends
Ancient Books, as you say you can; see the Postscript to your Ishmael annexed.
-- I will only trouble my Reader in this Place with one Citation more, and it
is about the Trinity, and in this George is as defective and short, as in the
other, and the reason is as plain; which is, to cover over their Blasphemy
against the Blessed Trinity; to manifest which, there are several Charges out
of diverse Books of the Quakers, in the Book entitled, Some few of the Quakers
many Horrid Blasphemies, Heresies, and their Bloody Treasonable Principles
Destructive to Government, out of which I shall mention but one, to show as
well how short Whitehead is in reciting it (upon his Excuse of being only
defensive, and thereby not under a necessity to cite the whole) as above noted;
See Some few of the Quakers many Horrid Blasphemous Heresies, etc. p. 1. out of
G. Fox's Great Mystery, etc. p. 246. The Scripture do not tell the People of a
Trinity, nor Three Persons, but the Common-Prayer-Mass-Book speaks of Three
Persons, brought in by the Father the Pope. To this George Whitehead Replies,
Truth and Innocence vindicated, etc. p. 50. saying, Their first Objection, the
Scripture do not tell People of a Trinity, nor Three Persons, etc. and so dropped
the other part of the Quotation out of Fox, viz. But the
Common-Prayer-Mass-Book speaks of Three Persons brought in by the Father the
Pope. These he left out, as now not proper to mention, since the Act of
Toleration enforces the Acknowledgment of the Blessed Trinity, as the Condition
of their Liberty.

But as a Salvo, p. ibid. George Whitehead urges another Book of George Fox's,
styled, Some Principles of the Elect People of God called Quakers, etc. Printed
1671. p. 43. Of the Word Trinitas; there is no mention made in Scripture, yet
the Scripture speaks of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and all these are one.

I have with some Difficulty procuted this Book in order to trace and to find
out George Whitehead in all his Subterfuges, and lurking Places, and I find him
as false, in citing Fox their Apostle, as in the above-noted: For of the 57
Words in Fox's Paragraph, he (G.W.) has cited but 26 Words, which is not the
one half, but the reason is, there is no more for his Turn, and his Business is
only to serve a Turn, Jesuit-like, as his Friend Anne Docwra well observes; now
to the Quotation of Fox, which Whitehead has split, viz. Some Principles of the
Elect, etc. p. 43. Of this Word Trinitas there is no mention made in Scripture,
yet the Scripture speaks of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and of Water, Blood,
and Spirit, and all these are one among us, as in the Primitive time among the
Apostles, who gave no such outward Names to them as Trinity, as the World now
does, etc.

Who then can believe this People, who thus split Sentences, and mangle the
Sense? For here is Six Persons in the Quakers Godhead, Father, Son, Holy Ghost,
Water, Blood, Spirit; all these are one among the Quakers; so that here is a
twofold Trinity, Trinitas and Trinitas, in the Unity of their Essence, where no
one is greater or lesser than the other, nor yet one before or after the other;
for the Water is Spirit, the Blood is Spirit, and both the Light within,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and all within, and every of these Lights is their
Eternal God: And to this agrees George Fox, Jun. in his Works, p. 66. viz. By
one that witnesses God, Christ, the Light, the Word, the Spirit, the Truth,
the Kingdom of God, within me and these are one.

Reader, Here is in the Quakers Essence Septem Personas; of which, no one was
before the other, nor none greater or lesser than another, and all within.
Again, p. ibid. Stumble not at the Light, for if thou do, thou stumblest at
God, at Christ, at the Door, the Way, the Truth, the Life, the Rock, the Elect
Stone, and all these are but one. Here again is one added; here is Octo
Personas in the Unity of their Essence, of which no one was before the other,
nor none greater or lesser than the other; for the Stone is Light, the Rock is
Light, the Life is Light, the Truth is Light, the Way is Light, the Door is
Light, and God is Light, and all within them: Only measurably, as p. 72. And
verily, Friends, if you keep not to the measure of the pure God in you; so that
God dwells in them by parts or measure; see p. 55, 83. ibid. The next thing I
am to prove is their Light within to be the Eternal God; this done, I think I
have proved that they, like Thieves and Robbers, have climbed up another way,
distinct from the Holy Apostles, Primitive Christians, Saints, and Martyrs, and
all Christian Churches to this Day; in order to which, see p. 46, to 50. ibid.
I the Light will fall upon you, and grind you to Powder. All -- who will not
own me the Light in you; and -- I will make you to know, that I the Light am
the true Eternal God, which created all things, and that there is not another
beside me can save. I matter not by what Name you are called by; whether it be
King, Protector, Prince, Duke, Lord, Judge, Justice, Parliament, Priest,
Lawyer, Gathered Churches, Army, Gentry, Mean Men, or Beggars, -- I Will break
all Sects and Opinions, and Gathered Churches, which are not in me, I Will break
you in pieces; -- I the Light in you will consume it all, I Will Burn Heaven and
Earth; I Will burn within and without; -- I the Light will overturn Kingdoms, and
Nations, and Rulers of all sorts, and Armies, and gathered Churches, which will
not own me the Light in them, to Guide and Lead them -- And I will be your
Dread, and ye shall be the Dread of Nations -- And ye shall Reign over all the
World -- I will give you Dominion over all your Enemies within and without, and
I will make them all bow before you; and even as I am, (i. e. God) so shall ye
be also.

Reader, from hence we may gather what Harangues they have in their Yearly
Meeting, when their Doors are close and secure, where they revive and re-assert
their Ancient Testimonies; but their Trumpet gives such an uncertain sound, as
none know but themselves how to prepare to the Battle; you hear now that their
Light within is God, the Eternal God by whom all things were made and created,
and besides their Light within, there is no God that can save; and yet
sometimes they Speak to their Light, and Teach their Light, even their Eternal
God. For this see their Book, The Vials of the Wrath of God, etc. by G. Fox,
Printed 1655, p. 6. Therefore to the Light in your Consciences do I speak, etc.
Sometimes their Light is Honest; that is, they have an Honest God. For this,
see their Book, The Trumpet of the Lord Blown, etc. by James Parnel, p. 2. To
the Light in all your Consciences I speak, which is Honest of God. Sometimes
their God is Blind, or Dim-sighted; for this, see G. Fox's News coming up out
of the North, etc. The God of the World blind your Eye, which is the Light.

Thus have the Quakers, like the Gibeonites, deceived many Thousands.

But hark, George, I have not yet done with your Guilty Excuse. In your
Innocence and Truth Vindicated, etc. p. 69. viz. We (says George) are only
Defensive, etc. How George? What only Defensive? That I do deny, and shall now
make it appear, That from first to last you have been the Aggressors; although at
present you are so close Attackt that you begin to call for a Cessation of
Arms. But, George, we are now for Reparation, or else no Quarter. It is not
your Excuse, That the Clergy in Oliver's time were no Ministers of Christ, nor
your Flattering the Episcopal Clergy, will now do, unless you condemn your
Erroneous Books. See J. Feild's Defense, etc. If Francis Bugg accounts those
Ministers of Christ, that turned, and kept the Bishops out of their
Bishoprics; how can he have the Face (says Field) to own himself a Member of
the Church of England? In this J. Field thinks he hits the Mark, but with a
Reverse; for, John, I do believe that in Oliver's time there was a Christian
Ministry of Learned Clergymen: And one Reason among others which make me so
believe, is, because they wrote many sound Orthodox Books against Quakerism;
and the Quakers, as they began, so they kept on against them: And that you are
still as great Enemies to the present Clergy, as you were against them, I shall
show anon. But I have not yet done with your Brother Whitehead; who with a
mealy Modesty simpers it out, That you Quakers are now only Defensive; you are
for an Amicable and Friendly Conversation, and no Lovers of Contention: Oh meek
Saints! But hark, George, did not the Quakers first Challenge the Norffolk
Clergy? I say, yea; and shall prove it from the Words of your Letter: viz. If
you think you have Matter to charge us (Quakers) withal, let us have your
Charge under your own Hands, and appoint Time and Place convenient; and we or
some others of us will meet you as publicly as you please, -- Any of you all,
-- Of your Cloth, -- And stand a Public Trial, etc.

By which it is self-evident that the Quakers Challenged the Clergy, and if I
mistake not, very boldly too; considering the many gross Errors, and horrid
Blasphemies you stand charged with, and convicted of, out of your most
Authentic Writers. And for you, yea, I say, for such a Tribe of Self-Condemned
Schismatics, to prick up your Ears, and to Challenge the most Learned Clergy
the World have, and who are Ministers of the most Reformed Religion, and of an
Established Church by Law, I think this was bold with a witness.

But come, George, let us go back to your Beginning, and take our Measures from
thence; for you would not have us take you for Changlings: You know Quakerism
is the same, and the Principles of it; even what it always was, and will be to
the End of the Chapter. For one single Instance of which, I could give many.
See your Prophet Burroughs's Epistle, prefixed to George Fox's Great Mystery,
etc. viz.

Then being prepared of the Lord, and having received Power from on high, we
went forth, as commanded of the Lord, -- And the dread of the Lord went before
us and behind us; and first of all our Mouths were opened, and our Spirits
filled wih Indignation against the Priests and Teachers; and with them, and
against them. First we began to War; as being the Causers of the People to err;
and the Blind Leaders, that carried the Blind into the Ditch: And against them
as the Fountain of all Wickedness, abounding in the Nations, and as being the
Issue of Profaneness, -- Showing unto all them, and to all their People, that
they were not Lawful Ministers of Christ, sent of him, but were Deceivers and
Antichrists, and such whom the Lord never sent. And we spared not publicly,
and at all Seasons, to utter forth the Judgments of the Lord against them, and
their Ways, and their Churches, and Worships. -- And this was our first Work
which we entered upon, to Thresh down the Deceivers, and lay them open; that all
People might come to see their Shame, and turn from them, etc.

Thus then it plainly appears that the Quakers began this Contest, and have
carried it on in the same domineering and insulting manner, until of late: And
nothing makes you pull in your Horns, but the Discovery of your Bloody,
Treasonable, Seditious and Blasphemous Principles and Practices. And as a Third
Instance that you are as Implacable Enemies to the present Established Church,
Ministry, Scriptures and Ordinances, as you were in your dear Friend Oliver
Cromwell's Time, (as your Apostle Fox Saluted him) I shall cite some few of the
Reasons you give, why you deny the National Ministry, even in 1671, as more at
large you may see in your Book wrote by George Fox, entitled, Some Principles
of the Elect People of God called Quakers, Printed 1671, p. 5. viz.

Grounds and Reasons why we deny the Worlds Teachers.
I. THEY ( i. e. the Public Ministry) are such Teachers, as have told us the
Letter was the Word, when the Letter says God was the Word; therefore we deny
them, John 1.1.

Query. Where do the Scriptures say, that God the Father, the First Person in
the Trinity, is the Word? No; Christ, the Second Person, is the Word; proved by
that Scripture above quoted, and perverted by them. Whitehead in Ishmael, p. 9.

II. They are such Teachers as tell People of a Sacrament, for which there is
not one Scripture; and so feed the People with their own Inventions; and
therefore we deny them.

III. They are such Teachers as have told us the Letter was the Light, whenas
the Letter says, Christ is the Light; therefore we deny them, John 1, etc.

Query. Where is the Man? What is his Name? What Book is it in? That the
Public Ministers ever said, that the Letter (as they contemptuously call the
Holy Scriptures) was the Light mentioned John 1. or the Essential Word of God;
only the Written Word of God, spoke forth by Men Divinely Inspired; and as
such, are a Light, or give us Light; and are a Means to understand the Mind and
Will of God, through the Influences of his Holy Spirit assisting therein? No;
this I take to be a false Accusation, like that of Joseph Wyeth's Anguis
Flagellatus, p. 158. i. e. Upon Examination of Christopher Wade's Words, they
seem to imply, as if he had affirmed of the Scriptures, that they were the
Eternal and Indwelling Word of God, etc. This is a Lie told in Hypocrisy; for
I have read the Page through, and there is no such Saying, or any thing like
it. And thus do they belie their Adversaries, both by false Citations, and
Charges. Wherefore as the Protestants says touching the Jesuits, so may the
Protestants conclude by the Quakers; both in reciting their Opponents, their
reciting their Friends, and their Sham-Creeds and Protestations, in their late
Books presented to the Parliament, the Judges, Justices, etc. viz. Distrust
them in all they say. A Specimen of all which you have in this small Treatise.
But to go on.

IV. They are such Teachers as tell People, that Matthew, Mark, Luke and John,
is the Gospel; (therefore we deny them.)

V. They are Babylon's Merchants, that make a Trade of the Scriptures; --
there-we deny them.

VI. They are such Teachers, as take a Text out of the Saints Conditions; ( i.
e. out of the Scriptures,) therefore we deny them.

These are some of the chief Reasons why the Quakers deny the Public
Ministers; and not only so, and there leave it; no; but in Magisterial,
Insulting, Domineering manner, counsel and command the People, contrary to all
the Laws made and established, to go no more to Church: The like of which I do
believe never was done by a dissenting People (who enjoy their Liberty by
Indulgence) since the World began; which after I have recited Fox's Motion from
God, as he audaciously pretends, I shall recite this Counsel against the
Estabished Church; and next, his Authority from The Word of God, as he
audaciously pretends, as in p. 15, 54. viz.

Moved of the Lord, written from the Spirit of the Lord, for the Cleansing of
the Land of all False Teachers, Seducers, and Deceivers, and Witches, who
beguile the People; and Inchanters, and Diviners, and Sorcerers, and Hirelings,
etc.

All People that read these things, never come ye more at the Steeple-House,
nor Pay your Priests more Tithes till they have Answered them; for if ye do, ye
uphold them in their Sins, and must partake of their Plagues, -- This is the
Word of the Lord God to you all, G. F.

Reader, their First and Great Commandment is, Pay your Priest no more Tithes;
and their Second is like unto it, Never go more to the Steeple-House; and upon
these Two Commandments hangs their Law and their Prophets; and by this you may
know that his Disciples love him, in that they keep his Commandments. And the
Reasons he gives to enforce Obedience to their Commandments are, because the
Priests tell them that the Holy Scriptures are the written Word of God; because
they tell us of a Sacrament; because they tell People, that Matthew, Mark, Luke
and John is the Gospel; because they take a Text out of the Scripture, and
Expound it to the People: And for these and the like Reasons, they call them
False Teachers, Seducers, Deceivers, Witches, Inchanters, Diviners, Sorcerers,
and Hirelings: And for their Warrant, This is the Word of the Lord God to you
all.

Thus do they sit in the Judgment Seat, even as in O. Cromwell's Time; and for
the same Cause, now, as then, they have Condemned not only the Church of
England, but Protestant Dissenters too.

But, George, as I have turned thee topsy-turvy, so am I now turning thy Inside
outward, showing by thy Ishmael, etc. thy Ancient Testimony and Principle; and
thou say thou art not changed. See thy Ishmael, to which I have neither
added, nor diminished, only the backside of the Title Page, Running Title,
Marginal Notes, and Observations from Page 11. thy Name being on the
Title Page, the middle, and at the end, Signed and also Sealed with your Common
Seal, i. e. Given forth from the Spirit of the Lord in us, G. Whitehead, etc.
But let me clear up one Passage in your Truth and Innocence Vindicated, etc. p.
31. As for this Quotation in Ishmael, etc. p. 10, 11. G. Whitehead has
positively disowned the Words, and affirms they are none of his, and that he
writ not that Part of the Answer to Townsend, which was in the Year It was 1655.
1654. and that he shall neither stand by nor own these Words. viz. And here
thy Antiquity, and the Three Persons, which thou would devide out of one, like
a Conjurer, are all denied, and thou shut up with them in perpetual Darkness,
for the Lake and the Pit.

Now, George, though thy Signing and Sealing this Book with thy Hand and Common
Seal, as aforesaid, were sufficient to Entitle thee to this Hellish Blasphemy;
as if thou had Signed and Sealed a Bond of an Hundred Pound, made by a
Scribe, would oblige thee to Pay the Debt; though thou did not write the Bond,
yet, George, I have a further Demonstration to prove the Book thine, and never
heard that until 1690, (an Act being made, which enjoined all that expected
Toleration to own the B. Trinity) that you did disown any part of this Book.
But, George, Disowning will not now do, you must Retract and Condemn it; and
this to do, will be as bitter a Pill as it was to thee and thy Brethren to own
K. W. III. Rightful and Lawful King of these Realms. For I have Mr. Smith's
Book, The Quakers Disarmed, etc. and your Book, Truth Defending the Quakers,
etc. both Printed 1659. wherein he charges you with this Ishmael, and you both
own and defend it. And first,

The Qua. Disarm. etc. Mr. Smith. He that writ this Book Ishmael, opens a Door
to Damnable Heresies, you writ this Book, G. W. therefore you open a Door to
Damnable Heresies.

G. W. I deny it, I did not write all, there is something scribled on it.

Mr. Smith. True; here are some things writ on the backside, I Will charge you
with nothing but what is printed: Were you the Author of all that is printed in
this Book; your Name is printed at the beginning, middle, and end of it.

G. W. About three Years ago, I and Four more writ it betwixt us.

Mr. Smith. Pray tell me plainly whether you will own it or not; if you will
not own it at all, then tell me what you will own, and what not; otherwise,
when I have proved it a most wicked Book, you may disown it, and so all my
Discourse fall to the Ground. It Is no pleasure to me to speak, or this People
to hear vain Words. If you will not own it, speak; but you may as well disown
to morrow all that you say to day, (telling us Words are but Wind) if you
disown what you have Printed and affixt your Name so often unto.

G. W. Well, I will own it, prove what you can.

Now, George, lest thou should say this is an Adversary's Book, (though that
in this Case would not help Dun out of the Mire,) I shall now come to thy own
Book, Truth defending the Quakers, etc. Of Damning the B. Trinity to the Pit
and Lake.
said in the Title Page also, to be written from the Spirit of Truth in G. W.
etc.

P. 1. Question recited out of the foregoing Book, to which this is in Answer.

Mr. Smith. Do not you repent G. W. for your endeavoring vainly to Defend,
Aug. 29. 1659. in so great a Congregation, these Positions printed in your Book
of Ishmael, etc.

G. W. The Positions we defended are according to the Scriptures of Truth, and
them we need not repent of: As first, in denying the Bible to be the written
Word of God: Secondly, in asserting the Scriptures not to be the Word: Thirdly,
that there is no such Word in the Scripture, as Three Persons in the Trinity;
but it is a Popish Doctrine, mentioned in the Popish Mass, or
Common Prayer Book: Fourthly, And thou that affirm Three distinct Persons in
the Godhead, art a Dreamer; and he that Dreams, and tell Lies, he with his
Imaginations and Dreams, is for the Lake.

Truth Defending, etc. Where in the 33d Question, in The Quaker Disarmed, etc.
thou have falsely Charged George Whitehead's Book Here he owns the Book, and
defends the Doctrine.
with proving several Blasphemies in it, which is a wicked Lie and Slander; for
thou never yet proved any Blasphemy in it: For that thou countest Blasphemies,
was our Mark, Our Witnessing.
Witnessing against such Doctrines as thou could not prove by Scripture; as
that of a Trinity of Three distinct Persons in the Godhead, and that of the
Letter being the Word.

Truth defending the Quakers and their Principles, etc. P. 24. G. Whitehead
therein reciting the 45th Question of Mr. Smith's, out of his Book The Quaker
disarmed, p. 6. for I have them both before me, G. W. thus Recites, and then
Answers; viz. Do not you, G. Whitehead, blasphemously take to your self an
Attribute of God, while you pretend ordinarily to know the Hearts of Men; and
tell Mr. Townsend of Norwich in the second Page of your Ishmael, that the Light
of God is departed from his Conscience, etc. I think it is the fairest Citation
that ever I met with, viz. of G. W.'s, now comes his Answer: I (says G. W.)
take no Attribute of God to my self, but what God has given me, etc. -- And as
for Townsend, I never said that the Light was departed from his Conscience, as
thou have belied me; But that from the Light of God in his Conscience he is
departed And so are the Words in p. 2. of Ishmael, as you may see: A plain
confession, and owning the Book, etc.
, etc.

Truth Defending, etc. P. 25. In thy 46th Question thou have (says G.
Whitehead) charged me with Printing Railing Language, with calling Priest
Townsend Witch, Liar, Blind Guide, in p. 3. of Our Book A plain confession, and
owning the Book, etc.
, etc. -- But there is not the Word Witch, but that thou would bewitch People
with thy Lies, etc.

Reader, I cannot enlarge, I now refer you to the Book which Geo. Whitehead
owned, when he and his Partners Wrote it, when they Printed it, when they
Disputed with Mr. Smith, Aug. 29. 1659. when G. W. Printed his Truth Defending,
etc. which is at four or five sundry times, and till 1690, which was 45 Years,
never disowned it: Yet now he finds Quakerism sinking, would insinuate he did
not Write it does not Own the Words; is sorry his Name is to it; and the like
Dissimulation. No, George, you must either Condemn it, as rank Blasphemy, or
Defend it; since your Hand Wrote it, Signed and Sealed it, as your Act and Deed.

Now therefore, George, my Advice is, That you go forthwith to your
Second-Day-Meeting, and together with them, Condemn by Public Censure under
your Hands, this your Blasphemous Book Ishmael, and all other Books of yours,
and of your Friends, of the same Nature and Tendency: For as St. Peter once
said to Simon Magus, I fear it may be said to your Self, (and Partners.) Read
Acts 8.21, 22, 23. Thy Heart is not right in the sight of God; repent therefore
of this thy Wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the Thoughts of thy Heart (and
the Words of thy Mouth) may be forgiven thee; for I perceive thou art in the
Gall of Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity.

FINIS.
ISHMAEL, AND HIS MOTHER Cast out into the WILDERNESS Amongst the wild Beasts
of the same Nature.

OR, A Reply to a Book entitulled, The Scriptures proved to be the word of God,
put forth by one of Ishmaels Children, who calls himself a Minister of the
Gospel, and a Pastor of S. Austins and Savours Parish in Norwich; but is
clearly made manifest by the light of God in his Servants, to be a scoffer, and
an enemy to the Gospel, which the Saints of God are Ministers of, and sufferers
for, by such as he is, who Ishamellike, has laid his folly open, and is
discovered to the faithful, who are of Abraham, and of the seed of Promise.

ALSO, A clear distinction between the Ministers of Christ, who are of the seed
of Abraham, and the Priests of this generation, who are of Ishmaels root; who
with the Truth are plainly made manifest, by the light of Christ in us, who for
the testimony of God do suffer by the sons of Hagar, and this Generation of the
Priests in Norwich: Given forth for no other end, but that the truth may be
cleared from such as scoff and deny it.

Given forth from the Spirit of the Lord in us that do suffer in the Goal of
Norwich for the truths sake, which is persecuted and slandered by the Priests
and Rulers of this City: Whose names in the flesh is, Christopher Atkinson,
George Whitehead, James Lancaster, Thomas Simonds.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle, at the West end
of Paul's, 1655.

OBserve, Reader, That though the Quakers late Books seem to be more Orthodox
than their Ancient Books, said to be given forth (though most Blasphemously) from
the Spirit of the Lord, yet they are still the same in Principle, though they
otherwise word the Matter; for Proof of this, see their Book, Primitive
Christianity Revived, etc. by Jos. Wyeth, Printed School, viz. Our Principles
(says he) are now no other than what they were when we were first a People,
etc. Next, see G. Whitehead's Counterfeit Convert, etc. p. 72. I may (says he)
see Cause otherwise to word the Matter, and yet our Intentions be the same,
etc. So that it is morally impossible to understand the Quakers by their Words,
whilst they say and write one thing, and mean another, ARIUS like.

Therefore David ran and stood upon the Philistine, and took his Sword, and
drew it out of the Sheath thereof, and slew him, and cut off his Head
therewith: And when the Philistines saw their Champion was dead, they fled: And
the Men of Israel and of Judah arose and shouted, and pursued the Philistines,
etc. 1 Samuel 17.51, 52.

A bundle of papers, P. 1. 4 to.
being brought unto our hands by one of the chief Priests of Norwich, which he
has raked up in his Imaginations, against the harmless people called Quakers,
and being full of lies and deceit, we are moved of the Lord for the truths
sake, to clear the truth from his lies and deceit, and false accusations, and
to lay him and his two propositions (as he calls them) open unto the simple
minded; who have been bewitched and deceived by such deceivers and blind guides
as he is; and put forth by one Sampson Townsend, who calls himself a Minister
of the Gospel, and a Pastor of Saint Austins and Savours Parish in Norwich.
Priest.

THE Title of thy confused papers is, The Title of Mr. Townsend's Book.
The Scripture proved to be the word of God, as also the only foundation of
faith, and rule of our obedience, or a clear conviction of the errors of the
quakers, who blasphemously affirm that the Scriptures are not the word of God,
nor the foundation of Faith, nor yet the only rule of our obedience; to which
lies and falsehoods we are moved to answer.

Answer.

The Quakers Answer.
THE Scriptures proved to be the word of God is false, and one of the blind,
deceitful imaginations, which thou and thy generation has deceived people
with, telling them, that that is the word which says that God is the word, who
made himself manifest in the days of old, before the Letter was, which word was
Moses rule, who wrote forth Scripture, and not the Letter but the word, which
word by which Moses was guided to speak forth Scripture, and this is that word
the Prophets prophesied of which dwelt amongst us, P. 2. 4 to.
which was before the world was, and seen before the Letter was written; now
with the same life and power by which the Scripture was spoken, do we challenge
thee to prove such a Scripture as says that it is the word of God, and thou
that would make people believe that the Letter is the foundation, would make
void the foundation, upon which the Prophets and Apostles were builded, which
spoke forth the Letter, and thou that would build upon the Letter, hates the
Light and the Foundation, which is Christ, from which the Letter was spoken,
and thy foundation, and thy rule and obedience is tried with it, and by it thou
art judged, now that which is convicted by thy airy spirit is like unto thy
self, and is to be scorched up as the briars, but the children of light who are
of God and in the truth, cannot be convicted by such as thou art, who from the
light of God in thy Conscience is departed, and with it art to be condemned, so
with the word and the life by which the Letter was declared thou art seen and
comprehended to be an enemy unto that from which the Scripture was declared,
and here again I challenge thee to be a perverter of it, notwithstanding all
thy profession from it, and whereas thou have directed this confused paper unto
us, of whom thou have described the names, as follows, to Christopher
Atkinson, James Lancaster, George Whitehead, and Thomas Symonds, now in Norwich
Goal for their Errors and Miscarriages.

Priest. Thou say if ever the truth of God were turned into a lie, it is by
us (thou say) that deny the Scriptures to be the truth of God, and pretend
immediate Revelations to be our rule for our actions, and can not produce any
proof, but the words of a dead Man like thy self, which thou calls Mr.
Buroughs; to which we answer.

Answ. By thee Priest Townsend, is the truth of God turned into a lie, and thou
art taken with one in thy mouth, who says that we before mentioned are in the
Goal of Norwich for errors and miscarriages, here thou slanderer we challenge
thee to prove what errors or miscarriages can be laid to our charge, what is
thy lies and slanders, that which you would make the people believe? and are we
counted deceivers for declaring the Truth, and testifying against thee and thy
generations, as it is counted an error in us to unvail thy deceits, and lay
thee open to all men: here in the presence of the Lord do we declare against
thee, for errors and miscarriages do we deny, and this thy confused stuff
wherein first thou say that we deny the Scripture to be the truth of God,
which is a lie, as thy own words makes it manifest, who in the same page of thy
shameless discourse, which now is laid open to the understanding of the Simple.

Priest. And again thou say that we acknowledge the Scripture to be the
truth, and yet deny them to be the word of God, here let all that sees thy
confused paper judge thee, who art in Babel, where the confusion is, and a
minister of it.

Answ. The Scripture we own as it was spoken forth by them that lived in the
word, and receive it as a Declaration of God, and of what he spoke unto them of
former ages, Luke i.i. P. 3. 4 to.
but thy words and imaginations we do deny, who would call that the word which
says God is the word, and that the light which is not the light, but says
Christ is the light, which is thy condemnation, that hates it in particular,
and the worlds condemnation that hates it in general, as is made manifest, who
hates revelations, and us who witness it, shutting thy self forth from the
Scriptures, and from them that gave them forth, whereas Christ says, no man
knows the Father, but the Son, and to whom the Son will reveal him, as thou may
read, Mat. ii. 27. here thou have plainly shown thy self to be both without the
knowledge of the Father and the Son, who art in thy mediate natural knowledge,
which from the light which comes from Christ is erred, and with it to be
condemned; thou dreamer, what have thou to do to profess thy self a Minister of
the Gospel, who art but yet in thy mediate natural conceivings, when the
natural man knows not the things of God, for they are Spiritually discerned; so
we from God is unto thee thou deceiver, who would make people believe that that
which is natural and carnal is the foundation of Faith and obedience, and so
would bewitch thy people with thy lies, to draw them from the anointing within
to obscure something without them, as they did, that would have drawn away the
Galations from the Spirit, as thou may read, Gal. 3.

Priest. And whereas thou say in the third Page that thou will reason with
us, and tells us, that we did acknowledge the Scripture to be truth, which in
the Page before thou did deny; and thus is making thy folly manifest, who says
that it is our judgment, that we are perfect and free from Sin, which thou
never heard us affirm, but these thy lies will clearly be made manifest by the
Scriptures which thou calls thy foundation of faith, and only rule of
obedience, by which thou shall be judged, for Christ says unto them whom he
taught, be ye perfect, as your Heavenly Father is perfect, Mat. 5.28.

Answ. But thou and thy generation hates this, and says that there is no
perfection to be attained here; Oh thou blind guide! did Christ ever command
any thing that might not be accomplished? or did he speak of being perfect, not
till after death, here thou do deny the very end for which Christ came, who
came to take away Sin, and in him is no Sin, Mat. i. 21. i. John 3.3, 4, 5, 6.
and i. John 5.18. here thou have plainly made it manifest, that thou art
without Christ and his knowledge, and in Antichrist, now what the Scriptures
speaks, in our measure do we witness concerning these things, and thee we do
deny, and all thy generation, thou enemy of God, who does pervert the
Scriptures, and wrest them to thy destruction, and here with the light that
never changed art thou to be condemned from God, and all the Children of God.

Priest. Another of thy lies is made evident, thou slanderer, who art not
ashamed impudently to affirm, that we deny the power of the Magistrates in the
matters of God, and that we speak not evil only of Governors, but of
Government, and condemn the Ministers of the Church of England, and despise
them as false teachers, P. 4. to.
and say they know nothing of the true light, and say we condemn them for
preaching for hire, and say we deny Ministers should take any wages for their
works.

Answ. The powers that are of God ordained, we own in our souls, and for
Conscience sake are subject to them, and such as rule well in the things of God
without respect of persons, which respects of persons is contrary to Scripture,
such we say are worthy of double honor, and such our Souls are subject to, for
such executed the Law upon transgressors, and encourage them that do well, and
their honor lies not in a hat, or bending of the knee, which is nothing but
filthiness, which thou and thy generation upholds, but the honor and
subjection to him that rules well is in our souls, as it is written, Romans
13.1. and here thy lies and thy slanders we do deny and charge it upon thee
from the Lord, to prove where ever we were not subject unto the power of
Magistrates as it was of God, or where ever we spoke evil of Governors or of
Government: thus art thou found with lies in thy right hand, thou enemy of God,
and where thou say we condemn the Ministers of the Church of England, the
Ministers of Christ we own, but such as thou art we deny, who seek for your
gain from your quarter, and such as call Steeple house Church, and letter word,
and foundation, and light, and rule, when Christ says he is the way, and he is
the light, and he is the foundation, and he is the word, which was before the
Letter was, i. John i. 9. and John 3. and Rev. i9. i. Cor. 3. i2. and here
again we do deny all such as say that sprinkling of Infants is the Baptism and
the seal of the Covenant, as thou Sampson Townsend did affirm, and take i2
pence for sprinkling of a poor prisoners child here in this prison of Norwich,
the sixteenth day of the eleventh Month, and Scripture says that the Baptism
is with one Spirit into one body, and the Baptism is but one, and the Church
but one, which is in God, as thou may read, Ephesians. 4, 5, 6. and i. These. i. and
here thou and thy Church, and thy Baptism is shut out of Scripture, and with
it judged, and with the light condemned to be upheld by such sottish blind
guides as thou art.

Priest. And again thou say that the Ministers of England speaks nothing but
what is according to the Law and the Testimony of God in his word, which is the
rule to try all teachers by, and thou say that this our Judgment is contrary
to Tit. 2.15.

Answ. Whosoever read that Scripture will condemn thy blindness in these
things, who have pretended thy self a teacher of others, Mark, Reader, this
their Ancient Testimony, and they are the same still.
and yet shut up in perpetual darkness; thou blind sot, where is it said in all
the Scriptures that the Letter is the rule to try all teachers by, or where
does it ever say that the Saints did ever try the Spirits by the Letter, or how
can thou prove that ever it was called by the Saints the only rule of
obedience; or a written word of God, with these thy lies thou and thy
generation has deceived the blind and simple, taking their money for that
which is no bread, P. 5. 4 to.
making them believe lies instead of truth, Oh, ye enemies of God, how long
will ye despise the truth, if Scripture had not been these your filthy lies
would have gone forth as truth to those that are in darkness, but praised be
the Lord who has discovered your filthiness, and laid you open with his light,
from which the Scripture was spoken, by which light we read you in the
Scriptures to be among the false Prophets in their steps, and in the ways of
the Pharisees, and now finding you in the latter times your condemnation is
justly related in the Scriptures, who go in the way of Cain, and run greedily
after the error of Balaam, as thou may read Jude 4.10, 11. and 2 Timothy 3.2, 3,
4, 5, 6.

Priest. And again thou say that Christ and his Apostles gave strong reasons
for their maintenance, and to prove it; thou brings those Scriptures, Mat.
10.10. Luke 10.7.

Answ. Let all that read these Scriptures judge thee by me to be a liar, who
formerly have testified, that the Scripture was the word of God, and thy rule
and foundation, and now calls it reason, which from reason was never spoken,
but holy men of God spoke them forth, as they were moved by the holy Ghost, now
the Apostle which was as Minister of Christ never took wages of of the world,
neither did he compel them. though to them he preached the Gospel, and though
he robbed other Churches, yet he robbed not the world, neither took he wages of
the world, nor hired with them for a certain time, as thou and thy generation
do, and this was his boasting to cut off offenses, 2 Cor. 13.9, 10, 12. but
with the light of God in the offenses we find you, who take wages of the world
contrary to the Apostles, whose practices judges you to be without their life,
whose entrance unto the Thessalonians, he plainly does declare, that it was
neither for pleasing men, neither of deceit, nor guile, nor a cloak of
covetousness, neither was their Gospel burthensom, as thou may read 1 Thessalonians. 2,
3, 4, 5, 6. contrary to which thou and thy generation art found in the steps of
them, Mark the Perversion Offenses for occasion, these are the Infallible
Reformers.
the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles cried against, as thou may read, Isa.
56. and Ier. 5. and Mic. 3. and Mat. 23. and 2 Pet. 2. and Jude 11. And this is
the Gospel the Apostles preached, which is witnessed by the same Spirit which
to thee is hid, and all thy generations, who out of their steps are found
walking in the steps of the false.

Priest. Again thou say the Apostle intimates that God is mocked, when his
Ministers are not maintained, and thou say that God will not be robbed.

Answ. Here is another of thy lies, who perverts the Apostles words, and art
found adding thy lies to Scripture, when there is not such a word in all the
Apostles words as intimate, but thou and thy generation are seen to be both
thieves and robbers, who enters not in at the door, but climbs up another way,
in your inventions, consequences, and imaginations, which are here plainly seen
and discovered to them that enter in at the door, and for dishonest gain you
destroy Souls, Ezekiel. 22.25, 26, 27. P. 6. 4 to
and as a Troop of Robbers wait for a man, so do the company of Priests murder
by consent, Hosea 6.9. and are found Robbers of God, as the false Prophets
were, who in the time of the Law took tithes, and did not bring them to the
storehouse, as thy generation now do, as thou may read, Mal. 3.8, 9, 10.

Priest. And thou says thy design according to promise, is, to prove the
Scriptures to be the word of God, the only ground of faith, and rule for our
obedience, which thou say thou presented us with, and bids us read it,
examine it, if it be not truth, witness against it by truth, if it be so, as
undoubtedly you will find it truth, as thou say, and so bids us submit to
it, be ruled by it, and undoubtedly our bodies shall be freed from our deserved
Imprisonment.

Answ. We have read it, and examined it, and thee both, and have found thee to
be a liar, and a denyer of the Word, and of the rule, and of the foundation,
which is Christ, and with that which thou calls a rule, and word, and
foundation, art thou judged, and with the light thou art seen to be a wrester
of the Scriptures, and thy Rotten foundation being already to fail thee, The
Holy Scriptures they say are a rotten foundation; this is their Ancient
Testimony from which they have not varied.
for it is among the blind Watchmen and greedy dumb Dogs, and hirelings, and
among the thieves and robbers, and among the Dogs and swine and filthy
dreamers which the Scriptures speaks of, and as for our deserved imprisonment,
here thou liar do we challenge thee and them that imprisoned us, to prove the
breach of any law by us, for they that did imprison us as many can witness,
could not charge us with the breach of any Law; but by their wills to maintain
such dumb shepherds as thou art; for, for the truths sake, which witnesses
against thee and all thy generation do we suffer, for which thou and thy
generation did never suffer imprisonment, nor persecution of the world, for ye
are the world, and the world speaks well of you, and hears you, as it did of
your Fathers the false Prophets, 1 John 4, 5, and Luke 6.26. drunkards swearers
liars and thieves speaks well of you and fights for you, and loves you, and
pleads for you, and there is your fruits and freedom; from our imprisonment
will we never speak for in yielding to thy lies, and false accusations, as is
plainly here laid open.

Priest. And thou say from thy study, January 29.

Answ. Here thy filthy rotten stuff which thou have been such a long time of
gathering together in thy study, its tried and seen to be fuel for the fire,
and thou art seen to study divinations of thy own brain, and to be an inventer
of lies, contrary to Scripture, and where did ever any of the Saints go into a
study, and rake up such filthy stuff, and invent such lies as thou art
disapproved in, and with that which thou calls thy word, thy foundation, and
only rule of obedience. Here let the life of all the holy men of God judge thee
to be both shut out of their life, and out of the Scriptures.

Having returned answer to the former part of thy rotten stuff, P. 7. 4 to.
Sampson Townsend wherein thy lies and deceit is uncovered to all them that
have eyes to see, may see thy nakedness and thy shame laid open: now for the
simple ones sake, which thou by thy lies and divinations makes a prey upon, and
through thy covetousness makes Merchandise of, who pharisee-like would neither
enter into the Kingdom thy self, nor suffer others to enter in; now for their
sakes are we moved to unvail thee and thy deceit, that they that see not might
see thee in thy lies and wresting the Scripture, as thou have also made it
appear in the latter part of thy book; wherein thou say,

Priest. That thou have undertaken against the Quakers these two Propositions,
i. that the Scriptures contained in the Old or New Testament (commonly called
the Bible) is the revealed will and word of God, 2. That the Scripture, which
is the word of God, is the only foundation of our Faith, and only rule for our
obedience, which thou say thou will prove, 1. by Scripture, 2. by Reason,
and thou say that he that will not hear the voice of the Scriptures is an
Infidel, and he that will not hear the voice of reason is a beast.

Ans. We who in scorn by thee and thy generations are called Quakers, do own
Scriptures, but thee we utterly deny for an evil Beast, whose mouth must be
stopped, Tit. i. 10, 11, 12. who in thy filthy reason art going about to
maintain those things which thou can not prove by any plain Scripture, but to
it art found adding in thy reason, and thy invention, and therefore the plagues
that are in it written is thy portion, and the lake, which is the portion of
all liars as thou art, Rev. 21.8. Rev. 22.18, 19.

Priest. Again thou say that the Scriptures ought to convince us as
Christians, reason as rational men.

Answ. They that are Christians do see and comprehend thee, and thy reason, thy
faith, thy obedience, thy rule, thy foundation, to be without the foundation
and the word, which was before thy inventions was, and before Tuball Cain the
inventer thy father was, P. 8. 4 to.
in whose condition thou art, and the word and foundation, and the way, was
before the Beast and false Prophet was, which thou art, Isa. 9.15, 16. and this
rule and foundation and word, did Moses, David, and the rest of the holy men
of God witness, who spoke forth Scripture, which thou calls the word, rule, and
foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11. Psalm. 18.2.31.3. Here thou would make Moses, David,
and the rest of the holy men of God who spoke forth Scripture, blind, like thy
self, both without the word rule, and foundation.

Priest. Now to prove the Scripture the word of God, thou brings Exodus 20.1.
Levit. 10.13. and many other Scriptures thou brings to the same effect, how God
spoke these words.

Answ. Thou blind sot, we challenge thee in the presence of the living God, to
prove in any of these They deny the Scriptures to be the written Word of God.
This is their Ancient Testimony, from which they are not changed; they tell you
so.
Scriptures, that the Scriptures are the written word of God, or else stop thy
mouth thou evil beast, and slow belly, do thou make no difference between the
word and these words? and here again we charge thee to be a liar, and an adder
to Scripture.

Priest. And thou brings these Scriptures Isa. 24.3. and Psalm. 125. and other
Scriptures to the same purpose, how the Lord says, and thus says the Lord,
and Jer. 1.1, 2.4.9. the words of Jeremiah to whom the word of the Lord came.

Answ. And the word of the Lord that came to Joel, Amos, and others, thou
dreamer, does ever Isaiah, Jeremiah, or David, or Joel, or Amos, or any of the
holy men of God, say that the Scripture is the written word, whenas God who is
the word, John 1. spoke these words unto them, whose voice thou never heard,
who spoke unto them before the Letter was written, which is a declaration of
what the word spoke unto them, or was that paper and Ink, or could it be
contained in paper and Ink, which came to the Prophets, whenas Jeremiah says
the word is fire in his heart, and a burning shut up in his bones, and a hammer
that breaks the rocks, Jer. 20.9. Jer. 23.29, 30. and behold I am against the
Prophets says the Lord, that steal my word every one from his neighbors, and
behold I am against the Prophets says the Lord, that use their tongues, and
say he says, and behold I am against them says the Lord, that profess false
dreams and tell them as thou do, and cause my People to err by their lies,
P. 9. 4 to.
and by their lightness, yet I sent them not, nor commanded them, therefore
they shall not profit the people at all says the Lord, and there thou art
among the false Prophets and dreamers, which Jeremiah who witnessed the word,
cried woe against such Pastors as thou art, Jer. 23.1.

Priest. Thou say thou shall not need to mention the sayings and doing of
our Savior Christ, which are frequently recorded in the New Testament, and
hence it is called the word of Christ, and thou brings the Scripture, Coloss.
3.16. let the word of Christ dwell in you.

Answ. Here again we challenge thee to be a liar, and an adder to the
Scripture: do thou make no difference between death and life, for Christ
says, my words gives life, and it was by his word that the dead was raised,
John 11. now that which Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John wrote of Christ, could
not give life, for that is called a Declaration of those things which was
freely delivered among them, Luke 1.1. and that thou calls the word which is
death and kills, as thou may read, 2 Cor. 3. and Paul was a Minister of the
New Testament, and not of the Letter, which thou calls the New Testament: ver.
6. and this word which dwelt in the Saints, they did neither call the Bible nor
the Letter, as thou do, here thou have manifested thy self to be a blind
guide, both ignorant of the Word and the Letter.

Priest. Thou say that it is all one to say the Scripture says, and God
says.

Answ. Thou blasphemous beast, do thou make no difference between the
Scripture and God, or is the Scripture God, God who is the Word; so they do not
distinguish the Father from the Son, i. e. the Second Person of the Trinity.
when the Scripture says God who is the word, was in the beginning, and by him
was all things made, and this was before the Scriptures was written, John 1.1.
which thou would make thy God of, and here let all that reads this see thy
blasphemy.

Priest. Again thou say the word Scripture is put for God speaking in the
Scripture, and thou brings Joshua 1.5.

Answ. Let all that reads that Scripture Judge and condemn thee to be a Liar,
for it speaks not such a word, as God speaking in the Scripture.

Priest. Again the same page thou say, that all the rest that is written in
the volume is but a comment or exposition of those ten precepts.

Answ. Thou diviner, where do thou prove such a Scripture as comment? was
that which the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles spoke out a comment or
exposition? here again we charge thee Priest Townsend, to be an inventer and a
deviser of lies, P. 9. 4 to.
which thou have no Scripture for.

Priest. Again thou say that thus it appears that the Scriptures are the
word of God, because God writ them, and caused them to be written.

Answ. That which is written is the Letter, which is death and kills. 2 Cor.
3.16. but the word is living, Heb. 4.12. there again with the Scipture thou art
disaproved to be a liar.

Priest. Again in another page thou say, that the Scriptures are called the
counsel of God, the will of the Lord, the mystery of Gods will, and thou bring
these Scriptures, Romans 3.2. 1 Pet. 4.11. Acts 20.27. Psalm. 33.11. and Pro.
19.21. Ephesians. 5.17. and to conclude this, thou say that God himself calls
the Scriptures his word, and to maintain that thou brings Zach. 1.6.

Answ. Let all that reads these Here Mr. Townsend is together with the Holy
Scripture, judged and condemned: behold their Ancient Testimony!
Scriptures, see thee to be a perverter of Scripture, and adds thy inventions
to them, for they that spoke forth these Scriptures, knew the Counsel of God,
and the mystery, and the Gospel, which to thee is hid, whom the God of this
world has blinded thy eyes, and out of the mystery and Gospel, and rule, and
foundation, thou art with that which thou calls the only rule, and word, and
foundation, art thou judged, and with light seen and condemned, to be an
inventer of lies and a deceiver of the blind, but no further can thou
proceed, for thy folly shall be made manifest to all men.

Priest. In a second reason of thine; thou say, the antiquity of the
Scriptures do clearly prove them to be of God, for man could never write of
things done before he had a being, but the works of the five first days
Creation, are mentioned in Scripture, but man was not made till the sixth day,
therefore they must needs be the word of God.

Answ. Here thou blind Beast, who art ignorant of God, who makes antiquity as
thou calls it, the perfect knowledge of God, and says that man could not
declare of things before ever he had a being, and so would make people believe
that the Scripture reveal God; thou blind Beast, whether was man, or the
Scriptures first? and whether did God make himself manifest unto? and thou that
say that the Scripture reveal God, thou art a liar, for God revealed himself
to Moses, before the Scripture was written, and Moses was the first penman of
the Scripture, was 14 Generations after the fall, and yet he wrote of things,
before the fall was, and thy father Cain was before Moses was, and yet he knew
no Scripture, and thou that would make the Letter the light and way of knowing
God, are not so much as a Minister of the Letter, and here thou art made
manifest to be in the fall, in the death, which past over all men before Moses
was, and are not come to fee the first Days Work, to see light divided from
darkness, and here let all the Prophets and holy men of God judge thee with the
Light, from which thou art erred, for they wrote of Christ, and saw his day
many Generations before he came in the flesh, and here thy antiquity, and thy
reasons, and the three persons thou dreams of, which thou would divide out of
one, like a Conjurer are all denied, and thou shut up with them in perpetual
darkness for the lake and the pit, for thou have no Scripture that mentions
such things. This is their Ancient Testimony, to damn the Blessed Trinity to
the Pit of Hell.


P. 11. 4 to
Piest. And where thou art telling that the Scripture converts the Soul, and
works Grace, and the opening thereof make hearts to tremble, and says that
Scripture discovers men's thoughts, and makes Laws for them.

Answ. Here thou have made thy self manifest, where did ever any of the holy
men of God say that the Scriptures converts the Soul, or make Laws for men's
thoughts? and what is that which opens the Scripture? or where is it, if the
bare Letter convert the Soul? here thou Priest of Baal, for that is thy name,
thy lies are made manifest and deceits laid open to the children of the Light,
and art seen with the light from which the Scripture was spoken.

Priest. Again thou say the Scripture speaks to all men alike, but thus do
not the word of man, therefore thou say they are the word of God.

Ans. But thou thy self and thy generation are perverters of the Scripture, and
are respectors of persons, for you are called of men Master stands praying in
the Synagogues, has the chiefest places in the assemblies, and the greeting in
the Markets, and are pleading for cap and knee, and says we do not reverence
Magistrates, because we do not put off our hats, and bend our knees, as thou
and the rest of thy generation of Hypocrites do, who have men's persons in
admiration, because of advantage, Jude 16. and this which you calls the word,
speaks not to all men alike, for woe is pronounced in it to such as thou art,
who art found in the steps of the false Prophets and Scribes, and Pharisees,
and goes in the way of Cain, to envy, and after the error of Balaam for gifts
and rewards, which woe was never pronounced to the righteous, and woe unto thee
thou liar, who art a wrester of Scripture to thy own destruction, and art found
with so many Lies, as thou have here uttered.

Priest. In another place thou say no Creature (Angels men or, Devils if all
were put together in one) could ever declare beforehand, what particular person
should be born, and what should be their names, in so many thousands years
before their birth.

Ans. Here thou art taken with another lie, with which thou have stuffed up
this thy confused Book, for both by Angels and Men was Jesus Christ the Son of
God prophesied of Moses, who was many years before Christ came in the flesh,
prophesied of Christ, and said, like unto me will God raise up a Prophet, him
shall the People hear, Mat. 1.17. see if thou can number the year of all these
generations which prophesied of Christ, and when Christ came, he says, before
Abraham was I am, thus art thou known and comprehended with the truth, which
all thy fathers and generations past persecuted, so be ashamed, and stop thy
mouth for ever.

Priest. In that thou calls thy two propositions, 1. thou say the Scriptures
are the means by which faith is wrought, and to prove that ly thou brings, Romans
10.17.

Ans. Shame cover thy face, thou full of rottenness and filthy dreams,
Scriptures not a means to work Faith. This is their Ancient Testimony
where did thou ever read in Scripture that it is the means whereby faith is P.
12. 4 to.
wrought, when that Scripture says, faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word; here thou art deaf, and never heard the word, and thy faith and word is
without, but the word of faith which we preach, is nigh in the heart and mouth,
Romans 10.8. therefore search thou the Scripture with the Saduces who knew not
Christ, for in them thou and thy generation thinks to have eternal life, but ye
will not come unto Christ, that ye may have life, John 5.38, 39, 40.

Priest. Again thou say that the Scripture which thou calls the word, is an
everlasting rule so long as we live on earth. The Scripture, which Mr. Townsend
calls the Foundation of Faith, in the Mire and Dirt.


Ans. Thou blind sot, see thy confusion; can that Letter be everlasting while
we live upon earth? here thou have showed thy reason where it is, that they
that are not stark blind may see thee, thy reason and thy foundation to be in
the mire and dirt, and may see thee to be a senceless natural bruit Beast, who
with thy lies art made to be taken and destroyed, 2 Pet. 2.13.

Priest. And again thou say the most eminent believer sin in many things.

Ans. Here is the end of thy teaching, here is thy rule, and here is thy
foundation, and here is thy obedience, and here is thy fruits, and here is thy
service, who commits Sin, and a Servant to Sin, and free from righteousness,
John 8.24. Romans 16.20. Oh thou blasphemer and slanderer of the just, when will thou cease from thy Lies and Blasphemy, where do or can thou prove such a
Scripture as the most emminent believer, Sin in any things, when the Scripture
says he that believes is born of God, and he that is born of God sins not,
for whosoever sins has not seen him, neither known him, and he that
commits sin is of the Devil, and there is thy condition, and he is thy Father,
who is the Father of all liars as thou art, i. John 3.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Priest. And to conclude thy filthy rotten stuff, thou say they that make
not the word of God the rule for their actions are led either by their own
fancies, or the Devils temptations, or both.

Ans. Thee Priest Townsend art here laid open, and thou art uncovered, and here
thou art found to be a denyer of the word, and rule, and foundation, and thou
art led by thy dreams and fancies, and thy foundation Viz. The Holy Scritures.
is in the dust, and thou art reserved in everlasting chains under darkness,
for everlasting fire, and here thou in all these thy lies, are shut our from
God, and all the Children of God, among the Dogs and Sorcerers, and the Lake
is thy portion, which is the portion of all liars, Jude 6, 7, 8. thus have we
returned a full answer unto thy senceless stuff, and in plainness have we
dealth with thee, and have not flattered thee at all there, call it not
railing, lest thou violate the Scriptures so with the word of truth thou art
tried, and comprehended, and us shall thou witness eternally, when the book of
Conscience comes to be opened, and thou judged out of it, so we remain,

Sufferers for the truth, and witnesses against thee and thy generation. Named
according to the flesh, George Whitehead, Christopher Arkinson, James
Lancaster, Thomas Symonds.


A Cutting Switch FOR THE Wounded Snake.
I have used Similitudes, Hos. 12.10.
READER,
BY the Word Snake, which I use by way of Metaphor, (alluding to the Quakers
obscure way of Reasoning, evermore hiding themselves in the dark, by their
Ambiguous and Doubtful Way of expressing themselves in their Unintelligible Way
of Writing) is what I call Quakerism; and having taken this Snake, Quakerism,
out of the Grass, and laid her on the Table, and taken out her Sting, I am now
coming to exercise my Switch, which I lately twisted out of Jos-Wyeth's Hand,
as David did the Sword out of the Hand of that uncircumcised Philistine, Goliath
of Gath, which he designed to wound the Israelites with; for this Joseph, like
blind Hob, playing at Blind-Man's-Buff, smiting every Man that passed by,
without all Fear or Respect, being Fool hardy, I was resolved to unarm him, and
take his Weapon from him; for like Goliah's Sword, there is none like it: And
whereas this Water-Snake has swam over Sea, I am minded to send this Switch
thither also, that so wherever her Spawn is gone rattling up and down in
other Nations, and Plantations, this Switch may pursue her, and deal severely,
or cuttingly, with her, for she has done much Harm.

And now I shall tell what is the Cause of this Snake's Fury, which is, as on
the Title Page of this Third Part, and where you may see she put forth her
Sting against Mr. Townsend; for that he, like other Christian Champions, went
to prove the Holy Scriptures to be the Word of God; for this the Rattle-Snake
came out of his Thicket, and flung out his Deadly Poison at Mr. Townsend, thus,
Ishmael and his Mother cast out among the Beasts, etc. calling him a Dreamer, a
Deceiver, a Witch, a Liar, a blind Guide, without Christ and his Knowledge, an
Enemy of God, an Antichrist, a blind Sot, a sottish blind Guide, shut up in
perpetual Darkness, Blasphemous Beast, as in P. 7, 8, 10, 14, 17, 25, 29. Thus,
Reader, having showed thee the Cause of the Dragon's Fury, and the Ground why
he threw out his Floods of Malice against the Gospel Ministers, I shall next
show thee in short a few Words to Confirm what I have said, and that out of the
Snake's own Mouth, as in P. 14, 17, 24. first, That the Scriptures are not the
written Word of God, but a Rotten Foundation, not the Means to work Faith in
the Heart: And because Mr. Townsend, in Opposition to the Quakers Heretical
Doctrine, had proved the Scriptures to be the written Word of God, and as such,
a good Foundation for our Faith in our Crucified Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
and the Means to work Faith in our Hearts, which works by Love, Oh how did Geo.
Whitehead and his Partners hiss like Snakes, sting like Adders, and roar like
Dragons, calling him, as before noted, Dreamer, Deceiver, Witch, Liar, blind
Guide, Enemy to God, Antichrist, Sot, blind Sot, Blasphemous Beast, shut up in
perpetual Darkness, with other the like Virulent Railing, and Hellish Malice!
And this, Reader, is a Map of the Original Controversy, between the Clergy and
the Quakers, for with them the Scriptures are Death, Dust, Carnal and Killing,
Serpents Meat, Beastly Ware, a Rotten Foundation: For alas they have no need of
the Scripture; with them the Holy Scriptures are needless, as I shall just now
show.

See Isaac Pennington's Book, styled, Some things relating to the Royal
Society, etc. p. 7. Now observe the Difference between the Religion which God
has taught us, and led us into, and the Religious of all Men upon the Earth
besides; our Religion stands wholly out of that, which all their Religions
stands in; their Religion stands in the Comprehension, in a Belief of a Literal
Relation or Description, our Religion stands in a Principle, which changes the
Mind, -- where we hear the Voice, and see the express Image of the Heavenly
One, [i. e. God] and knows things not from an Outward Relation; yea, here (say
they) we must profess, that we so know things, that we are fully satisfied
about them, and could not doubt concerning them, though there had Never been Word
or Letter written of them, etc. And to this agrees the Doctrine of Edward
Buroughs in his Epistle to Fox's Great Mystery, p. 17. and many other Places I
could mention, but I study Brevity.

But, Reader, I have not done with this Snake, but must have the other Blow at
her, and smite off her Head, lest she get into the King's High Court of
Parliament, and do mischief, for she is mischievous Beast, and full of deadly
Poison, and begins to stink all the Nation over; and the Cause why I shall give
this Mortal Wound to this Rattle Snake, which so often changes her Skin, while
she is the same, with respect to her Venomous Nature, that she was at her first
Rise, Anno 1650. I say the Cause is this: Whereas Mr. Townsend of Norwich
having proved the Scriptures to be (as indeed they are) the written Word of
God, and a good Foundation for our Faith, and a great Means to work Faith in
our Hearts; all which George Whitehead and his Partners opposed with great
Vigor, he, Mr. Townsend, having first proved these things, he then goes on to
prove a Trinity of Three distinct Persons in the Godhead, according to the
Faith of all sound Christians; and for Proof thereof he does not only bring
Scripture, but many strong Reasons, as well from Antiquity as of later Date. To
all which George Whitehead, etc. from the Spirit of their Lord in them, as in
p. 22. And here thy Antiquity, and thy Reasons, and the Three Persons thou
dreams of, which thou would divide out of one, like a Conjurer, are all denied,
and thou shut up with them in perpetual Darkness, for the Lake, and the Pit,
etc. adding by way of Corroberation respecting Mr. Townsend, p. 26. thus: Thou
(Townsend) art Reserved in Everlasting Chains, under Darkness, for Everlasting
Fire, -- shut out from God among the Dogs and Sorcerers.

Having by this time not only discovered the Snake, but given her a deadly
Blow, I shall next show, that the Quakers, respecting their Principles, are the
same that ever they were; only I am in Hopes they shall never do so much Hurt
in a Hundred Years, as they have done in Fifty, the time of their date: The
Sting of Quakerism being taken out, and the Bowels thereof ripped up, and their
Inside turned Outward, by many Infallible Proofs out of their Impious Books,
especially by Reprinting one of them; but let us not be too secure, lest the
deadly Wound which she has received should be healed; and my Counsel is, that
as Persecution never did Good, so may it not be used amongst Christians; but
yet a good Expedient is very proper, which is to have them examined, whether
these things be so or no; and if what has been objected against them be proved
upon them, let them be obliged to Retract and Condemn these their Ancient
Blasphemous and Heretical Books and Pamphlets, which have poisoned many
Thousands of otherwise well-meaning People; and as this will be easy, so will
it be one effectual Means to stop the Gangrene of this Pestilential Disease,
and this will be no Persecution.

POSTSCRIPT.
AND to show that the Quakers are the same still, notwithstanding their
contrary Testimonies, I shall recite some few Passages out of their Writings,
viz.

I. In their Yearly Epistle, 1696. We cannot (say they) but recommend unto you
(our dear Brethren) the holding up the Holy Testimony of Truth, which has made
us to be a People, and that in all Parts of it Then in Damning the Blessed
Trinity.
, for Truth is one.

II. The Quakers cleared, etc. p. 7. God is the same, Truth is the same, his
People the same, and their Principles the same.

III. Their Primitive Christianity, etc. Printed School. p. 6. Our Principles are
now no other than what they were when we were first a People.

IV. They have inserted a long Paragraph in the Post-Man, Numb. 568. saying.
The Quakers not questioning but to acquit their Ancient Friends and their
Writings, not being Conscious of deviating in any one Point of Doctrine from
what they first held And what they held in 1655. G. W.'s Book Ishmael gives a
Sample, for they are all of a Piece.
.

V. But Jesuit-like G. W. thus says in his Count. Conv. p. 72. I may (says he)
see Cause otherwise to word the Matter, and yet our Intentions be the same, etc.

FINIS.
A Reply to a Book, Entitled, A Defense of an Apology for the Quakers, in
Answer to a Book, Entitled, Quakerism Exposed, etc. (wrote by Fran. Bugg.) Or
some Papers delivered to the King and Parliament. PART III.
I Have read and considered this Book of John Field's, A Defense, etc. in
Answer to the Books and Papers aforesaid; but how far his Book answers his
Titlte, will best be understood, by comparing both: For in J. Feild's Book, of
32 Pages in Quarto, I find but 35 Lines of mine cited, which is not one Page of
64 of mine in Octavo, and that not pag'd, and thereby difficult for his Readers
to find, in order to compare the Books; a right Trick of a Quaker. Now how this
can rightly be called an Answer, is a Paradox to me; but however, an Answer
they must have, though nothing almost to the purpose, and then tell their poor
Hearers Fr. Bugg's Book is answered; Ay, that it is; nay, and repeatedly too,
though I do not know of one single Book of mine so answered by the Quakers, but
that they have left untouched the greatest Part of the Charges objected against
them, and Six or Seven Books of mine never so much as pretended to be answered.
Oh the Polacy and Deceit of the Ringleaders of this Sect! And this has
occasioned me to give and take this Advice from a wise and prudent Caution, in
a Book, Entitled, The Missionaries Arts, etc. wrote against the Jesuits,
Printed 1668. p. 32. viz. To distrust every thing they say. For as the Learned
Dr. Stillingfleet, late Bishop of Worcester, in his Discourse of the Idolatry
of the Church of Rome, etc. p. 282. very well observes, that they are as like,
as if the Quakers and the Jesuits were Children of one Father, and brought
forth by one Mother, even Mystery Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, and Cage of
every Unclean and Hateful Bird; His Words are these, viz. Any who compares
them, ( i. e. Jesuits and Quakers) would imagine the Life of Ignatius Loyola
had been their great Exemplar: I know not (said the Bishop) whether any of that
Innocent and Religious. Order or Jesuits had any Hand in forming this new
Society (of Quakers) among us, (as has been frequently suggested) but if one
may guess the Father by the Child's Likeness, Ignatius Loyola, the Founder of
the Jesuits, was at least the Grandfather of the Quakers, etc. And as I do
believe the recited Caution, To distrust every thing they (i. e. Jesuits) say,
it is as applicable to the Quakers; and to demonstrate this, let us but observe
how frequent it is with them to blame their Opponents with splitting Sentences,
mincing, mangling and curtailing, whilst themselves are ten times more guilty;
for instance, I find a Passage in my Book, Quakerism Exposed, etc. p. 27, 28.
4thly, That you (Quakers) value the Scriptures above any Books in the World,
This is false with a Witness, when you in Print tell us, we may as well burn
the Bible as your Writings, Truths Defense, p. 2, 104. calling the Scriptures
Dust, Death, Serpents Meat, Beastly Ware, and that Preaching out of them is
Conjuration. And G. Whitehead tells us in his Book, Truth defending the
Quakers, etc. p. 7. That what is spoken by the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as
great Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and greater: And many of
your Books (nay, even that) are said to be given forth from the Spirit of
Truth, the Holy Ghost, and from the Mouth of the Lord; how then do you value
the Scriptures above any Books in the World? But as Solomon said, Prove. 26.3. A
Whip for the Horse, a Bridle for the Ass, and a Rod for the Fool's Back: And so
you must give me Leave to whip this J. Field for his deep Hypocrisy and
Deceit, and I wish it may do him Good; what! to pretend that the Quakers value
the Bible above all Books, then consequently above their own. This is such a
Lie, that it stabs it self, when you exalt and value your own as of greater
Authority, and as such, are commanded by your Teachers to read them in your
Meetings, whilst you never read, nor by your Teachers exhorted to read, one
Chapter of the Old or New Testament in your Religious Meetings, (if such I may
call them) since you were a People; neither is it agreeable to your Ancient
Testimony. Nay, farther I am fully persuaded, That should the Government think
fit, for a Proof of your Sincerity herein, to enjoin you to read a Chapter of
the Bible, at the beginning of your Meetings, (I mean, by such of your Teachers
as can read a Chapter, for many of them cannot) you would be so far from
submitting to Authority, that you would first go to Jayl, and then call it
Persecution, and Record it as such to Posterity: But would it therefore ever
the more be so? I true not, since it was the Practice of the Jewish, as well as
the Christian Churches, in all Ages of the World, etc.

Now in Answer to this long Paragraph, John Field in his Defense, etc. p. 7.
This Fran. Bugg says is false with a witness, and so you must give me Leave to
whip John Field for his deep Hypocrisy and Deceit; what! to pretend that the
Quakers value the Bible above all Books, then consequently above their own,
this is such a Lie, that it stabs it self, etc.

This, Reader, is all he recites, neither does he go about to Refute my Reasons
for what I said; nay, nor so much as mention them. How then can this be an
Answer? Only he re-asserts in the same Page, saying, I do affirm that the
Quakers always had, and still have a high Esteem, and true Value for the Holy
Scriptures, etc. But this is his own bare Ipse Dixit, without any Refutation
of, or once reciting my Arguments for what I said; and therefore this Tool, I
am loath to say Fool, must yet be more scourged for his deep Deceit and
Hypocrisy.

And therefore Christian Reader, I beg of you to dwell a little here, and to
consider of the Quakers way of answering Books; you see my Charge, and how I
proved it, both from Matter of Fact, and Demonstration; first, They teach the
Scriptures are Death, Dust, Serpents Meat, Beastly Ware, etc. not a Word of it
Denied or Refuted. Again, That Preaching out of them is Conjuration, not at all
by him denied. Again, And that by G. Whitehead's Doctrine, That their Sayings,
from their Spirit of Truth, is of greater Authority than the Bible; not a
Syllable of it Denied or Refuted. Again, You hear they command their Disciples
to Read their Own Epistles in their Meetings for Divine Worship; not a Word of
it denied or justified. Again, That they never, since they were first a People,
did so much as read any one Chapter in the Bible in their Religious Meetings;
which if they had such an high Esteem, and true Value for the Scriptures, even
above theit own Books and Epistles, they surely would, or else they are very
Hypocrites indeed, if they will not read, and recommend to be read in their
Meetings, to their People, that which is best, most esteemed, and of highest
Value, yet you see he cannot say that they do, or ever did read a Chapter in
such their Meetings. Now whether this Tool Field does not deserve to be
severely lashed, as well as his Tutor Geo. Whitehead, in this black Art, let
the Reader judge.

Thus much then as a Proof, First, Of their not citing the Substance of their
Opponent's Position, but by picking Sentences, and breaking them in pieces,
thereby marring the Sense. Secondly, That the Quakers are guilty of the several
things therein charged, else J. Field (who has a Fund to support him in his
Charge of Printing) would not so silently pass by all those several Charges,
without a Vindication of his dear Friends; and this being a Figure of all their
Answers, I shall pass by many things of the like Nature, and apply my self next
to their Sufferings, That being the best Flower in their Garden, and in which
they most of all glory; much Good may it do them, since they bring most of it
upon themselves, by their obstinately adhering to their blind Guides and the
Dictates of their Erroneous Consciences, which has befaln them thorough their
Contempt and Neglect of adhering to the Rule of the Sacred Word of God; I mean
the Writings of the Holy Prophets and Apostles, and the Practice of the
Primitive Saints and Martyrs in all Ages. Again,

A Defense, etc. p. 21. A Brief Abstract of some Sufferings of the People
called Quakers, given to Confront Francis Bugg 's Diminutive Account, etc.

Reply, I find of late some Alteration in the Quakers Arrogant Style touching
themselves, it formerly was generally thus, The People of God called Quakers,
or Some Principles of the Elect People of God called Quakers, or from the
People of the Lord called Quakers, but now of late they are come a Step lower,
viz. The People commonly called Quakers, or, The People called Quakers: I hope
the Sermon I prepared for the Quakers (which I took out of their Writings, with
no little Study and Pains) have done them some Good, see Pilg. Prog. p. 108, to
127. It was a long Sermon, I confess, but in regard it turn to a good Account,
I think not my labor vain. But why is my Account of their Sufferings
diminutive? Were they not Sufferings? Yea, else they would not have recorded
them; were they then not recoraed? Yea, I took them out of their Chronicle, and
told them both Book and Page: Well, what then? Oh! but they were of the least
Size: No matter for that, if Sufferings, then Meritorious; else why were they
so carefully Collected, and put in Order, even to a Row of Pins, a Child's
Biggen, a Child's Double Clout, a Woman's Cross-cloth, a Nightcap, a
Dung-Fork, and the like; fit to be put into their Martyrology. But to deal
plainly, I question the truth of them; and much more the truth of this
Abstract: For to me they appear like Fox's Miracles in his Journal, Published
Thirty or Forty Years after they are said to be wrought: And no Body can tell
me where, not when, nor the Persons Names Cured, or any Witnesses to attest
them. Even so are the Sufferings of this Abstract. Nor is their one Justices
Warrant cited; nor any formal Trial of any one of these Sufferers brought
forth, to show whether they suffered for the Name of Jesus, or for
Righteousness sake? Still, like Fox's Miracles, never an one of which are said
to be wrought in the Name of Jesus; but only in his own Name, and by his own
Power; like Simon Magus, whom the Samaritans Adored, even as the Poor
Infatuated Quakers Adore this Fox: They (the Samaritans) called him (Simon
Magus) the Power of God; so do the Quakers call Fox; and that his Kingdom is
Established in Righteousness; and that of the increase thereof there is no End.
And for these Reasons, these Sufferings ought to be, even as Fox's Miracles are
(and thatby many of the Quakers too) rejected, and held as Fabulous as the
Papists Legend. And now, as a further Demonstration, that this Abstract, with
all its Appendices, ought to be rejected, and held as a Fabulous Story, I shall
give Twelve Reasons in order to Confront John Feild's magnifying their
Sufferings; which can be for no other Reason than for which they at first
Record them; that is, Pride and Ostentation. And my Reasons shall be grounded
upon such a bottom, as all the Quakers that will see with their own Eyes, and
read in the Quakers Books, must say Amen to; even upon that lying Spirit which
has entered all their Inspired Prophets. And if they can tell 12 Lies, they may
tell 12000 Lies; and then what Credit is to be given either to the Miracles of
Fox, or the Sufferings of the Quakers?

LIE 1. In that they teach by their Books, That their Sufferings are greater,
and more unjust, than the Sufferings in the Days of Christ, his Apostles, the
Ten Persecutions, or any time since. Burrough's Works, p. 273.

LIE 2. (That Sam. Cater, one of their Wordy-windy Teachers, said, and got it
recorded, That he suffered Twenty Pound, when he did not suffer Twenty
Farthings.

LIE 3. In that G. Fox, their Apostle, and High Priest of their Profession,
said, He was covered from the World; and that the World neither knew Him, nor
his Name; when there was not Ten Men in this Kingdom, whose Names were better
known. See their Book, Several Petitions Answered, p. 30.

LIE 4. In that they teach, saying, HE that HAS the same Spirit that raised
Jesus from the Dead, is EQUAL with God. Saul 's Errand to Damasscus, p. 8.

LIE 5. In that they teach, That Geo. Fox was before Languages were. See the
Introduct. to their Battledoor, in Folio.

LIE 6. In that they teach, That the Thundering Voice answered Geo. Fox, at his
Trial in Lancaster Assizes, as in p. 21. of his Book, (and which the Quakers
have left out of his Journal) Saying, I have Glorified thee, and will Glorify
thee again: And immediately his Head and Ears was filled with Glory. Thus do
they vye it with Christ, not only in saying their Sufferings are greater than
his, his Apostles, and all the Martyrs; but as there was a Voice from Heaven,
from God the Father, speaking to God the Son, or Second Person in the Trinity;
saying, I have Glorifed thee, and will (after the state of Humiliation was
past) Glorify thee again.

LIE 7. In that Fox, your Apostle, said, He saw a Pool of Blood, and a Channel
of Blood, in the Town of Litchfield; when there was not a Drope of Blood, much
less a Channel. See his Journal, p. 53. And the Young Prophets believe him,
else they would not have Printed it after his Death in his Journal.

LIE 8. In that William Mead, the great Quaker, told William Harris, That this
Journal of Fox is a better Book than the Bible.

LIE 9. In that G. Fox says, and the Quakers believe it, else they would not
have Printed it in his Journal, p. 47. viz. That he saw the Heavens open, (as
St. Stephen did) nor that the Quakers had seen David's Sepulcher, so many
Thousand Miles off England, as Fox say they did. See Truth's Defense, alias,
the Fountain of Lies and Blasphemies.

LIE 10. In that Geo. Whitehead teach, in his Book, Truth Defending the
Quakers, p. 7. That what is now spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, meaning
the Quakers) is of greater Authority than the Holy Scriptures.

LIE 11. In that Father Penn in Print Teach, (and whom Geo. Whitehead
vindicates therein; Truth and Innocence Vindicated, etc. p. 52.) That the
Person that Suffered (at Jerusalem) was properly the Son of God, we (Quakers,
says he) utterly deny. See his Serious Apology, etc. p. 146.

LIE 12. In that the Quakers teach, That the Name Jesus and Christ belong to
every Believer, as well as to the Head: See Pennington's Questions to
Professors, etc. p. 27. When the Lie is so manifest, as that the Name Jesus and
Christ do not belong to Geo. Whitehead, nor Will. Penn, so well as it did
belong to the Person that Suffered at Jerusalem, which the Quakers utterly deny
to be the Son of God: And if not to them too, much less to the Quakers of a
lower Form, whom yet they account Believers; yea, the only Church of Christ:
And that they may have full Tale, I Will give them a Baker's Dozen of Lies to
confront their dubious and unintelligible Abstract.

LIE 13. They teach, Tht there is no Salvation out of the true Church; and that
the Quakers are this true Church: And also that in their Church there is no
Tares, nor Hypocrites; See Josiah Coal's Whore unvailed, First Impression, p.
16, 18, 40, 41, 43. And R. Farnsworth's, A Rod to drive out the Wild Boars,
etc. Printed 1655. p. 13. And to prove this a loud Lie, see the Cage of Unclean
Birds, in my Pil. Prog. cap. 14. p. 127, to 145.

LIE 14. The Quakers say, They are resolved to Love their Enemeis, and Pray for
their Adversaries; And for proof of this pretense, see John Feild's Defense,
etc. p. 11, 19. Saying, I did not say, that Francis Bugg was like Judas,
(Contradictory to the stream of the whole Gang) or that Haman and Judas his End
might be his; for I pray God it may not -- We are resolved to love our Enemeis,
Bless them that Curse us, do Good to, and Pray for them that Persecute us etc.
Oh! John, as this is contrary to thy Natural Temper, so it is to the Spirit of
Quakerism; else you are changed, and not the same that ever you were. No, John,
I take this as a Piece of Flattery, a sudden Mood, a Fit that will over, and be
gone presently. Nay, John is yet more kind, (for I Will give the Devil his due)
p. 11. ibid. I am persuaded (the Quakers) never designed (Fran. Bugg) any harm:
O! John, I see thy Cloven Foot; and will keep out of harms way as near as I
can; and therefore D. do thy worst,

But to prove this a Lie, spoken in Hypocrisy, to glos over their Malicious
Spirit, which is the most revengeful of the Seven Evil Spirtis which possesses
the Leaders of this Sect; and which is as contrary to their Ancient Principles
as Light is contrary to Darkness; see their great Apostle Fox's Book, Truth's
Defense, etc. p. 15. who writing against Comelfeild a Minister, and being
unwilling to unbosome himself at that time (a fault they are seldom guilty of)
gave him this assurance, touching praying for their Enemies, viz. No Prayers
can we send to thee, but for thy Destruction, thou Man of Sin, and Enemy of
Christ, etc. This is according to their Ancient Principles; and shall I think
they are changed? No, not a tittle; they tell us so: And they do not only Pray
for the Destruction of their Adversaries, as you have heard; but if their
Governors do not please them to a Hair's Breadth, they will not mention them in
their Prayers to their God; (no matter indeed whether they do or no, for the
late King James II. for whom they mos Prayed, his Reign was the shortest Lived)
for Oliver Cromwell, whom they often saluted with their Familiar Appellation of
Dear Friend, Noble Oliver, and the like Flatteries; yet because he turned them
out of the Army, and would nto suffer them to be Justices of the Peace
forsooth, Thee and Thou, by Yea and Nay, grew angry and pettish, and would no
more mention him in their Prayers to God, than now they do his present Majesty;
as may be seen by Edward Burrough's Book in Quarto, Printed 1656. Good Counsel
and Advice rejected, p. 15. And these things are not right, that such who have
been Faithful in their Trust for many Years, and hazarded Life and Liberty for
Conscience sake, which they cannot now Possess; but are cast out for the
exercise of their pure Consciences; consider of it, when such are cast out of
their Places, p. 16. of Judicatories in thy Government, and out of thy Armies;
for I know the Lord has Cursed them (the King and Royal Party) and thou have
had Dominion given thee of God to break them in Pieces: And what thou have done
their King, (i. e. King Charles II.) should not be reckoned against thee by the
Lord, if thou art Faithful to what he requires of thee By the Quaker Prophets,
then they would Acquit the Murder.
p. 20. Though we the People of God, do not Envy thy Person nor Government; --
Yet, Friend, the want of our Prayers to God for thee, is worse to thee than all
the Plotting of all wicked Men: And how can we mention Nor do they ever mention
K. Will. III. in their Prayers.
thee in our Prayers to God for thee, except it be to be delivered from thee,
etc. Here is then no Penny (or what is Equivolent) no Pater Noster, for either
Priest or Governors. See Pil. Prog. p. 78. for more of this. And that they
valued themselves as Members of the Army, see their Book styled, A Dispute with
the Teachers of Chesterfeild, etc. Printed 1655. p. 16. It is known (say they)
that most of us have adventured Life and Estate for the present Power (or
Government); and and at that Day their Cry ran strong against the Clergy and
the King; see their Book, News coming out of the North, p. 19. So you ( i. e.
the Priests) must be cut down with the same Power that cut down the King ( i.
e. the Sword) who Reigned over the Nation, whose Family was a Nursery for the
Papists and Bishops: But the Beast (that is, the Government and the false
Prophets ( i. e. the Priesthood) is standing still. -- The same Teachers are
standing still, that was in the time of the King and Bishops. p. 31. Slay Beal,
Balaam must be Slain, all the Hirelings must be turned out of the Kingdom, etc.
Now I would ask this Knotty Question of John Field, and his Tutor George
Whitehead, Whether this was not raising the Monster Persecution? And do desire
them not to pass silently over it, as they do most of the Charge Objected
against them; but in all Friendliness desire their Answer by Yea, or by Nay.

But I cannot forget John Feild's smooth pretense; That the Poor Quakers think
or design me no Harm, but Pray for me; and do not mean to compare me to Judas;
no, by no means; though it be their Common Text, when they are not able
otherwise to answer me: And for a proof thereof, see their Book, A Defense of
the People called Quakers, etc. By John Fiddiman, Rich. Ashly, and four more;
where, on the Title Page they thus say,

And Judas Iscariot, one of the Twelve, went unto the Chief Priests to betray
him unto them:

And when they heard it, they were glad, and Promised to give him Money; and he
sought how he might conveniently betray him, Mark. 14.10, 11.

Ay; but says John Field in his Defense of his Apology, etc. p. 11. But I did
not say that Francis Bugg was like Judas, or that Haman and Judas's End might
be like his, for I pray God it may not; I am persuaded the Quakers never
designed him any Harm. Page 19. 'We are resolved to Love our Enemies.

And yet the very same J. Field has this Passage himself in his Epistle to the
Reader, i. e. And when Satan entered into Judas, he went his way, and communed
with the Chief Priests and Captains how he might betray him; and they were
glad, and covenanted to give him Money. Thus then, though not so broad-fac'd as
the former, yet it is their common Theme or Text, That any one who opposes and
discovers their Errors, is Judas, and themselves Jesus; especially when they
know not otherwise how to defend themselves. But though they pretend to be all of
one Mind and Judgment, and to give forth their Books from the Spirit, or Light
within, yet as harmonious as Harp and Harrow, and agree in concord as Light
with Darkness. For, says Fiddeman and Ashby, etc. p. 1. And the Priests
Mercenary Agent Bugg; again, p. 21. Francis Bugg their Mercenary Agent. Now as
this agrees with the two Verses in the Title Page, and do show they meant
Francis Bugg to be Judas; yet smooth. J. Field he denies any such Deisign, he
loves me, and prays for me, as if he were as real a Christian as he is a
Quaker. But to make it yet more plain, if more can be, see their Letter to the
Clergy, etc. which the Quakers printed under the Sham-Name of a Member of the
Church of England, and Published many Thousands of them. Nay, so fond they were
of it, that they read it in their Meetings in some Places. Oh! an Excellent
Epistle, and which in my small Tract, entitled, The Christian Ministry of the
Church of England Vindicated, etc. I have so replied to it, as since I have
heard no News of it. Well, but let us hear whether by them two Texts on their
Title Page, Mark 14.10, 11. they do not mean Francis Bugg, as John Field
pretends.

A Letter to the Clergy, etc. p. 6. The High Priests had a Judas at Work for
Money, to betray Christ into their Hands for Money. Have not you a Judas at
Work now for Money? Pray where is the difference between these two Traitors?
Why the difference is twofold; the first was a Judas, the latter a Bugg.
Secondly, Judas had thirty Pieces of Silver, which was paid by the High
Priests; the latter had his Money, not only from the High Priests, but a
Recommendation also.

I am the larger herein, to show John Field the Nature of this Beast that
carries their Bell, and how it suits with the Spirit of Quakerism: Only this
Defense being designed for the Hands of some Persons which he thought might
resent it, and therefore he is now for not calling F. B. Judas; no, by no
means; but for Praying for him: Which being rightly interpreted, is as Fox
Prayed for the Priests, namely, for my Destruction: But I thank God, I fear not
their Curses, nor regard their Pharisaical Prayers: And this being as great a
Lie as most of the other, I shall therewithal conclude this Head, thereby
confronting John Feild's Abstract of Sufferings.

But J. Field proceeds in his Defense, etc. Now if he prove that those
Ministers of that Age, who entered into a Solemn League and Covenant against
Prelacy, Kingly Office, House of Lords, etc. were God's Heritage, etc.

Reply. I grant, that if any of the Ministry did so, (for he names none) they
were so far in the wrong; yet with this difference, The Quakers in those Days
did thus much, and much more, and that as Prophets of the most High God, and
they tell us they are still the same, Print and Reprint their Books which so
teach. But the Public Ministers, if any such did so, they did not pretend they
were led thereunto by the Eternal Spirit, that they are the same still, and
their Principles now no other than they were then: They now are obedient to the
King's Laws, they have by their joining in the Association, declared him
Rightful and Lawful King, they Pray for him in their Assemblies: But the
Quakers have in their Books of Divine Authority, as they boast, Anathematized
all Kings since the Days of the Apostles, as Apostates, and Spiritual
Egyptians: That a Parliament chosen by the most Voices, were not like to act
for God, or the Good of his People: And they tell us they are the same still,
only they word the Matter otherwise.

I grant the Dissenters then were against the Bishops, yet not like the
Quakers; for, in their Declaration recited by the Quakers, they were for
preserving their Persons from all Violence and Injuries, and for Liberty of
Conscience, though with some Restriction: But the Quakers, as in Burrough's
Works, p. 618. and in R. Hubberthorn's Works, p. 229. assaulted this
Declaration, saying; What are you about to make a League and Covenant with
Antichrist? Do you look upon them (i. e. the Clergy) to be Ministers of Christ,
or of Antichrist? What are you now for tolerating Episcopacy? And if
Episcopacy, why may not Popery be tolerated, and the like? No, nothing but
Blood, and Slaughter, Banishment, and the utter Extirpating of the Clergy,
would satisfy their blood-thirsty and malicious persecuting Spirit: As in
Fox's Book stilled, New coming up out of the North, p. 31. So you must be cut
down with the same Power that cut down the King, whose Family was a Nursery for
Papists and Bishops; the same Teachers are standing that were in the time of
the King, and the same that were in the time of the Bishops. -- Sound the
Trumpet, sound an Alarm; call up to the Battle, gather together for the
Destruction, draw the Sword, hew down all fruitless Trees which cumber the
Ground, cleanse the Land from Filthiness, slay Baal, Balaam must be slain; all
the Hirelings must be turned out of the Kingdom, etc. This was in Oliver's
Time, but you tell us you are the same still, and your Actions manifest the
same. For though you held in Oliver's Time a Mock-Court, wherein you Tried all
the Clergy, and Condemned them; yet when in 1672. you reprinted the Works of
your Prophet Borough, you revived your Trial, and reprinted the same, as in
page 223. Viz. A Just and Lawful Trial of the Teachers and Ministers of this
Age, (1672.) by a perfect Proceeding against them; and they are righteously
Examined, justly Weighed, truly Measured, and Condemned, to be contrary to all
the Ministers of Christ in former Ages, and to agree and concur with all the
false. Prophets and Deceivers; and being brought to the [Quakers] Bar of
Justice, these Things are truly charged, and legally proved upon them, and
found Guilty, etc. I need not add the Trial, And yet G. W. say^ he was n^^
skilled i^ Law-terms, the more Fo^^ he.
the Title of the Book setting forth the Quakers Verdict (where my Lob Chief
Justice Borough, the Quaker-Prophet, was both Judge, Witness, Jury and
Executioner) is enough to set forth their presumptuous, unwarrantable,
arbitrary, and extrajudicial Proceedings, not only against 12, but 1200
Persons. And that it may further appear, that though this Quaker-Court was first
erected (to show what they would be at, had they Power) in O. Cromwell's Time;
yet in 1672, they to set forth his Skill in Law-Terms, reprinting the same
Trial as a Monument of his Righteous Judgment; and that he might make Work on it
to some purpose, in p. 273. he joined with the Jews, and all the persecuting
Heathen Emperors, against Christ, his Apostles and Martyrs; saying, That the
Sufferings of the Quakers were greater, and more unjust than the Sufferings of
Christ, his Apostles and Martyrs, etc. But still, as one Demonstration more
(though I could give twenty) that it was not the Ministers in Oliver's Time
only that the Quakers thus Arraigned, Judged, and Condemned, as John Field
would insinuate, but also King Charles the Second his Reign; see W. Smith,
another of their Preachers, in his Works printed Anno 1668, p. 161. viz. A
General Summons from the Authority of Truth, to all Ecclesiastical Courts and
Officers, etc.

By which we may see their arrogant Boldness, thus to Summons, Judge, Try, and
Condemn, not only the Clergy, but all Courts Ecclesiastical and Officers;
notwithstanding they were Dissenters, a poor illiterate People, that as
Buroughs tells us, (in his Epistle to Fox's Mystery) they lay in Barns (like
Gypsies:) See then the Impudence of these Proud, Pragmatical Quaker-Prophets.

In my Book Quakerism Exposed, etc. there is this Passage, page 28. Now though I
profess my self a Member of the Church of England, I have often, and do now
again tell you, that I am against Persecution; and will add, That Persecution
for the Name of Jesus, or for Righteousness sake, is a Badge of a false Church;
of which your Schism in Pensilvania has given a Demonstration; and had you
Power in your Hand, (which God grant you may not) I doubt not but we should
soon feel your Little Finger as heavy as ever you felt the Parliament's Loins;
witness your Indicting me in the Old Bailey, your Persecuting G. Keith: But I
hope all Suffering is not Persecution. Shall Men Fire Houses, and Poison
Rivers, and not be controlled, limited, nay, punished, if they will follow
their own Light, blind Zeal and Imaginations? In like manner, such as poison
the Streams of the Christian Religion, subvert the Faith, undermine
Christianity, broach and maintain damnable Errors, denying the Lord that
bought them, as you have done; I hope then it is not raising Persecution, to
have you Examined, and your Errors censured; which is the main thing you fear,
whilst you would make the World believe you fear Persecution.

In answer to this, John Field, in his Defense, etc. p. 3. recites thus much,
viz. I do profess my self a Member of the Church of England, I have often, and
do again tell you that I am against Persecution; and will add, That Persecution
for Righteousness sake, is a Badge of a False Church, etc. But these Words
(with many others, as by comparing you may see) for the Name of Jesus he has
dropped, as not for his turn. And in this, though John Field was a Tool, yet he was
no Fool; for he knew very well, that no Quakers ever suffered in England for
the Name of Jesus: Neither was there (in their time) ever known, that an Act
Parliament was made, or a Justice's Warrant ever signed, to persecute any Man
for the Name of Jesus. And I now anew do declare, That I am against
Persecution, and do refer the Reader to my Book, The Picture of Quakerism drawn
to the Life, etc. page 73, to 125. for my Judgment in that Case.

But there is one Passage I may not let slip in Geo. Whitehead's Truth and
Innocence Vindicated, etc. p. 44. Such Records are not intended to make the
Governors nor Government odious for Persecution to Posterity. -- Neither do I
know of any among us, that have so threatened to publish to After-ages, etc.

Reply. But Ah, George, what is become of thy Sincerity, that can thus Lie in
the Face of the Government? What do not thou know W. Penn? Is he not still
among you? And though others be dead, yet their Books are still among you. I am
now turning thee upside down, even thy Inside outward; therefore hold up thy
Chin and draw near me, that I may take off thy Mask of Sincerity, and show thy
foul Inside. Read the Picture of Quakerism, p. 102, 103. where diverse of your
Books are quoted, that do so threaten; particularly, W. Penn's Judas and the
Jews. etc. p. 41. Our faithful Chronicles (says he) of the Bloody Tragedies of
that Professing Generation will tell future Ages other things. Now, George, is
not this a Threat? Yes sure. Only Sam. Cater's, and other Sham-Sufferings, are
discovered, which will despoil your Chronicle. Again, in his Rejoinder, p. 410.
New Provocations (says Penn) may give fresh occasion for their History to come
abroad to the Nation more compendiously than ever. See also R. Barkley's
Anarchy, etc. p. 42. That as through our Faithful Testimony in the Hand of the
Lord, that Antichristian and Apostatized Generation, the National Ministry,
has received a deadly Blow, by our discovering and witnessing against their
forced Maintenance and Tithes, against which we have testified by many cruel
Sufferings, of all kinds, as our Chronicles shall make known to Generations to
come, etc.

What George, is here no Threatening? Do thou indeed say thou know of none
among you that have an intent to publish your Sufferings, to render the
Government odious for Persecution? This is such a Lie, that it will wound the
Author. And so I turn to John Field again.

In my Book, Quakerism Exposed, etc. there is this Passage, p. 23. But this
your Shuffle showed the Gentry, Justices of Peace, the Clergy and Protestant
Dissenters, That your Principles are so destructive to Common Christianity, as
that you did not dare to stand the Test: And this, yea, on this, yea, only
this, so far as I know, put them upon a Petition to the Honorable House of
Commons, to do that for God and the Christian Religion, which they could not
do; namely, to Examine your Principles, and Censure your Errors, as to their
Wisdom should seem meet: And in this, they (i. e. both the Church of England
Men and Protestant Dissenters) are unanimous; and this disturbs you, this
perplexes you; and for this your Tool John Field calls and compares them to
Herod and Pilate, Haman and Judas.

Upon this, John Field by way of Prayer, replies, Defense, etc. p. 10. Pray let
Fra. Bugg, who asserts this, make it appear to the King and both Houses of
Parliament, that this, yea, only this, put them upon it, and that they are
unanimous herein: For if so, there is not one of these Sorts, but what is
consenting thereto, or has been actually concerned in the Petition. But if it
has not been so, then the Parliament may be hereby informed, That he has not
truly represented themselves, (i. e. the Parliament;) for they are included in
his general Words: And let him tell if he can, what that common Christianity
is, that the Quakers Principles are so destructive to, etc.

Well, John, I have heard thy Prayer, and G. W.'s Ishmael herewith reprinted,
do tell you, (if what I have hitherto does not) what that common Christianity
is which your Principles are destructive to, and in a great part show the Cause
of your Shuffle; in that you did not dare to own your Books, and either defend
or retract your Blasphemous and Seditious Principles; together with many other
Reasons in my said Book, Qua. Exposed, etc. to which I refer the Reader. Nor
does it follow from what I therein said, that every individual Man of all sorts
was concerned in the Petition; nor that the Parliament was at all concerned.
What, the Parliament Petition the Parliament? No, John, this is a Quibble,
which has no Ground in any Field, but such that bring forth nothing but Thorns
or Thistles.

But, John, here is more in this Suggestion than every body on first sight will
be aware of. For what is it less, than to tell all the Counties, Shires, Cities
and Buroughs in England and Wales, that their Representatives are such Friends
to your Errors; that they are not unanimous in and with their Electors, as to
have you examined about them. And not only so, but the Protestant Churches
abroad, who are Scandalized by your pernicious Errors; if you be (as your
selves boast) Recognized Protestants. And this, John, I take to be Scandalous
to our English Protestant Parliament, who profess Faith in our Lord Jesus,
which you testify was not the Son of God; which is a Damnable Error, denying
the Lord that bought you with the Price of his most Precious Blood, if you
would accept thereof on Gospel-Terms.

And from this Scandal there needs be no other Vindication, than the Good and
Christian Laws already made, and their frequent Votes in Parliament, and the
Humble Address made to the King's Majesty, in the Year 1697. which not only
gave me Encouragement to Charge and Challenge you; and when you threw that off,
and Challenged the Clergy, it likewise encouraged them to Charge you: And when
you shuffled and evaded their Charge, it gave them Encouragement for the
Petition, that they might Examine you; an Abstract thereof is as follows, viz.

The Humble Address of the House of Commons to the KING.
May it please Your Majesty.
WE your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Commons in Parliament
Assembled, do, with great Joy and Comfort, remember, the many Testimonies which
your Majesty has given us of your Sincerity and Zeal for the true Reformed
Religion, as established in this Kingdom, and in particular we beg leave to
present to your Majesty our most Humble and Thankful Acknowledgments for the
late Gracious Declaration your Majesty has made to us from the Throne, that you
would effectually discourage Profaneness and Immorality, etc.

-- We do further, in all Humility, beseech your Majesty, that your Majesty
would give such effectual Orders, as to your Royal Wisdom shall seem fit, for
the suppressing all Pernicious Books and Pamphlets, which contain in them
Impious Doctrine against the Holy Trinity, and other Fundamental Articles of
our Faith, tending to the Subversion of the Christian Religion, and that the
Authors and Publishers thereof may be Discountenanced and Punished, etc.

And to the end that the Quakers may see the Zeal of our Government, against
the Errors contained in their Books; and not to presume to Discourse as they
do; as if they, and they only, were the White Hen's Chickens and the only
Favorites, as I can give particular Demonstrations, both by what I have heard
with my Ears from some of their Young Disciples, (who, as the Old Cocks Crow,
the Young ones Learn) as well as I have observed from Credible Information, I
shall recite His Majesty's most Gracious Answer to the foregoing Address, which
is as follows, viz.

Gentlemen,
I Cannot but be very well pleased with an Address of this Nature; and I will
give immediate Directions in the several Particulars you desire: But I could
wish some more Effectual Provision were made for the suppressing those
Pernicious Books and Pamphlets which your Address takes notice of.

By this time the Quakers thought themselves concerned, being Conscious to
themselves, (as well they might) that no People in the King's Dominion, no, not
the Muggletonians, were so obnoxious to the Censure of the King and Parliament,
as themselves: Upon which they bestirred themselves, like the Magicians in
Moses's time, to bring forth a likeness: And therefore when there was a Bill
Preparing, they Printed a Paper, and presented it to the House of Commons by
way of Instructions; in which there were these Words, viz.

WHereas the Bill enacts, That if any Person or Persons, etc. shall deny any of
the Persons in the Holy Trinity to be God, and make it punishable by the same
Bill, were it not more safe and plain to put it in Scripture Terms, as instead
of Deny any one of the Persons to be God, to insert, If any one shall deny any
of the Three, that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, or the Holy
Ghost to be God? 1 John 5.7. Now if the Quakers can but bend the Parliament to
their Bow, then they will agree; (but as for them, they cannot condescend a
Hair's Breadth, as one of their Teachers, Patrick Livingston, formerly Taught).
For, say they, The Father is Light, the Son is Light, and the Holy Ghost is
Light: Nay, if they desire three or four Persons more added; as that the Door
is Light, the Elect Stone is Light, the Vine is Light, the Blood is Light, the
Water is Light, they will allow all; and all these are One, no one of which was
before or after the other; nor one greater or lesser than another; and yet all
this while they mean not a Word according to the Scriptures, and the common
belief of all Sound Christians, but Reduce all to their Light within.

But still fearing what might happen, and to guard their Errors, they soon
presented His Majesty with a Paper; and this put me upon undergoing the Charge
of Reprinting one of their Books entirely, that so I may set them in their True
Light, to be seen and read of all Men: And as it is my Duty, so by my
Reasonable Service to God and my Country; though by some my Words may be
despised, Eccles. 9.16. A Copy of the Quakers Paper is as follows. viz.

To King William III. over England, etc. The Grateful Acknowledgment of the
People Commonly called Quakers, Humbly Presented.
May it please the King.
SEeing the most High God, who rules in the Kingdoms of Men Dan. 5.21.
, and appoints over it whomsoever he will, has by his overruling Power and
Providence, placed thee in Dominion and Dignity over these Realms, and by his
Divine Favor has signally preserved and delivered thee from many Great and
Eminent Dangers, and Graciously turned the Calamity of War into the desired
Mercy of Peace, we heartily wish that we, and all others concerned, may be
truly Sensible, and humbly Thankful to Almighty God for the same, that the
Peace may be lasting, and a perpetual Blessing.

And now, O King, the God of Peace having returned thee in Safety, it is Cause
of Joy to all them that fear him, to hear thy good and seasonable Resolution,
effectually to discourage Profaneness and Immorality, Righteousness being that
which exalts a Nation. And as the King has been Tenderly Inclined to give
Ease and Liberty of Conscience to his Subjects of different Persuasions, (of
whose Favor we have largely partaken) so we esteem it our Duty Gratefully to
Commemorate, and Acknowledge the same, earnestly beseeching Almighty God to
assist the King, to prosecute and effect these his just and good Inclinations,
that his Days may be Happy and Peaceable, and hereafter he may partake of a
lasting Kingdom that will never fade away.

London, the 7th of the 11th Month, 1697. Signed in Behalf of the said People,
by us, George Whitehead Peter Bowen Will. Mead Gilbert Layty John. Edge Daniel
Quane Tim. Emmerson Thomas Hawes Samuel Jobson Theod. Eccleston Nicholas Gates
Will. Ingram Will. Onkingate Thomas Lower John Pain John Butcher Will. Macket
Rich. Needham John Vaughton John Hound Michael Russel Jof. Wilkinson Joseph
Wyeth John Hall Josiah Ellis.


Now by this fair and smooth Paper, who would think but the Quakers would have
Signed the Association, pursuant to the Act of Parliament; Entitled, An Act
for the better Security of His Majesty's Royal Person and Government, etc. Oh!
no, by no means: For they tell you in their Paper, Entitled, The Ancient
Testimony and Principle of the People called Quakers Renewed, with respect to
the King and Government; and touching the present Association, Dated the 23d of
March 1695/6 viz. And whereas we the said People are required to sign the said
Association; we sincerely declare, That our refusing so to do, is not out of
any dissatisfaction to the King and Government; nor in Opposition to his being
declared Rightful, and Lawful King of these Realms; but purely because we
cannot for Conscience sake, Fight, Kill, or Revenge, either for our selves or
any Man else. Oh! no, by no means, this they could not be brought to; and the
Riddle I have unfolded in my Pil. Prog. etc. 2d Edition, p. 192, to 199. For as
they yet never made one Public Ad, dress to His Majesty from their Yearly
Meeting, that great and dangerous Body; nor one Prayer, that I could ever hear
of, either in their Books or in their Meetings; nor ever yet wrote one Book in
Favor of the Government: But did all these in the late Reign. But still there
is one Clause in this Paper worth Notice, i. e. ' As the King has been tenderly
inclined to give Ease and Liberty of Conscience, etc. And I pray is it
inconsistant with His Majesty's Tenderness to give Liberty of Conscience to His
Protestant Dissenters, who hold the Fundamentals of the Christian Faith, joined
in the Association to preserve his Majesty's Royal Person and Government: And
Pray heartily for him in their Meetings. And to Curb and Restrain such as will
doneither; but hold such horrid Pernicious and Destructive Principles, both to
Church and State, and even to Humane Society? No sure, God has given him both
Wisdom and Conduct; and he knows how to make a difference, and distingush
between such as Subvert the Faith, undermine Christianity, and Damn the
Ever-Blessed Trinity to the Pit of Hell; and such who make it their Business to
Instruct their People in the Fundamentals of Christianity; as is well expressed
in diverse Laws, particularly in that wherein is this Clause, viz.

Provided, and be it enacted, That no Quaker, or Reputed Quaker, shall by
Virtue of this Act, be qualified or permitted to give Evidence on any Criminal
Causes to Serve on any Juries, or bear any Office or Place of [Trust or]
Profit, in the Government; any thing in this Act contained to the contrary; in
any wise notwithstanding. And for this Clause all true Protestants have good
cause to be Humbly thankful to God, the King and the Parliament; and that for
more Reasons than I think meet here to enumerate.

But notwithstanding the Quakers Temporizing Paper above recited, the King's
Majesty as a Nursing-Father to the Church, and Spouse of Christ; and as a
Zealous Defender of the Faith, once delivered to the Saints, put forth his
Royal Proclamation from his Court at Kensington, the 24th of Feb. 1697. which
we have read both at Church and Courts of Judicature: An Abstract thereof is as
follows, viz.

By the KING, A PROCLAMATION.
WILLIAM REX.

WHereas we cannot but be deeply sensible of the great Goodness of Almighty
God, in putting an end to a Long, Bloody, and Expensive War, by the Conclusion
of an Honorable Peace, so we are not less touched with a Resentment, that
notwithstanding this, and many other great Blessings and Deliverances, Impiety,
Profaneness, and Immorality, do still abound in this our Kingdom; and whereas
nothing can prove a greater Dishonor to a well-ordered Government, where the
Christian Faith is professed, nor is likelier to provoke God to withdraw his
Mercy and Blessings from us, and instead thereof, to inflict Heavy and Severe
Judgments upon this Kingdom, than the open and avowed Practice of Vice,
Immorality, and Profaneness, which amongst many Men has too much prevailed in
this our Kingdom of late Years, to the high Displeasure of Almighty God, the
great Scandal of Christianity, and the ill and fatal Example of the rest of our
loving Subjects, who have been soberly Educated, and whose Inclinations would
lead them to the Exercise of Piety and Virtue, did they not daily find such
frequent and repeated Instances of dissolute Living, Profaneness, and Impiety,
etc.

-- And whereas several Wicked and Profane Persons have presumed to Print and
Publish several Pernicious Books and Pamphlets, which contain in them Impious
Doctrines against the Holy Trinity, and other Fundamental Articles of our
Faith, tending to the Subversion of the Christian Religion: Therefore for the
Punishing the Authors and Publishers thereof, and for the preventing such
Impious Books and Pamphlets being Published and Printed for the future, we do
hereby strictly Charge and Prohibit all Persons, that they do not presume to
Write, Print, or Publish any such Pernicious Books or Pamphlets, under the Pain
of our High Displeasure, and of being Punished according to the uttermost
Severity of the Law: And We do hereby strictly Charge and Require all Our
Loving Subjects to Discover and Apprehend such Person or Persons whom they
shall Know to be the Authors or Publishers of any such Books or Pamphlets, and
to bring them before some Justice of Peace, or Chief Magistrate, in order that
they may be proceeded against according to Law.

God save the KING.
For these and the like Reasons, the Norfolk Clergy did Accept the Quakers
Challenge, did meet them at the time perfixed; and there did endeavor to show
them their Errors, and would have convinced them thereof, and then had them
Retracted their Errors; and thereby to have merited the Indulgence of the
Government, and the Love of their Christian Neighbors. But they refusing all
this Labor of Love and Good Will; boasting they were Protestants, and so
Recognized; and with all boldness rejected all their Endeavors of Conviction;
upon which the Gentry in Norfolk (some of which were there) and many Justices
of the Peace, and others; Signed a Petition (as they also in the County of
Suffolk have done) waiting a seasonable Opportunity to present the same. A Copy
thereof, excepting Names, is as follows, viz.

To the Honorable the Commons of England in Parliament Assembled; the Humble
Petition of the Justices of the Peace, and Grand-Juries of the said County of
Norfolk in Session Assembled; in behalf of themselves, and the Body of this
County at large.
Humbly shows,
THAT We cannot without Resentment take Notice of the Growth and Daily Increase
of a Sect of People among Us, called Quakers, and the Mischiefs and Dangers
from thence threatening this Nation.

It is too observable with what restless Zeal their deluding Teachers, and (as
may well be suspected) many Romish Emissaries under their Vizar and Disguise,
daily ramble into all parts of these Kingdoms, and boldly spread their Venomous
Doctrine every where, attempting to Infect and Shock the Minds of Weak and
Unstable Protestants, and Assuming to themselves Rules of Discipline, Powers in
Matters of Religion, and Forms of Government, repugnant to the Established Laws
of the Kingdom, contrary to the very Acts of Toleration and not allowed to any
other Dissenters, vouching in all their Practices Divine Inspiration for their
Warrant, and their Indulgence of the Government for their Indemnity.

How apparently their Blasphemous Books and Pernicious Principles tend to
subvert the Fundamentals of Christianity, and the undermining the Civil
Government, are sufficiently demonstrable. The Publishing whereof by pretended
Permission of Authority We humbly conceive to be of most dangerous Consequence.

We therefore obliged in Duty to God and Our Country, do humbly pray, That you
will vouchsafe to take these Matters into your Care and Consideration, that
(with whatever Tenderness to the Persons and Estates of these People) their
said Principles and Practices may be strictly Examined, and Censured, or
Suppressed, as they shall appear to deserve, and as in your great Wisdom shall
seem expedient; and that our true Christian Religion (more dear to us than our
Lives) may be Defended and Preserved to all Posterity, free from Popish
Superstition, and unpolluted with Enthusiastical Innovation.

Thus have I recited the Petition, and that for these Reasons following, viz.

1. Because it is nothing but what is agreeable to the Mind and Pleasure of the
King's Majesty, and his Honorable House of Commons; and thereby no Dishonor
to the Petitioners.

2. Because that when the Petition is Presented, every Member may have one of
them in his Custody to Consider of it; and the Reason that put them upon so
doing.

3. Because there are more Petitions of the same Nature prepared, and
preparing, as this find Acceptance; when a convenient opportunity offer it self.

4. To let the World see how reasonable a thing it is; and not such a monstrous
thing as the Quakers have represented it, even to raise up the Monster
Persecution.

5. Because it is nothing but what they conceive to be their Duty to God and
their Country, to acquaint that great Assembly, with the Grievances of the
County; and that as the most proper place for a Remedy.

6. And Lastly, that the Contents are agreeable to the Laws of the Land; and
particularly to the very Act of Tolleration: And to manifest the same, I may
recite a Branch thereof, which is as follows, viz.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid; that
neither this Act, nor any Clause, Article, or Thing herein contained, shall
extend, or be construed to extend to give any Ease, Benefit or Advantage to any
Papist, or Popish Recusant whatsoever; or that any Person that shall deny in
his Preaching or Writing the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, as it is declared
in the aforesaid Article of Religion. I have likewise Discoursed with some of
the most Eminent of the Protestant Dissenters; and with their own Mouths they
have declared that they are sorrowfully affected to think that the Quakers
should be joined with them in the Act of Toleration; and to see Christianity
suffer so deeply by their Antiscriptural Doctrine: And not only so, but I have
a Testimony well Attested of their Abhorrence of their Blasphemous Tenets. The
substance of which is as follows, viz.

THat the Quakers render the Holy Scripture to be of no more Authority than
Aesop's Fables: That the Blood of Christ is no better than the Blood of another
Saint: That the Quakers are the Spawn of the Ranters: That the Quakers owning
Christ is no other than a Mystical Romance: The the Tendency of all the Quakers
Reasoning about Instituted Religion is to Debauch Mankind *: that their
Principles improved are destructive to all Humane Society: That their Teachers
are Cheats and Impostors, and Implacable Enemies to the Christian Religion,
etc. Here then is the unanimous Consent of all sound Protestants, the King's
Majesty, and his Honorable House of Commons, and the Laws of the Land. What
remains now, but Examination, and for that too we have some Encouragement from
the Quakers themselves, if they mean as they say. See An Apology for the
Quakers, by J. Field, etc. p. 7. Examine (say they) the Doctrine of your
Neighbors the Quakers, blame not before thou have examined the matter; first
understand, and then rebuke, etc. Again, George Whitehead to the same purpose,
in his Book, Truth and Innocence vindicated, etc. p. 69. Let our Books (says
George) be compared, to evince them more fully, and clear our Innocence, etc.

Now whereas the Quakers themselves (if they be sincere in what they say) seem
to be willing to have their Books, and the Doctrine contained in them, come
under Examination, in order to be cleared from the Objections against them; and
as this is highly reasonable on their parts, so it will (I humbly conceive) be
a means to put a stop to the Gangrene of Quakerism; (as also answer the Request
of many Thousands, who are earnestly solicitous to have their Books Examined,
and their Errors Censured, who yet are not for Persecution, nor any Alteration
in the Act of Toleration;) so is it also a Method pursuant to their own Terms
and Proposition, and with which they cannot reasonably be offended.

And thereupon I do most humbly pray, That our Superiors (if it may seem good
in their sight, in Answer to the Quakers Request, and the Peoples Prayer) would
appoint, some Judicious Learned Men to give us an Equal Hearing, and the
Quakers Books an Impartial Examination: And if I do not make a full Proof of
what I Charge them with, let me suffer any Punishment (for my Default) which
our Government shall think fit. But then on the other hand, if I do make good
my Charge, (as an Equivalent to my Suffering, in case I do not) let the Quakers
be obliged to Retract and Condemn such Books of theirs as do contain such
Impious Doctrines, as I have, or yet shall both Charge and Prove: And this is
all I desire, and which I believe would be a General Satisfaction to the
Nation, as well as for the Good of the Quakers themselves.

But remembering a Saying of Festus a Roman Governor, though in a contrary Case,
Acts 25.27. For it seems a thing unreasonable to send a Prisoner, and not
withal to signify the Crimes laid against him. And so it seems to be
unreasonable in me, to desire the Examination of the Quakers Books, and not
signify the Errors (at least some of them) contained in them; and especially,
since it is at the Quakers earnest Request: For say they in their Book, A
Defense of an Apology, etc. page 7. Pray let Francis Bugg make it appear to the
King, and both Houses of Parliament, that (our Shuffle at West-Dereham in
Norfolk) put the Gentry, Clergy, and Protestant Dissenters, upon their Petition
to the House of Commons; and that they are unanimous therein. -- And let him
(Francis Bugg) tell, if he can, what he means by that Common Christianity,
which the Quakers Principles are so destructive to.

As to the first, that is, That the Justices of Peace, the Gentry, the Clergy,
and Protestant Dissenters are unanimous herein, I have already showed: And as
to the second Part, that is, what I mean by that Common Christianity, which the
Quakers Principles are sodestructive to, I shall at his viz. J. Feild's, Prayer
and Request, show in the next place. For wherein I can find his Prayers and
Request reasonable, I hope I shall be ready to gratify him. For I believe with
the Gentry, the Justices, the Clergy, the Protestant Dissenters, and all other
Christians, That Jesus Christ, who was Born at Bethlehem of Judea, of the B.
Virgin Mary, was the Son of God, that he was Crucified, Dead and Buried, that
he Rose again the third Day, and Ascended into Heaven, and there sits at the
Right Hand of God, making Intercession for us Sinners, who lay hold on him by
Faith, and live in Obedience to him, his Laws, Institutions and Precepts in the
Gospel, left upon Record by the Four Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John,
and others of his Apostles, in their Epistles: And that we ought to Worship and
Adore him, together with God the Father and the Holy Ghost, Three Persons and
One God, in the Unity of his Essence. This is the Trinity in Unity, of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which is One God, blessed for evermore: And this
is that Common Christianity which I mean, that the Quakers Principles are so
destructive to. Now the next thing I am to tell at the Prayer and Request of
John Field, is, Wherein and whereby their Principles are Destructive, etc.

I. The Quakers deny Jesus of Nazareth, who was Born of the Virgin, and
Suffered at Jerusalem, to be the Son of God.

II. That they account him only a Vail, a Garment, an outward Vessel; and can
(as their Books teach) never call him Christ, and that his Blood was no better
than the Blood of another Saint.

III. They teach, that their Sufferings are greater, and more unjust, than the
Sufferings of Christ, his Apostles and Martyrs, in all Ages since. For that (as
they teach) the Sufferings of Christ, and his Army of Martyrs, were inflicted
by a Law, and in great part by the due Execution of a Law.

IV. That such are False Ministers, who bid People believe in Jesus Christ, as
he is in Heaven above, at God's Right Hand; and that by Preaching Christ in
Heaven, the Devil gets his Work done on Earth.

V. They teach, That G. Fox was their great Apostle, which said thus of
himself; I am the Light of the World, him by whom the World was made, and does
inlighten every Man that comes into the World.

VI. They teach, That the Name Jesus and Christ belongs to every Believer, as
well as to the Head Christ, that Suffered, Died, Rose again, etc.

VII. And thereupon they teach, That he that, has the same Spirit that raised
Jesus from the Dead, is equal with God.

VIII. And in coherence with this Doctrine their Prophet Sol. Eccles taught,
That Geo. Fox was a Prophet indeed: And that as it was said of Christ, He was
in the World, and the World was made by him; and the World knew him not: So it
might be said of G. Fox, as in the 5th Instance.

XI. They teach, That G. Fox was the Father of many Nations; that his Being and
Habitation was in the Power of the highest, that he Ruled and Governed in
Righteousness; that his Kingdom is established in Peace; and that of the
Increase thereof there was never to be an End.

X. They teach, That the Holy Scriptures are not the written Word of God; but
contrariwise, that they are Dust, Death, Serpents Meat, Beastly Ware; but that
their own Writings are the Word of God, given forth by Divine Iuspiration, and
that they, as such, are of greater Authority than the Bible; and thereupon read
them in their Meetings for Divine Worship, whilst they never read in any such
Meeting this Fifty Year, one Chapter of the Bible, either in the Old or New
Testament: For they teach, They are not the means to work Faith in the Heart,
but are a Rotten Foundation.

XI. They teach, That Circumcision is as much in force as Water Baptism; and
the Paschal Lamb as Bread and Wine; and their disuse of these two Ordinances
for this Fifty Years, show that they reject them, and allows not of them.

XII. And touching the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, they are so far from
owning it, as that they Damn them to the Pit of Hell; as in G. Whitehead's Book
Ishmael, etc. herein Reprinted, may he seen.

Now, John, I having Replied to your Book, A Defense of an Apology, etc. i. e.
to the principal parts of it; and showed your Falacies, and shallow
Subterfuges, as well as in some places answered your Request; I rest, desiring
that your self and your People may Consider of it: Repent of your Errors,
Retract and Condemn the same, and Pray to God, and the Nation, to forgive you;
in which I shall join with you, [And in this you will have no cause to cry out
of Persecution] who am your Friend,

Fran. Bugg.

An Humble Address to His Majesty King WILLIAM III. over England, etc. by one
of the Meanest yet most Dutiful Subject FRANCIS BUGG.
May it please your Most Excellent Majesty,
I Cannot but with great Joy and Comfort Remember your Majesty's Repeated
Assurances given to your Loving Subjects, of your Majesty's Care and Christian
Zeal for the Protestant Religion, as by Law established in this Kingdom, by
your many and repeated Speeches to your Parliaments; and particularly by your
late Gracious Proclamation, consisting of two Parts: In which your Majesty's
Pious Zeal has been abundantly manifest, First, Against Vice and Profaneness;
and, Secondly, Against such Books as contain in them Impious, Doctrine against
the Holy Trinity, and other Fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith; and
therein have given Encouragement to all your Loving Subjects to discover the
Authors of such Books.

Wherefore in Obedience to your Majesty's Royal Command, as well as my Duty
therein to God, I have herein Reprinted one of the Quakers Books, of which Geo.
Whitehead is one of the Authors, to the intent that your Sacred Majesty, and
the whole Kingdom may be presented with a Specimen of the Quakers Doctrine. And
do most Humbly Pray in the Name of the Church of England, and other your
Majesty's Dissenting Protestants, that such Care may be taken to suppress the
same, (with others of their Books of the same Narure) as to your Royal Wisdom
shall seem meet. And as it pleased God Almighty to give King Solomon Wisdom to
Execute Justice; so will he endue the King with an Understanding Heart to Judge
who is in the wrong, and to Punish accordingly: And in this case let not the
King Respect Persons in Judgment, but if I be not able to maintain my Charge,
then let me bear his Majesty's Displeasure, and suffer what Punishment shall be
due for the same: But if I do make good my Charge, then do as seems good in
your Eye. Thus, with all Dutiful Submission, do I Sign this my Humble Address,
this 13th Day of December 1699.

Francis Bugg.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books wrote by Fran. Bugg.
1. DE Christiana Liberate, etc. in 8 vo. bound. 2. The Painted Harlot stripped
and whipped, etc. 4 to. 3. Reason against Railing, etc. 4 to. 4. Innocence
Vindicated, etc. 4 to. never Answered. 5. The Quakers Detected, and their
Errors Confuted, etc. 4 to. 6. A Letter to the Quakers, showing their frequent
Addresses to, and Prayers for the late King Jam. II. and not to King Will. III.
7. Battering Rams against New Rome, etc. 4 to. 8. One blow more at New Rome,
etc. 4 to. 9. New Rome Unmasked, and her Foundation Shaken, etc. 4 to. 10. New
Rome Arraigned, and out of her own Mouth Condemned, etc. 4 to. 11. A Sheet
Presented to the Parliament, 1693. in Answer to the Quakers Allegations, etc.
12. Quakerism Withering, and Christianity Reviving, etc. 8 vo. 13. Quakerism
Anatomized, etc. 4 to. never Answered. 14. The Quakers Yearly Meeting impeached
on the behalf of the Commons of England, etc. 15. The Quakers set in their true
Light, etc. Presented to the House of Lords, 1696. never answered. 16. A Brief
Reply to the Quakers Ancient Testimony, presented to the Lord's House, 1696.
never Answered. 17. A Brief History of the Rise, Growth, and Progress of
Quakerism, 8 vo. never Answered. 18. The Picture of Quakerism drawn to the
Life, 8 vo. never Answered. 19. A Sober Expostulation with their Hearers
touching the Mercenary Teachers, never Answered. 20. The Pilgrim's Progress
from Quakerism to Christianity, etc. Printed in 4 to. and Reprinted in 8 vo.
21. Seventy Queries to several Quakers, etc. never Answered. 22. A Broad Sheet
with a Scheme of the Quakers Synod, presented to the Parliament, 1699. 23.
Jezebel withstood, and her Daughter, Anne Dowcra publicly Reproved, never
Answered. 24. Quakerism Exposed to Public Censure, etc. 8 vo. 25. The
Christian Ministry of the Church of England vindicated, etc. 8 vo. never
Answered. 26. A Defense of my Book Quakerism Exposed, etc. Besides three Books
I wrote part of.
27. Will. Rogers his Seventh Part of the Christian Quaker distinguished, etc.
about 1682. 28. A Looking Glass for the Quakers, in 2 Columns. 29. A Postscript
to the Norfolk Clergies Book, i. e. A Brief Discovery some of of the Quakers
Blasmous and Seditious Principles, etc.
ADVERTISEMENT.
IF any Person be desirous to have this Book and my former Books, Bound, either
them in Quarto or them in Ostavo, or Single, sticht; they may be furnished with
all (except them of those Impressions wholly Sold off) at Mr. Janeway's a
Bookbinder in St. Paul's Churchyard, next Door to Child's Coffee-House,
London. And,

Likewise, if any Abler Men (for of such there is very great need) be disposed
farther to unmask the Leaders of this Heresy; this is to give notice, that in
the Library of Christ-Church College in Oxford, there is, by a Worthy
Gentleman, a Divine of the Church of England, bought of me, and given by him
for the Service of the Church, of Quakers Books, wrote by the most approved
Authors of that Sect, which I think are thus Chained up (from doing any more
hurt). First, G. Fox's Journal; next to it Muggleton's Journal or Works,
(containing more than 1000 pages 4 to.); and I think the best Quaker of the
two; next to that G. Fox's Great Mystery, etc. Fol. with near 20 more of his
Books; next the Works of Edw. Buroughs, Francis Howgil, Will. Smith, Sam.
Fisher; all in great Folio's; next the Works of Jos. Coal, Step. Smith, R.
Hubberthorn, Will. Bailey, Is. Pennington, G. Fox, Junior, in 4 to. next diverse
Books wrote by James Naylor, Will Penn, Christ. Atkinson, G. Whitehead, Sol.
Eccles, Tho. Lawson, Christ. Tailor, R. Farnsworth, Geo. Bishop, and diverse
others; in all near the Number of Four Hundred, bearing distinct Titles, which
may furnish any Person sufficiently with Matter of Fact.

The CONTENTS.
A Parable of an Island Page 14 In which arose a Sea Monster ibid Who stung
many of the Inhabitants ibid The Physicians several Applications Page 15 The
Quakers Ingratitude Page 16 The Wounded Peoples Ingratitude Page 17 St. Paul's
Example a good President ibid. Anne Docwra's witness touching the Quakers Page
17 R. Sandylan's Letter of Retraction Page 20 Will. Mucklow's witness is true
Page 21 Their Singular way of Answering Books Page 23 Their Sufferings greater
and more unjust than the Sufferings of Christ or his Apostles Page 24 They deny
Jesus to be the Son of God Page 26 The Author's Apology for his proceedings
Page 27 Prayers for their Recovery Page 28
Part the First.
Their Contradictory Books hinted at Page 2 How the Quakers and Papists agree
Page 4 About choosing of Parliaments Page 9 Their Sentence of all Kings Page 14
Of their denying the Blessed Trinity Page 17, 30 Of their Light within being
God Page 20 The Quakers began this Contest Page 23 Of G. Whitehead's owning his
Ishmael, his shuffle about it since Page 30 His Blasphemy therein hinted at
Page 31 Counsel given him, Acts 8.21, 22, 23. Page 32
The Second Part
G. Whitehead's Book Ishmael Reprinted Page 1 The cause of the Quakers Rage
discovered Page 2 They deny the Scriptures to be the Word Page 4 They also deny
the Scriptures to be the Rule Page 10 Saying they are a Rotten Foundation Page
14 That they are Death, and kills Page 20 That they do not work Faith Page 24
And to them not necessary Page 29 As a consequence thereof they Damn the B.
Trinity to the Pit, and Mr. Townsend the Minister also. Page 22, 26 The Snake
deciphered Page 27 Jos. Wyeth wounded and unarmed Page 28 The Snakes Hiss like
Serpents Page 29 Another stroke at the Rattle-Snake Page 30 G. Whitehead's
Blasphemy explained Page 31 She not changed in Principles proved. Page 32
Part the Third.
A Caution to beware of Quakerism Page 2 The Quakers the Offspring of the
Jesuits Page 3 Their Answer to Books horribly falacious Page 5 Of their
diminitive Sufferings Page 7 Their Sufferings and Miracles jointly considered
Page 8 Twelve Reasons to confront J. Feild's magnifying their Sufferings Page 9
J. Field does not say F. B. is like Judas Page 13 His Hypocrisy therein
discovered Page 17 Their not Praying for K. W. III. Page 15 The Quakers
greatest Persecutors Page 16 Their Dissimulation thereabout discovered Page 18
Quakers fling at Dissenting Protestants Page 19 The Quakers against Liberty of
Conscience Page 20 At first lay in Barns like Gypsies Page 22 Their rendering
the Government odious for Persecution further Illustrated. Page 24 An Address
from the Honorable House of Commons to His Majesty, and his Answer Page 30
Their Printed Paper to the Parliament Page 31 Their Paper to his Majesty Page
32 They debar'dd of Places of Profit Page 35
FINIS

