A LETTER OF A Protestant Clergyman TO THE Reverend CLERGY OF THE Church of
England, AND To all other good Protestants, advertising them from the sacred
Revelation of St. John of the Evil which he apprehends to be coming upon THE
PROTESTANT CHURCH, etc.

Written by DIGBY BULL, M. A. and late Rector of Sheldon in Warwickshire.

London: Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by the Booksellers of
London and Westminster. 1695.

Reverend Brethren both of the Clergy and Laiety,
I Am apprehensive and very confident than an Evil Time is at hand, and that
Popery is ready to come in upon us, for the great Abuse of that blessed Light
of the Gospel, which we have so freely enjoyed: And I doubt that first and last
there will be a great deal of Bloodshed in this Nation; and I would have you
all advertised hereof, That you may make all the due Preparation against such a
Dreadful Time that may be; and may do all that lies in your Power to preserve
your selves and the Flocks that are committed to your Care, that you may not
fall to Popery, nor be taken in any other great Wickedness, and so be swept
away with the Beesom of Destruction. I would have you to peruse Archbishop
Usher's Prediction, and to make the best use of his Advice that may be: For I
take it to be of a Divine Nature, and do believe that there is Truth in it, and
that the dismal Time which he speaks of is now at hand. And I am persuaded that
this Day will come in a surprising manner, as he says, and that such as give
themselves up to a carnal and vain Security, will be wrapped up in Misery and
Destruction before they are well aware of it. And therefore it behooves all Men
to look well to the grand Concerns of their Souls and Lives, and to be
continually upon their Watch and Spiritual Guard, that they may not be taken in
a vain Confidence, like the rich Fool in the Parable, Luke 12.16 --. And from
Rev. 11. I do believe that Popery will prevail over us for three Years and an
half, and that then (to the great wonder of the World, and like Men from the
dead) the Protestant Religion shall rise up again, and be as Glorious as it was
before, if not much more so. And from the comfortable expectation of this
lightsome and joyful Morning, we may be the more encouraged with Patience and
Perseverance in the Truth, to weather out this dark and dismal Night. And by
the blessed Help and Assistance of Almighty God we shall be able to do it; and
his Divine Help will never be wanting to us, if we seek it with that diligence
and care that we ought. And the more to keep us from falling to Popery, we may
remember how strictly we are commanded to keep the Faith and Doctrine of the
Gospel pure and incorrupt, and how severely the Violators thereof are
threatened: And we may sufficiently see, that Popery is not at all consistent
therewith.

First, We may see that we are strictly enjoined to keep the sacred Commands of
Almighty God, and to contend earnestly for the Faith of the Gospel; and at our
Baptism we did solemnly engage to do so by our Sureties. Upon our love to him
does our blessed Lord require of us that we should keep his Commandments. If ye
love me (says he, Joh. 14.15.) keep my Commandments. St. Paul also in sundry
places does strictly charge both Timothy and Titus, and in a Solemn manner
before God, to keep the Precepts and Commandments that he gave them; 1 Timothy
5.21. and 6.13. And he shows that the Philippians were to strive together for
the Faith of the Gospel. Phil. 1.27 -- That ye stand fast in one spirit, with
one mind striving together for the Faith of the Gospel; and in nothing
terrified by your adversaries --. And this St. Jude presses also, Jude 3. It
was needful for me (says he) to write unto you, and exhort you, that ye should
earnestly contend for the Faith, which was once delivered unto the Saints. And
to the Angel of the Church in Sardis says our Savior, Rev. 3.3. Remember
therefore how thou have received and heard, and hold fast, and repent. By the
Angel here we are to understand the Bishops and Pastors of the Church and the
Flocks under them; the Angel seems to be put for the whole Church, but
especially for the Governors and Pastors of it. And this place, as Dr. More
shows, respects our own times. And here we are admonished to remember how
we have been Instructed in the sacred Scriptures; and also how we have been
taught by the blessed Reformation to lay aside all the sinful Errors and
Practices of the Romish Church: And here we are also strictly enjoined to
retain and hold fast all that is good and agreeable to the sacred Scriptures;
and upon our neglect herein we are severely threatened with Judgment, as the
following words show.

Secondly, We may see that such as any ways make void the sacred Word of God,
are sharply rebuked, and severely threatened for it. Our blessed Lord himself
does sharply rebuke the Jews upon this account, and shows that such Religion is
vain, when Men leave the Divine Laws and Commandments of Almighty God to follow
the Traditions and Precepts of Men. Mar. 7.7. In vain do they worship me (says
he) teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. For laying aside the
commandment of God, ye hold the tradition of men --. And says he, Mat. 5.19.
Whosoever shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so;
he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven --. St. Paul also does
show that he that disannulleth the Gospel of Christ, and sets up any thing
in opposition to it, is to be had accursed, yea though he were an Angel from
Heaven. Gal. 1.8. But though we (says he) or an Angel from heaven, preach any
other Gospel unto you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed. And this the Apostle doubleth that it might be the more heeded and
minded, and that none might presume to do so. And says St. John, 2 John 9.
Whosoever abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God. And says he
again, Rev. 22.18 -- For I testify unto every man that hears the words of the
Prophecy of this book; If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add
unto him the plagues that are written in this Book: And if any man shall take
away from the words of the book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part
out of the book of life --. By these plain places of Scripture we may see how
closely we ought to keep to the Sacred Word of God, and that it is in vain to
pretend to worship and serve Him except we do so: And we see that it is a
cursed thing to make void the Gospel, and to preach up any thing in opposition
to it; and that such as do so must expect the Wrath and Judgment of God to come
upon them. And according to these places of the Sacred Scriptures do we make
profession in St. Athanasius's Creed. -- Which Faith except every one do keep
whole and undefiled, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly --. And we may
clearly see that the Romish Religion is flat contrary to the first and second
Commandments of the Decalogue. This is the grand Commandment of all, viz. Thou
shall have no other Gods before me. Exodus 20.3. But this grand Commandment do
the Papists violate, and make Petty Gods of the Saints, and worship the
Elements of Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, and make Gods of them. And they
make, and worship, and bow down to Images, flat contrary to the express Letter
of the second Commandment. They teach for Doctrines the Commandments of Men,
and preach another Gospel, which Christ and his Apostles preached not, in that
they preach up the Pope's Supremacy as a fundamental Doctrine in their
Religion, and Purgatory, and Popish Pardons, etc. which are not in the Gospel
of our blessed Lord and Savior, but are repugnant to it; and therefore they do
incur the Curse of the Apostle, in preaching another Gospel. And herein we may
see that they sin with a high hand, in that they stifle the Sacred Word of God,
and will not let the Common People know it, that they may keep it and do it,
contrary to God's express Command, who would have all Men to know his Sacred
Word and Commandments, and to do them: And instead hereof, they order their own
Precepts and Traditions to be observed and kept: Thus superseding and
overruling the whole Word of God by their own Commands, at their own will and
pleasure; thus exalting themselves above God himself, in keeping his Sacred
Word in an unknown Tongue from the People, and ordering their own Commands to
be kept as the supreme Commands of all. And the Papists are accounted no better
than Gentiles, Heathens and Pagan Idolaters, by the Sacred Oracles of the
Revelation of St. John, as I understand them. And you may see that Archbishop
Usher and Dr. More, these Learned and Pious Men are of the same mind; and Dr.
Barrow, another Learned and Pious Man says little less. See Dr. More's
Antidote against Idolatry, and Dr. Barrow's Treatise of the Pope's Supremacy.
We may see that there is no hope of Salvation for such as are of this
Communion, so long as they continue therein. And I wish that all well-minded
Papists would seriously lay these things to heart, and take a due Care to save
their Souls, and not suffer themselves to be deluded to their Eternal Woe and
Destruction. But farther,

Thirdly, We may see that Righteous and Holy Men would by no means be driven to
break the Sacred Commands of Almighty God, and to depart from his Blessed Word;
but would rather part with their Lives than do so. The three Children would not
be driven with all the Terror of a Fiery Furnace to fall down and worship King
Nebuchadnezzar's Image, contrary to the express Command of Almighty God, Dan.
3. The Church in Pergamos would not deny the Faith of Christ, though they dwelt
even where Satan's Seat was, and in those Days too wherein Antipas the faithful
Martyr of Christ was slain among them; and they are highly commended for so
doing. Rev. 2.13. I know thy works (says our Lord) and where thou dwell,
even where Satan's seat is; and thou hold fast my Nome, and have not denied
my faith, even in those days wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was
slain among you, where Satan dwells. The Church also in Philadelphia is
commended for keeping the Word of God, Rev. 3.8. And St. John does show that
many have been put to death for the Word of God, and for adhering and sticking
close to the Truth, and giving Testimony to it. Rev. 6.9. I saw under the altar
(says he) the souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for the
testimony which they held. And Rev. 20.4. And I saw (says he) the souls of
them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God --:
By these Instances and many more that might be alleged from the Sacred
Scriptures and other Authors, we may see with what great Courage and
Magnanimity righteous Men have stood to the blessed Word of God and maintained
it; and have chosen rather to resist even unto Blood, than to be driven from
it, or to violate it in any notorious manner. And this does show that we ought
to do so too; and may serve for a sufficient disswasive to us to keep us from
falling to Popery, though we run very great hazard in standing against it. But

Fourthly, We may farther consider that we are under several solemn Engagements
that are flat against Popery. We of the Clergy especially, and many others have
taken the Oath of Supremacy; and many of us have subscribed the Declaration
called the Test: We have read and given our Assent to the 39 Articles of
Religion, and have subscribed the three Articles in the 36th. Canon: And these
in many particulars are all directly against Popery. And if we should now fall
to Popery, we shall notoriously break and violate all these solemn and sacred
Engagements to the contrary, and be most wretchedly perfidious, and show to the
World that there is no Truth and Faithfulness in us, but that we are cursed
lying Children. And according to our great Wickedness herein, if we should do
so, shall we be dealt with: For we are plainly told, Rev. 21.8. That all liars
shall have their part in the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone: And
it will be sufficiently manifest both to Men and Angels too, that such we are,
and that in a high manner too, if we have no regard to all these solemn
Engagements which we call God to attest and bear Witness to. If then we have
any fear of God before our Eyes, and would avoid his dreadful Wrath, and have
his Favor which is better than Life it self; If we have any regard to the
grand Concerns of our Souls, and our eternal Well-being and Happiness in
another World; If we would avoid that dismal place where the Prince of Darkness
and the Father of Lies is to have his residence and abode; Then we must have a
care that we do not violate the sacred Word of God, and these solemn
Engagements that we have made, but resolve rather to part with our Lives, though
it be at the Stake, than to break them and fall to Popery.

But I am apt to believe, That the standing against Popery in a Meek and
Christian manner with Spiritual, and not with Carnal Weapons, will be the best
way to preserve both Life and Soul too; and that such as do so shall be
preserved alive, when many others, that fall to Popery on the one hand, or that
rise up against Authority on the other, shall perish and lose their Lives. And
Archbishop Usher does show that the sincere and faithful Worshippers and
Servants of God shall then be preserved, when many others are like to perish.

Many of you, Reverend Brethren, by your late Miscarriages in taking the New
Oaths, etc. have put your selves into a worse Condition than otherwise you
would have been in; and after a short time, I suppose, you will be fully
convinced of your Error in so doing. But by your sincere and hearty Repentance
and earnest Prayers to God, and by all other good Endeavors to this purpose,
and especially by the blessed Help and Assistance of Almighty God (which we
must all rely upon) I hope you may recover your Ground, and be able to stand
against Popery, and so preserve your Souls and Lives too, if God sees it good
to spare them; or else may be able cheerfully to lay them down, if he shall
require it at your hands. I hope and am fully persuaded that Mercy does yet
wait upon you, and that if you will now return and repent, you may be saved.
But if ye still proceed on in your own ways, and despise the Goodness and
Long-suffering of God, which does now in an extraordinary manner wait for your
Return to him; If you now stop your Ears against all the loud Cries and Calls
to Repentance and persist on to Backslide more and more; If you now slight all
the kind Invitations and Warnings of Providence, and instead of repenting
should fall to the Black Religion of Rome; There is then no Peace nor Comfort
for you that I know of, but a Tremendous expectation of Judgment and Fiery
Indignation which will consume all before it. With Eyes therefore full of
Tears, and with a Heart full of Sorrow and true Christian Charity and
Compassion, as I hope, do I earnestly entreat and beg of you, That you would
not now Trifle with Eternity, when you are upon the very Brink of Destruction,
and have but one moment of time to provide for your Security, and to save your
selves in. Remember poor Esau, that could find no place for Repentance, though he
sought it carefully with Tears, when once the Sentence was past against him,
Heb. 12.16, 17. Genesis 27.33 --. It was then irrevocable, and all his Tears and
his exceeding bitter Cry could not alter it. And when once the Heavens now are
covered with thick Darkness, your Cries will hardly pierce through it, and find
access to the Throne of Mercy: And when once the consuming Fire of God's Wrath
is kindled, it is not a few Tears that will quench it.

In the Bowels of Christ Jesus then, and by all the Endearments of a Christian
Brother, do I earnestly beseech you now to return, and thankfully to accept of
the Overtures of Mercy, while Mercy may be had, before abused Goodness be
turned to Wrath, and Mercy it self be shut up in displeasure against you: For
then you may cry aloud for Mercy, like the Worshippers of Baal, (1 Kings 18.)
and find as little answer and regard as they did. But if you will now repent
and return to God with all your heart, and firmly resolve to abide by him at
all times, I hope you will readily find him, and find him a God ready to help
and succor you now in the greatest Straits and Dangers.

And to animate us all the more herein, we may see that we have very great
Encouragements in the Sacred Word of God, patiently and contentedly to undergo
all the Persecutions and Sufferings that befall us here for doing our Duty to
God, and keeping a good Conscience, and sticking close to our Profession and
the Truth of the Gospel. And

First, We may see that this is declared to be a blessed thing, when Men suffer
for Righteousness sake; and those that do so are pronounced blessed and happy.
Behold (says St. James 5.11.) we count them happy, which endure. And says St.
Peter, 1 Pet. 2.19. For this is thank-worthy if a man for conscience toward
God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. And ver. 20 --, But if when ye do well,
and suffer for it, ye take it patiently; this is acceptable with God. And 1
Pet. 3.14. But and if ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye; and be
not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled. And to this purpose, 1 Pet.
4.14. If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit
of glory, and of God rests upon you: on their part he is evil spoken of, but
on your part he is glorified. This we see is a most blessed thing, and highly
acceptable in the sight of God, when Men suffer for Righteousness sake, and
keeping a good Conscience toward Almighty God.

Secondly, We may see that such as endure constant to the end, and forsake not
their Profession for any Persecutions that befall them, shall be sure to be
saved from Eternal Death and Destruction; and often, though not always, from
Destruction here in this World, when they are in great danger of losing their
Lives; God then in a wonderful manner delivering them by his good Providence
out of all their Troubles and Danger. This is often declared by our blessed
Lord in the Gospel, that such as endure constant to the end shall be saved.
Matt. 10.22. And ye shall be hated of all men for my Name's sake; but he that
endures to the end shall be saved. And Matt. 24.12, 13. And because iniquity
shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold: but he that shall endure to the
end, the same shall be saved. And these words are not so to be confined to one
particular State of the Church as to exclude all others; but so as to be
Instructions to Christians at all times when there is need of such; and such in
an especial manner does this present juncture of time seem to me to be. The
Church while it is Militant here below is always like to be subject to
Persecutions; and when these grow very smart and sharp, the love of many is
like to grow cold: But that this may be no great discouragement to good
Christians at such a time, and may not make their heart to grow faint when they
see so many to fall off, they are to encourage themselves with such Sacred
Consolations as these. And says our Lord, Mar. 8.35. For whosoever will save
his life, shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the
Gospel's, the same shall save it. The exposing of our Lives to hazard upon this
account is the best way to preserve both Life and Soul too; and so I believe it
will be now.

Thirdly, We may see that our blessed Lord does promise abundant reward, even
in this Life, to all such as do sustain any loss for his sake and the Gospel's.
Mar. 10.29, 30. And Jesus answered and said, verily I say unto you, there is no
man that has left House, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or
Wife, or Children, or Lands for my sake and the Gospel's, But he shall receive
an hundred fold, now in this time, Houses --. And to this purpose in other
places. And I do believe that such as sustain any loss, and run any great
hazard at this time, to keep a good Conscience toward God, shall be well
rewarded even in this World, besides what they may expect hereafter in another.
But

Fourthly, For our great Comfort and Encouragement herein, we have many
promises of a blessed Reward hereafter in Heaven, for suffering for a good
Cause, and for Righteousness sake. Eternal Glory and Happiness shall then be
sure to be our Reward for such high Obedience as the suffering meekly and
patiently for the sake of the blessed Jesus is. Matt. 5.10 -- says our
Savior; Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake; for
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake:
Rejoice and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in Heaven --. And to
this purpose, Luke 6.22 -- Blessed are ye when men shall hate you, and when
they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast
out your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and
leap for joy: For behold your reward is great in Heaven; for in the like manner
did their Fathers unto the Prophets. And those that forsake Houses and Lands
for Christ's sake and the Gospel's, shall, besides their reward here in this
World, inherit Eternal Life and Happiness in the World to come. Matt. 19.29.
and Mar. 10.30. And in the world to come, eternal Life. And says St. Paul,
Romans 8.17 --. If so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together. For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy
to be compared with the glory, which shall be revealed in us. Christ ought to
have suffered, and so to enter into his Glory, Luke 24.26: And if we will be
his Disciples and followers, we must expect to do so too, and to enter in by
the strait Gate of affliction. But our sufferings here will bear little or no
proportion to the Glory that does await us for them: For if St. Paul could say
fo, who has given us so large an account of his sufferings (2 Cor. 11.23 --)
much more may we say so. And again says St. Paul to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.12. If
we suffer, we shall also reign with him. And says St. James 1.12. Blessed is
the man that endures temptation; for when he is tried, he shall receive the
Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him. And this is
our Lord's promise by St. John to the Church in Smyrna, Rev. 2.10. Be thou
faithful unto death and I will give thee a Crown of Life: And all are to hear
what the Spirit says to the Churches, ver. 11. And again, Rev. 3.21. says he,
To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also
overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne. To this high Dignity is
the faithful Sufferer like to be advanced.

Fifthly, For our farther Comfort and Support in all the Sufferings that we
meet with for Christ's sake, and for keeping a good Conscience toward God, we
may see that God does regard and pity us in all our distresses and afflictions;
and that he will then succor and strengthen us, and not suffer us to be
overpowered and born down with the violence of such temptations as we have not
strength to resist and withstand. Though our Trials sometimes may be sharp; yet
if we have recourse to him, and call upon him in that due manner that we ought,
we shall be sure of a supply, and shall have strength sufficient for all the
Combats and Encounters that we shall meet with. Our God is a God of Love and
tender Compassion toward his Creatures and faithful Servants, and will not
desert and forsake them in the Day of Anguish and Distress; but will hear and
succor them when they cry to him for help. This he declares by the Psalmist,
Psalm. 50.15. And call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me. And says God by the Prophet Isaiah, 49.15. Can a Woman
forget her sucking Child, that she should not have compassion on the Son of her
womb? Yea they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. The care of these tender
Mothers toward the Children of their own Womb, is not comparable to that of
God toward his faithful Children. And says the Apostle, Heb. 13.5, 6. For he
has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee: So that we may boldly
say, the Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me. And
our Savior does promise to be constantly with his Church as need shall
require; Matt. 28.20; And lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the
world; Amen. And says he, Matt. 10.30; But the very hairs of your head are all
numbered: Fear ye not therefore --. So great is the Care that God has of his
Servants, that the smallest matters belonging to them are all regarded and
minded by him, and due care is taken about them. And says St. Paul, 1 Cor.
10.13. There has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man; but
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able;
but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to
bear it. God by his infinite Wisdom and Power, will so order all things, that
we shall be able to overcome the temptations that we meet with, some way or
other, if we do our utmost endeavors; and he will so help us, that we shall
not be overpowered by them.

Sixthly, For a fuller confirmation of this [ viz. That God will always be
ready to help us in our greatest needs] we may see that he has always been
with his faithful Servants in a remarkable manner, and afforded them
extraordinary Help and Assistance, when their Need and Necessities have
required it. In an extraordinary manner was he with Joseph in the Prison; with
David, when Saul sought to take away his Life; with Elijah, when Jezebel would
have put him to death; with the three Children in the Fiery Furnace; with
Daniel in the Lions Den; with Paul, when he was brought before Nero the Roman
Emperor; and with Stephen when he was put to death. These, and many more that
might be alleged to this purpose, are like a Cloud of Witnesses to confirm
this to us, viz That God will be sure to be with his faithful Servants in the
worst of Times and Dangers to assist them with his Almighty Arm: And as the
sufferings of the Apostles did abound, so did their inward Joy and Strength; (2
Cor. 1.5.) And in the midst of their sufferings could they rejoice, (2 Cor.
12.10. Col. 1.24.) such sweet Influence and Communications of his Love and
Goodness did God then afford them. And I am apt to believe that many, who have
been driven out of this World with the Fire of Persecution, and with the
merciless Torments of cruel Men, have departed hence with as much, if not more,
ease than many that have died quietly upon their Beds, and undisturbed by the
sinful and restless Troublers of this World. And if so, then we have no great
cause to draw back, or to be sore afraid even in the worst of Times and
Dangers. To animate us the more then herein, let us remember how victoriously
many Saints have gone out of this World to those unspeakable Joys that are
prepared for them in the next; And as Paul says ( Romans 8.37.) have been more
than Conquerours, through him that loved them, in all the Trials and Combats that
they have been exercised with. And seeing that we are listed Soldiers under
Christ, Let us follow them in a meek and patient suffering of all the
Adversities and Injuries that befall us here for keeping the Faith of Christ,
and a good Conscience toward God: Let us be persuaded as St. Paul was, Romans
8.38, 39. That neither Death nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers -- shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord: Let us look unto Jesus the Captain of our Salvation, the Author
and Finisher of our Faith, who endured such contradiction of Sinners against
himself; Who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross despising
the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne of God, Heb. 12.2
--: Let us consider him that we may not be wearied and faint in our minds, but
be faithful unto death, that we may not lose our Crown of Life.

But if we will not be prevailed upon by all these powerful Arguments and
Persuasions to keep Faith and a good Conscience, and to stick close to our
Profession even in the worst of Times; If the glory of such sufferings, and the
unspeakable Reward that does await them; If such assurances of Divine Help and
Assistance, that Almighty God will never be wanting to us, but will have us
always under his watchful Eye, and will always grant us Succor and Strength
answerable to our needs; If these will not prevail with us, Then we may farther
take notice what a miserable condition such Revolters will be in, that for fear
of Persecution shall forego their Profession. Such are like to lose their
Lives, as our Lord shows, Mar. 8.35. For whosoever will save his life, shall
lose it --. And such as are ashamed of him and his words, must expect the same
measure again to their great and eternal Reproach, as our Lord shows, ver. 38.
Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my Words, in this adulterous
and sinful generation; of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he
comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels. And those that deny
him, must look for the same return again to their utter confusion. Matt. 10.33.
But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father
which is in heaven. The Apostle's words also are now especially to be heeded
and laid to heart; Heb. 6.4. --. For it is impossible for those (says he) who
were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made
partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good Word of God, and the
powers of the world to come; If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto
repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put
him to an open shame --. And says he again, Heb, 10.26. -- For if we sin
wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the Truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sins; But a certain fearful looking for of
judgment, and fiery Indignation which shall devour the adversaries --. And if
we Protestants should turn to the Popish Religion, we may expect that this will
be our condition. And to conclude, we may see that all Cowards that are not at
all valiant for the Truth, are like to go to the Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone. Rev. 21.8. But the Fearful and Unbelieving -- shall have their part
in the Lake, which burns with Fire and Brimstone --. And this consideration
also will be of great use to keep us from Backsliding and falling away from our
Christian Profession to any Idolatrous, or to any other sinful Practices, that
are not consistent with the Truth of the Gospel, when we so plainly see, as
here we do, That such Revolters must bid adieu to all the Bliss and Happiness
that is promised in the Gospel; and are like to go to the grand Apostate, and
to that everlasting Fire that was prepared for him and his Angens; Matthew.
25.41. And if these Arguments will not prevail with us, I know not what will.

Seeing then that the Concerns before us are so very great, the avoiding of
Eternal Woe and Misery, and the obtaining of Eternal Life and Happiness
depending upon our good Behavior and Christian Carriage here; Let us be wise
then betimes, and show our selves Men, and not be like Solomon's Fool, that had
a price in his hand to get Wisdom, but had no heart to it; Prove. 17.16. Let us
not to avoid a little Suffering here, forfeit our Title to the Crown of Life
and the blessed Kingdom above, and run into endless Misery and Destruction; For
this will be prodigious folly and madness. But seeing it is the Lord alone that
must keep and uphold us all, or else we shall be sure to fall; and all the
Watchman's care, without his good Protection, is to no purpose, ( Ps. 127.1.)
Let us then be careful and diligent to call for his blessed Help and Succor at
all times, and never trust to our own strength and abilities, but let us always
be mindful of that Divine Instruction of our blessed Lord, and put it in
practice; Luke 21.36. Watch ye therefore and pray always, that ye may be
accounted worthy to escape all these things, that shall come to pass, and to
stand before the Son of man.

And now that all men may be the more sensible of the heavy judgment of God,
which I affirm to be at hand, I shall here add the Eleventh Chapter, and some
other places of the Revelation of St. John, which do particularly treat of the
second grand Woe of that sacred Book, which is the judgment that I speak of.
And that this Eleventh Chapter may be the better understood of all men, I shall
add a short explication of it, according to that little Insight that I have
into this great Mystery; wherein, through God's help, I intend to be plain,
that the meanest Capacities may in a good measure understand it if they will,
and may clearly see, that this judgment is there foretold, and therefore will
certainly come to pass.

Revelation, Chapter XI. 1. And there was given me a reed like unto a rod, and
the Angel stood, saying, Rise and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and
them that worship therein. This is spoken in allusion and with respect to the
great Temple of God's worship at Jerusalem. But by the Temple here, we are to
understand the Christian Church; and by the Altar, the Religious Worship and
Services and Devotions that are performed in the Christian Church; and by Them
that worship therein, we are to understand the Worshippers in the Christian
Church: For the great Temple at Jerusalem has long since been destroyed, even
before St. John wrote this Book of Revelation, as it is affirmed. And by this
measuring the Temple of God here, is showed That our blessed Lord would come to
take a strict View and an exact Account of his Church in the end of this sixth
Trumpet, which begins, Rev. 9.13, and before the second dreadful Woe should
come upon it, which is now at hand: As heretofore God told Abraham that he
would go down to Sodom, and see whether they had done altogether according to
the great Cry of their sin and wickedness that was come unto him ( Genesis 18.20,
21.) before he destroyed it in such a dreadful manner.

2. But the Court which is without the Temple, leave out, and measure it not:
For it is given unto the Gentiles; and the holy City shall they tread under
foot forty and two months. As if our Lord had said; But the Court which is
without the Temple cast thou out as wast ground that affords me neither
profit nor pleasure and delight; and therefore I have given way to the Gentiles
(that is, to the Papist) that they may take possession of it, and use it as a
part of their Church; and therefore have thou no regard of it, and be not
curious about it in measuring of it: And the holy City (that is, the true
Christian Church) shall they tread under foot and domineer over forty and two
months (that is, about three years and an half.)

By the Court without the Temple, we are to understand the formal Professors of
the Protestant Church, whose Religion consists in an outward Show, that, like
the Pharisees and Hypocrites, they may appear righteous before men, Matthew.
6.16. and 23.28; but they do not take that due care that they ought to approve
themselves to God, and to purisie their lives and hearts from all sin and
wickedness, that they may be fit Temples for the blessed Spirit. And this the
Reverend Archbishop Usher shows. The outward Court (says he) is the formal
Christian, whose Religion lies in performing the outside Duties of
Christianity, without having an inward Life and Power of Faith and Love,
uniting them to Christ; and these God will leave to be trodden down, and swept
away by the Gentiles: But the Worshippers within the Temple and before the
Altar are those who do indeed worship God in Spirit and in Truth, whose Souls
are made his Temple, and he is honored and adored in the most inward thoughts
of their hearts, and they sacrifice their Lusts and vile Affections, yea and
their own Wills to him --. And he also takes the Papists to be the Gentiles
that are here mentioned, as I also affirm them to be. And as the outward Court
was far larger than the inward Court and the Temple; so is it to be feared that
the greater part of those that now go for Protestants, will then turn Papists
as soon as these Popish Gentiles appear with their displayed Banners and menace
and threaten the Protestants with death. But let not this shake the faith of
any good Protestants, but let them remember what our blessed Lord has told us,
Matthew. 7.13, 14, viz, That the Gate is wide, and the way broad that leads to
Destruction; and that many there be which go in thereat: But that the gate is
strait, and the way narrow which leads to Life; and that there are but few
that find it. By the holy City, are we to understand the true Church of Christ,
that it shall be trodden down of the Papists, and that they shall prevail and
domineer over it forty two months, or about three years and a half, or 1260
days as it is Rev. 12.6. But these I understand of natural and ordinary days,
and not of prophetic days, when a day is put for a year: For there is no
appearance of truth in taking them that way, and suppossing them to be now
past. For about three years and an half then is Popery like to reign over the
true Church of Christ, and to spread it self as far as ever it did before. This
seems to be plainly showed, Rev. 13.5-9; And there was given unto him a mouth
speaking great things, and blasphemies, and power was given unto him to make
war forty and two months. -- And it was given unto him to make war with Saints,
and to overcome them; and power was given him over all Kindreds, and Tongues,
and Nations. And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names
are not written in the book of Life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of
the world. If any man have an ear, let him hear. This is certainly meant of the
Papacy and Romish Church: And here we see that this Romish Beast, viz. the
Popedom is like to overcome the Saints, and to have Power over all Nations,
that is, all Christian Nations where it had power before. This Romish Beast had
his deadly wound given him in the Reformation when so many Provinces and
Kingdoms fell off from Popery and the Romish Church, and it was in a fair way
to have been totally destroyed. But now this Wound is like to be healed up
again for a time, and all these Provinces and Kingdoms are like to be brought
again under the Power and jurisdiction of Rome, and all are like to worship
this Popish Beast, but the true Servants of Almighty God, who are resolved to
dye rather than to defile themselves with the Popish Religion, and to fall down
and worship this Beast and his Image.

3. And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy a
thousand two hundred and threescore days clothed in sackcloth. As if our Lord
had said; But that I may show my Pastoral Care over my Church, and not be
wanting to it at such an extraordinary Time as this is, I will order my two
Witnesses (two eminent parts of my Church and some of my faithful Servants) and
they shall prophecy 1260 days, that is, about three years and an half in a
mournful manner, before these Popish Gentiles shall have power to tread down my
Church, and the Romish Beast shall prevail over it; That all my Servants may
have timely notice of it, and such as will hearken to my Sacred Oracles, and
the Voice of my Providence may be advertised of it, and may have time to Arm
and prepare themselves against it, and may not be surprised therein in to their
prejudice; And that I may declare to all the world how desirous I am that all
men should come to Repentance and be saved, and that now I wait with long
Patience three years and an half after I have sent forth my Heralds in mournful
habit to proclaim my coming in judgment, that hereby the formal and
hypocritical Worldlings and all Sinners might be brought to a true and sincere
Repentance and Reformation of their Lives according to my Divine Precepts, and
so find Mercy at this time. But if this Gracious method of mine will not
prevail with them, and no Overtures of kindness will work upon them; I will
take away the Mask and Vizard of their Hypocrisy, I will suffer the Popish
Gentiles and the Beast of Rome once more to bear Rule over my Church, and then
it will be manifest to all the world whether they will own me for their Lord
and Master, or whether they will reject me, and adore this Beast of Rome flat
contrary to my sacred Laws, and that Abhorrence and Detestation that I have
declared against this Romish Beast and the Popish Religion in these sacred
Oracles. And if they will presume to do this, let them know that my second
Dreadful Woe is at hand, and at their Eternal Peril let them look for the
Direful Effects of it.

This does not all indeed arise from this single Verse, but it may be fairly
drawn from this Verse and the rest of the Chapter. These Witnesses seem to be
two eminent parts of the Protestant Church, and the faithful Servants of God.
And I am persuaded that the eminent men of the Non jurors of this Kingdom do
bear a considerable part herein, being now suspended purely for a Point of
Conscience, and in a mournful condition. And perhaps something of a like nature
may be now acted in other Protestant Countries. And these two Witnesses are to
prophecy 1260 days, that is, about three years and an half before that Popery
shall prevail and have power over the true Christian Church. And although it be
now above three years and an half since these men were suspended, yet this does
not prove that they can be no part of these Witnesses. For tho they began then
to be in a mourning condition, yet the more solemn time of their Prophesying
did not begin till afterward; and this may be looked upon as a Praeludium to
their more solemn Prophesying. But I would not have any one to think that there
will be three years and an half yet before Popery shall come in: For it may
come in within a twelvemonth month for ought I know. I am fully persuaded that
these 1260 days are now a running, but I cannot define the exact beginning of
them, and therefore not the end, and am ignorant of God's secret working in the
Prophesying of these Witnesses. The exact time belongs to God, and I know it
not.

4. These are the two Olive Trees, and the two candlesticks standing before the
God of the earth. This may have some respect to the Prophet Zechariah's Vision,
and the answer that the Angel gave him to his question about it. Zec. 4 11, 14.
Then answered I (says the Prophet) and said unto him (that is to the Angel)
What are these two Olive Trees upon the right side of the Candlestick, and upon
the left side thereof? -- Then said he, These are the two Anointed Ones that
stand by the Lord of the whole earth. And this is understood to be meant of
Zerubbabel and Joshua those two eminent Servants of God, and is a high
commendation of them. And so is this to be looked upon as a high Encomium and
commendation of these Witnesses, and shows our blessed Savior's high
approbation of them. And this may be farther confirmed by what is said of the
undefiled Ones in the Church of Sardis, and is an argument to show that these
places contemporize and belong to the same time. Rev. 3.4. Thou have a few
Names (that is Persons) even in Sardis (says our Lord by his Angel) which have
not defiled their garments; and they shall walk with me in white; for they are
worthy. Tho the Generality of the Bishops and Pastors in the Sardian Church be
very tardy and faulty, yet we see that there are a few in this Church that are
approved of and highly commended: And these I take to be the Witnesses here.
And by these high Characters that our Lord has given of these Witnesses, he
has showed that these are the great Lights of his Church, and hereby has
admonished all men to have a due regard to them, and to hearken to their voice,
and to be ready to be guided and directed by them. And as I take the eminent
men of the Non-jurors to be a part of these Witnesses, so would I have all men
to have a due regard to them, and now to hearken to their pious Instructions
and admonitions, that they may save their Souls and Lives too if it may be. But
if any Non-jurors do show themselves to be sinful and wicked men in other
respects, or to be favorers of Popery, they are not to be looked upon as any
part of these Witnesses. For these are the true and distinguishing Characters
whereby all men are to know these Witnesses at this time; to wit, Their sad and
mournful condition, Their Prophesying in sackcloth, as it is in this xi.
Chapter; and their undefiled Garments, as it is, Rev. 3.4.

5. And if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth, and
devoureth their Enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner
be killed. This may have some respect to Moses and Aaron, whom God did in an
extraordinary manner protect, when he sent them to Pharaoh King of Egypt to
redeem his People out of their Egyptian Bondage, as we may see Exodus 7. and
thence forward: And afterward in the Wilderness did God in a miraculous manner
destroy those that rose up against them, causing the earth to open and swallow
up one part of them; and sending down fire from Heaven to consume another part
of them, as we may see Number. 16. And this may also have some respect to God's
two great Prophets Elijah and Elisha, for the protection of the former of
which, God twice sent down fire from Heaven to consume the two Captains and
their men that were sent to apprehend him; 2 Kings 1. And for the protection of
the other, God vouchsafed an heavenly Host of Horses and Chariots of fire; 2
Kings 6.17. And by this fire proceeding out of their mouth here, we are to
understand (as I conceive) that God will in an extraordinary manner protect and
defend these Witnesses during the time of their Prophesying; and will execute
some signal punishments upon their Enemies rather than suffer them to hinder
his Witnesses in the execution of their offices, which they do in obedience to
his blessed Will. And it may seem the more requisite that he should vouchsafe
them this extraordinary Safe Conduct for their protection, as he did to Moses
and Aaron, and to Elijah and Elisha, seeing the World heretofore has been too
ready to stone his Prophets; and seeing these Witnesses are sent out as his
special Heralds, and have such a weighty Charge upon their hands to Proclaim
his coming in judgment, and to give warning that this second Dreadful Woe is
now at hand, and coming upon all such as will by no means be Reclaimed and
brought to Repentance.

6. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their
Prophecy: and have power over waters to turn them to blood; and to smite the
earth with all Plagues as often as they will. This seems to be spoken in
allusion to the Miracles that God wrought by Moses and Elijah. Elias (says St.
James, 5.17.) was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed
earnestly that it might not rain; and it rained not on the earth by the space
of three years and six months. And this was in Ahab's time, as we may see 1
Kings 17. and 18. Chapters. And Moses at God's command bid Aaron to stretch his
rod over the waters, and they were turned into blood, Exodus 7.19. And many
other Miracles did God by their hand in the land of Egypt, as we may see in the
Book of Exodus. And with respect to these do these words here seem to be
spoken. And by these Witnesses having power to shut Heaven, etc. we are to
understand (I conceive) That Almighty God will in an extraordinary manner order
and Overruled the Affairs of the world during the time of their Prophecy; and
will do little less than work Miracles upon their account while they are
executing their Offices and fulfilling his Will; that they may not be
interrupted in the doing of it, and others may have the greater opportunity to
mind them; and that with an high Hand, and an outstretched Arm he will keep out
Popery till they have done their great Work and the 1260 days of their Prophecy
are sulfilled: For if God had not with a high Hand kept out Popery, it had been
here before this time.

7. And when they shall have finished their Testimony, the Beast that ascends
out of the bottomless Pit, shall make War against them, and shall overcome
them, and kill them. When these Witnesses shall have finished their Testimony,
and fully executed their Office in Proclaiming the coming in of Popery and the
Dreadful Woe that is at hand, and have given other seasonable Instructions and
Admonitions for such a great juncture of time as this is; And when the 1260
days, or three years and about an half, that are allowed them for this work,
are ended; Then the Beast that ascends out of the bottomless Pit, (that is,
the Papacy the Pope and his Agents) shall assault them; and those of the Romish
Religion shall prevail over them, and will quite put them to silence, and
deprive them of all the Rights and Privileges of living men, and pass the
Sentence of Excommunication and Death upon them perhaps, as seems probable; and
will then put a stop to all outward appearance of the Protestant Church. This
seems to be the meaning of Killing them, here. And here in these sacred Oracles
we may see what a sinful Religion Popery is, and what a sinful Church the
Romish Church is; to wit, That it is Diabolical and Hellish enough, that it
comes from the Infernal Pit of Darkness, and that it is promoted and carried on
by the Devil and his Agents, and is a grand Enemy of Christ's Church, and the
Killer of his faithful Servants. Here we may see with what black Characters and
Marks our Savior has Stigmatized and branded the Papacy and Church of Rome.
And let no good Protestant then ever any more presume to say, that there is any
hope of Salvation for such as are of the Romish Church and continue therein,
and so help to deceive the Papists, and such as turn to the Romish Church. And
Rev. 13.5, 6. And there was given un to him a mouth speaking great things and
Blasphemies; and power was given unto him to make war forty and two months. And
he opened his mouth in Blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his Name, and his
Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven. Here we may see that the Popedom and
Romish Church is flatly charged with Blasphemy against Almighty God himself;
thas the Religion and Practice of the Papists is no better in God's account
than downright Blasphemy against him. And how then can any man be saved by
joining with those that Almighty God has declared to be Notorious Blasphemers
of him, and grand Rebels against him: For it is clear that the Popes of Rome
and the Popedom are meant by this Beast, as I have showed before by the deadly
Wound that was given him in the Reformation, and the healing of it up again now
when Popery is to be extended as far as it was before, and the Pope and his
Ministers are like to Lord it over all the Protestant Church again. And as for
the Beast with two Horns, Rev. 13.11 --, It is clear that he is a Creature
subservient to the Popes and Popedom, and perhaps these late western Emperors
may be meant by him. Horns denote Principalities and Power; and these Empero's
have been some times Kings of France or Spain and Emperors; and some times
Princes or Dukes and Emperors. And the cursed Courts of Inquisition, their
merciless Racking and Tormenting of poor Souls that are unwilling to join in
their Idolatrous and sinful worship, and their threatening of men with Fire and
Sword, and the most terrible Deaths that can be invented, may look like the
doing of great Wonders and making of Fire to come down from Heaven on the earth
in the sight of men, ver. 13; when by these Terrors, in a manner like thunder
from Heaven, they fright and drive men to fall down and worship this Beast of
Rome, and own him as it were for a Deity. And again Rev. 14.9 --; And the third
Angel followed them, saying with a loud voice; If any man worship the Beast and
his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead or in his hand (that is, shall
own the Pope to be the Head of the Church, and join in the Popish Religion, and
any ways publicly declare himself to be a Papist; which we are to understand
by worshipping the Beast and his Image, and receiving his mark --) The same
shall drink of the wine of the Wrath of God, which is poured out without
mixture in the Cup of his Indignation, and he shall be Tormented with Fire and
Brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb:
And the smoke of their Torment ascended up for ever and ever --. And can any
man now say that Papists may be saved that continue in the Romish Church,
except he will flatly contradict these sacred Oracles of Truth? For all men
that will seriously mind this book of the Revelation may see that these things
are spoken of the Church of Rome by the Angels interpretation Rev. 17.9 --, and
other places. And the more these sacred Oracles come to Light, the more peccant
and culpable will those be that offend against them. And I conceive that men
will be far greater Sinners now in turning to the Popish Religion, than they
would have been heretofore; Because the Light of these sacred Oracles does
shine more clearly now, than it did in the days of our Forefathers, as to what
respects Popery and the Romish Church.

8. And their dead Bodies shall lie in the street of the great City, which
Spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified. That
is, these Witnesses and Servants of God shall remain like dead men (being cast
aside like dead Carcasses) in the street, that is within the jurisdiction and
within the reach of the Power of the great City of Rome, which in a Mystical
way by the Spirit of God is called Sodom and Egypt; and within whose
jurisdiction and by whose Power our blessed Lord and Savior was crucified.
Rome is the great Metropolis of the Popish Church, and by it we are to
understand the whole Romish Church, within which the dead bodies of these
Witnesses are to remain; that is, these Witnesses themselves in a dead and
forlorn condition, being cast aside like dead men, and having no more to do
with the Affairs of the Church or State than dead men. And Rome and the Romish
Church for the great wickedness thereof is compared here to Sodom, which God
destroyed in a prodigious manner with fire and brimstone from Heaven, for the
abominable sin and wickedness therefore, as we may see Genesis 18. and 19.
Chapters. And it is also compared here to Egypt, for the Tyranny and merciless
Cruelty that the Romish Church exercises toward the Servants of God and all
good Christians; as Egypt kept the People of God under hard Bondage, and in a
merciless manner destroyed their Children, that they might not increase, Exodus
3 --; and was prone enough to Idolatry, as the Romish Church also is. And
within the jurisdiction, and by the Power and Authority of the City of Rome was
our blessed Lord crucified. Pompey the Roman General had taken Jerusalem and
brought Judea into subjection to the Romans about sixty years before our
Savior was born: And Pontius Pilate the Roman Governor, by the Power and
Authority that he had from Rome, did pass Sentence upon our blessed Savior and
caused him to be crucified and put to death.

9. And they of the People, and Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations shall see
their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead
bodies to be put in graves. That is, the Papists the Popish Gentiles, and all
other Sects, and People of several Nations, that shall then join with them,
shall behold these Witnesses and faithful Servants of God in this dead and
forlorn condition, being made as the filth of the World (as the Apostle says 1
Cor. 4.13.) and esteemed like dead carcasses, but still continuing steadfast in
the Faith of the blessed Jesus; These poor Wretches shall they behold and see
before them three years and an half, while they have the Government; and shall
carry themselves as Unchristianly toward them, as it would be to see a dead
man lie upon the ground, and not vouchsafe to bury him: But by an high Hand of
Providence they shall be prevented from killing them in a natural and common
Sense, and taking away of their Lives. By, their dead Bodies, I understand
these Men in this forlorn and dead condition, but still to be living Men. And
by, not suffering their dead Bodies to be put in graves, may be meant their
Unchristian carriage and Inhumanity toward them, and that God with an high
Hand would still preserve these Witnesses that the Papists shall not really
kill them, and send them clean out of the World. And by three days and an half,
we are to understand three years and an half wherein Popery is to reign; this
being an usual thing to put days for years in the Prophecies in the Scriptures.
And to the Prophet Ezekiel the Lord said, Ezekiel 4.6. And thou shall bear the
Iniquity of the house of Judah forty days; I have appointed thee each day for a
year. Days were to signify years here in Ezekiel, and so often in other places;
and so in this place of the Revelation But to make three days and an half to
signify 1260 years, is a strange racking of the Sacred Text, as the Learned Dr.
More has done to make it comply with his own Sentiments, and being altogether
ignorant, as it seems, of this great Woe that is now at hand. And he has
confounded the 1260 days of the Prophesying of the Witnesses, with the 42
months wherein the Gentiles are to tread down the holy City; whereas these 1260
days are first to be finished and ended before the 42 months of the Gentiles
begin. For the Beast is not to prevail over them, ver. 7. till they have
finished their Testimony; and therefore the Gentiles are not to tread down the
holy City and pure Christian Church till that time. And if the 1260 days should
signify so many years, as he would have them to do, and should end at the
Reformation, they must begin before the Reign of Constantine the Great. And if
they begin after the time of Constantine, they must take in the time of the
Reformation; so that there is no appearance of Truth in understanding them this
way, and taking them for so many years: For if these be times of Sackcloth, all
are Sackcloth since Christianity began. There is no appearance of Truth in this
Learned Man's exposition of this Chapter; but it is indeed flat contrary to the
Sacred Oracle in this place. I say this, because I would willingly prevent Men
from being deluded by the mistaken Interpretation of this Learned Man in this
weighty Matter to the great hazard of their Lives and Souls too.

10. And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and make
merry, and shall send gifts one to another, because these two Prophets
tormented them that dwell on the earth. That is, the Papists and Romish Church
shall then rejoice over these Witnesses and the Protestant Church, and be merry
and heartily glad, and show great expressions of their joy and gladness one to
another, because they have brought the Protestant Church under again, and
intend to put an utter end to it: Because these Witnesses and the Eminent
Servants of God in the Protestant Church were continually upbraiding them with
the sinfulness of their Religion and Practice, and warning all men to have a
care of the Romish Religion, and drawing Papists from it, telling them that it
was flat contrary to the Sacred Word of God, and that nothing could be expected
from it but Eternal Death and Destruction; and this was very tormenting and
vexatious to those of the Romish Party to hear of the Sinfulness and Danger of
their Religion, which they were unwilling to leave, because of the sinful and
worldly Profits and Pleasures and Honors that they received by it. To hear this
profitable Diana of theirs cried down, and to see men, dissuaded from the
worshipping of her, this moves their blood and puts them into a tumult; Act
19.28.

11. And after three days and an half the Spirit of life from God entered into
them; and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon them which saw
them. That is, after Popery shall have Reigned three years and an half, and
after these Protestant Witnesses and Servants of God shall have remained in
this dead and forlorn condition three years and an half, Then by the Omnipotent
Power of God they shall be raised up again from this dead and miserable
condition into a lively and happy one. Not by might, nor by any Power of their
own, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts; Zec. 4.6. And then shall all
men be struck with exceeding great fear at this wonderful Work of God, and must
then expect the dreadful Effects of this second Woe, as the following verses
show.

12. And they heard a great Voice from Heaven, saying unto them, Come up
hither. And they ascended up to Heaven in a Cloud, and their Enemies beheld
them. That is, By an extraordinary Hand of Providence, like a commanding Voice
from Heaven, there was a way made for their great exaltation; and accordingly
they were exalted to great Honor and Power and Authority in the Church of
Christ in a remarkable manner; which I understand by their ascending up to
Heaven in a Cloud. And their Enemies of the Church of Rome saw this, and
wondered at it, that these Protestants, which they thought they had in their
Power and were wholly subdued, should be so strangely rescued from them, and
exalted again, and set out of their reach and power. And this is to come to
pass after Popery has prevailed three years and an half over the Protestant
Church.

13. And the same hour was there a great Earthquake, and the tenth part of the
City fell, and in the Earthquake were slain of men (or Names of Men, that is
Persons of Men) seven thousand: And the Remnant were affrighted, and gave Glory
to the God of Heaven. That is, At the same time that the Protestant Witnesses
shall be raised up again in such a wonderful manner, there will be a great
Earthquake; that is, an exceeding great Commotion and Tumult of War in the
Protestant parts of the World, and great Alarming and Fighting: And then the
Third Part of the Romish Church, as I conceive, shall be destroyed and fall off
from the Popedom, part being killed in this great Earthquake and Tumult of War,
and part turning Protestants: And then will there be an exceeding great
Slaughter of Men; for seven thousand seems here to be put, not barely for seven
thousand, but for an exceeding great number of Men that shall be then slain.
This we may conclude, because this is one of the three grand Woes of this Book;
and we see that a far greater number than seven thousand have often been slain,
and yet accounted no Woe by these Sacred Oracles. And the rest of the Papists,
being struck with fear and astonishment at this wonderful and heavy Judgment of
God upon them, will acknowledge in their Hearts and Consciences that this is in
truth the Handiwork of Almighty God; and many (as may be hoped) will upon this
turn Protestants, and so give Glory to the God of Heaven both with their Heart
and Mouth and in the whole course of their Lives.

By the Tenth Part of the City here, I conceive may be meant a Tenth Part of
the old Roman Empire and about a third Part of the Popish Empire as it will
then be when the Protestant Kingdoms are united to it again. This seems
probable to me, because St. John says ver. 15, There were great Voices in
Heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms of our Lord,
and of his Christ --. And hereby, I conceive, we are to understand a
considerable part of them, and more than a Tenth Part of the Popish Empire. And
three of the ten Horns, in Dan. 7. fell before the little Horn with Eyes and a
Mouth; whereby I understand that the Popish Empire was to be extended over
three tenth Parts of the old Roman Empire; and so a third Part of the Popish
Empire will be a tenth Part of the old Roman Empire, which I suppose may be
here meant.

It seems probable to me that there will be some Bloodshed when Popery comes
into this Nation; and let the great City of London look to that: Let the worthy
and pious Citizens thereof hearken to the Watchman's Voice, for he is willing
to do all that lies in his power to save their Souls and Lives too at this
great juncture of time. But Woe, Woe, Woe to poor England and the whole Kingdom
thereof, and the other Protestant Kingdoms at the end of the three years an and
half, when Popery shall be driven out: For then we see that this dreadful Woe
is to be executed. Then let the Revolting Protestants and all the Papists of
these Kingdoms expect that the heavy Wrach of Almighty God will come upon them,
if they do not in due time take care to prevent it, by hearkening to Wisdom's
Voice, and taking a due care to reform their Lives according to her Divine
Precepts.

14. The second Woe is past; and behold, the third Woe comes quickly. When the
three years and an half of Popery are past, and this heavy Judgment of God has
been executed upon the formal and sinful Professors of Christianity, and an
exceeding great multitude of them are slain, Then we are to know that the
second great Woe is past. And behold the third Woe comes quickly: That is, in
a short space of time, and in a far shorter space of time than had been between
the first Woe and this second Woe. And this third and most dreadful Woe of all
is like to come upon the Romish Church about an hundred and thirty years hence,
and about the year of our Lord 1826. This is too great a Mystery for me, and,
as I conceive, for any man else to define the exact year when this dreadful Woe
shall fall; and therefore I only say about the year 1826, and do not define
that for the exact year when the Popedom shall go down. But yet I am persuaded
that it will stand but a very few years after that time. For by these Sacred
Oracles we are assured that the number of the Beast is but 666. Rev. 13.18.
Here is Wisdom (says the Angel, or St. John from him.) Let him that has
understanding count the number of the Beast: for it is the number of a Man; and
his number is six hundred threescore and six. By the Beast here, I understand
the Beast with seven heads and ten horns; and by this Beast with seven heads
and ten horns, I understand the Papacy and Church of Rome. For though this Beast
be said to have seven Heads both in respect of the seven hills upon which Rome
stood and was built, and also in respect of the seven Supreme Governments of
Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Emperors, etc. by which that City and the Roman
Polity have been governed, and which resided there as their great Metropolis;
yet it is plain to me, that by this Beast is for the most part, or altogether
meant the Popedom and Romish Church since it became an Idolatrous and
Persecuting Church. And when the Popedom and Church of Rome has stood 666
years from its first assuming the Nature and Disposition of a Beast of Prey;
when 666 years are completed from the time that it first put the true and
faithful Servants of God to death in a notorious and remarkable manner, then
shall the Popedom and Romish Church be destroyed in a most dreadful manner, and
then shall the third and last Woe be executed upon it. And these 666 years do
begin, as I conceive, about the time of the Waldenses and Albigenses, and about
the year of our Lord 1160. What was done before that time may be looked upon as
done in the Minority of the Beast before he came to his full growth and not to
be reckoned of; but about that time he became of a full Stature and Strength,
and in a bloody and remarkable manner did destroy the Sheep and Church of
Christ, and thousands lost their Lives and perished by him. And about that
time, and about the year 1160 do these 666 years begin: And when they shall be
ended, this third Woe comes; which may be said to come quickly, in respect of
this far longer distance of time that has been between the first Woe and this
second Woe.

15. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great Voices in Heaven,
saying, The Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of
his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. The seventh and last of these
Trumpet-Angels here sounds to Usher in the seventh and last Scene of Affairs
of the Church, as they are divided under these seven Trumpet-Angels. For after
the time of this seventh Trumpet-Angel is expired, an End is to be put to this
World, and there is to be time no more, as the Angel swear, Rev. 10.5 -- And
the Angel -- lifted up his hand to heaven, and swear by him that lives for
ever and ever --, That there should be time no longer: But in the days of the
voice of the seventh Angel, when he should sound, even the Mystery of God
should be finished, as he has declared to his Servants the Prophets. In the
end of the days of the voice of the seventh Angel the Mystery of God is to be
finished, and this World then is like to be at an End. In this Sacred and
Mysterious Book of the Revelation there seem to me to be three Septenaries or
distinct Sets and Orders of Prophecies. The first is of seven Churches; the
second of seven Seals; and the third of seven Angels sounding with their
Trumpets. And in the times of the three last of these Trumpet-Angels were to be
three grand Woes, as the Angel declared, Rev. 8.13. And I beheld (says St.
John) and heard an Angel flying through the midst of Heaven, and saying with a
loud voice, Woe, Woe, Woe to the Inhabitants of the earth, by reason of the
other voices of the Trumpet of the three Angels which are yet to sound. The
first of these Woe's was in the time of the fifth Trumpet-Angel, and is now
long since past; the second, which is to be in the time of the sixth Trumpet
Angel, is now at hand; and the third is to fall under the time of the seventh
and last Trumpet-Angel, and will be fulfilled hereafter, as I said before. And
the time of the seventh Trumpet-Angel does begin presently after this second
dreadful Woe shall be executed. And upon his sounding there were great voices
and acclamations in Heaven (as it was represented to St. John in this Vision)
declaring that the Kingdoms of this World, that is, a considerable part of
them, were become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and hereby
showing that they will then be so indeed, and will then become Protestant
Kingdoms, and sincere Professors of the pure Word of God, and live and act
according to the blessed Precepts and Commands of the Gospel of Christ: And
then he shall Reign over them to the World's end, and be owned by them for
their Lord and Master, and his Sacred Laws shall then stand valid and in force
with them; and neither the Pope of Rome, nor any other such cruel and sinful
Lord shall any more in such a manner Tyrannize and Domineer over them and
Persecute them, and drive them to Idolatry or any other notorious violation of
the Sacred Word of God.

16. And the four and twenty Elders which sat before God on their seats, fell
upon their faces, and worshipped God. Upon this wonderful Work that Almighty
God had wrought here upon earth for his Church and faithful Servants, the
Elders of the Court of Heaven were represented to St. John as falling upon
their Faces before God, and worshipping of him in this profound manner; and
hereby showing that the Church then ought and will magnify him in an exceeding
high manner. For these Elders seem to allude to the Jewish Sanhedrim and great
Council, and are the Representatives of the Christian Church, as we may see,
Rev. 5.9, 10. where they say of the Lamb: For thou wast slain, and have
redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People,
and Nation: And have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall Reign
on the Earth. By declaring that they were redeemed by the blood of the Lamb,
and that they should Reign on the Earth, they show that they are the
Representatives of the Christian Church.

17. Saying, We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and
art to come; because thou have taken to thee thy great Power, and have Reigned.
And here is their Song of Thanksgiving and ascribing of Glory to Almighty God,
who was from all Eternity and endures to all Eternity, upon the account of
what he had done for his Church and Servants; because in the Day of Anguish and
Distress he had in such a wonderful manner stretched out his Omnipotent Arm,
and rescued them from the very Jaws of Death and Pit of Destruction, and given
such a Proof of his irresistible Power.

18. And the Nations were angry, and thy Wrath is come, and the time of the
dead that they should be judged, and that thou should give reward unto thy
Servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and them that fear thy Name, small
and great, and should destroy them which destroy the earth. This is a
Narration of the Elders showing their high Approbation of what God had
righteously done, Declaring that the Popish Nations were angry and enraged
against the Protestant Church and true Servants of God, resolving to put an end
to the Protestant and pure Church of Christ; And that the Wrath of God then
came upon them, and prevented them from doing of it, and defeated this bloody
design of theirs; And that it was time then that these Dead Men, that were dead
in trespasses and wickedness, and past all hopes of being Reclaimed and brought
to Repentance, should be judged and sentenced to Destruction according to their
great Sin and Wickedness; And that it was time then that God should think upon
all his faithful Servants and all such as fear his Name of what Rank or Degree
soever they be, and reward them according to their Piety and the faithful
service that they have done for him; And that he should destroy and Sentence to
Corruption those of the Romish Church, that destroy the Earth, and corrupt all
the Morals of Mankind: For this is here related as past.

19. And the Temple of God was opened in Heaven, and there was seen in his
Temple the Ark of his testament, and there were lightnings, and Voices, and
thundrings, and an Earthquake, and great hail. And The Temple of God (says St.
John) was opened in Heaven: And hereby seems to be meant, that the Protestant
and pure Worship and Service of Almighty God shall then be publicly set up
again, and celebrated in public Churches to the Praise and Honor of his great
and glorious Name; and that all men shall then have free access to his sacred
and pure Worship again, and to all the Mysteries of the Christian Religion,
which seem to be meant by the Ark of his Testament being seen therein, to wit,
That all men shall then be admitted again to draw nigh to God in his Church and
Temple and sacred Worship, and admitted to his Table again in the holy
Communion: And the lightnings and Voices, etc. seem to show the great
acclamations and shoutings of joy that there shall be then, and the Psalms of
praise and thanksgiving that shall then be heartily sung to Almighty God, and
the great alterations that shall then be made for the better ordering of
Affairs both in Church and State. The third and grand Woe of all is to be
executed in the time of this seventh Trumpet-Angel, about the year 1826 as I
have said; but the Angel having declared ver. 14, That the third Woe comes
quickly, the farther treating of this Woe seems to be put off till some
Chapters after, upon which I shall briefly touch by and by.

I have here endeavored to make this sacred and infallible Oracle as clear as
I well can, that the Light thereof may now shine forth, and that it may
Proclaim aloud to the world this second dreadful Woe that is now at hand; That
men may now at the last be admonished and prevailed with to repent and amend
their lives, seeing the heavy Wrath of God now hangs over our heads, and this
Woe is now ready to be executed upon us; That they may now be awaked out of
their carnal security, and take some effectual means for their own safety,
seeing the Danger is so great and at hand, and there is but one step between
them and the Pit of Destruction. And let all the Bishops and Pastors of the
Protestant Church now read over with hearty attention the Epistle to the Church
in Sardis, and look upon it as directed to themselves. There they may see that
they are too tardy and too negligent of Christ's Flock, even according to the
Divine and Infallible Censure of our blessed Lord himself; Rev. 3.2. Be
watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to dye: For I
have not found thy works perfect before God. Be watchful and double your
diligence, and look after and strengthen that little Flock of Christ, that
remains, and is ready to dye and perish; For your works, you see, are not
found perfect before God. Let all the Bishops and Pastors of the Protestant
Church now take care to cherish and strengthen their Flocks, and especially to
fortify and strengthen them against Popery, that they may not be devoured by
that Beast that ascends out of the bottomless Pit. I here give public
Warning to all the Bishops and Pastors of the Protestant Church that our
blessed Lord is coming and at hand; and therefore let them take care, That
their loins be girded about, and their Lights burning, and they themselves like
unto men that wait for their Lord --. Blessed are those servants, whom the
Lord, when he comes, shall find watching --. Luke 12.35 --. And ver. 43 --
Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing. Of
a truth, I say unto you, that he will make him Ruler over all that he has. But
if any man will not take warning, but put his confidence in an Arm of flesh,
and trust to Carnal security; If any will not prepare for such a Coming of our
blessed Lord, as I here warn him of, but will put the Evil Day far off and out
of his thoughts, and sing Requiems to his Soul, and pursue his pleasures and
delights; Let that man know that these very words of our blessed Lord shall be
verified upon him; Rev. 3.3. If therefore thou shall not watch, I will come on
thee as a thief, and thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee. And
how our Lord will then treat such a man he has plainly told us, Luke 12.45,
46. But and if that servant say in his heart, my Lord delayeth his coming, and
shall begin to beat the men servants and maidens, and to eat and drink, and to
be drunken: The Lord of that servant will come in a day when he looks not for
him, and at an hour when he is not ware, and will cut him in sunder, and will
appoint him his Portion with the unbelievers. And let all the Protestant
Bishops and Pastors and all men else take care that this be not their Condition
and Doom at this time.

Now is the time that the Angel is to be sent forth with the Seal of the living
God, to Seal the Servants of God in their foreheads and to mark them out for
Protection and Deliverance, that the destroying Angels may not hurt them, Rev.
7.2 --. And let all the Pastors of the Protestant Church take diligent care
that they may be fit and well qualified for such an Angelical and Divine Mark
of Mercy and Protection; And let them use their utmost endeavors that others
may be so too, and may be Registered in the Book of Life both for Salvation at
this time, and also in the world to come. Now is the time that the gloriously
adorned Woman, the pure Church of Christ, is like to undergo her hard and sore
Travel, when the great red Dragon will wait and stand by her ready to devour
her hopeful Offspring as soon as it is born, Rev. 12.1 --. And let all the
faithful Pastors and Members of Christ's Church now implore the Divine
Assistance of Almighty God, That now, seeing the Child is come to the Birth,
there may be strength to bring forth, (2 Kings 19.^;) and that the Fruit of her
Womb, this Royal and hopeful Issue may be delivered from the bloody Talons and
merciless Paws of this red and fiery Dragon, and may be caught up to the Throne
of God, and there preserved, that in due time he may Rule all Nations with his
strong and iron Rod. Now is the time That that Grand and Set Battle is to be
fought between Michael and the Dragon, Rev. 12.7 --. For now will Michael the
Archangel and all the Host of blessed Angels that are under him, exert and put
forth their utmost strength and power, and use their utmost vigilance and
Industry for the supporting and upholding of the pure Church of Christ, and to
keep the Servants of God from Revolting and Backsliding and falling to Popery,
and being driven by the Terror of men to fall down and worship the Beast that
ascends out of the bottomless Pit. And now will the Dragon also set his
shoulder to the work, and he and his black Regiments will labor with Might and
Main to extinguish and utterly to put an End to the pure Christian Church, and
to drive all the faithful Servants of God to desert and forsake him, and to
turn to the Popish Religion, and to join with the Beast of Rome, which God has
declared to be a grand Rebel against him and his Kingdom. And now therefore it
is the Duty of every good Protestant, and especially of the Bishops and Pastors
of the Protestant Church to be at their most ardent Prayers to Almighty God,
and to implore his Help, that he would have Mercy upon his Church and preserve
it from being destroyed by the restless Enemies thereof. Now is it their duty
to lift up their incessant Cries to the blessed Jesus, that he would make good
that Promise to his Church ( Matthew. 16.18.) That the Gates of Hell should not
prevail against it: That he would now hold up his Auspicious Hand while this
Battle is fought, as once Moses did upon a like occasion, ( Exodus 17.11.) and
that he would stretch out his Almighty Arm for the support of his Church and
Servants, and Succor us frail Creatures in the Day of Trial, and Grant Success
and Victory to Michael and his Angels, who is represented as General of the
Christian Forces. Now let all the valiant Soldiers of Christ put on the whole
Armor of God that they may be able to stand against all the Wiles of the
Devil, Ephesians. 6.11 -- For we are now to wrestle, not with flesh and blood,
against the bodily strength of a single man, as wrestlers do; But against
Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness, or the dark
and sinful Rulers, of this world; against spiritual wickedness in high places.
Wherefore let us take unto our selves the whole Armor of God, that we may be
able to withstand in the evil Day, and having done all that is in our power
that we may stand. Let all the faithful Servants of Christ now give all that
little help and assistance that they can in so righteous and sacred a Cause as
this is, when the Church and Spouse of Christ lies at the Stake, and wherein
the blessed Jesus and Savior of the World requires their service: And then if
they fight valiantly in this sacred and Renowned Cause, and persevere to the
end; then let them expect his Euge, Well done thou good and faithful Servant
--, Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord; Matthew. 25.21. And says our Lord to
the Church in Sardis, to the Pastors and Members thereof, even to the present
Christian Church (as I understand it, and as Dr. More also has interpreted it)
Rev. 3.5. He that overcomes, the same shall be clothed in white raiment, and I
will not blot out his name out of the Book of Life, but I will confess his name
before my Father, and before his Angels. Those that overcome in this Grand
Battle against the Dragon, in this splendid manner like Victors and Conquerors
are they to be clothed; their Names are like to stand Registered in the Book of
Life, as those that are like to enjoy eternal Bliss and Happiness; And to their
unspeakable joy and endless glory they will be had in honor before Almighty God
and his Angels. But if any man draw back, his Soul will have no pleasure in
him, Heb. 10.38. And our Lord has told us, Matthew. 10.33; That whosoever shall
deny him before men; him also he will deny before his Father which is in
heaven. And now let all the Bishops and Pastors of the Protestant Church
remember that bitter Curse which the Angel pronounced against the Inhabitants
of Meroz, Jud. 5.23. Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) Curse ye
bitterly the Inhabitants thereof; because they came not to the help of the
Lord, to the help of the Lord against the Mighty: And let them take care, that
there may be no cause for the Archangel Michael now to pronounce such another
bitter Curse against them for their backsliding at this Day, when this great
Battle of the Lord upon the account of his Church is to be fought. And here we
are taught how we must prevail and overcome; Rev. 12.11. And they overcame him
by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their Testimony, and they loved
not their Lives unto the death. These are the means by which we are to overcome
at this time, and not by carnal Weapons, viz; By procuring an interest in the
Blood of the blessed Jesus; and by a meek and patient suffering for his sake,
and a firm resolution rather to dye than to depart from the Testimony and Faith
of Christ, and violate and break his sacred Commandments, freely offering up
our Lives to him, if he should call us to the Cross to suffer Martyrdom for his
sake. And for our great Comfort and Encouragement herein, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.12. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him. And says St. John Rev.
14.13. And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the
dead which die in the Lord from hence forth, yea says the Spirit, that they
may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them. And again says he,
Rev. 20.4 -- And I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of
Jesus, and for the Word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast, neither
his Image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads or in their
hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years. -- This is the
first Resurrection. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first
Resurrection; on such the second death has no power, but they shall be Priests
of God, and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years: See Dr. More
upon this place. And for our great stay and sure support in such a fiery Trial,
says our blessed Lord, Matthew. 28.20. And lo, I am with you always, even unto
the end of the world; Amen. Which words I hope I may thus paraphrase with
respect to this great juncture of time. My incessant Care and watchful
Providence shall always attend you my Servants, and I will never be wanting to
you, but will be ready to assist you always with my Counsel and Help, if ye
will hearken to me, and carefully observe the motions of my Hand: And even now
in this dark Day and fiery Trial that is coming upon you, mine eyes shall be
continually upon you, and my hand stretched out to uphold and strengthen you,
and Death with its ghastly looks and dreadful face shall not then too sorely
affright and terrify you when ye dye Martyrs in my Cause: And know that it is
I the Savior of the world that am the sure and faithful Watchman, and that I
do now advertise and give you warning of the dark Days that are coming upon
you, and the heavy Woe that is to follow them, that ye may know these things
beforehand, and may not be surprised at them when they come, to your
astonishment and prejudice: For it was I that awoke my Watchmen, and set them
to give warning of the Evil approaching, otherwise they had been taken in a
drowsy and sleepy Condition: I am faithful in what I promise, and according to
my Word, Lo I am with you now, and at all times even unto the end of the World.
Amen.

The second Woe, which is now at hand, and like to fall, as I conceive, upon
the Protestant Kingdoms chiefly, is like to be very dreadful: But yet the third
Woe, which is like to fall upon the Popish Kingdoms and within the jurisdiction
of Rome about 130 years hence, is like to be far more dreadful; for so do these
sacred Oracles plainly seem to declare. Then is the terrible Vision of the
sixth Seal (as I conceive) to be consummated and completed; Rev. 6.12-17. And I
beheld (says St. John) when he had opened the sixth Seal, and lo, there was a
great Earthquake, and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon
became as blood, and the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a figtree
casts her untimely figs when she is shaken of a mighty wind; And the heaven
departed as a scroll when it is rolled together, and every mountain and Island
were moved out of their places; And the Kings of the earth, and the great Men,
and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty men, and every
bondsman, and every freeman hid themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the
mountains; and said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from
the face of him that sits on the throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb: For
the great Day of his Wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? This Seal
may in part belong to this second Woe, that is now approaching; but it will be
consummated and completed, as I conceive, when the third and last of these
three dreadful Woes comes. And then Woe, Woe, Woe to Rome and the Romish
Church; for then are all these dreadful things like to be fulfilled and
completed according to the sense and meaning of them: And the Destruction of
new and Mystical Babylon is set out in as prodigious a manner, as the
Destruction of old Babylon was, ( Isaiah 13.9 --) as if the Frame of the whole
world should then shake and tremble and be disordered at that Day; and as if
the Terror of it should be like the Terror of the last Day, when the Heavens
and the Earth shall be dissolved; and as if men should then be surrounded with
Blackness and Darkness on every side; and should then seek to hide themselves
in the dens and caves of the rocks, and call to the rocks and mountains to hide
and shelter them from the fiery Wrath and merciless Cruelty of that Day, that
should have no Light nor Comfort at all in it. Then will be the time that the
great Harvest of the earth, the great Harvest of Sin and Iniquity, will be
fully ripe and fit for the Sicle, and shall then be cut down and cleared away,
Rev. 14.14-16. Then will the great Winepress of the Wrath of God be trodden,
Rev. 14.19, 20. And the Angel (says St. John) thrust in his sicle into the
earth, and gathered the vine of the earth, and cast it into the great Winepress
of the Wrath of God: And the Winepress was trodden without the City, and blood
came out of the Winepress even unto the horses bridles, by the space of a
thousand and six hundred furlongs. O Dreadful! What an astonishing treading of
the Winepress of the Wrath of God is this like to be, when Blood shall thus
flow from it like a great River, whose Stream shall swell and rise as high as
the horses bridles, and not be stopped before it has run a thousand and six
hundred surlongs? What an Akeldama and field of Blood will Rome and the
jurisdiction thereof then be? But through the good Providence of God, this great
and stupendous Winepress of the Wrath of God shall be trodden without the
City: Not without the City which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt; Not
without the City of Rome and the jurisdiction thereof; for these are like then
to be the Shop and Anvile of Divine Vengeance, where all the Heats of Wrath and
Fury are to be hammered: But it will be trodden without the holy City and pure
Church of Christ; God then so overruling and ordering Affairs, that his
faithful Servants shall not then be dipped in this bloody Stream; And our Lord
then making good his Promise to the Church of Philadelphia his beloved Spouse.
Rev. 3.10. Because thou have kept (says our Lord) the Word of my Patience, I
also will keep thee from the Hour of Temptation, which shall come upon all the
World, to try them that dwell upon the earth. From this dark hour of Trial and
judgment is the Church in Philadelphia then to be preserved, as a recompense
for her sore Travel and great exercise of Patience that she is now to undergo
in the end of the Sardian Church; and after this second Woe is past, the
Philadelphian Church, I hope, will begin. Then, when the third Woe comes, are
all the seven last Vials of the Wrath of God to be poured out upon the earth
and upon the City which Spiritually is called Egypt, and it is like to be
plagued in such a manner as heretofore the Land of Egypt was; Rev. 16.1 --.
Then is the water of the great River Euphrates to be dried up, that the way of
the Kings of the East may be prepared to come in to the Fall of great Babylon;
Rev. 16.12. Then are the three unclean Spirits like frogs, proceeding out of
the mouths of the Dragon, the Beast, and false Phrophet, to go forth to gather
the Kings of the whole world to the Battle of that great Day of God Almighty:
And then they are to be gathered into a place called in the Hebrew tongue
Armageddon, which shows that they are all there to be destroyed, where this
vast Army shall be drawn together; Rev. 16.14, 16. Then is to be that grand
Earthquake, such an Earthquake as the world had never known before; ver. 18.
And there were Voices (says St. John) and thunders, and lightnings, and there
was a great Earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, so
mighty an Earthquake and so great. Then is the Earth to be shaken in such a
manner as it had never been shaken before, with the Tumults of War, and Armies,
and Battles, and bloody Tragedies that shall then be acted upon it. Then is
great Babylon like to be shattered and rent to pieces. ver. 19. And the great
City was divided into three parts, -- And great Babylon came in remembrance
before God, to give unto her the Cup of the Wine of the fierceness of his
Wrath. The great City of Mystical Babylon is then to be divided into three
parts, but never an one of these three parts will be left to uphold the Papal
Chair. For then will the Kings of the earth, that have committed fornication
with her, and her Merchants and Paramours and Lovers that doted upon her, be
glad to make their escape from her Torment and Burning, and to stand afar off
for fear of it, and there to pour out their doleful lamentations for her when
they behold the smoke of her Burning; Rev. 18.9 --. And of the ten Horns it is
said, Rev. 17.16. These shall hate the Whore, and shall make her desolate, and
naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. And then will they be
ready to curse the day, wherein they were made such Slaves and Drudges to the
Papacy and Popish Religion. And of the Beast and false Prophet it is said, Rev.
19.20. And the Beast was taken, and with him the false Prophet; -- These both
were cast alive into a Lake of fire burning with brimstone: which shows that
they shall be totally destroyed, and swallowed up with a swift and merciless
Destruction. Then, when this third Woe comes, are all the Popish Princes like
to lay down their Scepters, and to bid Farewell to all Regal Authority; for so
do these sacred Oracles show. Rev. 16.19. And the Cities of the Nations fell;
says St. John: That is, all the Popish Principalities and Polities shall then
fall to naught and be destroyed. And under the sixth Seal it is said, Rev. 6.15
-- And the Kings of the earth, and the Great men -- hid themselves in the dens,
and in the rocks of the mountains; and said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on
us and hide us --. Then are all the ravenous Fowls of heaven to be called to
the Supper of the great God; That they may eat the flesh of Kings; Rev. 19.17,
18. And I saw an Angel standing in the sun (says St. John) and he cried with a
loud voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, Come and
gather your selves together unto the Supper of the great God: That ye may eat
the flesh of Kings, and the flesh of Captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and
the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all men
both free and bond, both small and great. When this third Woe comes, Then not
only the Popedom and Popish Church and Religion, but even the very City of Rome
also shall then in a Violent manner be totally destroyed, and no Artificer's
hammer shall any more be heard therein, and the sound of the millstone is then
like to cease there, and no candle is to shine there any more; Rev. 18.21 --.
And a mighty Angel (says St. John) took up a stone like a great Millstone, and
cast it into the Sea, saying, Thus with Violence shall that great City Babylon
be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all. Here we have the Type of
Rome's dreadful destruction, viz. that it is to be like the violent dashing of
a great millstone into the Sea. And ver. 22 -- And the voice of harpers and
musicians, and of Pipers and trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee;
and no craftsman of whatsoever craft be he, shall be found any more in thee;
and the sound of the millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee; And the
light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee; and the voice of the
Bridegroom, and of the Bride shall be heard no more at all in thee --. The very
City of Rome it self is then like to be totally consumed, and nothing left but
the sad Ruins thereof to declare to Posterity, That there once stood the great
City that Spiritually was called Sodom and Egypt, which was the great
Metropolis and Den of all the bloody Tyrants and cruel Persecutors of the
Church and Servants of God, and the place where Satan himself kept his black
Court; Rev. 2.13. These Melodious and joyful voices and comfortable sounds
shall then totally cease there, and the hideous howlings of the beasts of the
desert are then like to succeed in their room. Rome then is like to become the
Rendezvous of Demons, and the Cage and Receptacle of all hateful and uncouth
birds: For this is the proclamation of the Angel that came down from Heaven,
Rev. 18.2. And he cried (says St. John) mightily with a strong voice, saying,
Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of Devils,
and the hold of every foul Spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful
bird. The Satyrs and Goblins may then dance there, and the Owls may take it for
their habitation: All the doleful Creatures of the twilight may then resort
thither, that are fit to howl and hollow forth the sad Ruin and Desolation of
this place, and to proclaim to the World That Rome's Day is at an End, and the
dismal Night of Darkness is come upon her.

And this third Woe also will come in a surprising manner upon all such as are
wrapped up in Carnal security, and are too intent upon their worldly Concerns,
and eagerly pursuing their sins and wickedness. This our Savior shows,
declaring that his Coming at this third Woe should be like the coming of a
thief. Rev. 16.15. Behold I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watches, and
keeps his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame. Let all men
then take care to be upon their watch, and look to it, that they be not
surprised in their sins and filthiness to their eternal shame and reproach. And
says the Angel, Rev. 18.8. Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death,
and mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire. This seems
to intimate that her plagues should come unexpectedly one upon another; and she
is to be totally consumed. And it seems probable that the City of Rome the
Mystical Babylon will then be burnt down with fire. And as Noah gave warning of
the Destruction of the old World a hundred and twenty years before the Flood
came to sweep away and destroy the Sinners thereof: So let these Papers now
give warning of this dreadful Woe 130 years before it comes, that all such as
shall have any fear of God before their eyes, and shall be heartily concerned
for the safety of their Lives, and the eternal Salvation of their Souls, may be
advertised of it beforehand, and may take a due care to save themselves that
they may not then be destroyed and perish. Let them harken to the Voice of
Mercy, which St. John heard from Heaven, while Mercy may be had and before it
be too late; Rev. 18.4. And I heard another Voice from Heaven (says he)
saying, Come out of her my People, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and
that ye receive not of her Plagues. Let all Persons of the Popish Church both
now and hereafter harken to this sacred voice and be admonished by it to leave
the Communion of the Romish Church, while there is hope of Mercy for them,
before Mercy be shupt up in displeasure, and there remains no more but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery Indignation, which shall
devour the Adversaries, Heb. 10.27.

It is clear to me that both Mr. Mede and Dr. More, tho learned men, are
mistaken in these passages that relate to these two great Woes; and therefore
perhaps it may not be a miss for me to set down those places in this sacred
Book of the Revelation, which appear to me to respect these Woes and the times
about them. And perhaps it might be the Will of God that these things should
remain as it were under a cloud till now, that the Light of them breaking forth
on a sudden and unexpectedly might the more startle and fright men out of their
Carnal Security and worldly mindedness, and have the greater influence upon
them to persuade them to Repentance and a Reformation of their Lives, and stir
them up to use their utmost Care for their own Safety and Salvation at this
great juncture of time, when they apprehend themselves to be in so great Danger
of Perishing both in this World, and that which is to come too.

The Places that seem to respect this second great Woe, and the Times about it
The Church in Sardis, Rev. 3.1 -- 6. The Sixth Seal, Rev. 6.12 -- 17. In part,
and in part to the next Woe. The Sealing of the Servants of God, Rev. 7. In
part, and in part to the next Woe. The three Woes, Rev. 8.13. The two Woes to
come, Rev. 9.12. The measuring of the Temple, Rev. 11. The giving up of the
outward Court, Rev. 11. The Treading of the Holy City under foot, Rev. 11. The
Prophesying of the two Witnesses, Rev. 11. The Beast's War and killing of them,
Rev. 11. Their returning to Life again, Rev. 11. The great Earthquake and
Slaughter, Rev. 11. The Woman in Travel, Rev. 12. The War between Michael and
the Dragon, Rev. 12. The War of the Beast with the Saints, Rev. 13.5 --.
As for the seven Epistles to the seven Churches, Rev. 2d. and 3d. Chapters, we
are to look upon them, not as the Epistles of St. John to particular Churches,
but as the Epistles of our blessed Lord directed to his universal Church at
certain junctures of time, written by St. John as they were dictated to him by
the Angel. For though he addresseth himself to them, Rev. 1.4. saying, John to
the seven Churches --; yet when he comes to write these Epistles, he writes
them in the Name of our blessed Savior, as the Prefaces of them do show: Rev.
2.8. These things says the First and the Last, which was dead and is alive.
And ver. 18. These things says the Son of God --; and so of all the rest of
these Epistles. And these Prophetic Epistles our blessed Savior directs to
his universal Church at the great junctures of time when it was, or shall be
most seasonable for him to do so; and when his Church stood, or shall stand in
the greatest need of his Divine Instructions, Admonitions and Encouragement.
And about what times they seem to me to be directed to the Christian Church, I
shall here set down.

The Epistle to the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.1 -- 7, seems to be directed to
the Christian Church some considerable time before the 16th. Year of the
Emperor Adrian, and does chiefly respect the Christian Church in Judea. For
herein our blessed Savior takes notice of their Labor and Patience, etc. but
withal tells them that they had lost their first Love, and that he would remove
their Candlestick out of his place, except they should repent and show a higher
pitch of Zeal and Love than of late they had done, ver. 4, 5. Nevertheless
(says our Savior) I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy
first Love. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do
the first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. Our Savior does here tell
them that they were fallen from the great Zeal and Love that the Church had
formerly showed; and does admonish them to repent, and show such Love and Zeal
toward him: And tells them plainly that if they would not, he would come
quickly, and remove their Candlestick out of his place; that is, that he would
remove the Light of the Gospel from them, if they would make no better a use of
it. And when the Christian Church in Judea and of the Jewish Nation had had a
considerable time to repent in after this Admonition and Threatening; they not
repenting as they ought, our Savior according to this Threatening did remove
their Candlestick out of his place between the 16th. and 18th. Year of the
Emperor Adrian. For about that time the Jews were all driven out of Judea and
their Land was laid waste, and the Christian Church there was quite destroyed;
several hundred thousands were slain in Battles, a great number perished by
Famine and Diseases, and others were banished into Spain, and the Jews were
forbid to come within sight of their Country: And till that time the Bishops of
Jerusalem had been of the Jewish Nation; but after that time, when there came
to be Bishops of Jerusalem again, there were no more Bishops of the Jewish
Nation. See Eusebius, lib. 4. chap. 5 and 6. and the Authors that Valesius
mentions in his maginal Notes upon the 6th. Chapter. And it was just and right,
that, seeing the Christian Religion was first planted in Judea and in the
Jewish Nation, their Candlestick should be first removed, when they began to
abuse and did not make that good use of the Light of the Gospel that they
ought. And this our Savior had told them when he was conversant among them;
Matt. 21.43; That the Kingdom of God should be taken from them, and given to a
Nation bringing sorth the fruit thereof. And this was to be a warning to all
other Churches and at all times, that they also are like to have their
Candlestick removed, when they grow unfruitful under the blessed Light of the
Gospel and begin to abuse it; Rev. 2.7; He that has an ear, let him hear what
the Spirit says unto the Churches The Period of this Church therefore is not
to be placed till the 18th. year of the Emperor Adrian at the soonest, and till
about the year of our Lord 135; and Dr. More has placed it too soon in placing
it in the 10th. of Nero, and in the year of our Lord 63. For it is not to be
placed till this Candlestick was removed, and till about the year 135.

The Epistle to the Church in Smyrna, ver. 8 -- 11, seems to be directed to the
Christian Church some time before Dioclesian's Persecution, which began about
the year 303. For herein our blessed Savior does take notice of the
Tribulation and Hardships that they had undergone in the Persecutions that they
had already endured; but yet notwithstanding this, he tells them that they were
still to have Tribulation for ten days, that is for ten years, days being put
for years, as I have said before. I know thy works (says our Savior, ver. 9.)
and tribulation and poverty, but thou art rich: And I know the blasphemy of
them which say they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan. That
is, I know the tribulation and sorrow that thou have sustained in the
Persecutions that are past, and the Poverty that thou art now under in respect
of the things of this World, but thou art rich in Spiritual Treasure that is
more precious than Gold tried in the fire, and will one day be thy glory and
comfort too: And I know the blasphemy of the Gnostics and such wicked Wretches
that say they are Jews, that is, which pretend to be Christians, but in truth
and reality they are not, but are the Synagogue and Servants of Satan, living
impure lives, and blaspheming my Servants because they take up the Cross and
suffer Martyrdom for my sake, as I have commanded them. And because this was
the sharpest Persecution of all, our Savior does here advertise them of it
beforehand, and encourage and fortify them against it, saying ver. 10; Fear
none of those things which thou shall suffer: Behold, the Devil shall cast some
of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten
days: Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. Thus
does our Savior advertise them of, and animate them against this bitter
Persecution of ten years, which was begun by Dioclesian, and was carried on
after he resigned up the Empire. The ten days are put for ten years; and that
this Persecution lasted ten days Eusebius affimeth, lib. 8. chap. 15. And when
Constantine the Great had overcome all the Adversaries of the Church, and
became a nursing Father to it, then those Christians that survived enjoyed a
Crown of Life and Happiness here; and those that suffered death enjoyed a
better in another World. And seeing this Promise was completed by the year of
our Lord 324, where Dr. More sets the period of this Church, I do not think
good to alter it, or any thing else that he has well done; but shall let the
year 324 remain still for the period of the Smyrnean Interval of the Church.
But the Tribulation ten days, cannot well be understood of the ten
Persecutions, because before all these Persecutions this Church had undergone
no Tribulation; but our Savior does here take notice of the Tribulation that
they had already undergone, and yet tells them that they were to have ten days
of Tribulation more: And some of these Persecutions also were before the
Ephesine period of the Church.

The Epistle to the Church in Pergamos, Rev. 2.12-17. seems to be directed to
the Christian Church some time before the Waldensian and Albigensian Wars, but
after the suffering of the Waldensian and Albigensian Martyrs that suffered
about the year 1160 and presently after that time. For herein our Savior does
mention his Martyr Antipas that was slain among them, v. 13. And by this Martyr
Antipas, I understand the Waldenses and Albigenses and the Martyrs that
suffered under the Popish Persecutions about the year 1160 and presently after
that time, and before the year 1200. And here our Savior also does accuse
them, because they had some that held the Doctrine of Balaam and the Doctrine
of the Nicolaitans which he hated, v. 14, 15. That is, which did not live such
pure and chaste lives as they ought, but were too much given to their fleshly
lusts and pleasures. And these our Savior admonishes to repent and amend; and
if they do not, he threatens to come quickly upon them, and to fight against
them with the Sword of his Mouth, ver. 16. Repent (says he) or else I will
come unto thee quickly, and I will fight against them with the sword of my
mouth. By this fighting against them with the Sword of his Mouth, I understand
the Waldensian and Albigensian Wars after the year 1200, when so many hundred
thousands of the Waldenses and Albigenses were killed with the Sword in France
and other places, between the year 1200 and the year 1242. And seeing what our
Savior here threatened was fulfilled by the year 1242, where Dr. More sets
this period, and when he says the Waldensian War was ended, I shall not alter
the period of this Pergamenian Church, but let it remain at the year 1242 where
he has set it.

The Epistle to the Church in Thyatira, Rev. 2.18-29. seems to be directed to
the Christian Church some time before the Reformation. For herein our blessed
Savior does take notice of their Charity or Love, and of their Service, Faith
and Patience that they had showed under the Popish Persecutions; and that their
last works of this kind did exceed the first, v. 19. And he blames the Princes
and Governors of the Church that had some sense of Piety toward him, and yet
adhered to the Romish Church, because they suffered that Woman Jezebel to teach
and seduce his Servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed
unto Idols, v. 20. That is, because they suffered the Papacy and Church of Rome
to seduce his Servants to commit Idolatry, and to make them join in their
sinful Religion, and did not cast off the Popish Authority and Religion, seeing
things were then come to that maturity that they might do so. But as for those
that had already cast off the Popish Religion, our Savior exhorts them to
hold fast, and to persist on in leading their lives according to his blessed
Word, ver. 24, 25. But unto you, I say, and unto the rest in Thyatira, as many
as have not this Doctrine (that is of the Romish Church) and which have not
known the Depths of Satan, as they speak (that is which have not known and
practiced the deep Mysteries of the Popish Religion, as they call them, but are
in truth the deep Mysteries of Satan) I will put upon you none other burden;
but that which you have already, hold fast till I come: That is, persist on in
your reformed Religion, till I come to give you freedom from your Popish
Persecutions, etc. And here our Savior does threaten this Jezebel, that is,
the Papacy and Church of Rome; ver. 22, 23. saying; Behold, I will cast her
into a bed, and them that commit adultery with her, into great tribulation,
except they repent of their deeds: And I will kill her Children with death --.
And what our Savior here threatens, I conceive had its completion toward the
latter end of this Thyatirian Interval, in the Plagues and Wars and other
Calamities that were then inflicted upon the Popedom, from about the year 1500
till 1558, the Pope himself being then taken prisoner by the Emperor Charles
Vth. and Rome being taken and sacked, etc. And here also our Savior does
promise to give power over the Nations to him that overcomes and keeps his
works unto the end, v. 26. And seeing this Power over the Nations was granted
to the Protestants in these Kingdoms when Queen Elizabeth came to the Throne,
therefore with respect to these Kingdoms of England and Ireland, I shall set
the period of this Thyatirian Church at that time when Queen Elizabeth came to
the Throne, and at the year of our Lord 1558.

The Epistle to the Church in Sardis, Rev. 3.1-6, seems to be directed to the
Protestant Church some considerable time before this Second Woe that is now at
hand. For here our Savior admonishes the Protestants to remember how they
have received and heard concerning their Predecessors and the Reformation, and
to hold fast the Protestant Religion according to the blessed Word of God, and
not to return to the Popish Religion again. And also he exhorts them to repent
and mend their lives, and not only to bear the dead name of life, but to take
care that the Spiritual Life may be quick and vigorous in them, and exert and
show it self in all the vital operations thereof in all kinds of Piety and
Goodness: And if they will not be admonished to repent and take more care, he
tells them plainly, That he will come in judgment upon them as a Thief, and
that they shall not know at what hour he will come, and be sensible of his
coming, ver. 3. And seeing this is a prophetic Epistle of our blessed Savior
directed to the Protestant Church some time before now, therefore it is that I
desire that all the Bishops and Pastors of the Protestant Church would
carefully read it over and lay it to heart, and look upon it as directed to
themselves, as I have said before. And when this second Woe shall be past, and
the sinfuller part of the Church cut off; and when the Protestant Religion
shall be set up again after Popery has prevailed over the Protestant Church
three years and an half, then, I conceive, the Sardian Church will end, and
that of Philadelphia will begin.

The Epistle to the Church in Philadelphia, Rev. 3.7-13, seems to be directed
to the Christian Church between this second Woe which is now at hand, and the
third Woe which is like to fall upon the Popish Church about the year 1826.
That this Epistle is directed to the Christian Church before the Destruction of
the Popedom and Popish Church seems plain by ver. 9, where our Lord says:
Behold, I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan, (that is, of the Popish
Church) which say they are Jews, and are not, but do lie (that is, which
pretend to be Christians, but in truth and reality are not, but are lying
deceivers) behold, I will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and to
know that I have loved thee. That is, as I understand it, I will make them to
stand in fear and awe of thee, and in a submissive manner to crave thy favor;
and to know and be sensible that thou art protected by an extraordinary and
peculiar hand of Providence. And here our Savior does advertise his Church and
Servants of the third dreadful Woe; and for their great Patience does promise
to protect and keep them, if they stick close to him, then when all the World
about them is like to be up in Arms, ver. 10, 11. Because thou have kept the
Word of my Patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of Temptation, which
shall come upon all the World, to try them that dwell upon the earth. Behold, I
come quickly, hold that fast which thou have, that no man take thy Crown. The
Church and Servants of God will then be in great Danger, and will see great
cause to fear, as is showed in this place and elsewhere in this sacred Book;
and the Papists then will make their last Attempt against them: But if they
hold fast and keep close to God, they will be sure then to be preserved, and
may expect a Crown when the Marriage Supper of the Lamb comes after this third
Woe, as I conceive. And as for the period of this Philadelphian Church, it
seems probable to me that it will fall about the year of our Lord 2826. The
Popedom is like to be destroyed about the year 1826, as I have showed; and then
I conceive the thousand years when Satan is to be bound, Rev. 20.2 --, will
begin. This seems to be intimated, Rev. 12.12, where it is said; Woe to the
Inhabiters of the Earth, and of the Sea; for the Devil is come down unto you,
having great wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time. By the
Earth and the Sea here, I understand the Popish Kingdoms and the Heathen World.
And when the Devil is expelled and cast out of the true Christian Church from
Domineering over it any more after this second Woe, then he will go with
greater wrath and fury into the Popish Dominions and Heathen World; because he
is sensible that he has but a short time to domineer and play his games in
till the third Woe comes, when he must be bound a thousand years. And if the
thousand years begin about the year 1826, and do signify the full and just
number of a thousand years, and so far as I know they may; And if the
Philadelphian Church shall endure to the end of these thousand years, and so
far as I see, it may; Then the period of the Philadelphian Church will fall
about the year 2826.

The Epistle to the Church of the Laodiceans, Rev. 3.14 -- 22, seems to be
directed to the Christian Church some considerable time before the end of the
World. For herein they are exhorted to be zealous and repent, ver. 19. And a
considerable time for repentance is here to be allowed, as in all the other
Epistles where any Evil is threatened. And if they do not repent, and get out of
their lukewarm condition and grow more zealous, our Savior threatens to spue
them out of his Mouth, ver. 16, and to have no more to do with them, as being
nauseous and loathsome to him: And this is to be fulfilled at the end of the
World. And if the period of the Philadelphian Church falls about the year 2826,
as I have said before; then it seems probable to me, that the period of this
Church and the end of the World will be about the year of our Lord 3000, and
when the World has stood about 7000 years from the Creation of it. For the
Reverend Archbishop Usher, I suppose, is not much mistaken in setting the Birth
of our Savior in the year of the World 4000; for I am apt to believe that he
was born about that time. And the Week consisting of seven Days, and the often
using of the number Seven in the sacred Scriptures, may make it seem the more
probable, that the World may consist of seven Millenniums and endure just seven
thousand years. And although the World should endure just 7000 years, yet our
Savior's Words will still prove a verity and truth, as they are applied to the
end and last period of the World. Matt. 24.36. But of that day and hour knows
no man, no, not the Angels of Heaven, but my Father only. For as no man now can
tell exactly how many years are passed since the World was Created; so will no
man then be able to know exactly when the 7000 years will be expired and
completed. I know not the Day and Hour when this second Woe will fell, nor the
the Day and Hour when the third Woe will fall, nor the Day and Hour when the
End of the World will be. Through the good Hand of God, so much Light I have as
to be able to give warning of these two Woes, and to advertise men to take care
that they do not perish therein, and to let them know when they are
approaching; but not to tell them the Day and Hour when they will come, nor the
Day and Hour when the End of the World will be. Thus much for the seven
Epistles to the seven Churches.

The seven Seals, Rev. 6. and chap. 8.1; do represent and signify so many
successive Scenes of Affairs here upon Earth from the beginning of the Church
to the end of the World. And how I understand them, I shall here briefly set
down.

The White Horse at the opening of the first Seal, Rev. 6.1, 2. and the Rider
thereof with a Bow and a Crown, that went forth Conquering and to Conquer, I
understand to be a representation and signification of the propagation and
progress of the Gospel under the auspicious Conduct of the blessed Jesus from
the beginning of the Christian Church till about the 16th. year of Trajan, and
the year of our Lord 113, or there about.

The Red Horse at the opening of the second Seal, Rev. 6.3, 4. and the Rider
thereof that had a Sword given unto him, and power to take Peace from the
earth, and that they should kill one another, I understand to be a
representation and signification of that great Scene of Blood and Slaughter
both of the Martyrs and others from about the 16th. year of Trajan till
Constantine had overcome Licinius and the year 324. I take the Red Horse and
the Rider thereof with his Sword -- to represent and signify the great Wars
and Bloodshed that was in the Roman Empire in this Interval of time.

The Black Horse at the opening of the third Seal, ver. 5, 6. and the Rider
thereof with a pair of Balances in his hand, I understand to be a
representation and signification of that black Scene of Affairs during the time
that the Barbarous Nations overran the Roman Empire from Constantine's time
till toward the time that the Saracens set up their Kingdom at Bagdad, and
till about the year 740. In this Interval there was a black and calamitous
Scene of Affairs; great Fires, Earthquakes, Inundations and Plagues; and the
Goths, Hunnes and Vandals, and other Barbarous Nations caused great Bloodshed,
and plundered and spoiled all before them, and caused great Scarcity and
Famine. For great Armies, though they find a Land like the Garden of Eden, full
of all plenty and store, yet do soon make it a desolate Wilderness, consuming
and destroying all before them, and putting a stop also to tillage and
agriculture do soon bring a miserable Famine upon a Land and Nation. And that
there was to be great Scarcity and Famine in this Interval of time, the Voice
in the midst of the four living Creatures does show, ver. 6, saying, A measure
of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny, and thou shall
not deal unjustly in the oil and Wine. The measure here is something above a
quart, and the penny here is about seven pence half penny of our Money. And
when a man can buy but a little above a quart of wheat with seven pence
halfpenny, it shows that there must be great scarcity and dearth. And as Dr.
More observes (tho he be quite mistaken in his Interpretation here) the
Choenix, which is the measure here, was an allowance of food for a day; and the
penny here was the wages of a day's labor. And there must needs then be great
scarcity and famine, when a man's labor would only buy him food, and there is
nothing left to buy him clothes and other necessaries, and to help to maintain
the rest of his Family. And what is here predicted was accomplished in the
scarcity and famine that was caused by these Barbarous Nations, and the other
famines that God sent upon them in this Interval of time.

The Pale Horse that had Death for his Rider, and Hell or the Grave for his
Attendant, ver. 7, 8, at the opening of the fourth Seal, I understand to be a
representation and signification of the great Scene of Mortality and
Destruction of men during the time of the Saracens from about the year 740 till
about the year 1150. That this was to be a Scene of great Mortality and
Destruction of men is here showed, ver. 8. And power was given unto them over
the fourth part of the earth, to kill with the sword, and with hunger, and with
death (that may be with the pestilence and mortal diseases) and with the beasts
of the earth. And these seem to have had their completion in this Interval of
time, when the Saracens overran so great a part of the Roman Empire; and men,
so far as I see, might be destroyed all these ways.

The Souls under the Altar at the opening of the fifth Seal, ver. 9, 10, 11, I
understand to be a representation and signification of the great Scene of
Martyrs, viz. of the Waldenses and Albigenses and the Martyrs that suffered
under the Popish Persecutions from about the year 1150 till about the
Reformation and the year 1558 when Queen Elizabeth came to the Throne. At the
opening of this fifth Seal says St. John, I saw under the altar the Souls
(that is the persons) of them that were slain for the Word of God, and for the
Testimony which they held. That is, in this Vision he saw a great number of
Martyrs, that were put to death and killed for Truth and Righteousness sake,
and for keeping the Commandments of God, lying at the foot of the Altar and
round about the Altar, like sacrifices of sheep that lay ready killed beside
the Altar to be offered upon it to God after the Jewish way of worship. And
these Martyrs in this Vision are a representation and signification of the
great Scene of Martyrs that was in this Interval of time: For in this Interval
many thousand Martyrs were put to death by the Papists in the Popish
Persecutions; and myriads of Protestants were killed with the sword in the Wars
that the Papists raised against them. And as God said to Cain concerning Abel
the first Martyr that suffered for his sake, Genesis 4.10. The Voice of thy
Brother's blood cries unto me from the ground; So were these Martyrs here, tho
dead, represented to St. John as crying with a loud Voice and saying; How long,
O Lord Holy and True, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that
dwell on the earth? That is, How long shall it be thy good pleasure to suffer
this bloody Society of men of the Popish Church to put thy Servants to death in
this cruel and Merciless manner, before thou will be revenged on them? And
white Robes were given unto every one of them; which shows that they should be
rewarded in a glorious manner for their dying for the Word of God and the
Testimony of the Gospel. And it was said unto them, That they should rest yet
for a little season, until their fellow Servants also, and their Brethren that
should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled. That is, that they and
their surviving Brethren should have a little patience till those Martyrs that
were to suffer after this Interval of time, and after the year 1558, as I have
distinguished this Interval, had undergone their Matyrdom; and that then God in
his due time would take vengeance upon this bloody Society of men: And this he
will do in part at this second Woe which is now at hand; and will fully execute
vengeance upon them, and totally consume and destroy them when the third Woe
comes.

The Earthquake, etc. at the opening of the sixth Seal, ver. 12-17, I
understand to be a representation and signification of these two dreadful Woes;
but this Seal seems chiefly to respect the last of them, as I have showed
before. And the time of this Seal, as I have pointed it, is from the year 1558
till the third dreadful Woe is completed and fully ended. And this third Woe is
like to fall about the year 1826 or soon after that time, as I have showed
before.

And when he had opened the seventh Seal (says St. John, Rev. 8.1.) there was
silence in Heaven about the space of half an hour. And this long time of
silence I understand to be a signification of a long time of Peace and
Tranquillity that the Church shall enjoy, after the third Woe is completed and
fully ended, to the end of the World. And the Interval of this Seal is from the
end of the third Woe to the end of the World, which perhaps may be about the
year 3000, as it seems probable to me, as I have said before.

The seven Angels with Trumpets, Rev. 8, 9, 10 and 11 Chapters, signify also
so many successive Scenes of Affairs with the judgments that are or were to
fall in them, from the beginning of the Christian Church to the end of the
World. And how I conceive they may be divided I shall here briefly set down.

The vision of hail and fire mingled with blood, at the sounding of the first
Trumpet, Rev. 8.7. may denote and signify the great Commotions and Bloodshed
that were from the beginning of the Christian Church till the end of the
Emperor Adrian's Reign and the year 138; and so the Interval of this Vision
will end with the Ephesine Interval of the Church, for the end of that may be
set at this year. And the Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, and the Bloodshed
and Commotions that were before St. John wrote the Revelation, as well as those
after, are to be referred to this Vision: For as the Ephesine Church, and the
first Seal do comprehend the time before St. John wrote, as well as after; so
also does this Vision. The hail and fire mingled with blood here, may signify
the judgments of God that were inflicted in this Interval of time. By the Earth
here may be meant the Roman Empire; by the Trees, may be meant the Cities and
Corporations of men; and by the Green Grass, may be meant the Common People.
And from our Savior's time to the end of Adrian's Reign, the destruction of
these was so great, that a third Part of them might be said to be destroyed and
dissolved by the judgments of God in this space of time, exceeding great
numbers of men being destroyed in Vespasian's, Trajan's, and Adrian's time,
beside what were destroyed in the time of Nero and others.

The Vision of the second Trumpet, ver. 8, 9, may denote and signify the
judgments of God that were inflicted upon the Roman Empire between the year 138
and the year 324 inclusively till Constantine had quite vanquished Licinius.
The great Mountain here, burning with fire, that was cast into the Sea, may
signify the heavy judgments of God that were inflicted upon the Roman Empire
in this Interval of time. By the Sea here, may be meant the Roman Pagan Empire;
and by the third Part of it becoming Blood, may be meant that a third Part of
it should be much watered and soaked with blood. By the Creatures here, may be
meant the Creatures, as we say, of the Heathen Empire; that is, the great
Zealots for the Heathenish Idolatry, such as Dioclesian, Maximianus Galerius,
Maximinus, and Licinius. And by the Ships here, may be meant the Roman Pagan
Armies and their Naval Forces which are Ships in a literal sense. And I think
that there is no great reason to doubt, but that a third Part of these were
destroyed by this fiery Mountain of God's Wrath in this Interval time, there
being so many bloody Battles fought even in Constantine's time, besides all the
Bloodshed before, and the judgments that Almighty God had inflicted upon this
Pagan Empire before in this Interval.

The Vision of the third Trumpet, ver. 10, 11, may denote and signify the
judgments of God that were inflicted upon the Roman Empire from the year 324,
till toward the time of Odoacer and about the year 470. The great Star burning
like a Lamp, may denote the Barbarous Nations. And by the Rivers and Fountains
of waters, may be meant the Kingdoms and Provinces of the Roman Empire. And a
third Part of them being made bitter, and many dying thereby, may denote and
signify the great Calamities that should come upon them in this Interval by
the Irruptions and Invasions of the Barbarous Nations plundering and destroying
where they came, and killing many with the Sword. The Star is called Wormwood,
to show that it should be very bitter and grievous to those places upon which
it should fall, that is, where these Barbarous Nations should come and abide
some time.

The Vision of the fourth Trumpet, ver. 12, may denote and signify the
destruction of the Western Empire, first by Odoacer, and afterward the
stripping and depriving Rome of all Imperial and Regal Power in this Interval
of time, viz. from about the year 470 till about the year 740. The Sun here may
signify the Imperial and Regal Power; and the Moon, the Senatorian Power; and
the Stars, the Inferior Magistrates and Governments. And all these were
destroyed and extinguished in the Western Empire in this Interval of time, and
Rome it self became tributary to Ravenna in the time of the Exarchate. And a
third Part of these Lights are said here to be smitten: And in the time of
Augustulus, I suppose, the Western Empire was not above a third part of the old
Roman Empire; and part of Italy after was subject to the Eastern Emperors in
this Interval of time.

The Vision of the fifth Trumpet, Rev. 9.1-12, seems to denote and signify the
Saracens as Dr. More has explained it. And the time of this Trumpet may be
from the year 740 to the year 1150. But Dr. More seems to end it at the year
1258.

The Vision of the Euphratean Angels and Horsemen at the sounding of the sixth
Trumpet, ver. 13-21, seems to denote and signify the Turks and their taking of
the Eastern Empire, as Dr. More has explained it. And the other part of the
Contents of this Trumpet in Rev. 11. Chap. I have already explained. And the
Interval of this Trumpet, as I place it, is from about the year 1150, to the
end of this second Woe which is now near at hand.

The seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11.15-19, I have explained. And the Interval and
time of this Trumpet is from the end of this second Woe which is now nigh at
hand, to the end of the World, which perhaps may be about the year 3000. And in
this Interval about the year 1826, the third and most dreadful Woe of all the
three is like to be executed. And thus have I briefly communicated my present
thoughts concerning these three Series and Orders of Prophecies.

And as for that Grand Battle between Michael and the Dragon, I am satisfied
beyond all doubt that it is to be fought now, and was not fought in the time of
the Primitive Martyrs. The Dragon here is said to have seven Crowned Heads,
Rev. 12.3; but in the time of the Primitive Martyrs he had but six, Rev. 17.10.
Here the Dragon is said to have ten Horns; but then he had none, Rev. 17.12.
The Dragon here is said to draw with his Tail the third part of the Stars of
Heaven, and to cast them to the earth, Rev. 12.4; that is, to bring under his
jurisdiction a third part of the Princes of the old Roman Empire. And before
the little Horn with eyes and a mouth, Dan. 7, three of the other ten Horns
fell and were plucked up by the roots. And this little Horn signifying the
Popish Empire, does show that the Popish Empire was to be extended over three
tenth Parts of the old Roman Empire; that is, over about a third part of it,
according to what is said here, Rev. 12.4. These Characters and Notes do show,
that by the Dragon here we are to understand, not the Pagan, but the Popish
Empire and the Devil working therein: And therefore that this Grand Battle does
not belong to the times of the Primitive Martyrs, but to these times under the
Popish Empire. And all that Dr. More has said upon this particular is of no
force at all.

The places that seem to respect the third great Woe, and the times about it.
The hour of Temptation, Rev. 3.10, 11. The sixth Seal, Rev. 6.12-17. In part,
and in part to the second Woe. The sealing of the Servants of God, Rev. 7. In
part, and in part to the second Woe. The three Woes, Rev. 8.13. The two Woes to
come, Rev. 9.12. The third Woe comes quickly, Rev. 11.14. The number of the
Beast, and not of his name, Rev. 13.18. The Angel with the everlasting Gospel,
giving warning of the third Woe. Rev. 14.6-20. The Harvest of the earth. Rev.
14.6-20. The treading of the great Winepress. Rev. 14.6-20. The seven last
Viols and Plagues. Rev. 15 and Chap. 16. The ten Horns hating the Whore. Rev.
17.16: The description of the Fall of Babylon. Rev. 18. The Lamentation of her
Royal Paramours and Merchants. Rev. 18. The Rejoicing of the Apostles and
Prophets. Rev. 18. The Fowls called to the Supper of the great God. Rev. 19.11.
-- 21. The Beast and the Kings gathered together to make War against the Rider
of the white horse. Rev. 19.11. -- 21. The Destruction of them. Rev. 19.11. --
21.
These are the chiefest places of the Revelation which seem to me to respect
these two great Woes and the times about them. And it highly concerns all men,
both Protestants and Papists to mind them and to be warned by them, and not to
be wilfully blind, and to run headlong into the Pit of Destruction, when they
may see it so plainly before them, if they will but seriously mind these sacred
and infallible Oracles of Truth when rightly understood. And I hope it will
plainly appear by these Papers to all such as are piously disposed and willing
to understand the truth of these things, That these two great Woes are clearly
predicted and foretold in this sacred Book of the Revelation, and therefore
will certainly be fulfilled in their appointed Times.

Now is the time for all good Christians to encourage and assist one another
what they can; and to give and take all the good advice and Instructions that
may be. And that I might do my part herein, according to the Talent that is
committed to my trust, I have thought good to write these few sheets to you.
And what I have written with good will, I desire may be so taken.

I hope Repentance and a Reformation of our sinful Lives will abate something
of the Severity of this Day: but without this, I doubt it will go very sore
with the Protestant Church, as well as with the Papists. And therefore we had
need to neglect no opportunity in doing all the Good we can; and to observe the
Prophet Daniel's advice to King Nebuchadnezzar: when he told him of the Evil
that was coming upon him; Dan. 4.27. Wherefore, O King, let my counsel be
acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine
iniquities by showing mercy to the Poor; if it may be a lengthening of thy
tranquillity.

Dear Brethren, I earnestly desire that you would mind and lay to heart what I
have here written to you. I desire also your earnest Prayers for the Good of
the Protestant Church, and of all the Members thereof; and particularly for my
self, that my Faith may not fail, nor my strength be too weak in the Day of
Trial, but that I may persevere to the end, and not lose my Crown of Life, and
be exiled and banished from the glorious presence of God the fountain of all
true joy and Happiness, and be sent to the Infernal Shades of Death below, and
the Regions of Eternal Darkness and Misery. And the God of all Love and Mercy
preserve and keep us all from falling away from him; and grant that his
watchful Providance and the Light of his Countenance may always attend us here
through this Vale of Misery, that we may find Help and Comfort from above, when
we can meet with none here below: Which God of his infinite Mercy Grant for his
dear Son Christ Jesus's sake.

Amen.
A Quotation taken out of the Remarkable Predictions of the Holy and Learned
James Usher Archbishop of Armagh, as it was written by the Person who heard it
from his own mouth not long before he dyed, and published with License in the
year 1678.
I Then presumed (says this Person) to enquire of him what his present
apprehensions were concerning a very great Persecution which should fall upon
the Church of God in these Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, of which
this Reverend Primate had spoken with great confidence many years before, when
we were in the highest and fullest state of outward Peace and Settlement. I
asked him whether he did believe those sad times to be past, or that they were
yet to come. To which he answered, That they were yet to come, and that he did
as confidently expect it, as ever he had done, adding, That this sad
Persecution would fall upon all the Protestant Churches of Europe. I replied,
That I did hope it might have been past as to these Nations of ours, since I
thought, that though we, who are the People thereof, have been punished much
less than our sins have deserved, and that our late Wars had made far less
devastations, than War commonly brings upon those Countries where it pleases
God in judgment to suffer it; yet we must needs acknowledge, that many great
Houses had been Burnt, Ruined, and left without Inhabitants, many great
Families impoverished and undone, and many Thousand Lives also had been lost in
that bloody War, and that Ireland and Scotland, as well as England, had drunk
very deep of the Cup of God's Anger, even to the overthrow of the Government,
and the utter Desolation almost of a very great part of those Countries.

But this Holy Man, turning to me, and fixing his Eyes upon me with that
serious and ireful look which he usually had when he spoke God's Word and not
his own; and when the Power of God seemed to be upon him, and to constrain him
to speak, which I could easily discern much to differ from the countenance
wherewith he usually spoke to me; He said thus.

Fool not your self with such hopes, for I tell you, all you have yet seen,
has been but the beginning of sorrows to what is yet to come upon the
Protestant Churches of Christ, who will ere long fall under a sharper
Persecution than ever yet has been upon them; and therefore (said he to me)
look you be not found in the Outward Court, but a worshipper in the Temple
before the Altar, for Christ will measure all those that profess his Name, and
call themselves his People; and the Outward worshippers he will leave out, to
be trodden down by the Gentiles. The Outward Court (says he) is the formal
Christian, whose Religion lies in performing the outside duties of
Christianity, without having an inward Life and Power of Faith and Love uniting
them to Christ, and these God will leave to be trodden down, and swept away by
the Gentiles; But the worshippers within the Temple and before the Altar, are
those who do indeed worship God in Spirit and in Truth, whose Souls are made
his Temples, and he is honored. and adored in the most inward thoughts of
their hearts, and they sacrifice their Lusts and Vile affections, yea and their
own wills to him; and these God will hide in the hollow of his Hand, and under
the shadow of his wings; and this shall be one great difference between this
last and all the other preceding Persecutions; For in the former the most
eminent and spiritual Ministers and Christians did generally suffer most, and
were most violently fallen upon, but in this last Persecution these shall be
preserved by God as a Seed to partake of that Glory which shall immediately
follow and come upon the Church, as soon as ever this storm shall be over; For
as it shall be the sharpest, so it shall be the shortest Persecution of them
all; and shall only take away the gross Hypocrites and formal Professors, but
the true Spiritual Believers shall be preserved till the Calamity be over-past.

I then asked him by what means or Instruments this great Trial should be
brought on. He answered, By the Papists; I replied, that it seemed to me very
improbable they should be able to do it, since they were now little
countenanced, and but few in these Nations, and that the hearts of the People
were more set against them than ever since the Reformation. He answered again,
That it would be by the hands of Papists, and in the way of a sudden Massacre;
and that the then Pope should be the chief Instrument of it.

All this he spoke with so great Assurance, and with the same serious and
concerned Countenance, which I have before observed him to have, when I have
heard him foretell some things which in all humane appearance were very unlikely
to come to pass, which yet I my self have lived to see happen according to his
prediction, and this made me give the more earnest attention to what he then
uttered.

He then added, That the Papists were in his Opinion the Gentiles spoken of in
the 11th. of the Revelations, to whom the outward Court should be left, that
they might tread it underfoot; They having received the Gentiles Worship in
their adoring Images, and Saints departed, and in taking to themselves many
Mediators; And this (said he) the Papists are now designing among themselves,
and therefore be sure you be ready.

This was the Substance, and I think (for the greatest part) the very same
words which this Holy Man spoke to me at the time beforementioned not long
before his death, and which I writ down, that so great and notable a Prediction
might not be lost and forgotten by my self nor others.

This gracious Man repeated the same things in Substance to his only Daughter
the Lady Tyrril, and that with many tears, and much about the same time that he
had expressed what is aforesaid to me, and which the Lady Tyrril assured me of
with her own mouth, etc.

FINIS.

