A Second Summons to the City Abel, 2 Samuel 20. To deliver up Sheba, the Son of
Bichri, that Man of Belial; by way of Metaphor, Alluding to the Quakers and
Geo. Whitehead. And may serve for a Reply to their Answer to my Printed Sheet,
styled, The Quakers Yearly Meeting Impeached, etc.
Geo. Whitehead,
I Have perused your Printed Sheet, as I have Reason to Judge, although it is
Signed by five of your Undergraduates; being either ashamed to appear your self
(as well you may) or else fearing that if your Name were to it, People would
slight it, as not worth Reading, being the Fruit of an Old Contentious
Makebate, etc.

You say, page 2. That Wickliff, Suinderly, etc. Testified against the Popish
Clergy, and Tithes, etc. By which you seem to make no difference between a
Popish and Protestant Clergy, for which the Church of England will not thank
you. But George, why do you thus fight with your own shadow, and thus trifle
besides the business? I did not Impeach the Quakers for not paying Tithes,
though that be Criminal enough; but your Yearly Meeting, for Imposing the
non-payment of Tithes upon your People, and that too as a grand Oppression, and
Antichristian Yoke. And I say again, for you to Meet Annually, by way of
Convocation, to make and promulgate such Antimagistratical Laws, not only
against, but contrary to the Laws of the Land; Is both against the King's
Prerogative, the Rights of Parliaments, and Property of the Subject; yea, and
of dangerous Consequence. And I say again, that by these your Cannon Laws you
do actually Absolve the King's Subjects (if the Quakers may be so called) from
their Active Obedience to the Laws of the Land, which requires them to pay
Tithes, Churchwardens Rates, take Lawful Oaths, carry Guns, etc.

But say you, these are but Epistles, and consequently no contrived
Constitutions: But G. W. this will not do; it is true, you call them Epistles,
but you send them down to your Monthly and Quarterly Meetings as Laws: And as
Magna-Charta was formerly wont to be read in the Churches once, or oftener,
every year, so do you Order your Epistles to be Recorded and Read in your
Quarterly Meetings (which is more than ever you did the Scripture.) See your
Epistle, styled, Renewed Advice to the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, etc. in
England and Wales, etc. And at the Conclusion you end thus: Record this Epistle
in your Quarterly Book, and sometimes read it for Remembrance and Notice. Thus
it is plain that your Epistles are Laws to your People, and as plain, that as
the Power and Influence of your Yearly Meeting prevails, so must that of
Westminster vail; since what is made Lawful at Westminster, at your Yearly
Meeting is made unlawful; yea, a Grand Oppression, an Antichristian Yoke: And
as such you charge and Command your People not to pay Tithes, etc. as in my
former Sheet more at large.

And this Consideration, together with your Indicting me for Printing without
License As your Indictment sets forth, for I took a Copy of it, which possibly
you may see hereafter, with some Observations upon it.
, although it be your own frequent Practice, put me upon delivering a Printed
Sheet to the Parliament, styled, Something in Answer to the Allegations of the
Quakers, etc. Dec. 1693.

To which Sheet G. W. replied and proposed, saying, viz. I G. W. freely offer,
and am willing to make it appear before any six, ten, or twelve competent
Witnesses, who are moderate Men of Sense and common Reason, That Fr. Bugg has
grossly abused and perverted Truth, and wronged the People called Quakers, both
in Charge, Citation, and Observation, etc. Now in Answer to this seeming fair
offer, I came up to London the February following, and then proffered to meet
G. W. and to leave Matter of Fact to the decision of four Men, chosen by each
of us, out of Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Independants, or Baptists; or out
of any one of those four Christian Societies. But this G. W. refused; but I
held him to his word any, and renewed my Acceptance of his Proposal, May 1695.
but he still refused to stand to his word: Then I Impeached their Yearly
Meeting. And now in this their Answer, G. W. complains, saying, p. 7. But now
see how knowingly unfair Fr. Bugg is, after his railing against G. W. and the
Quakers Books; as none so bad, none so gross, none so blasphemous, but G. W.
the Quakers Bellarmine, will undertake to Vindicate them, who for these Forty
Years and upwards has been like Ishmael, his Hand against Episco -- Pres --
Indep. and Baptists, and theirs against him. Such then are Fr. Bugg's
disinterested Persons, whose hand is against G. W. (as he confesses) And yet
would have him leave Matters of Fact in Controversy to their Judgment and
Decision, etc.

I grant that Episcopalians, etc. are great Enemies to the Errors of the
Quakers, and that some of all those Societies have wrote against them, and that
G. W's. hand, like Ishmael's has been against them all. But this G. W. knew as
well as I, before he made the proffer; his proffer was voluntary, and
uncompelled to meet me before any eight, ten, or twelve moderate Men, etc. And
what to do? Why, to make it appear that Fr. Bugg had wronged the Quakers in
Charge, Citation, and Observation. Now this is Matter of Fact; what, cannot he
find four moderate Men in those four Christian Societies, that will do him that
Justice, to Judge aright, whether Fr. Bugg cited the right Book, quoted the
same Page, observing from thence the true sense of the matter? Truly his
pretense to a Charitable Distinction, in the Qua. Vind. p. 2. Col. 2. between
the more moderate and the rigid, etc. amounts to very little, if he dare not
trust their Judgment to decide whether Fr. Bugg rightly cited their Books,
truly quoted their Pages, and from thence fairly observed the Sense thereof, or
no: But still suppose they be such Partial Wretches, as that eight or ten
cannot be found amongst them all; who is to be charged with unfairness? It Is
not Fr. Bugg; he only takes G. W. at his word, [and holds him to it.] See
Quaker. Withering, etc. p. 2. to 12. where this (...).

Object. But possibly some may say, You deal too severely with the Quakers, not
only by exposing their Principles, but you render them Perjured, and deserve
Pilloring, etc.

Answ. I grant some may blame me, yea, and good Men too; who do not see so
clearly into their deceitful Practices as I do, and through much Experience
have done. Erasmus was a good Man, who was accounted the Light of that Age, yet
he blamed Luther, Hist. of the Reformation, etc. p. 42. Luther (said he) has
excellently admonished the World in many things, I wish he had done it more
civilly, he would have had more favorers and defenders, and have reaped for
Christ a more plenful Harvest, etc. Thus you see that Zealous Luther was blamed
by Worthy Erasmus: And if such a Man as Luther was thus blamed, why should I
think it strange? As to the Pillory, the occasion of it was their falsifying
their Word in the case of Evidence between G. W. and me: For they long before
that, by their Books styled, The Case of the People called Quakers, in relation
to Oaths, etc. p. 26. And in another Book, styled, A Treatise of Oaths, etc. p.
3. They pretended A willingness to suffer, as in the Case of Perjury, in case
they brake and falsified their Word, etc. As at large recited in New Rome
Arraigned, etc. Epist. to the Bereans, etc. And though I erected a
Mock-Pillory, to show them, what in reality they did deserve, yet it had this
Service, that it manifested their Persecuting Spirit, and what they would be
at, had they Power put into their hands. O! how did they fly to the Powers of
the Earth (which they formerly blamed others for) crying out to Secretary
Trenchard for help against Fr. Bugg! Yea, they Indicted If they do deny it, I
have a Copy out of the Court, with G. W's. Name and the rest: And their
Indictment is in the most aggravatious terms that ever I saw.
me at the Old Bailey, London, when I was absent Sixty Miles, and knew nothing
of it. O! how did they solicit the Secretary of State against me! And did not
W. Crouch give Five Pounds, and Promise a larger Sum, if he could have had
their Revengeful Prosecution of me taken effect; and my Book, New Rome, etc.
(which they had got seized) to be burnt. With many other signs of their
Persecuting Spirit, which, had they Power, they would manifest more and more,
as they did in Pensilvania to G. Keith and his Friends, where they both Fined
and Imprisoned them, and took away R. B's. Goods for Conscience Sake: Yea, so
Inhumane were they, that when they Committed W. Bradford and John M'comb, one
of their Wives was newly brought to Bed, and lay very weak in a High Fever, and
several thought she would not live; and though he requested them to let him go
home, yet they would not grant him leave to see her. Oh, merciless Magistrates!
I my self, when a Quaker, was Prisoner at once more than three Years, yet
during that time I had leave diverse times to go home to visit my Family, which
I find I must not expect if ever I be Prisoner under the Quakers, who being
Magistrates in Pensilvania; can both Fine, Imprison, and take away Goods, and
fight with Carnal Weapons; both which, viz. Persecutioh for Conscience, and
Fighting with Carnal Weapons, they have pretended to be against. But now I see
it is but till they get Power, and become Magistrates themselves. And truly, if
as T. C. has modestly computed, there be but 100000 Quakers in England, and
1000 of them Preachers, and 1000 Meetings, and W. Pen Influence (as he
observes) but 80000 of them to Fighting and Persecution, I know not what a
little time may bring forth. For as T. C. well observes, They are but sowing
their Seed now, but the full Crop may not appear in this Age; which puts me in
mind of their former Declaration, Printed 1659. Signed by W. Crouch and
fourteen more, saying, p. 12. We have chosen the Son of God to be our King, and
he has chosen us to be his People: And he might Command Thousands, and Ten
Thousands of his Servants at this day, to fight in his Cause, and give them
Victory over all their Enemies, and turn his hand upon their Persecutors. But
yet his Kingdom is not of this World -- Neither can we yet believe that he will
make use of us in that way: -- But for the present we are given up to bear and
suffer all things for his Names-sake. From whence it is plain, that in 1659.
they said, Neither can we yet believe: But by their Practice in Pensilvania in
Anno 1692. they believe they may now Fight and Persecute too. That in 1659. the
Quakers said, But for the present we are given up to bear and suffer all things
for his Names-sake: But by their Practice in Pensilvania 1692. they say, they
will not be affronted by any body: They will Fight with Guns and Swords, and
Persecute (such as tell them they go from their Principles) with Fines and
Imprisonment. Come, G. W. what is become of your Interpretation of the word as
yet? What, is it tamen? I hope you see it to be Adhuc; as yet in exception to
the time to come. I know you are good at Inuendo's, and at directing the
Intention (Jesuit like.) See his Book, styled, The Light and Life of Christ
within, etc. p. 58. Solomon Eccles (one of their False Prophets, which
prophesied that John Story should dye within a Year, who lived three or four
Years after) who said, The Blood which was forced out of Christ's Body, when he
was dead, was no more than the Blood of another Saint: Which Blasphemy G. W.
excuses, saying, No more than the Blood of another Saint, his intent was, as to
the Papists, etc. Which Blasphemy G. K. in his Book, styled, A true Copy of a
Paper, etc. p. 17. to 31. has effectually discovered. And G. W. is so good at
Directing the Intention, that he knows what all his Friends mean; for in his
Counterf. Conv. etc. p. 72. he says, I may see cause otherwise to word the
matter, and yet our Intentions be the same: The English of which is, though Is.
P. deny Jesus of Nazareth to be Christ, and make him but a Vail, a Garment,
etc. And G.W. confess him to be the Christ, yet they mean all one thing, only a
Garment. And (the Light) that was therein crucified is the Christ. And what was
his Person to them more than another Person? Oh, but says his Young Pupil
Pennington, The Discoverer Discovered, etc. p. 13. The Author of this Doctrine
being nameless, I suppose he has forgot who it was: And truly I cannot blame
him for forgetting what I believe (says he) had never any other Foundation but
mere Imagination, etc. Surely if his Infallible Spirit, with which they pretend
to be endued, so as thereby to be furnished with Discerning and Judgment on all
occasions, ( Judas and the Jews, etc. p. 58.) could not tell him, yet G. W.
might, for it is in The Christian Doctrine and Society, by G. W. p. 5. and W.
Baily's Works, p. 300. 307. Come, G. W. since the Quakers are attained to that
Perfection, as that they hold Courts of Judicature in the Name of the
Honorable William Penn; And that you have Judges, Lawyers, Bailiffs,
Constables, Goalors and Soldiers, Guns and Swords in Pensilvania, tell me the
Intention of your great Apostle G. Fox, in his News coming up, etc. p. 20.
Sing, all ye Saints, and rejoice, clap your hands, and be glad, for the Lord
Jehovah will Reign Viz. When we get Governors over Pensilvania and England,
etc.
, and the Government shall be taken from you pretended Rulers, Judges and
Justices, Lawyers and Constables; all this Tree must be Cut down, etc. But I
cannot enlarge at present on this Subject; but the more you strive to cover and
cloak your Errors, the more do you give occasion to have them manifested; which
puts me in mind of a Fable, recited by Luther, Malum irritatione auctum, A Sore
grows worse by chasing. And truly since our Scuffle first began about Women's
Meetings, the Sect of the Foxonian Quakers (like the Man in the Fable) appears
not only Lame, but Scabby, etc. And the more they give occasion, the more I rub
and chafe this Corrupt Sore, until it will stink all the Nation over. If they
again complain, that I put frightful Garments upon them, let them withal
remember, it is a Web of their own Weaving.

Now I shall show what Geo. Fox, the Founder of Quakerism, says of himself;
next, what his Brethren, by way of Confirmation, say of him; and next, what the
Quakers they say of the National Ministry, of the Scriptures, Sacraments, and
of their own Writings, briefly and in Order.

First, of G. Fox's Assuming Divine Attributes to himself.
News coming up, etc. p. 1. Written from the Mouth of the Lord, from one who is
naked, and stands naked before the Lord, clothed with Righteousness, whose
Name is not known in the World; Risen up out of the North, which was prophesied
of Quere, by which Prophet?
, but now it is fulfilled, etc. Several Petitions Answered, etc. p. 60. My Name
is covered from the World, and the World knows not me, nor my Name, A
Battledoor, etc. Introd. All Languages are to me no more than dust, who was
before Languages were, etc. (Alike to James Parnel, in his Book, The Watcher,
etc. p. 37. But to the end of all Disputes and Arguments I am come, for before
they was, I am. I have Power to bind and to loose whom I please, from him whom
the World calls George Fox, who is the Son of God. G. F. W. O. C.

The Examination and Trial, etc. p. 21. The Thundering Voice answered [me Geo.
Fox] I have glorified thee, and will glorify thee again. And I was so filled
full of Glory, that my Head and Ears was filled full of it. A Journal, etc. p.
31. 60. 67. I was in the Paradise of God; and that it was Christ the Eternal
Power of God, that spoke in me at that time unto them: -- And that was the Word
of the Lord, and of Christ through me to him: So that it was a dreadful thing
unto them, when it was told them, the Man in Leathern Breeches is come. See
also p. 45. And for his pretended Miracles wrought in his own Name only, p.
371. 374. Readiness Errand, etc. p. 8. And he that has the same Spirit that
raised up Jesus Christ, is equal with God, which Spirit G. Fox pretended to
have. The Great Mist. etc. p. 894. The Quakers have a Spirit given to them
beyond all the forefathers (which we [said G. F.] do Witness), since the days
of the Apostles in the Apostasy. And they can discern who are Saints, who are
Devils, and who are Apostates, without speaking ever a word. The Great Mystery,
etc. page

Thus Reader, I have given you a few Instances of Blasphemy, which hang and
depend one upon another, as a Chain linked together. And the next shall be what
his Preachers said of him, by way of Corroboration. But first, hear what G. W.
says, in order to convince the World that Geo. Fox owned Jesus of Nazareth;
which indeed and in truth is no more nor less than he, G. F. said of himself: A
notable Proof, well may he be afraid, or ashamed, or both, to meet me before
moderate Men of sense. Well, hear G. W. for once; A Just Enquiry, etc. p. 23.
And G. F. is more fully cleared from these Adversaries Reproach in this matter
by his own Innocent Testimony. Great Mist. p. 254. That by Christ the Light,
all things were made and created, and that he was glorified with the Father
before the World began, etc. Well done, George. But now let us see if he do not
say thus much of himself; and if so, what Paint have thou in store next? The
Teachers of the World unvailed, etc. p. 27. I am the Light of the World, him by
whom the World was made: And does enlighten every Man that comes into the
World Meaning the Light in him.
Again, The Examination and Trial at Lancaster Assizes, etc. p. 21. And before
I came at the Bar, I was moved to Pray, and the Thundering Voice answered, I
have glorified thee, and will glorify thee again. I marvel that Whitehead
should have the Face to appear in Print with no better Proof that Fox owned
Jesus of Nazareth. Surely he may well be ashamed to appear before any Men of
sense, to Justify these his Abominations. And so much briefly for what Fox
says of himself, and what Whitehead brings to excuse him.

The Quakers Adoring Geo. Fox, etc.
Fifth Part of the Christian Quaker disting. etc. p. 77. That G. Fox is blessed
with Honor above many Brethren, and that Thousands will stand by him in a
Heavenly Record, That his Life Reigns, and is spotless, Innocent, and still
retains his Integrity; whose Eternal Honor, and Blessed Renown shall remain;
yea, his Presence, and the dropping of his tender words in the Lord's love was
my Soul's Nourishment. The Quakers Challenge, etc. p. 6. Stand up, Muggleton --
who call thy Book, A Looking-Glass for Geo. Fox, whose Name thou art not
worthy to take into thy mouth; who is a Prophet indeed, and has been Faithful
in the Lord's business from the beginning. It was said of Christ, that he was
in the World, and the World knew him not Here G. F. and Sol. Eccles agree; G.
F. said, The world neither knew him, nor his Name; mark what Idolatry and
Blasphemy is here.
. So it may be said of this true Prophet, whom John said he was not. But thou
shall feel this Prophet [ i. e. G. F.] one day as heavy as a Millstone upon
thee; And although the World knows him not, yet he is known, etc.

Josiah Cole's Letter, wrote from Barbados, 21 of the twelfth Month, 1658. to
Geo. Fox, and vindicated by William Penn, in their Book Judas and the Jews,
etc. p. 44. viz. Dear Geo. Fox, who art the Father of many Nations, whose Life
has reached through us thy Children, even to the Isles afar off, to the
begetting many again to a lively hope, for which Generations to come shall call
thee Blessed; whose Being and Habitation is in the Power of the Highest, in
which thou Rules and Governs in Righteousness: And thy Kingdom is Established
in Peace, and the Increase thereof is without end.

John Audland's Letter out of the Well of England, (which was Printed before G.
F. dyed) taken out of the Original (which we have) an Abstract thereof is as
follows, viz. Dear and Precious One, in whom my Life is bound up, my Strength
in thee stand; by thy Breathings I am nourished, by thee my Strength is
renewed, Life and Strength came from thee, Holy ONE: Daily do I find thy
Presence with me, which does exceedingly preserve me, for I cannot Reign but in
thy Presence and Power. Pray for me, that I may stand in thy dread for
evermore. I am thine, begotten and nourished by thee, and in thy Power am I
preserved. Glory unto thee, Holy One, for ever. See this Blasphemous Letter
more at large in The Discovery of the Accursed Thing, by T. C.

I remember when I charged the Quakers in my Sheet to the Parliament, Dec.
1693. p. 4. with their Contempt of the Public Ministry, out of their Book, A
Brief Discovery, etc. calling them (as false Ministers) Witches, Devils, etc.
First, Geo. Whitehead, in The Quak. Vind. p. 2. Col. 2. denies that he knew the
Book; and yet I find in his Just Enquiry, etc. p. 13. Printed ten Months before
that, he could Answer it, tell the Title, Date, and number of Subscribers,
namely, five; saying, But stay, soft a little, were these Characters given in
general, or to all other Ministers that are not of us? No sure. In their
Vindication, etc. delivered to the Parliament, page 2. Col. 2. though he denied
to know the Book, yet he then could say, Yet his charging us with Contempt of
the Public Ministry, is too general, and harsh; we Charitably distinguish
between the more moderate sort and the rigged Persecutors, etc. Well, let us
see whether G. Whitehead be sincere: He cries soft a little in one Book, and
pretends Charitably to distinguish in the other Book: So that a stranger would
think him very fair, at least tolerable. But to prove him deceitful, and that
they give those Contemptuous Language to all Ministers, nor Quakers, I shall
make appear, for the Title over the Names is, Of the False Ministers. And
therefore the way to find out G. W. is to Examine, First, who they account
False Ministers; and, Secondly, what Names they are pleased to bestow upon them.

First, Who the Quakers Account False Ministers.
1. G. Fox his Primmer, p. 84. Scholar. Who have been the Ministers and
Instructors of the People, that they are erred so from Scripture-Example? Let
me have some Marks and Signs, by which I may know the Deceivers and False
Prophets, etc. Geo. Fox gives his Scholar Ten Instances against the Clergy, one
is this, namely, They are such as sprinkle Infants, and tell People, it is an
Ordinance of Christ.

2. Smith's Primmer. etc. p. 8. Schol. How may I know when Christ is truly
Preached? Answ. They that are False (Ministers) Preach Christ without, and bid
People believe in him as he is in Heaven above; but they that are Christ's
Ministers, Preach Christ within.

3. Readiness Errand to Damascus, etc. p. 7. All that do study to raise a living
thing out of a dead, to raise the Spirit out of the Letter, are Conjurers: And
the Lord is against all such, and who are of God are against all such.

4. The Quakers Challenge, etc. p. 2. Come, Protestants, Presbyterians,
Independants, and Baptists, etc. the Quakers deny you all, p. 3. The Quakers
are in the Truth, and none but they.

5. The Guide Mistaken, etc. by W. Penn, p. 18. And whilst the Idle,
Gormandizing Priests of England run away with above 1500000 l. a Year, under
pretense of being God's Ministers; and that no sort of People have been so
Universally through Ages the bane of Soul and Body of the Universe, as that
abominable Tribe, for whom the Theater of God's most Dreadful Vengeance is
reserved to Act their Eternal Tragedy upon, etc.

6. An Antidote, by Thomas Ellwood, p. 78. Truth allows of no Payment of Tithes
at all under the New Covenant: They who Pay Tithes, uphold a Legal Ceremony
abrogated by Christ, and thereby deny Christ to be come in the Flesh, which is
a mark of Antichrist.

I think I need not enlarge on this Point, for all that sprinkle Children with
Water, all that Preach Christ without, as he is in Heaven above at the Right
Hand of God, all that Preach out of the Scripture, all that are Ministers, and
not Quakers, all that Pay Tithes, or receive Tithes, are of that abominable
Tribe, for whom God's Dreadful Vengeance is reserved, etc. In fine, all, not
Quakers, are False Ministers, by the Doctrine of the Quakers. And now it
remains to show what the Quakers call them in their Book, A Brief Discovery of
a Threefold Estate of Antichrist, etc. under the Tithes, as in p. 7, 8, 9, 10.
Viz.

Of the False Ministry.
The Priests of the World are, I. Conjurers, raising dead Doctrine, dead Uses,
dead Motives, dead Reasons out of the Letter, which is Death; raising Death out
of Death, notable Conjurers. II. Thieves and Robbers. III. Antichrists, the
Priests of Baal, cannot show any Scripture for their Heathenish ways, and
Bestial Worships. IV. Witches, blind Guides. V. Devils, the Serpent is Head in
them. VI. Liars, the Commission and Call of Baal's Priests, Come from Oxford
and Cambridge, which they call the Wellhead of Divinity; corrupt Streams issue
from thence I can witness [fetching the same Commodities] drinking a Cup of the
same Poisonous Fountain; the Fountain is bitter, the Streams are no better.
Even the Sir Symons of the Age run to Oxford and Cambridge: These are not
Ministers of Christ, but Stewards of the Devil's Magazine, Dissemblers and
Liars. VII. A Viperous and Serpentine Generation, going about to Murder and
Strangle the Child Jesus, holding a Worm-eaten, Beastly Form. VIII.
Blasphemers, yea, of the Devil, fearful Blasphemers. IX. Scarlet-colored
Beasts: A Harlot full of Abominations and Filthiness. X Babylon's Merchants,
Selling Beastly Wares for a large Price; the Letter, which is Dust and Death:
The day is coming when these Idol Merchants, these costly Sermon-makers, shall
cry, etc. XI. Whited Walls, professing nothing but Poisonous stuff. XII.
Ravenous Wolves. XIII. Greedy Dogs, really they are Bloodhounds, still hunting
and gasping after their Prey, like the mouth of Hell; barking and raging like
Sodomites. XIV. Eminent and Ambitious Pharisees of the Devil; woe, woe, woe,
was the Portion of these Pharisees then, and woe, woe, woe, is their Portion
now: And woe and misery is the Portion of the upholders (whether King or
Parliament) of that Treacherous and Deceitful Generation, etc. Come, G. W. you
say, Soft a little, we Charitably distinguish, etc. But now your Spirit, your
Principles and Practice by your Books, are found out; and the Reason why you
refuse to meet me, according to your Proposal, is now found out; for you know
you must either Justify these your Antichristian and abominable Books, or
Condemn them; Condemn them you will not, for that they are given forth by your
great Apostle G. F. and his Disciples, and (as you say) by the Eternal,
Infallible Spirit of God, for then down goes your Infallibility, and great will
be the fall thereof. Justify them, you cannot; for if you tell them these
sayings came from Heaven, they will tell you they came from Hell; so that here is
a Gulf between you and them: You may fret and fume, rage and rail, invert,
pervert, gloss, and paint, but all to no purpose; I have hemmed you up, and cast
a Trench about you, and taken you as in a Net, and resolve to hold you fast;
for I will not leave the decision of our Controversy to Quakers, Ranters,
Muggletonians, nor to your Grandsire the Pope. Come, G. W. I have not done with
you yet; you say, The Quak. Vind. p. 2. As for Baptism and the Lord's Supper,
Scripturally considered, we confess and own, etc. But, may some say, how is
this possible, who have not baptized any with Water, nor received the
Sacrament, under the Elements of Bread and Wine, these 40 years? Answ. Let me
Interpret their meaning, which I take to be thus: They own them Scripturally,
that is, as they own the Scriptures, they own the Sacraments; also upon the
same Hypothesis, they may say, they own the Scriptures Sacramentally, viz. as
they own the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, when alas, they own
neither, no otherwise than Arius owned the Faith of one Substance; who, when at
the demand of the Emperor, he signed the Nicene Creed, who beforehand wrote
his own Opinion in a piece of Paper, and put it in his Bosom under his Coat;
and coming to the Book, he takes his Oath, that he verily believed as he had
written, meaning as he had written in the Paper under his Coat. In like manner
the Quakers confess and own the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper Scripturally;
that is, as they have written in their own Books. And I pray, may some say, how
is that? For Answer, you may see the same Juggle, read News coming up, etc. p.
14. So dust is the Serpent's meat, their Original is but dust, which is but the
Letter, which is Death; and their Gospel is dust, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and
John, which is the Letter. Thus then they own the Scriptures Sacramentally,
viz. to be Dust, Death, and Serpents meat. And I will show you how they own and
confess the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper Scripturally, viz. as they own the
Scriptures; for Proof thereof, see a Book of their own writing (only they are
not so cunning as Arius, for he never Printed his Paper,) I say, see News
coming up, etc. p. 34. A Voice to all you deceivers, who deceive the People;
and Blasphemers, who utter forth your Blasphemies and Hypocrisies, that tell
People of a Sacrament, and tell them it is the Ordinance (...) God. Blush,
Blush and Tremble you who live in the Witchery, and bewitch the People (...)
Thus Reader, I have showed how they own the Lord's Supper Scripturally, and the
Scripture Sacramentally; which though they have Printed the same, yet they are
as loath to show their Books of this kind to Authority, as Arius was his Paper,
yet Arius could never pretend fairer to the Emperor, than G. Whitehead, in the
Quak. Vind. etc. did to the Parliament: The like might be said about their
owning the Fast commanded by Authority, p. 3. of their Vind. For the Intent,
Substance, and End of a true Fast, this we are frequently mindful of, etc. Oh
deceit! when it is generally known through the Nation, that on the days set
apart by Authority for a Fast, they follow their outward Callings, open their
Shops, and not so much as appoint a Meeting for that end, as others have done.
I have not room to show the depth of Hypocrisy in this Whitehead; it is like
his Pretense (of late Years) of owning the Scriptures, and preferring them
before all the Books in the World, but he means Sacramentally. If he deny my
Interpretation of their Reserves, then let him show me that any one Quaker in
England of the Foxonian Tribe, in Print has recommended the Reading of the
Scripture in their Religious Meetings [if such I may call them,] As they
frequently do their own Epistles; for instance, see Geo. Whitehead's Epistle
for the Remnant of Friends, etc. where he concludes thus: Let this [Epistle] be
Read distinctly Here must not be a Syllable mistaken, for it came from Heaven
in the Quakers: And yet I question it, for in page 12. he compares the
Sufferings of the Quakers to the Sufferings of Christ, like his Brother
Buroughs. E. B's. Works.
in the Life and Authority of God, from whence it came, amongst Friends in and
about London, and elsewhere, as Friends are moved in the same Life, etc. To
this Instance let me add Whitehead's Doctrine, in his Book, A Serious Apology,
etc. p. 49. That what is spoken by the Spirit of Truth in any (meaning the
Quakers) is of as great Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and
greater. And for further Proof that they value their own Pamphlets above the
Scripture, see New Rome Arraigned, etc. Introd. 10 Instances, etc. p. 40. to
47. And Quakerism withering, etc. p. 32. to 44. By which I have proved both
from Matter of Fact and Practice, what I charge them with, beyond all their
glossing.

And now I am leaving G. W. I apply my self to the Hearers amongst the Quakers,
and do Solemnly profess, that I never wrote one Book out of Malice, as he
suggests; and as may appear in every Book, by the Proposals and Offers I
therein make. But if you do not call out G. W. and cause him to stand to his
Proposal, or else condemn and censure his Errors, and the Errors in your
Friends Books, by him vindicated, under 12, or more of your hands, I do
purpose, if the Lord permit, to proceed to a Brief History of the Rise, Growth,
and Progress of Quakerism, from the Year 1650. to 1695. And the Projects of G.
Fox, the Founder of Quakerism. And wherein their Principles are Antichristian,
Antimagistratical, Irrational, Unreasonable, Tending to subvert the Christian
Faith, to introduce Mahumetism, Atheism, etc. And to show that their Faith and
Doctrine is contrary to that of the Primitive Christians, Saints, and Martyrs
in all Ages. First, in denying Jesus of Nazareth, contemning the Scriptures,
reviling the Magistrates, reproaching the Ministers of the Gospel, undervaluing
the Death and Sufferings of Christ, and exalting their own [of which many are
mere Cheats, particularly Sam. Cater's See New Rome un^^^^ 57.
, who is recorded to have suffered 20 l. where he never lost a groat, but had
10 l. sent him from London; so that instead of losing 20 l. for Preaching, he
got 10 l. clear; and many other things which may occur, which may be prevented
by a sincere Retractation. And let not G. W's. Cunning, and smooth, and demure
Carriage prevent you from Condemning what is Erroneous; for though he study no
Events, nor fear no Effects, as he says, yet I would have you be wiser. For
whatever you think (as some of his Friends have told him in Barkshire to his
Face) it is he that has been the chief disturber; it is he that has poisoned
the minds of many well-meaning People, it is his false glossing, and base
perverting, that has drawn the edge of my Pen against you; and if you will
stand by him, and not, like the Wise Woman of Abel, bring him forth, nor
condemn his Errors, etc. my Hand will be still heavier upon you, if God permit
me length of days, and the assistance of his Holy Spirit. For I do tell you,
his Impudence has exceeded all that ever I read of, none exceed him in
perverting and false glossing. And if this Answer had not come out, I was
minded by a quarter of a Sheet to give you a second Summons, whether you hear
or forbear. For I find G. W. will not come forth himself, he fears the Fate
of Hungate the Jesuit against Hall. See New Rome unmasked, etc. p. 33. to 49.
Oh Friends! for so I can call many of you, I am grieved to see you willingly
ignorant; and as I have already, so I could still take great pains to inform
you of the subtle working of some of your Juggling Teachers, whose Books are of
two sorts, and carry two faces, as I have often said; saying one while, that
the Scriptures are Death, Dust, Serpents Meat, Beastly Ware, etc. yea, so
uncertain, that whether Moses or Hermes be the first Penman is doubtful: But
your Bellarmine G.W. to serve a turn, told the Parliament in your Vind. etc.
that the Quakers believed it to be given by Divine Inspiration. Now, Friends,
one of these Books, which teach thus contrary to each other, must be wrong;
then let it be condemned. Again, G. W. says, you prefer the Scriptures before
all Books extant; and yet he himself teach by his Serious Apology, p. 49. That
what is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as great Authority as the
Scriptures and Chapters are, and greater, etc. And now you shall see how by
Practice he prefers his own Writings before the Scripture, for he never
recommended a Chapter of the Bible to be read in their Meetings of Worship: But
you shall see how he imposes the Reading his own, and you, poor hearts, are
obliged to hear it read, viz. An Epistle for the Remnant of Friends, by G.
Whitehead, which concludes thus: Let this [Epistle] be read distinctly in the
Life and Authority of God, from whence it came, amongst Friends in and about
London, etc. Now I appeal to your Consciences, which does G. W. prefer
think-ye? Again, G. Fox, in Answer to C. W. Great Mist. p. 246. said, The
Scriptures are not the Word of God, as thou Blasphemously affirmed; when upon
his own Epistle he set this Encomium, This is the Word of the Lord God to you,
all. Again, Several Papers given forth by G. Fox, he there tells his Friends,
This is the Word of the Lord: I charge you in the Presence of the Living God,
to send this [Epistle] amongst all Friends and Brethren every where, to be read
in all Metetings: To them all this is the Word of God, etc. Oh Friends! when
did ever G. Fox say so of the Scriptures? No, he is so far from that, that he
says, It Is Blasphemy to call the Scriptures the Word of God. Pray mark the
irreconcilable Difference, and yet your Bellarmine, G. W. had the Face to tell
the Parliament they prefer the Scriptures before all Books in the World. Oh
horrible Impudence! Again, see your Book, Truth's Defense, etc. p. 2. 104.
where they Teach, you may as well burn the Scriptures as their Writings; and
their Convocation, or London Yearly Meet^ng, 1675. confirm them by Decree,
saying, It is our Judgment in the Fear of God, and Authority of his Power, that
no such slight Names, ^dicts or Cannons, be put upon Friends Papers, which we
Testify have been given forth by the Spirit of God, etc. Now, when did they
ever send out a Decree, that no such slight Names and Expressions, as Dust,
Death, Serpents Meat, Beastly Ware, Carnal Letter, Husk, etc. should be cast
upon the Scriptures? No, no, they were so far from that, that the very Men that
gave the Scriptures these contemptuous Names, sent out this Preservative for
their own Books, Papers, and Queries. Oh, Friends! what do you think of G. W.
Is he not made up of Impudence? The Difference is so great between the value
they put upon their own Books, and that upon the Scriptures, that it can never
be reconciled, nor Satisfaction made to them that tender the Glory of God, and
the good of Souls with grateful Hearts for his Goodness in continuing the Bible
to us through all Ages, but by Condemning the one sort of the Quakers Books to
the Fire, as Oxford lately did a Book of the same Nature. Why then will you not
bring forth Sheba, the Son of Bichri, that Man of Belial? G.W. Is there not a
Wise Man amongst you? He tells you that I wrong the Quakers in Charge,
Citation, and Observation. Bring him forth according to his Proposal, and you
will see it proved that I have not. I have given you a few Instances, I might
produce a hundred more, but time would fail. G. W. has wrote to diverse
Clergymen to prevail with me to desist; they give me his Letters, and wish me
good Success. Two of your Teachers have been with me within these two Months
past, and used many Arguments with me; I tell them all is in vain, unless they
bring forth Sheba. And so I say still, or else come forth your selves, and
condemn what is Erroneous, and defend what is Sound and Orthodox. And so I
conclude, and subscribe my self your Friend in what I am able to do,

Milden-Hall, Aug. 20. 1695. Francis Bugg, Senior.

LONDON: Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by John Gwillam, Bookseller
in Bishopsgate-street. 1695.


