A DISCOURSE AGAINST Unequal Marriages. VIZ. Against Old Persons marrying with
Young. Against Persons marrying without the Parents or Friends Consent. Against
Persons marrying without their own Consent.


Auream quisquis mediocritatem diliget.

Horat. LONDON, Printed for Dan. Brown, at the Black Swan without Temple Bar;
and Tho. Axe, at the Blew Ball in Duck-lane. 1696.

AN ESSAY AGAINST Unequal Marriages.
CHAP. I. The Introduction.
THE Main and Principal Study of all Persons of what condition soever is, how
to divert and pass away their Time with most Ease and Satisfaction; and
likewise how to soften and lessen that Perpetual Stock of Miseries which Sin
and the Devil have so unhappily brought upon us. This makes mankind in a
continual trouble, and causes them still to exercise their Parts, and set their
Wits upon the Rack to find out New Arts and Tricks; and are always hoping for
New Diversions to gratify their hot and eager desire after Happiness, and to
quiet and please their turbulent and unruly Passions; which when best of all,
they may be compared to peevish troublesome and Froward Children, that must
sometimes be humored and played withal merely out of policy. And this makes
Humane Life so unquiet and disturbed, so strangely restless and uneasy, that
nothing can satisfy us but the prospect, at least, of those flattering Joys,
which Hopes throught a large Telescope present to our longing Eyes. It Is Hope
alone that makes us wish to live; and these are the puffing Bladders that raise
us up, bear us above Water, and keep us from plunging our selves into the midst
of an Ocean of racking Doubts and Despair; tho often they carry us over each
rolling Wave, and dash us against some secret Rocks. When a wise and thinking
man comes carefully and seriously to reflect upon all his past and former
Actions, he finds little but vain idle fooleries not worthy the consideration
of a Man, and scarce deserving a serious thought; and in truth would sooner
choose almost any sort of Life rather than have 'em played over once more; and
the very best and pleasantest of 'em would be both dull and tedious, were they
known before hand.

For this Reason it is that we can never be at rest, our Active Souls being
perpetually in Motion, like the Wide Seas, where Swelling Billows are always
working and beating upon the Shore, tho the Winds be never so still and calm:
so that we are always contriving and inventing; always expecting and desiring
better things than what we already enjoy, let our Wants and Reasons be never so
small and inconsiderable. And for this it is that every Man of what nature
soever, so violently pursues some sorts of Pleasures and Divertisements or
others, tho but very little and mean, if they be such as they may hope for
satisfaction from. Some we find who greedily desire nothing but the gross
Delights of Sense; others please and hug themselves with the sordid hopes of
Wealth and Riches; a third sort are for gratifying their Curiosity with the
more refined Pleasures of Books and Knowledge; and others feed upon the Airy
Charms of Honor, and the loud Trumpets of uncertain Fame. And so for all
others, who commonly follow those Pleasures and Delights, which either the
Dictates of the Natural Temper, or the common Rudiments of their Education
guides them to.

But the surest and most certain way to gain Quiet and Satisfaction in this
World is, some settled and Honest Employment suitable to our Estates and
Qualities; and that accompanied with an Unspotted Reputation and a Good
Conscience. I mean such a settled Employment as may keep us from being idle, and
free us in a great measure from the sensual temptations of the Devil. Then I
don't question but I may bring in Marriage for a large and principal share of
our Happiness. For this Blessing of all others, seems to be most solid and
durable, and what is most universally agreed upon by all men: it being a Sacred
Order and Institution, appointed by God himself when first he made the World;
ingrafted by Nature, and sought after by most men, as a State of Life capable
of affording all those Pleasures and Delights which a Voluptuous Man can seek
for; all those Comforts that Virtue and Innocence can desire, and of sweetning
the many bitter Portions of this Life. It Is this that increases the World,
upholds Mankind, and keep 'em from being at an end; and by this we see our
selves renewed, the little Images of our selves still growing up as we go down.
This is a principal means to keep us Chaste and Honest, and free us from the
Heavy Clogs of Conscience Which always attend Unlawful Acts. It Is this, like
the Universal Cement, unites Society, joins our Mutual Loves, and Blooming
Joys, and makes us Happy; for before we were but half men, and all our Worldly
Delights but half complete. And as the moderate Pleasures of it are innocent,
so are the Comforts inestimable.

It Is true indeed that notwithstanding all these Blessings of a Married Life,
yet a Single One is much more to be preferred and esteemed beyond that, by
reason of the many and vast advantages belonging to it. But then it must be
sure to be always accompanied with that perfect Innocence and unspotted
Chastity that is so wonderful strictly required of all that intend to keep to
this condition. And then indeed this State of Life may well be termed the best
and happiest of all others, it being perfectly stripped and divested of all the
unhappy troubles and cares of this World; free as the unbounded light of the
Sun, whose Glorious beams do shine over all the World; and a life that most
resembles that of the Angels. But these indeed are more peculiar Blessings,
which Heaven bestows on a few, and never designed 'em for all; therefore a
Single Life, in the greatest part of the World, is so far from being good or
commendable, that it generally proves a dangerous trap for their Virtue, and a
gilded Bait which the Devil sets to corrupt their Innocence. So I shall insist
no longer thereon, nor on those Ungracious Wretches who damn and ridicule
Matrimony as long as they can get Misses for their own use; but shall look upon
Marriage as a thing not only most absolutely necessary to keep up and propagate
the World, but also to keep it honest.

If this great and excellent Blessing of Matrimony be so very commonly and
frequently found so vastly contrary to men's expectations, the Wonder is neither
great nor strange, since the main Designs and principal Ends of it are too
often grossly perverted, and horribly abused, as tho it was an ordinary
indifferent thing, scarce worth a taking notice of. And if such a State of Life
as Matrimony begins rashly and wickedly, it is nothing strange if we find it
ends foolishly and desperately. When Virtues, Mutual Love, equality in Humors
and Ages, consent of Friends or themselves are never, or at least but very
slightly considered; the Devil always comes in for a good part, and is certain
to have a principal share in all such Matches. When he finds that he can so
well insinuate himself into our Business, and can have so great a hand in the
chief of all our concerns, there he finds a large and spacious Field to play
and please himself withal; and there he is sure to take his full swing of
Pleasure by so much indulging his chief Attribute, Envy.

Since then this is a State of Life of such a vast concern, and upon which
depends so large a part of Humane Happiness or Misery in this present World; it
will be the highest piece of Imprudence and Folly imaginable, to venture upon
such a serious and solemn Undertaking without either Caution or Consideration.
Want of care is often reckoned as ill and as dangerous as want of Virtue; and
if this will hold good in any place, certainly it will in a business of such
importance as this, where all Persons ought to be more than ordinary
thoughtful, and to consider that this is their last and best Stake, which
should not be thrown away upon every slight and trivial Occasion. To see a man
run desperately and rashly to his own certain Ruin, must be an unpardonable
Fault, that Wise Men would ever be ashamed of; neither would the World ever
acquit those Persons (who marry only to please others) of the most extreme
madness, were it not already so sordidly wedded to Money, and for that reason
alone most abominably partial to all its Friends.

Now a main and principal thing that causes Marriages to be so unhappy, and
makes this State of Life so miserable, is the inequality of them. This is the
great mischief that is become so Epidemical; and from hence arise most of those
deadly Feuds and Breaches, and those sad Misfortunes and Sorrows that so
usually attend a Marriage-Life, which like pestilential Diseases infect the
whole Mass of Blood, and put all things out of order. It is this alone that so
often deprives a Wedded Coople of that bright and inestimable Jewel Content:
making all their Designs and Actions unsuccessful and unfortunate, and their
ends most unhappy and miserable. And it is this Content which is the main and
only White to be levelled at; it being the very Throne of all our Happiness,
and the utmost height of our Ambition. And when this is missed of, the Person
is so far from being pitied, that he is often counted an obstinate Fool that
would not, or at best but an Ignorant One, that could not attain to it.

As concerning Unequal Marriages, it will be very difficult to determine any
thing that shall please all; and I don't at all question but a great many
Persons will think themselves very highly affronted, when they once come to
find their own Faults exposed in their true and proper colors; for every
Person mortally hates to see his ugly Face in a true Glass. There is usually
such a vast disagreement between Parents and Children in this case, that there
is no hopes of ever reconciling them, for they are always so very partial in
their own Cases, and so madly run into the Extremes, that they at last become
insufferable; sometimes urging things so far, that they seem to try who should
bid most for the highest place in Bedlam. The Old Men always hug themselves
with the Golden Thoughts of Interest and a Name; and the Young Men with the
glittering hopes which proceed from their own Foolish or Vicious Humors. So
that however the Case be given, one side must of necessity be exploded, for to
please two Opposites at once, is next to impossible. But to show my self as
impartial as possibly I can, I shall aim at the middle way, and strive to split
the Hair, choosing rather to displease both Parties in a just Case, than humor
one in a false.

Now this same keeping exactly in the middle way in all things, is the great
concern that has always been admired, and sought after by the wiser and more
public heads of all Ages; a thing much commended and talked of, but ever
little practiced and understood. Men are always so much in love with
themselves, that they believe nothing is Good or Bad, Just or Unjust, but only
those things that are for or against their particular Interests. And if a
Person has a settled mind perfectly calm and serene, and as free from all
Prejudice and Partiality, it is but at best like an exact and equal Balance
which stands still whilst nothing moves it, but yet is turned aside with the
least breath or blast of Wind. So that this way must needs be very difficult to
hit on; and in truth it is like a Person forced to walk over a deep Well upon a
small Cord; if the distant bottom or his giddy head should make him step aside,
he is lost beyond hope; but if he keeps upon it, he hurts his Feet, and is still
in danger of the bursting of the Cord. However I shall venture my Fortune, as
some others before me, and shall endeavor to show the unhappy consequences in
both Cases; for in truth there are Vices not to be spared or humoured; tho I
have a very unthankful sort of an Office, when I am almost certain to displease
all sides.

But before I come to particulars in these Matters, I shall premise thus much,
that to complete a true and happy Marriage are required Virtuous Inclinations,
Hearty Love, and True Liking, so that they may be both of the same Mind, and
both have one and the same Interest and Concern; and to make up this, there
must be a suitable agreement in Ages, Humors and Breeding, as well as
Religion, Families and Fortunes. Then when the Persons are so well and happily
joined, they may expect to find all that is Good and Pleasant, all that is Sweet
and Comfortable, and in a word all the Content and Satisfaction that this World
will afford.

But when any of these main and principal Ingredients are wanting, if God
bestows his worldly Blessings upon such a Match, it will be much to be wondered
at, because in every thing they will be tempted to clash and jar together,
making their Lives in continual trouble, like Furious Storms and Tempests,
which often end with Ruin and Desolation.

In discoursing of Unequal Marriages, I shall insist chiefly upon these three
sorts, namely, First of Old Persons Marrying with Young; Secondly, of Marrying
without Friends Consent; and Thirdly, of Marrying without their own Consent.
And all these I may, with good reason, call Unequal Marriages: The first more
properly comprehending Inequality of Ages and Humors; and the two latter,
Inequality in Families, Fortunes and Breedings. Of these I shall endeavor to
treat with all the Justice and Equity Imaginable, and with all the Impartiality
of an unconcerned Stander by; not fearing the Surly Looks of the Old Men, nor
the Insipid Scoffs and Jears of the Young.

CHAP. II. Against Old Persons Marrying with Young.
THis Chapter contains a very odd sort of a Subject, which will, I am sure,
afford matter enough for Ridicule; for to tie Old Age and Youth together in the
Matrimonial Noose, is a thing that may well be ranked among the greater sorts
of Extravagancies; and which neither Nature, Justice, or the World can justify
them in. As for Nature, there can be no manner of pretense of Incitement from
thence by either or both Parties; for what can be more unnatural and
preposterous than to go about to unite brisk and sprightly Youth with dull and
senseless Age? They might as well have undertaken to have joined Summer and
Winter, Light to Darkness, or any other such likely piece of Business, as to
think with all the Strength of Imagination to couple together a young lusty
piece of Flesh with an old frigid Statue. Then as for Justice, it will never be
satisfied, for what greater breach can there be of that, than to join two such
different Natures together, which will almost certainly be the Destruction of
each other, and to entail a stock of Misery upon Persons for term of Life. But
for the World, to be sure that will never excuse them, but I am confident will
be as forward as possible to laugh at them; and in sober sadness such Matches
seem as if they were designed for the laughing purpose. As for my part scarce
any thing can seem more ridiculous; for such Marriages look like some very
strange extravagant Farce, intended only to set all the Spectators into a huge
fit of laughter. And he that observes it well, would think they rather designed
to make mirth and sport for others, than to procure any manner of satisfaction
to themselves: For some persons are hugely pleased when they can say I Am glad I
have made you sport Sir.

But to come a little closer to the matter in hand; I Will suppose an Old
Gentleman, whose brisk days are over, that has a mind to take a turn or two in
the World, and once more venture the strength of his Body upon that comfortable
Text of Increase and Multiply. What can be more unnatural, than for such a dull
Walking Clod of Earth, an Old Doting Fellow of Sixty, to fall a Dying, Sighing,
and languishing for a Sprightly Girl of Sixteen? Certainly it must be very
comical to see how featly and trim our sweet Sir Courtly dresses himself up for
a Ball, or a Visit to his Mistress; how Spruce, Gay and Sparkish he appears
with his New Tricks and Fooleries about him; and withal how antickly fine he is
in all his Accoutrements, whilst a very Monkeys Face and a Deaths Head, shall
brave it out and be called a Beauty, forsooth. Nor can it be less pleasant to
see how Ape-like he mimicks the Customs and Actions of the Young Sparks and
shining Beaux of the Town (whom he continually envyes and mortally hates) and
to see him how neatly he practices the Bon Mien, the Good Grace, the exact
pointing of the Sword to his right Heel, the genteel role in the Stocken, the
Allamode combing of the Wigg, the careless placing of the Hat, and the other
noble accomplishments of the Town.

But the best of all is to see him addressing himself, and paying his Devoirs
to the bright Goddess his Mistress, where he falls down right to showing and
commending all his Excellencies* especially those which he fancies may be most
pleasing and grateful to the young beautiful Sex. He tells her He Is strong and
lusty, tough and sound at heart; and that the Young Men of this present Age are
all pitiful, weak, half-gotten Milksops, neither lasting nor able to do
service; and all consumptive Puny Shrimps, fit for nothing but to make sauce
of. His Mistress perhaps all the while stands listening, being struck dumb with
the Charming Rhetoric of this Venerable Mumpsimus. But should Father
Grey-Beard perceive any sort of Complacency in the Little Creature by
simpering, smiling or the like, then he falls on a fresh to bragging of his
Great and Mighty Feats of Activity, as how well he can Run, Leap and Ride, and
the like. But if by chance at any time his Performances are found to be less
than his Pretensions (for Old Men often make trials) then he comes off with an
idle flam or excuse, that it is only a Fall, a Strain, or Hurt, or some other
accidental Misfortune; but that he can still Drink and Wench with the best of
the Town. And thus he goes on with such extravagant Commendations of his own
deer self; all the while out-ranting a Common Gamester, and out-hectoring a
Town Bully.

The Poor Young Girl who knows little or nothing of the weighty concerns of
Matrimony is perhaps caught at last, being allured into the snare with the gay
expectations of being Married forsooth, and with the wonderful Honor of having
a Husband before she has got over the long and tedious time of her teens; or
rather (which is more probable) with the flattering hopes of riding in a fine
gilt Coach and Six, or with the harmonious gingling of his Guinea's; or lastly
she is forced upon him by a seveer and ridged Father, or some base mercinary
Guardian, who upon all accounts makes his Markets on her, and sells her at what
price he pleases. Whilst jolly Sir Feeble Fain-would leaves no stone unturned,
but bestirs himself on all sides to obtain his desire; is as busy as a Be,
and as merry as the wanton thoughts of a brisk young Wife can make him. But
when the Wedding day is come, then he is all in raptures, and is transported
beyond measure with delicate hopes of a Sweet Encounter as he calls it;
Methinks this conjunction seems far unlike that of Castor and Pollux, but
rather like Mecesius tying the living and dead together.

But to what purpose is all this ado? Or wdat is the consequence of such a
hopeful Match, but only the getting himself the right Worshipful Name of Fool,
or that more honorable Title of Cuckold? And indeed these dignified Names are
not very hard to be obtained, nor much harder to be deserved. For the last of
these he is sure to have, let his Wife be never so Chaste and Virtuous; except
the World be wondrous civil in this Point; which I may venture to assure him
is no common Obligation. For the Common People, as the times go now, have got
an ugly scurvy trick of speaking as they think when they find no inducement to
the contrary. But this is not all; from Sayings they will commonly fall to asking
of Questions; as What kindness she can have for such a Boyish piece of Gravity;
what real Comforts can she find in the loathsome Society of a fond jealous
Dotard, who suspects all that either look at or speak to her, and dreads
nothing like what he knows he deserves? And what true satisfaction can she have
by embracing a Statue, and being all night by an unwholsom Neast of Diseases, a
Cold Lump of Clay, whose utmost Power is only to increase desires, and set an
Edge upon that Appetite, which he can by no means satisfy?

Those Persons that are so curious and exact in asking Questions of one side,
without doubt will not be backwards in the oother, but will stily demand, Where
are the great Pleasures and sweet Delights such a Husband can take when he
finds himself fettered to a peevish ilnatur'd Wife that most certainly hates
him, and at every turn wishes him hanged, or at the Devil; a very kind
Creature! Who instead of comforting and cherishing him, plagues and torments
him? One that cares for nothing but his Money, fears nothing more than his
presence, and wishes for nothing more than her Gallants Company, and her
Husbands End? These are only Questions it is true, but they are good comfortable
ones however, and such as would make the Old Man's Wish tunable all weathers.
No doubt but our Hero will find a huge deal of Pleasure in being almost tongue
wearied to death by a screaming shrill Voice, louder than the Waters of London
Bridge, or the Chataracts of Nile; and now and then for a pure breathing
Diversion, to have his Bald Pate most civilly saluted with a good Brown Cudgel,
instead of being gently rubbed by a cleanly young Girl; or to have a Bucket of
fine cool Water thrown upon him, when he has far more need of a warm Bed and a
good Cordial to cheer up his Old Heart. It will also be a wonderful
satisfaction to him to have two or three bawling Brats got for him by some good
Neighbor, hanging about him and calling Daddy, Daddy! Perhaps this wise Fool
of a Father can hug himself with believing he was instrumental in getting such
bouncing Boys at this Age, when his kind Wife and Obliging World know to the
contrary.

These and such like Misfortunes are the common and (I may say) almost certain
consequences of all such Matches; and whatsoever Miseries and Troubles the
Husband meets withal in these Cases, he cannot so much as comfort himself with
that poor and mean pleasure of being pitied. The World, tho never in such a
good humor, will but laugh at all his complaints, and abuse him for what he
has done, saying, Now he is paid for all his Old Tricks; the Old Sot is right
enough served; who bid him play the Fool in his Old Days? Nay more than all
this, the most abominable Rogueries, and greatest pieces of Villainies shall be
called Acts of Justice forsooth. Sometimes indeed we meet with a very
extraordinary kind sort of Women, who stily to prevent the common and frequent
distempers of Old Age; and to ease the dear sweet Husbands of their many cares
and troubles of this present World, do sometimes give them a gentle Push into
the next: but this falls out as their old Friend the Devil and they can agree.

Having made a few Observations, and considered the Tricks and Ways of the Old
Men a little; let us face about to the other side, and take a small View of the
Old Women, who cannot forget the pleasures of Youth, but must be sporting and
playing still, tho just at the Graves Mouth. Certainly this sight can be no
less ridiculous and strange than the other; to see an old decayed worn out
Widow cast by a Vail and fairly set up for a Beauty and Fortune, when her
shrivel'd Skin looks like so much Parchment, and serves only for a courser sort
of Bag to carry her tattered Limbs and decayed Joints in: with an ugly Hags
Face, looking like the true Picture of Envy. And all this in expectation of
catching some young Woodcock in a Fools Trap, whom she doubts not but to
out-wit sufficiently, and show him a sly trick for all his desimulation; or
perhaps of striking up a Bargain with some Puny Small Wit, whom she supposes
easily to bring up to her hand, and manage him which way she pleases. Tho by
the way Fools for the most part are worst edged tools to meddle withal, and the
most unmanageable Creatures under the Sun.

Now to obtain her Ends (that is to say a Husband) it is necessary to seem brisk
and Young again; and to run back ten years in such a case is but a small
matter. For this reason she falls to using all the affected Smiles, antic
Tricks, and toyish Actions she can think of; still practicing the Genteel
Motion of the Body, the stately carrying of the Head, the neat side glance of
the Eye, the graceful tossing of the Fan, etc. Then to show that all her merry
days are not over yet, she is chaunting, gigling, and moving her Body at every
scraping tune she hears. And she prates and talks the whole Company to silence;
(for when the Teeth are fled, the Tongue seldom lie still) and all her
Discourse is of Fine Balls, Dancing Bouts, Weddings, Merry Meetings, Gay
Gallants, Mistresses, Intreagues and the like. The defects of her Old Wrinkled
Face must be carefully supplied by Art, and Patch and Paint must be made use of
to fill up those Furrows which Old Time with his Iron Teeth has so well and
plentifully bestowed upon her. As for Body, whether strait or crooked, her
Tailor can best fit that. But these indeed are disguises too affected and mean,
to be of any considerable use in these concerns, being in the readiest way to
make the business more odious and ridiculous; for all such unnatural things
carry with them a deformity so gross, as can never be concealed.

When she finds these little Tricks to fail in the intended promotion of her
purpose (as one may venture to swear they will) more substantial Means are then
to used; and the only way left, is to give out she has good store of Gold, as a
thing that seldom fails, and is sufficient to make amends for all other
Imperfections and Defects whatsoever: for that, like the glorious Sun, is never
Old or Ugly, but always Brisk and Charming, Young and Beautiful. With these gay
hopes she probably decoys some young Gaming Fop* or cracked Debauthee, who when
he is admitted to the Favor of a Visit, swears to her by all that is Good, it is
her excellent Person he admires and adores before all the Wealth and Granduer
in the World; and it is her Discretion, Gravity, Virtue, and (sometimes for
variety sake) Beauty, which he values and esteems infinitely beyond her Money;
with a great many of such fashionable pieces of Gallantry (as they are called)
which every Blockhead that is not blind and senseless may see through, and
perceive both the Knavery and Folly of. And truly this is no great and
wonderful thing now adays to see such base persons as these so seriously to
swear and lie for something, when they do it so very often for nothing at all.

This formal piece of Antiquity (you must suppose imagining something
extraordinary in her self) believes all he says, and perhaps as much more; then
pincking up her formal Face with a simpering kind of smile she tells him She
cannot believe but he is a mere Wag, a very Wag all over, and only dissembles
and flatters to wheedle kind hearted Creatures; but yet she vows that these
same Young Men have always a very strange taking way with them, and will never
be said nay when they are once set on. upon this with a Complement and a
gracious Smile on her side, and a fawning Leer on his, with the Formalities of
a second or third Visit, a Match is clapped up between the Old Fool and the
Young. She indeed expecting great and mighty things, but he guessing
beforehand what he is like to meet withal, seldom comes at her, passes away
his time merrily, and cares but little (as long as the Money goes briskly
about) which end goes forward; So that at best he is only as a kept Person in
continual Fee. But this will not do with him, for he will make her to know who is
Lord and Master, and since his old Grannam of a Spouse cannot please him, her
Money must then procure him such a one as can.

But what says the World to all this? O wondrous civil! as may be guessed by
that obliging language which follows. Oh hang her (says one) for an Old Beast;
must she be for riding at this time of day? She Is past Man's use now, it is high
time to fall to procuring. Ay (says a second) what should she do but procure a
good bit for her poor Husband and help him at a dead lift? Rot her Old Corpse
(says a third) she is good for nothing but to make money of. But he, for his
part, shall be applauded, and commended for what he does, and encouraged for
all his fine Rogueries, and she her self must be content to bear the brunt of
all. People are strangely pleased to find she is met withal at last, and
wonderfully pleased at every trick he serves her, if he should bring a Miss
publicly to his House, or some such slighty business; or if he entertains her
every day with the sweet Music of Damn me and Rot me Sparks. But if he chance
to find the advantage of touching her Copyhold; of making the dirty Acres fly
about, the old Houses to go to Pot, and the tall sturdy Oaks to rore; that is
mirth and sport enough for a month at least.

I will not insist any longer upon the ill effects and unhappy Misfortunes of
such Matches as these; and shall omit the many grateful returns these Persons
may expect from their Children and other Relations, who are very often fooled
out of good Estates by these means, and New Heirs seldom fail of being
produced, tho it is not in every man's power to get 'em. In my opinion the best
Use and greatest Advantage that can be made of such Matches is Penance and
Mortification. For such Old Wives and Husbands (besides the many Afflictions
they cause) may indeed prove a better Memento Mori than any Deaths Head; and
perhaps give persons a more lively hint of Mortality than a Skull can do. Such
sort of Marriages may indeed be well compared to tying a man Neck and Heels,
and leaving him to shift for himself, whilst his struggling only makes him
worse. But how great soever the Misfortunes are, they have always an original
so very ridiculous, that they are things more to be laughed at than pityed,
which have made me less serious in this Chapter than I thought to have been, or
perhaps will be counted agreeable to the perfect Rules of Gravity and Modesty;
and truly I am very much ashamed to handle this Subject any longer.

Before I finish this Chapter, I must desire the Courteous Reader to take
notice, that in all this Discourse there is not any thing spoken with the least
design or intention to bring Old Age into contempt; for I always held that to
be a thing that merits the greatest Esteem, Honor and Veneration imaginable.
But let all Old Persons take this along with them, that it will ever be counted
base and contemptable, and a Curse instead of a Blessing, while it wants the
Ornamental Marks of Gravity, Judgment and Discretion, which always ought to
carefully attend it, and be inseparable; and that a merry Old Fool, and a gay
apish Matron are things so unnatural, that a very Ingenious Person has
deservedly reckoned them among the tamer sort of Monsters.

CHAP. III. Against Persons Marrying without the Parents or Friends Consent.
THE main design of this Chapter is to show the great imprudence and impiety of
all such as run rashly, or without Friends knowledge or consent, upon such a
solemn thing as Matrimony; with the sad and fatal consequences thereof; which
will be enough, I Am sure, to deter all Persons of any Sense or Religion from
stealing of Matches, or suffer themselves to be stolen by others. This is a
great and abominable Crime which has grown wonderful common in these late
times; and for ought we can hear more frequent in our Nation, than in our
Neighboring Countries, especially for the Female Sex, because they are allowed
more Liberty here, than in most other Parts. Though within these few Years
there has somewhat more care been taken to prevent these Inconveniences, and
Licenses have been more cautiously delivered; yet still we find frequent
Examples of this nature to the great Misfortunes of the Persons themselves, and
sometimes to the Ruin of their Families. And we cannot expect it will be
otherwise, as long as there are some at every turn ready in the Dukes-Place,
the Mint, or some such Priviledg'd corner of the Town, who will do this small
Job of Coopling without the inconsiderable formality of a License, or the
little consideration of the Canonical Hour.

I shall first speak a word or two concerning such Men as steal Persons much
above themthemselves in Fortune, (for I can afford such vile Practices no
better title than stealing.) For though this at present is reckoned little or
no fault in the Man's part, and the most ridgid and censorious part of the
World seldom lay any thing to his charge: Yet for my part I can most clearly
and plainly see something in it that is most base and ungenerous, which is far
beneath the great and noble Thoughts of Man. For to pretend Love in this case,
is almost as ridiculous as the Tailor that very fairly fell in Love with Queen
Elizabeth; so that the Person can have no manner of Color for his Design in
hand but a greedy thirsting after Money, and an eager persuing after those
Riches which he has no sort of Title to, and gets 'em as unjustly as Pirates
and Robbers do their Booty. Besides, to Marry purely for Money, without any
other considerations, seldom fails of causing an unhappy Life: And common
Experience shows us that such Persons as these have very seldom any manner of
real Love or Kindness for their Wives, though they be never such Accomplished,
Beautiful and Deserving Ladies; then to what a fine pass have these poor
Creatures brought themselves to?

Let all your High Lookers, and great Pretenders to large Fortunes but
seriously consider, First, What a vast piece of Injustice it is to Rob a Loving
Father of a Daughter in which he places so great a part of his Delight; to take
his dearest Jewel from him; and violently to tear a lovely Blooming Sprig,
which he has Nurished with so much care and tenderness: And though the Night
promises well, the Horse stands at the Gate, the Doors open, the Riding-Grown's
on, the Lady ready, the Parson waiting, and all things smile and favor the
Design, running very smothly a long; yet in a short time after they are chained
together, the Magic cease, the Enchanted Castle Vanishes into fleeting Air;
the Tempest rises, and whole showers of Afflictions fall thick, imbittering all
their Joys, and destroying all their fine expectations. Secondly, Let them all
consider what a high piece of Imprudence it is for a man so dangerously to
venture himself with a young Creature, whose fickle Fancy turns like the wind,
and whose ungrounded Love often upon such accounts meet with its cold and
loathing Fits, and curdles to Hatred in a few hours time, which by the
overswaying power of flattering and and threatening Friends may bring his Life
at her Mercy. Besides, if he marry such when her Portion is not certain, he
commits a double Folly to no purpose; and then his Love for Money has left him
in a very sweet pickle indeed.

But now to come a little closer to the business of Marrying without Friends
consent, and to show the greatness of this Offense. It always ought to be
considered that Nature has given to Parents an extraordinary Power over their
Children, making far greater distinctions here than in any other Persons
whatsoever. And as this sort of Government is certainly the most natural of
any, so all other Governments seem rather to have been made in imitation of
this First Method; being for the most part Acquired by Usurpation and mere
Force, and increased by the Strength and Policy of more crafty heads. As
Parents Authority is great, so ought Childrens Obedience to be great too; and
all the Amends and Satisfaction they are ever able to make for their bringing
of them into the World, Education, Estates, and the like, is only a dutiful
compliance to all their just Commands, and a hearty desire of performing all
their good Wishes. Here it is that a Young Man shows his noble temper, as well
as humble disposition; and it is this that Heaven promises such peculiar
Blessings to, and that the World has so often crowned with its just Applauses.

As Marriage is the greatest concern, and the Principal thing in which a Parent
always takes most care; and to see them well Matched is as much as to see 'em
made happy: So for a Son or a Daughter to be disobedient to this, is the
greatest piece of Rebellion, as well as the highest point of Ingratitude they
can well be guilty of. This indeed has made many a Father (and that with
Justice too) utterly cast off a hot-brain Son from all his future care; and
whose unlucky Curses have hit him so right, and stuck so close to him ever
after, as have driven him to the utmost Miseries that attend Poverty and Rags.
The greatness of this Crime few young Persons consider, especially since they
are commonly so extremely partial and self-conceited of their own Prudence and
Judgment in choosing; laughing at their own Parents and Friends, thinking them
all very unfit Persons to consult withal, and not Good or Wise enough to choose
for them; but will run madly and furiously on, big with the expectation of some
wonderful Charms and extraordinary Bliss, till they are soon foundred and lost,
like one that rides a fiery Steed that stops at nothing but runs at Swelling
Rivers, Craggy Rocks and Deadly Precipices, till the Rider is hurled off and
dashed in pieces. These are the surious transports of Harebrain Youth, who run
mad for a Face, and ruin themselves for a mere trifle.

If all things be thoroughly and carefully considered, such a Crime as this must
appear extraordinary soul and infamous, and of such a Base Nature as can never
be excused by an unconcerned Stander by, such as I profess my self to be. To
have a kind indulgent Father, whose softest Wishes, and greatest Joys, always
attend his Sons good Fortune; careful of him even to the raging Passion of
Jealousy, to bestow his utmost Pains, use his greatest endeavors, and still
racking his contriving Head both day and night; and all with the joyful
expectation of his Sons being great and happy after his death, and placing the
greatest part of his own Happiness in his: then to have a stubborn ungreateful
Son to dash and overturn the whole Fabric of his great Designs, and by one
unlucky Cast, blast all his thriving hopes at once. This is too much for a
Father to bear, and then it is no wonder to see a Parent (tho never so gentle
and good Natured) decree the utmost severitys, and at one blow to lop off a
Monstrous Excrescency.

That this Offense is punished with Disinheritance, there is scarce any thing
more common; and a Father in this case is very seldom much blamed, or reckoned
severe or unjust; for when a Son or Daughter have by their Disobedience broke
their Fathers Heart, and and have thrown him off as a Person that has nothing
to do with them; he has a good and honest Plea to leave them to themselves.
Some Fathers indeed are often glad to find such an Excuse when they have a mind
to put off their Daughters without Portions, because they are sure that this
will certainly vindicate their Proceedings to the inquiring World. So that it
is most apparent that this is a far greater Crime than most young People take
it to be; so that for a man of Ingenuity and Generosity to be guilty of such a
fault, to me seems very inconsistant Neither can I well conceive how a man of
sense can ever excuse himself from such a prodigious piece of Ingratitude,
since that of all other Vices is justly esteemed the basest and meanest, and of
such a Nature, that even those Persons who have seemed to make their business
and design to act and brag of all other Rogueries, are yet ashamed of that, and
are very careful to conceal it, as a thing that can get them no manner of
Commendation or Applause, not so much as among their rude Companions.

But let us now spend a thought or two about the Female Sex. As for those,
Nature has seemed to take a more peculiar Care in moulding them and making them
more easy and compliant; and of giving them a softer and more flexible
Disposition, sinely adapted to Obedience. But to the Male it has afforded a
stronger and more governing Nature, and has given them more Power and Command.
Therefore Obedience and Compliance in the Female seems more convenient and
necessary, as being more suitable and natural. And if all things be rightly
considered, they are not to expect to be their own Carvers in all things, nor
to have so large a right in choosing as Men Their Friends Care and Judgment is
always rationally looked upon as far more fit and proper for the choice of what
will be for their happiness and Well-being, than their own fond Humors, which
proceed from an unsettled Fancy. So that their main and principal care in this
Life ought to be how to soften those troubles, and how to make that pleasant
and easy which falls to their share, if they should chance to meet with a
Person and Humors, not altogether so well and agreeable as might have
reasonably been wished for.

The truth of all this will easily appear, and become as clear as the Sun, if
we come carefully to consider and reflect upon the Unsteady Nature and
Unsatisfied Disposition of Youth, and especially of the Female Sex, whose
Reasons are for the most part biased by their Humors, and not strong enough
to discern and search into those things which are best for a Settled and Married
Life. For their Fancies are almost always carrying them aloft, which makes
their Brains giddy, overruling their Reasons, and leading them about through
Bypath and uncertain Places, like an Ignis Fatuus, and at last looses them in
a wild desolate Wilderness. It will be much more apparent and visible, if we
look upon Examples, which frequently shows us how extremely unfortunate many
young Women are in their choice, when it has depended wholly upon themselves.
And further, it is very common to find those very Ladies that have been so
extremely nice, so wonderfully curious and difficult to please, disdaining and
laughing at all that look like the Vulgar, and scorning and dispising all that
seem mean or common; so that one would think, nothing less could satisfy them
than an Angel dropped from the Clouds: Yet (I say) it is very usual for these
Mock-Criticks at last to throw themselves under the subjection of Whimsical
Flutring Fop, or a mere starched and joynted Bartholomew Puppet, whose Stock of
Wit and Money is as small as his Impertinence and Impudence is large.

If we do but observe the generality of the Young Ladies of this our Age* who
pretend so much to Modishness and the like; we cannot but wonder to find so
many Inconsistencies, and to see with what large mixtures of Fickleness,
Inconstancy, Vanity and Unsettled Fondness they are made up withal. How
difficult to please, how critical in foolish trifles, how Extravagant and
Finnical in their Attire; how wonderfully delighted with all that is gay and
glittering, how strangely ubounding in Discourse, how toyish and freakish in
their Actions; having vitiated Palates that can relish nothing that is Grave or
Serious, or can endure any thing that is prudent or discreet: We may (I say)
when we consider all this, well enough conclude that that Person who courts one
of them, and desires to gain her, needs only a gay laced Coat rather than a
decent one, to please her nice Fancy; an Impertinent Tongue (like Sir Formal
Trifles) overlaid with Fustian and Bombast Words rather than sense, to hold her
in discourse; and a Maggotish Noddle well stuffed with Impudence (like Sir
Positive at all) to make her believe any thing.

Upon such sort of Persons as these, common experience shows us that
Dancing-Masters and Singing-Masters have chiefly the greatest influence; the
one by the nimble shaking of his Heels, and the other by the cunning quavering
of his Voice, so melting and charming the poor Pool, that she is all upon the
sighing whining Vein, till she is stark mad to be delivered from her old Fathers
Clutches. And this is much more likely if Age has not strengthened her Reason,
or ripened her Understanding so far as to distinguish between gay things and
good things, and to discern the fatal effects of such Baseness: and this brings
her to laugh at the kind and wholesome advices of a Father, and to look upon
her Friends as all peevish, silly and inconsiderate Persons that deserve not a
serious thought to be thrown away upon them. After this indeed Years may harden
her in her wickedness, and help her to a large stock of Impudence, but they
seldom teach her any Prudence or Discretion, for her ridiculous Follies and
stubborn Vices will yet grow stronger with her Age; like gliding Rivers and
flowing Streams, still increasing the further they run from the Fountainhead.
But the poor self-deceiving Creature seldom looks about her, till the manifest
appearance of approaching Ruin from an inhumane cursed Husband opens her Eyes to
some purpose, and show her that all the Wit and Experience she have got are the
dearest things she ever purchased before now.

Thus we find many sad Examples of this Nature, of several Young Persons who
run rashly and without any sort of Consideration to get themselves married,
never minding any thing that belongs to such a Condition, but those vain
flattering Pleasures that their deluded hopes present to their distant view
through a corrupted and false medium. It Is often seen that many a poor Young
Girl is trickt and cheated into Matrimony to the great grief of her Parents,
and her own lasting Torment; and that too when she has but a small knowledge of
the troublesome cares and concerns of this World, and before she well
understand what a Husband means, or what and where lies the Conveniences and
Inconveniences that a Married Life is capable of. And perhaps the Person that
did it is some debauched beggarly Rakehel, some base ungenerous Fellow, whose
Dunghill Passion will never raise his drowsy Soul above the smell of dirst; and
desires nothing but Money, which he so greedily devours and swallows down to his
Wives ruin, and his own Destruction.

Now the main Source from whence these Passions (on the man's account) do rise,
and the chief Spring that moves so many young men's Affections, and hurries away
their Reasons from paying the Respects due to their Parents, is Beauty; an
Object that always carrys something with it so excellent and Charming, as can
never be well defined or described. And it is this that so many times sets
Unsteady Youth all in a raging fire, so violently tossing his tempestuous Soul,
and so forcibly carrys him on toward his Imaginary Bliss, that the loud cries
of Reason can never be heard, but only when it comes with a gentle smile, to
favor the cause in hand, and plead for that soft Passion: and this causes them
sometimes to be so extravagant as to make Goddesses of Women (Angels at least)
and place even Divinity it self in a poor silly Mortal. Then you will hear nothing
from him but Wishing, Complaining, Sighing, Languishing and Dispairing; of
Charming Pleasures, Gentle Flames, Broken Hearts, Melting Tears, and the like;
and all his Discourse shall be about his Mistress, of vindicating her to all
the World, of undertaking all desperate Attempts, and Dying for her three or
four times a Day. These things tho foolish enough, are true, and often deserve
more Pity than Laughter; for Beauty the chief cause of all this, is like a
cruel Basilisk that often kills us at distance, and before we know any thing of
it.

The Old Men indeed come bluntly to their Sons, and tell them that Beauty will
buy no Beef; (a course Complement to one up to the Ears in Love) But the Young
Men as pertly reply, It will buy Content which is far better; an Answer truly
sufficient, and of full force we grant, if it were as true as the other. But
this we frequently find so far from procuring any real satisfaction or Content,
that it has many times been the primary Cause of the greatest Miseries and
Afflictions that can befall a Married Life. And if Prejudice be wholly laid
aside, 'twill easily be seen that scarce ever any Marriage has been on both
sides happy, that had no other Foundation than what comes from the Charms of
outside Beauty; which indeed is far more fit to increase a Man's Appetite, than
to settle any true Liking, and will sooner procure Fondness than real Love; the
fatal Effects of which is Jealousy, that cursed Bane to all the Pleasures of
the Marriage Bed, which makes their best Delights a raging Torment, and turns
the greatest Blessings into the greatest Plagues. So that to have this without
Virtue, is a thing that none but stupid and senseless Persons would endure; For
then it is like a hot burning Coal whose bright and sparkling looks many may
gaze on with admiration enough, but none but Fools and Madmen are willing or
daring enough to touch. For who but such a Madman would for the gratifying of
his fancy run and throw himself into the devouring Flames? Who for a few
transient fits of Joy would part with all the Pleasures of his soft and sweet
Repose? Who for the Honor of Embracing a painted Cloud, would forfeit both his
Heaven of Content here, and his Heaven of Happiness hereafter, by being always
upon the rack of Jealousy, and tormenting Fears, least his Beautiful Jezebel
prove false, and another admire that Fantastical Face which he himself
formerly doated on.

Let us consider Beauty by its self, and quite stripped of all those Ornaments
she borrows from the Arts and Tricks of others; for her upper Decorations she
gets from common Shop keepers and Tyre-women, her lower ones from Tailors and
Brokers, and her sweet ravishing Complexion very often from a little Stuff that
comes from a Painters Pencil, which sometimes dawbs her over like a Sign Post.
There uniting all their Force do dress her up as gay as possible, and are as
extravagant (if it can be) as our unbounded Fancies. I say, if we seriously
reflect on all this, we should not find it so considerable as to make us forget
our greatest Blessings our Freedoms to enjoy it; nor yet so permanent as to
make us hope for any lasting Pleasures from it. For when it is never so natural,
a small fit of Siokness often takes away the superficial part of it, and a few
years, Children, and Ill Nature do take away all the rest of the varnished
Features. Then the hot fit of Passion soon turns to the cold one of loathing;
and all those soft Joys and charming Pleasures, which raging and unruly Desires
expected to meet withal, dull Fruition and Experience finds absent, and nothing
left but a rotten decayed Vessel, bereft of all that is good, and emptied of all
its Delights. So that Young Persons are under a very strange mistake when they
think Beauty alone can make any Marriage happy; for this they may be most
certain of, that whatsoever Love has no stronger legaments than what proceed
from thence (besides the Racks of Doubts and Jealousies which so often attend
it) can never last any longer than that will; no more than that Love which is
grounded on Money, can outlast the spending of it.

There are several other things besides Beauty, which makes many a Woman be
loved and admired, and often cause Young Persons to transgress the Duty they owe
to their Parents; as Good Nature, a fine Carriage, a quick Wit, and a sweet
Voice: and all these have each their peculiar Charms, and are admired by many
men (and perhaps with justice too) as much as Beauty it self. Yet for all that,
when every one of these unite their Power and Forces, and meet together in one
Woman (which is certainly as strong and mighty temptation for Youth to
encounter withal) they are many times misfortunes (when abstracted from virtue)
rather than Advantages, and Plagues rather than Blessings, there being all to
be found in many a common Prostitute, and in the very worst of Women. Neither
indeed can these procure any manner of satisfaction or real content, when true
Love, Virtuous Inclinations, and a Competency are wanting; the two former being
absolutely necessary to make firm their Happiness, and keep it so perpetually;
and the latter to gain Friends consents, and to crown all their Joys.

Now what man in his right wits that has the least grain of consideration in
him, would ever be so grossly silly and senseless as to marry a Woman (though
endowed with all the forementioned Charms) that he knew for certain did not
really love him, or had not Virtue or Honor to continue that Love? Certainly
he can have no manner of regard to his Quiet and Happiness in this Life, or
must be most strangely ignorant of the means and way to it, who shall thus
foolishly plunge himself into the midst of an Ocean of Doubts, which will be a
devouring Torment and a perpetual Rack to his Mind, if he has any thing of Life
or Soul in him. Yet he that marries a Person without his Parents consent, (the
want of an Estate being supposed to hinder their consent) though perhaps he is
not absolutely certain his Mistress don't love him, yet he can never be certain
she does, or that she don't love his Money far better than himself, which if he
knows he is doubly mad to marry her. For when all such Person first set their
hearts upon that (as it is most frequent in this case) they mind little else
but those ill Properties and ridiculous vanities, that all mean Persons so much
seek after; and what is more usual than to have Mercinary Spirits soon lose all
sense of Generosity or Gratitude?

Some Persons are of Opinion, that if they marry with them of Inferior Rank,
they can manage them as they please; and do verily believe that gratitude will
always be a sufficient Obligation to bind them to all Affection, Love, Respect
and Obedience; and by this means they propose to themselves strange and
wonderful things, and their contrivances the best ordered, and the most
ingeniously invented that can be for their quiet and content. But such a Person
ought to be put among the Cautious Sir Solomon's Projectors, and be sure to meet
with no better luck than he; for this is a vain and foolish supposition, fit
for only the unthinking part of the World, and contradicting all common
Experience. For that constantly shows us that he that takes his Maid for his
Consort, finds her no less Proud and Imperious, than he that marries with one
of the Highest Rank; nay very oftentimes more; for all Base Bron Inferior
Persons (though naturally of a Disposition good enough) are strangely changed
and altered by such Honors, as being so much above their Companions; which
makes them have a vast conceit of their own Worth and Merits, their Pride and
Insolency increasing to that degree as they become altogether insupportable;
while better Educations are far more noble and generous, being apter to own
Obligations.

Not to insist too long upon this Head, nor to be too tedious on this Subject;
in short, all Young Persons whatsoever may observe and take this for a most
certain and undeniable Truth, that they neither have nor can have a power of
disposing of themselves as they please, as long as their Parents or Friends
entrusted by them are alive, and they have any manner of dependence upon them;
and let their Inclinations and Desires be how they will, they cannot enter into
such a solemn and sacred Institution as Matrimony of their own accord without
their Parents consent; they being so far part of their Goods (and the clearest
and most valuable too) that to give themselves away unknown to them, is a kind
of Robbery or Theft, or perhaps something worse. This is a Crime which they can
never answer to God or Good Men; for a Marriage is not real or truly complete
according to God's Laws, till Parents by their consent make firm the Contract.
And this is the common Opinion of the chief of our Divines, as far as I can
understand.

But some perhaps whose ungoverned Passions have wholly led them away, will
pretend that the soft Allurements, and sweet Temptations of Beauty, Good
Nature, Wit and the like, have been so very strong and powerful, that they have
not been able in any manner to resist them. I will not examine how Humane
Nature may reasonably be supposed to have power of encountering there; but
however this Pretense will never serve, since the venturing to stand the brunt
and force of them, and of favoring of Opportunities, is one of their Principal
Faults. For those above all things, are ever to be most carefully and cunningly
avoided; and shunned as the most dangerous Infections; and like a full nest of
enraged Hornets, disturbed by some unwary Traveller, more to be fled from than
fought withal. Besides temptation is a poor pretense that every common
Prostitute makes use of to extenuate and excuse her filthy Lusts, and every
Perjured Villain to uphold his Rogueries; and if this would hold good, the
greatest Wickedness in the World might go unregarded, and Crimes of the highest
and blackest nature go still unpunished.

Therefore let Children consider and dread the Unhappy Consequences of all such
Matches, as their own Rashness and most Unruly Desires leads them to; whose
beginnings are commonly with the violent and hot flames of Love, and do soon
turn to the sad and cold fits of Loathing. By this means it is common for a Man
to have a tormenting Wife that plagues and hates him, stubborn and rebellious
Children that despise and scorn him, an Estate quite shattered and wasted, his
Unhappy Self upon the very brink of certain Ruin, not knowing how to avoid or
escape it, and all the time perhaps the hatred and anger of his unreconciled
Parents; which last will always be as a devouring and gnawing Worm, and a clog
of some weight to his distracted Soul. For Disobedience (the Fatal cause of
their troubles) is an aspersion so very vile and ugly, that nothing but Time
and Repentance can wipe off in this World. And therefore once more let me
earnestly desire and advise all Young Persons whatsoever to have a more than
ordinary care of such things, and that their Stubborness and Disobedience do
not pull down God's just vengeance, and their Parents curses upon their Head.

CHAP. IV. Against Persons Marrying without their own Consent.
PArents I do not doubt but will be well enough pleased with most of the
Passages of the former Chapter, since that speaks so much in behalf of their
Prerogative, and against Childrens Disobedience; but I am afraid they will scarce
relish this following Chapter, nor well digest a business which touches them so
nearly; for this treats of the last sort of Unequal Marriages, in which they
themselves are the principal Actors and are most guilty, namely of marrying
their Children without their Consents, or against their Wills. We may observe
that every Person is very angry and uneasy when he comes to see his own vile
Practices and Vices laid open to the censuring World; but above all, Old
Persons take it most grievously, because their high conceit of their own
Experience leads them to believe themselves beyond doing of Injuries, or at
least of deserving to be censured.

I am now arrived and just entering upon a most sad and Malancholly Subject, and
I cannot but bestow a few serious reflections and some mournful thoughts upon
it; a Subject that many are apt to start at, and cannot endure so much as to
hear it once mentioned, having experimentally found the sad and fatal Effects
of it, either in themselves or their Relations. And this is a Curse that mean
and Inferior Persons are seldom or never liable to, and are but very rarely
troubled with the Misfotunes that so commonly attend it. But this very
frequently accompanies the Gaudy Pomps and Airy Noise of Magnificence, Grandeur
and Riches, still aiming and striking at great and lofty Places, whilst little
ones commonly escape free; like the ordinary and common Diseases which proceed
from Luxury, being starved at Cottages do always shun them, and inhabit Courts
and Palaces. So that this is a thing that lights more upon the heads of Great
Persons Children than others, and that too upon the Female Sex more commonly
than the Male.

As for the greatness of this Injury, there is nothing more apparent; being
such, that all the pains and cares that a Parent is able to take or perform for
a Child in this sad case, can never make amends, or give any reasonable
satisfaction, the Misfortune being often so large and complete, that it is
beyond the Power of Man to relieve, or give ease to: Tho a Married Life is very
often found to be the happiest and most comfortable of all others; yet when it
comes to begin thus dismally, it mostly proves the worst of all conditions
whatsoever, and is very often one of the greatest Plagues that can well befall
a Man, making their conditions more sad and miserable than the poorest Wretches
who beg bread from door to door: and this may be confirmed sufficiently by too
many lamentable and deplorable Examples of this kind. So that a Wise and
Thinking Man (especially if he comes to consider the great sins that constantly
attend it) would sooner choose the basest and meanest Employments, and most
contemptible of all callings, than endure those restless Tortures, that so
necessarily belong to all such Unfortunate Matches.

For a Parent to bring up his Child with all the kindness, tenderness and care
imaginable; to be always ready to instruct him in every good and virtuous
Exercise; to be most exact in teaching him all the excellent and noble
Accomplishments which his Condition, Estate and Quality so much deserve; to
suffer him in, and to procure him all the moderate and Innocent Pleasures and
Recreations that may be had; and to indulge him and love him as his own Soul,
is a thing tho frequently yet very commendable, and is something that will bind
a generous Disposition far stronger than the Obligations that proceed from
Power, Fear and constrained Obedience. But then for such a Parent by his over
violent zeal, and too eager desire after his Sons Happiness, by an unlucky blow
to ruin him at once beyond all relief, is a thing most strange, unaccountable
and prodigious. I am extremely sorry that I can truly say, it is a thing that
has been often done and practiced; and that too by such Parents, whose good
Reputations, Gravity, Prudence and Ingenuity, would have spoke far better
things for them, and (one would have thought) might have taught them more
Virtue, Piety and Honesty, or at least more Wit and Discretion, than out of a
foolish Humor, scarce worthy of such a care, to imbitter their Childrens
Happiness, and entail Misery upon their Famelies for succeeding Ages.

When I come to consider the strange cares and troubles that Parents have for
their Childrens sake, it is then, and only then, that I am ready to think almost
all Marriages unhappy and unfortunate: but on the other side when I look upon
the sweet comforts and pleasant satisfaction they receive from their good
behavior, and their hopes they feed themselves withal of their proving well,
when they see nothing to the contrary; I find those are Engines strong and
powerful enough to hold them up, and to keep them from sinking under a load of
cares and concerns. Parents Lives are often like those of Poets and Gamesters,
who can very rarely arrive to the pleasure of being cool and at rest; their
busy Souls and overwhelmed Desires are continually in flame, which never
suffers them to have a calm and even temper, but makes them always either in
Raptures or Despair, according as their good or bad Fortune requires it. It Is
their overdoing of things which commonly ruins their Designs, and breaks all
their measures; their excess of Love makes their Children bold, impudent and
sausie; their overmuch Care and desire for them, makes them idle, careless and
undutiful; the Jealousy makes them mistrustful, disdainful and to hate and
slight their Commands; and their Rigidness cramps and destroys all their
generous thoughts, and corrupts the Morals. Yet they think many times they can
mould them as they please, and incline their minds as they think fit; and
because they suppose their Children do not know what is good for themselves,
their threats must drive them to it, which destroys the very essence and nature
of Good of Marriage; and when they have once got them coupled to an Estate and
a few Titles, they think they have done all; tho perhaps they have undone all,
and ruined them to all intents and purposes.

That no man might think that I have said any thing out of Ill Will or
Prejudice, I do freely and sincerely declare, that I have so good an Opinion of
all Parents, and particularly of these sorts I am treating of, that I cannot so
much as suppose any of them to desire, or heartily wish their Children the
least Hurt or Injury, much less their lasting Misery or Ruin; (tho we find
several upon the account of Faults and Disobedience, to have put extraordinary
ill things upon their Children, and such as they themselves must needs know to
be hard and cruel) But when I go about to aquit them of this Vice, I must of
necessity accuse them of an insufferable piece of Folly (besides a horrible Sin
which I shall mention to them by and by) when they think to make that Match
happy which begins with hatred and loathing; and this is a ridiculous thing
which men of their Age and Experience can never be supposed to be ignorant of.
They may as well hope to see the Poles of the Heavens meet, or make Fire and
Water agree, as the Loves, Inclinations and Affections of some Persons. Young
Peoples Humors and Passions are very often strange and ungovernable, and such
as are impossible to unite; and Fathers are not to imagine that their Children
are like Trees, in which they can graft different Humors and Inclinations, as
well as different Fruits.

But some Parents, who beginning to perceive and reflect upon the miserable and
deplorable Effects of the hard and severe Usage, their Pity flowing in a-pace,
do still flatter themselves with the hopes that time should ease them, and help
to set all to rights again. And this is the common and threadbare Pretense that
all Parents make use of to excuse their Severity and Injustice; for, say they,
tho the Wound be wide and troublesome, yet the Cure is not very hard; time and
balmy Blood, with a little care, will make all well again. But sad Experience
confutes this, and shows it to be altogether false and frivolous; for we
constantly find that length of times and days do very rarely produce any sort
of cure for this Distemper (as it has been often hoped for) but for the most
part rather increasing the Torment; for these Wounds are like the breaches of
Ships and Vessels which time only makes wider, but can never stop up; which as
the frequent and common Diseases of Old Age and Years, growing worse and worse,
till kind Death comes and puts an end to all. Only sometimes we happen of an
Ingenious Pious Person, who has got the Stoical knack of slighting all troubles
and caring for nothing, and to ease himself in this case will be sure to cause
his Wives Money to gingle, make havoc on her Cash, and the Yellow Boys fly
merrily about like dirt, in his Cups once ran home to bestow three or four or
half a dozen genteel curses upon his kind hearted Parents by way of thanks; and
briskly and finely pass away his time among the honorable Society of Chimney
Sweepers and Porters.

As for Emperors, Kings and such kind of Persons as those, I shall not dare to
presume to meddle withal, or concern my self in this case; nor will I venture
to determine any thing in the Mysterious Matters of State: But to all others I
must take the boldness to tell them that this is a very heinous Offense, and
piece of Wickedness, that can never be let pass unregarded. They indeed may
make the Minister join their hands, but the Marriage can never be complete or
lawful till their hearts be joined too; this being a most perfect violation of
their Native Freedom, and to be forced this way is the worst and most miserable
of all slaveries. Neither can these Parents any ways acquit themselves of
making their Children guilty of two mortal and most abominable Sins, namely
Perjury and Treachery, and those of the basest and blackest Die too. For let
any man seriously consider and see if they can find or imagine a greater and
grosser Perjury, than to make the most sacred and most solemn Vow that can be
thought of, in the aweful presence of God and the whole Congregation, to a
thing that is absolutely false? Or indeed how can there be a baser piece of
Treachery, than to make such a solemn Vow, when they neither can or will keep
it; and in a concern upon which so nearly depends all that is good and happy in
this world.

For my part, when I come to consider the greatness of these Crimes, I can but
tremble, and am amazed at the very thoughts of such Mons;trous Impieties as
these; and can but strangely wonder how either Parents or Children dare so much
as appear in such a horrid Business, and are not afraid of the Divine Vengeance
in the very Act. For certain Experience shows us, that things done with so much
Precaution, Consideration and Solemnity, always strike a most sad and deep
terror in men's hearts, more than sins commonly practiced, though never so great
and heinous. This most sacred Order of Matrimony is not to be played withal,
passed slightly over, or made a common property for Private Interest, but there
ought to be a wonderful deal of Caution and Care in it. And when a Match begins
with two such shameful Crimes as these; it is no wonder at all if the Almighty
sends his Plagues upon their heads, punishing Parents in beholding their
Childrens Miseries, and Children in feeling the deadly effects of their own
Perjuries: nor is it strange if the Devil be suffered to sow his cursed
Dissentions among them, and keeping them at such a vast distance that nothing
can reasonably be expected but Despair and Desolation.

Now a main and Principal Cause of all these troubles and disturbances, and
that makes Old Men so raging mad and desperately hot, is Money; a thing which
always commanded, ruled and governed the more degenerate and baser part of the
World as it pleased, bringing them wholly and entirely to its own Devotion, and
making them hazard all Troubles and Dangers, Honors and Reputations, and their
very Bodies and Souls; and all in hopes of obtaining Favors from, and enjoying
that Bright Beauty. This it is that casts such a deadly mist, and blinds Parents
Eyes, perverts their Reasons, and corrupts their Understandings so much, that
all Great and Generous Thoughts, all Glorious and Noble Designs are clogged,
pulled down and destroyed; so that by this means they become so sordid and dull,
as they cannot distinguish between the best and worst things. It Is for this
that many a Father toyls and torments himself, racks and disturbs his Plotting
Brains, for a stubborn ungracious Son, who will not so much as bestow upon him the
ordinary Complement of Thanks, but will spend and and make it fly faster than
ever they got it. This is so sweet and pleasant, that the most ridged Quaker,
and most presise Puritan, who will scarce permit or endure the most common and
innocent Recreations, yet they shall finely recreate and solace themselves with
this, and hug themselves over their full Bags, whilst Beggars may starve in the
streets for all any of them.

Parents do strangely please themselves with these hopes, and are continually
endeavoring to imprint their infectious Notions into their Children when they
are young, telling them what strange things they may expect from a good
Fortune, so that they may make it their chief Business to obtain it; for they
themselves believe there is no Happiness equal to a large Estate, nor no
pleasure like the sight of a huge heap of Guinea's; so that if they can but
obtain this for their Children, they think their own and their Happiness is
perfectly complete. But this a vain and ridiculous conceit, which whole
Multitudes please themselves withal; for Riches, if we consider the many
slavish cares and troubles that so constantly attend them, are far short of
that value that their gay and glittering appearance makes them seem to be. And
in truth they are but Baubles and mere Trash at best if compared with a clear
Unspotted Reputation, and a true Contented Soul; neither will all the Gold in
Peru purchase one Moment of real Satisfaction to an unsatisfied and disturbed
Mind; but will rather serve as a heavy Clog to his dejected Spirits, to plunge
him the deeper into a Sea of Sorrows.

Covetousness is a very strange and inconsistant thing, and (as a very
Ingenious Gentleman observes) seems not so much a Vice as a deplorable piece of
Madness; so that I can reckon it nothing but a tormenting Disease and plague
which is peculiar to some sort of Constitutions; and is more Contagious and
Epidemical in Old Persons than the Gout, Stone, or Palsy, and very often a far
greater Torment than any of them. In the spending Money, I grant there may be
several sorts of Pleasures; but in the hoarding of it up, and keeping it under
Lock and Key, (and very often for they know not whom) and making no use on it at
all; for the pleasure of that, I own it goes beyond my conceptions to imagine,
unless it be in weighing and telling of it, and then I reckon that picking of
Straws and catching of Flys are far more noble and innocent Recreations. This
however has been always observed, that all such Persons who desire and love it
most of all, and hug and grasp it closest, do constantly make the least use of
it, and find smallest comfort and satisfaction by it. As for the Pleasures and
Joys that belong to much Riches, they are always more imaginary than real, and
the Ease that so many expect in the enjoyment of Money is commonly found to be
the most false and Chimerical of all things. And he that eagerly persues and
thirsts after abundance of Money, only with that expectation of living a Quiet
and Undisturbed Life, is as ridiculously silly as he that hid himself in the
Water cunningly to avoid a shower of Rain.

For my part whenever I carefully reflect upon the many sad Disquiets,
Noyses, Envys and Gensures that so constantly attend Grandeur and Riches; I can
but admire that they should be so hotly sought after; and also can but heartily
pity the sad and mournful conditions of many excellent Young Ladies, who only
for the sake of their Quality, Greatness and Fortunes, are forced and driven by
the dreadful fears of threatening Ruin, to do that which is directly contrary to
their Natures, and which their Souls most abhor; and that too by base Uncles
and mercinary Guardians (oftentimes the worst of all People) as well as Parents
themselves. On the other side I can but almost envy the quiet and most happy
state of many Inferior Persons, whose Qualities and Fortunes are so small, as
never to prove dangerous to their Ease, or be made a trap to their Ruins; and
can bless themselves with the sweet satisfaction of Liberty, and with perfect
Freedom of Choice, being truly happy in each others Loves and Affections, not
teas'd and troubled with those base and contagious Noise of Sueing for
Portions, Tenants Complaints, Creditor-Duns, Neighbors Quarrels, etc. nor
plagued with the naucious Impertinence of a whole Covy of griping Lawyers and
merciless Atornys, and a House full of Writings at every Match.

There is one most ridiculous piece of Folly that I have often observed in
several Parents, which apparently shows that Money has turned and made their
Brains so muddy, that they are not right, that is, they will never consider of,
nor suffer any thing, tho never so estimable and valuable to stand in
competition with Money, no not so much as to make the Scale even. So that by
this means none of those noble Acquisitions, and excellent Accomplishments as
Learning, Education, Nobility, Ingenuity Virtue, Good Nature, and the like,
shall ever be esteemed of or thought of any value; whilst their Grand Idol
Money, like a most Sovereign and Absolute Monarch shall rule the World, and ride
Great Lord of the Universe; the mean time these shall crouch beneath its Feet,
and be content to go in Rags. This is a piece of Folly that one would think
People of their Discretion, Experience and Prudence should above all men not be
guilty of, being of that Age, as can never be supposed not to know the real
value of these forementioned things. For my part I think 'twas most generously
and nobly done of the Old Merchant that granted his Daughter to that Ingenious
Gentleman who valued his Education at fifty thousand Pounds, and his Barresters
Gown at as much more.

Notwithstanding all that have or could be said by others in the exposing this
most manifest piece of Ignorance and unthinking Prejudice; yet still we see
Parents run on in their old perverse ways, without either Fear, Wit or Honesty,
so that neither Sense or Reason can no more be driven into their Heads than
into a Mill Post; but still reckoning and judging all their Childrens Happiness
by the rule of their own corrupted and biased thoughts, and their depraved and
(sometimes) doting Dispositions; and so impertinently cautious it seems some
are, that after their Deaths, the consent of no less than six or seven must be
had for the Marriage of a Daughter. Some we find so inconsiderate and rash,
that they shall willingly choose for a Son in-Law the most Dull, Illiterate
Blockhead, the most Sordid Senseless Sot, the most Ill Natured Deformed Fellow,
and the most Horrid Wicked Wretch that can be, for the sake of his Money; when
at the same time an Ingenious, Virtuous, and most Accomplished Gentleman shall
be cast off, and not looked upon, and for nothing else but that poor and
pitiful Reason, that his Estate was but half so large as the others. Now let
any Person of Common Sense but consider and judge if these be not pitiful
Inconsistant Follies, beneath any Man that has any manner of Pretenses to
common Prudence, Piety or Honesty.

There is another Humor I have observed in some Parents, which has the
strongest tincture of Baseness and Partiality, that is, they shall use their
utmost Power, and be strangely careful to put off a Daughter to any Pitiful
Fellow that has but an Estate bigger in Proportion than what she is like to
have, tho it be never so much contrary to his Parents consent; and then at last
perhaps find some foolish quibble and ridiculous pretense to fob her off with a
few gay Promises, and give her nothing at all, especially whilst he is alive.
It would certainly make a very pleasant Farce but to take notice of and observe
the many grave Instructions, cunning Ways and sly Tricks, such a Parent makes
use of to obtain his ends; how wonderfully careful and exact he is in teaching
his Daughter her Lesson, how extraordinary civil he is to the young raw
Gallant, and how large and weighty are his Promises, till he once perceives the
Gudgeon well hooked; then but to see how slily the Old Fox gives them the slip,
leaves them both in the lurtch, and marches off as gravely with an idle Flam to
his Father as if he knew nothing at all of the Business.

Yet such a Fellow as this will never endure to hear of a Son to marry one a
little below his Fortune, tho never so deserving a Woman, but will be always
te^^ing him what a vast happiness 'twill be for himself, and what a wonderful
comfort 'twill be to his Old Father, to see him marry a mighty rich Wife. Ah
Tom! (says he) a Fortune Tom! thou look like a good honest Boy; I tell thee
there is nothing like a good Fortuue at last Tom* Thy Mother was a Fortune Tom,
else Old Jack must have knocked under board, and shrunk in his head, and been
content with making a less Figure in the World. Ay but (says Tom again) you
will not allow me any good Clothes, nor scarce a Shilling in my Pocket, and how
shall I go to work to get a Fortune? Ah Tom (cries the Old Miser) times are very
hard, and Money is strangely scarce; you should learn to be a good Husband Tom;
I save it all for thee Boy. But however since I have one in my Eye for thee,
thou shall wont for nothing if thou do but get her? Ah brave Tom Boy! right
Fathers nown Boy; shant we cheat the Old Fool her Father, Hah Boy? Upon this
perhaps Tom gets new Clothes, and he and his old Father fall to work upon some
young Creature much above his Fortune, and perhaps gets her and marrys her to
the great Grief of all her Relations. But if Matters should chance to come to
the Pinch, and to the utmost Extremities that may possibly be in this case; Old
Jack will be sure to find a trick to slip his own Neck out of the Noose, and
leave poor Tom fairly to hang for it.

Now are not these and the like things very gross pieces of partiality and
injustice? Yet We frequently find those very Parents who are so very hot and
violent in exclaiming against the Impiety and Ingratitude of Children that
marry without their Parents consent; those Persons we often find to be most
ready to transgress it themselves in the Persons of others (and that on the
basest manner too) when they perceive it is for the advantage of the Family.
And all their railings and bitter exclaimings against this Vice, is only a
right down Forgery and Cheat, a pure piece of Hypocrisy to scare their own
Children, and fright them into Obedience. This is the Nature and Disposition of
a great many Parents (tho not all on such gross a manner) and (that which is
more strange too) even of such as have very Prudent, Grave, Discreet, Ingenious
Gentlemen; and such too as have had all the appearances of Generous and
Religious Persons. But how much these things can agree with, or be any ways
consistant with such Mean, Sordid, Base and Ignoble Actions, I shall leave to
the Candor and Judgment of any Impartial and Unprejudiced Man whatsoever.

I shall conclude all with a few words of Friendly Advice. First for Old
Persons who are on the other side Sixty, I would advise them not to marry at
all, but rather employ themselves on the thoughts of the other World (for they
know they can have but a short time to stay in this) and in instructing and
doing good to others; and this will be the only sure way to get true Honor and
satisfaction. But if they must trouble themselves with the thoughts of
Matrimony (which upon some accounts may be reasonable enough too) let them
pitch upon some Grave and Pious Matron, suitable to their Years and Fortunes, by
which means they may prove mutual Helps and great Comforts to each other, and
not set their minds upon young Wild Creatures, who will be to hard for them
every way, cause them to be made common Laughing-stocks to the enquiring World,
plague and disturb all their Quiet and Ease, and help to send them to their
Graves long before their times.

Next for Children, since they have not a Power of disposing of themselves as
they think fit; and since such sad and deplorable Effects do often follow from
their making use of such a Power, let them not dare to venture upon this Sacred
Order of Matrimony without their Parents consent; but let them have a strict
and more than ordinary care to avoid all Temptations till they have leave, as
they would a most deadly Precipice. But for the Young Persons that have a
larger power of disposing of themselves, 'twill be the highest piece of Folly
to marry one that is much beneath them (except there be some extraordinary
Excellencies besides Beauty) for he can never be sure of her Love, the very
Life and Soul of all their Hopes and Comports. Neither would I have any Persons
aim at those that are much above their Rank (a Paradox indeen to a great many
People) for then the mind is often so horridly corrupted with base and
ungenerous Desires, that the danger and ill consequences are much the other way.

Lastly, For Parents and the like, let them seriously consider the great
Account they must give at the last day for many of their Childrens Failings,
especially those woeful Misfortunes they have brought upon them by their own
means, and with the heinous sins of Perjury and Treachery; therefore let them
dread the very thoughts of all such Unhappy Matches. For this reason let them
not be extraordinary ambitious of marrying their Children above their Fortunes,
but however they ought to take care to have them married in time, least they
prove Dishonest, Stubborn and Irreclaimable. On the other side, let them not
disdain to marry them below their Rank, nor stand too much upon Smithfield
Bargains when they have a Competency themselves, and they find a Sober,
Virtuous Person, whose Education, Ingenuity and other good Properties will make
amends for Money and all other inconsiderable Trifles.

Before I quite conclude all, I must advise every Person whatsoever, let 'em be
Young or Old, Parents or Children, to have a peculiar care of Marrying to any
of different Religions; for notwithstanding there be Content on all sides,
Love, Money, Good Inclinations, etc. this one thing is enough to ruin all,
destroy all their Pleasures, and may make it the dearest piece of Folly to 'em
they ever were guilty of in their Lives.

FINIS.
Books newly Printed for, and sold by Tho. Salusbury at the Kings Arms next St.
Dunstans Church in Fleetsteer. The five first were written by Mr. Law. Eachard,
A B. of Christ's College in Cambridge.
THE Gazetteer's, or Newsman's Interpreter: Being a Geographical Index of all
the Considerable Cities, Patriarchships, Bishoprics, Universities, Dukedoms,
Earldoms, and such like; Imperial and Hance Towns Ports, Forts, Castles, etc.
in Europe. Showing in what Kingdoms, Provinces, and Countries they are in; to
what Prince they are now subject; upon, or nigh what Rivers, Bays, Seas,
Mountains, etc. they stand; their Distances (in English miles) from several
other Places of Note, with their Longitude and Latitude, according to the best
and approved MAPS. Of special use for the true understanding of all Modern
Histories of EVROPE, as well as the Present Affairs; and for the Convenience of
Cheapness and Pocket-Carriage, Explained by Abreviations and Figures. Price
bound 2 s.

A most Complete Compendium of Geography, General and Special, describing all
the Empires, Kingdoms and Dominions in the whole World; showing their Bounds,
Situation, Dimentions, Ancient and Modern Names, History, Government,
Religions, Languages, Commodities, Divisions, Subdivisions, Cities, Rivers,
Mountains, Lakes, with their Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, and Universities: In
a more plain and easy method, more Compendious and Useful than any of the
lesser Sort. Together with an Appendix of General Rules for making a large
Geography, with the great Uses of that Science, very necessary for the right
understanding of the Transactions of these Times; Collected according to the
latest Discoveries, and agreeing with the Choicest and Newest Maps. The Second
Edition Corrected, much Improved, and Enlarged above one quarter: By Lawrence
Eachard, A. B. of Christs-College in Cambridge. Price 1s. 6 d.

2. A New and Exact Description of Ireland, Chronographically surveying all its
Provinces and Countries, showing the exact State of that Kingdom, and all the
principal things that are necessary to be known, with five Maps relating
thereto, being very necessary for the right understanding the present Affairs
of that Kingdom. Price 1 s. 6 d.

3. Flanders, or the Spanish Netherlands, most accurately described, showing
their several Provinces, their Bounds, Dominions, Cities, Towns, etc. Rivers,
Riches, Strength, Traffic, Religion, Language, Archbishopricks, Bishoprics,
Vnoversities, etc. extraordinary necessary for the right understanding of these
parts, and present Wars and Encampments of the Confederate and French Armies.
Price bound 1 s.

4. The Duke of Savoy's Dominions most accurately described, with some adjacent
Parts; showing the exact State of those Countries, and all the principal things
that are necessary to be known. In a large Broadside, Price 3d.

5. (...) A Law-Dixionary, interpreting such difficult and obscure Words and
Terms, as are found either in our Common or Statute, Ancient or Modern Laws:
With References to the several Statutes, Records, Registers, Law Books,
Charters, Ancient Deeds, and Manuscripts, wherein the Words are used; and
Etymologies where they properly occur. The Second Edition, with some
Corrections, and the Addition of above six hundred Words, By T. Blunt, late of
the Inner Temple, Esquire Price 10 s.

6. Jacob Behmen's Theosopick Philosophy unfolded in diverse Considerations and
Demonstrations, showing the Verity and Utility of the several Doctrines or
Propositions contained in the Writings of that Divinely Instructed Author; as
also the Principal Treatises of the said Author, Abridged, etc. By E. Tailor.
Price 6 s.

7. Chymichus Rationalis, or the Fundamental Grounds of the Chemical Art,
rationally stated and demonstrated by various Examples in Distillation,
Rectification, and Exaltation of Wines, Spirits, Tinctures, Oils, Salts,
Powders, and Oleosums, in such a Method as to retain the Specific Virtues of
Conorets in the greatest power and force. By W. Iworth, Spagyrick Physician and
Philosopher by Fire. Price bound 1 s.

8. A Treatise of Civil Bonds and Contracts, and the Nature, Causes and Effects
of Suretiships, with Cautions against it, By R. A. Gent. Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

9. A New Art of making above twenty sorts of Wines, Brandy, and other Spirits,
more pleasant and agreeable to the English Constitutions, than those of France;
compliant to the late Act of Parliament, and illustrated by the Doctrine of
Fermentation and Distillation, by various Examples on the Growth and Product of
this Island. By W. Y. Medicinal Professor. Twelves, Price bound 1 s. 6 d,

10. A New Art of Brewi^g Beer, Ale, and other sorts of Liquors, so as to
render them more healthful to the Body, and agreeable to Nature, and to keep
them longer from souring, with less Trouble and Charge than generally
practiced. To which is added the Art of making Malt. The Third Edition. By Th.
Tryon, Student in Pysick. Twelves, Price bound 1 s.

11. Wisdom Dictates, or Rules Physical and Moral, for preserving the the
Health of the Body, and the Peace of the Mind: Fit to be regarded and practiced
by all that would enjoy the Blessing of this World. To which is added a Bill of
Fare of 75 noble Dishes of excellent Food, without either Fish or Flesh* By
Tho. Tryon, Student in Physic. Twelves, Price bound 1 s.

Pythagoras's Mystic Philosophy revived, or the Mystery of Dreams and Visions
unfolded, wherein the Causes, Natures, and Uses of Nocturnal Representations,
and the Communications both of good and evil Angels, and also departed Souls to
Mankind, are Theologically unfolded. By Tho. Tryon, Student in Physic. Price
bound 1 s. 6 d. All sold by Tho. Salusbury at the King's-Arms in Fleetstreet.

FINIS.

