Quakerism Anatomized, by a Charge against the Quakers, with a Challenge to
Richard Ashby, one of their Teachers, to come forth in their VINDICATION.
The wicked flee when no man pursues, but the Righteous are as bold as a Lion.
AS I was going to Norwich, April 1694. staying a little at Wymondham, I met
with a Paper writ by R. Ashby; wherein he reflects on my Book, Quakerism
Withering, and Christianity Reviving, etc. saying, what I write is false: And
seems greatly concerned, That People should like my Book, and glad to see the
Quakers Errors discovered. And thereupon I wrote him a Letter, Dated April the
30th, 1694. to meet me the Wednesday following, to agree upon Terms to have a
Meeting, to Dispute the Points in Controversy: But he not Answering the same,
I sent him another Letter, Dated May the 3d, 1694. a Copy whereof is as
follows, viz.

To R. Ashby of Thuxton, These.
FRiend, I have met with your late cautionary Epistle and Warning, wherein you
thus write, viz. To the Inhabitants of Wymondham, that have met with Francis
Bugg's Book, Entitled, Quakerism Withering, etc. And I am informed, that some
of you the Inhabitants of Wymondham, are much pleased and elevated, etc. Now
this may certify you, that all this stir that F. B. makes, is but a mere
Boast: For I was at London at the same time when F. B. should, according to his
word, have met G. W. at Ben. Antrobus his House, but did not. And let this be a
Warning and Caution to you for time to come, that you lay not hands suddenly,
etc. I say, having seen this your Epistle and Warning, suggesting, that I
should have met G. W. at B. A.'s House according to my Word, and did not;
though he and others waited long for me, etc. which is false; for I never gave
G. W. my Word or Promise to meet him there, or any where else, to Dispute the
Points in Controversy, unless that he would first engage under his Hand to
retract what I proved him guilty of, and the Quakers Erroneous in. See
Quakerism Withering, etc. P. 2, 5, 6, 7, 8. and according to the Terms proposed
therein I still engage to meet him, or any Quaker in England. [And were he not
conscious to himself, that both himself in particular, and the Quakers in
general of Fox's Party were guilty of what I charge them with, no doubt but he
would subscribe such an Instrument, since it is consonant to their own printed
Proposition in the Epistle to Edw. Burrough's Works, that Son of Thunder, true
Prophet, and faithful Servant of God, as G. W. and others have styled him in
Print.] But since you have undertaken to Defend the Quakers, and seem troubled
that their Errors are laid open, and that the People are pleased with my
Books, which have been instrumental therein: And not only so, but slily
insinuate, That what I write is false. I do thereupon renew my Charge against
the Principles and Doctrine of the Quakers, and do Challenge you R. Ashby to
meet me at the Public School-house in Wymondham, on Monday, the 4th of June.
1694 at Ten of the Clock in the Forenoon, where I promise (if God permit) to
meet you, and before the People offer to prove the following Charge out of your
Approved Books, against all your Allegations to the contrary. And if after the
said Dispute you shall exhibit a Charge against me in Writing under your Hand,
giving me the like time to prepare for my Defense, I do promise (if God permit)
to meet you at the same place, that so the Inhabitants of Wymondham may be more
and more convinced of the grand Errors of the Quakers, whose Doctrine and
Principles tend to undermine and overthrow the Christian Religion. The said
Charge which I offer to prove, is as follows, viz.

I. That the Quakers deny Jesus of Nazareth, who was born of the Blessed Virgin
Mary, to be Christ, and the Efficient Cause of Man's Salvation.

II. That their Books are Blasphemous, and their Practices Idolatrous.

III. That they deny the Scriptures, by speaking contemptuously of them;
calling them Dust, Death, and Serpent's meat, etc.

IV. That they despise the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, as Baptism and the
Lord's Supper,

V. That they undervalue the Death and Sufferings of Christ.

VI. That they exalt their own Sufferings above the Sufferings of Christ, and
their own Pamphlets above the Prophets and Apostles, as in Quakerism Withering,
etc. P. 3, 4.

Writ and Subscribed per me Francis Bugg.


Now least R. Ashby should decline to meet me, but like his Brother Whitehead,
evade and shuffle; as I do hereby give public notice of my Challenge, so I
think it necessary to acquaint the World with their fallacious way of Writing;
insomuch that it is hard to know a Quaker by what he writes: For their Books are
of two sorts, of two Stamps, and carry two Faces, and both contrary to each
other; and yet the Quakers mean all one thing, viz. One sort of Books and
Epistles to their own Disciples, to confirm them in Quakerism, wrote by the
Perfect Quaker: The other sort of Books to the World's People, as they cant it,
with some seeming Truths in them; nay, were they but sincere, might pass, wrote
by the Counterfeit Quaker, whose chief Art is to decoy and proselyte the World;
but still he means the same asserted by the Perfect Quaker. As for instance:
When Is. Penington denies Christ, and calls him that was born of the Virgin, A
Veil, a Garment, a Vessel, affirming they can never call him Christ; yet G.
Whitehead the Counterfeit Quaker, in his Book, styled, The Counterfeit Convert,
etc. P. 72. vindicates him, saying, And though I have evinced Is. Penington's
meaning, on his Words reflected on about the Body or Flesh of Christ, it
follows not that I make his Expressions mine, seeing I note them as his: for
[says G. Whitehead] I may see cause otherwise to word the matter, and yet our
Intentions be the same, etc. Thus you see he is ashamed to own Is. P.'s Words
as his, yet has showed you his meaning, if you will believe him: And he
justifies his not owning his Words, for that he had noted them to be his; nay,
tells you he may see cause otherwise to word the matter, and yet their
Intentions the same. Who then, I marvel, can know a Quaker, if they can thus
equivocate? Is not this Jesuitism with a witness? Or Arius risen again under a
new Form and Figure, to deceive the World with a twofold meaning? And yet
behold G. W.'s Partiality, who in their Vindication charge me with John
Ansloe's Query to Sam. Cater as mine, though sufficiently noted by me to be
his, and not mine, which I have refuted beyond his glossing in Quakerism
Withering, P. 65. Well, but let us have a few Examples of these two faced
Quakers, the Perfect Quaker and the Counterfeit Quaker, who, however they
differ in wording their matter, and expressing themselves; yea, insomuch as
that the one is ashamed to own the Words and Expressions of the other; yet as
G. W. and that too truly, they mean all the same thing; they mean what the
Perfect Quaker says, viz.

The Perfect Quaker. The Counterfeit Quaker. Smith's Primer in Octavo, P. 8.
How may I know when Christ is truly Preached? Smith's Works in Folio, Leaf 4th.
Why, they that are false preach Christ without Only, and bid People believe in
him as he is in Heaven above, in opposition to his being within. But they th^^
are true Ministers, they preach Christ within, and direct People to wait to
seel him in themselves, and so to believe in him as he makes himself manifest
in them. Answ. They that are false (Ministers) preach Christ without, and bid
People believe in him as he is in Heaven above: But they that are Christ's
Ministers preach Christ within.

OBSERVATION.

Behold you the Inhabitants of Wymondham, here is one Book Printed and
Reprinted; the first for W. Smith, when living, in Oclavo, to teach their
Children, and instruct them in the Principles ^f perfect Quakerism. And by this
Doctrine all such as preach Christ without, and bid People believe in him as he
is in Heaven above, at the Right Hand of God, according to the Christian Creed,
are False Ministers; and as such they have censured them to be Witches, Devils,
Conjurers, Thieves, Antichrists, Gormandizing Priests, the very Bane of Soul
and Body of the Universe. The other Impression [when W. Smith was dead] in
Folio, to go abroad in the Nations to deceive. And here W. Smith's surviving
Brethren, the Counterfeit Quakers, as G. W. says, saw cause otherwise to word
the matter, and yet their Intentions the same. See his Count. Conv. p. 72.

And moreover, lest my present Antagonist Rich. Ashby says, that I write false,
and that there is no such two-fac'd doings, nor such Jesuitical Juggles amongst
them, I will point him to G. W.'s Sheet, styled, The Quakers Vindication, p. 1.
Col. 2. where he confesses in these words, viz. We confess there is one Edition
in Octavo reads it as Fr. Bugg quotes it; but the other Edition in Folio the
Paragraph runs thus, viz. as above recited under the Counterfeit Quaker. And so
much for that Juggle.

The Perfect Quaker. The Counterfeit Quaker. A Quest. to Proff. p. 33. Now the
Scriptures do as expressly distinguish between Christ and the Garment which he
wore, between him that came and the Body in which he came, between the
Substance which was veiled, and the Veil which veiled it; there was plainly he,
and the Body in which he came; there was the outward Vessel and the inward
Life; this we certainly know, and can never call the Bodily Garment Christ. The
Quak. Vind. p. 4. We sincerely believe and confess, that Jesus of Nazareth, who
was born of the Virgin Mary, is the true Messiah, the very Christ, the Son of
the Living God.

OBSERVATION.

Reader, here you see plainly, that Penington, writing in the Name of the
Quakers, calls the blessed Jesus a Veil, a Garment, a Vessel, which they can
never call Christ; yet you see he was not infallible; for Whitehead does now
see cause otherwise to word the matter, as under the Counterfeit Quaker, where
he, and diverse others, confess plain enough that they sincerely believe and
confess that Jesus of Nazareth, who was born of the Virgin, is the very Christ
of God; yea, this Body, this Garment, this Vessel, which was born of the
Virgin. This they confess too: But how? Because G. W. sees cause to word the
matter so, judging it high time, or down goes Quakerism. Not but that he means
as Penington, and the Perfect Quaker means: For if he did not, at the same time
they make this new Confession, they would condemn and censure the Perfect
Quakers Heretical Doctrine, which says, they can never call him Christ, but a
Garment, etc. as if the Prophets foretold that a Virgin should conceive, and
bring forth a Garment, etc. And for more of this, see my Book, New Rome
ununmask'd, etc. New Rome Arraing'd etc. Quakerism Withering, etc. where I have
at large unriddled their unc^^ch'd Doctrine, and Erroneous Principles.

The Perfect Quaker. The Counterfeit Quaker. News coming up, etc. p. 4. Their
Original is carnal, and their Communion is carnal, a little Bread and Wine: so
Dust is the Serpents meat; their Original is but Dust, which is but the Letter,
which is Death; so the Serpent feeds upon Dust, and their Gospel is Dust,
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, which is the Letter. The Qua Vind. p. 4. We
confess that the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are of Divine
Authority, as being given by Divine Inspiration of God. David's Enemies, etc.
by G. W. and his Brother Atkinson, p. 7. The Ministry (meaning the Minister) is
in the Letter which kills. The Count. Conv. p. 26. That we prefer the Holy
Scriptures before all the Books extant in the World.

OBSERVATION.

For more of this see my Sheet to the Parliament, and my former Books; yet you
see that George Whitehead sees cause so to word the matter, as that now the
Counterfeit Quaker confesses, that the Scripture is of Divine Authority, and
given by Divine Inspiration, and value it beyond all the Books extant in the
World. Not but that he and the Perfect Quaker mean and intend all one thing,
viz. That the Scriptures are Death, Dust, Serpent's Meat, and that such as
preach out of them are Conjurers; that it is questionable whether Moses or
Hermes was the Author of the first Five Books of Moses, or whether either or
neither, as in my former Books I have at large showed. And until the
C^unterfeit Quaker do condemn the contemptuous Sayings of the Perfect Quaker,
there is no ground to believe him sincere in these new-moulded Confesions,
which G. Whitehead and his Abetters make to serve a turn, who now see cause
thus to word their matter, whilst he tells you, they intend the same, viz. They
still mean, that Matthew, Mark, Luke and John is Dust, Death, and Serpent's
Meat; that it is Conjuration to preach out of them, and dangerous to read them.
Read their Books, Truth's Defense, etc. Readiness Errand, etc. David's Enemies
disc^v. etc. Several Petitions Answered, etc. A Threefold Estate of
Antichrist, etc. I say, read these their Books, and their Count. Conv. p. 72.
where G Whitehead says, He may see cause otherwise to word the matter, and yet
intend the same thing. And then judge Oh ye the Inhabitants of Wymondham, and
all Christendom, whether we have any ground to believe there is any Sincerity
in these new-moulded Confessions, until they censure and condemn their old
Heretical Books and Pamphlets, which they say are given forth from the Eternal
Spirit of GOD; and boldly affirm, we may as well burn the Bible, as their
Writings, Papers and Queries. See Truth's Defense, p. 2. 102.

The Perfect Quaker. The Counterfeit Quaker. News coming up, etc, p. 18.20.
Dreadful and powerful is the Lord, who is coming in his Power to execute true
Judgment upon all you Judges, and to change all your Laws, ye Kings -- Sing all
ye Saints, and rejoice; clap your hands, and be glad; for the Lord Jehovah
reigns; and the Law shall be taken from the pretended Rulers, Judges, Justices,
Lawyers and Constables: All this Tree must be cut down, and Jesus Christ (that
is in us) will reign alone. The Q. Vind. p. 4. And that Magistrates or Civil
Government is God's Ordinance for the punishment of Evildoers, and praise of
them that do well.

OBSERVATION.

Reader, here is a little hint of their Antimagistratical Principles; and when
you compare their Practice of Non-submission to the Laws of the Land, which
require payment of Tithes, which they say, whoever do, bear about them the Mark
of Antichrist; and which require payment to the Church-Rates or Lays, which
they throw off as a Yoke of Bondage; and their observing the Public Fast, when
one is at Plow, another at Cart, others in their Shops with their Windows open
in Public Testimony against both the Command of the Magistrate, and Formality
of the Fast; only they tell you, as in their Vindication, P. 3. For the Intent,
Substance, and End of a True Fast -- This we are frequently mindful of, etc.
But how? Why, they think of it when at their Employment, and at their Meetings
on contrary days: I say, when these, and a hundred things of like nature are
considered, together with G. W. the Counterfeit Quaker's seeing cause (as he
says) otherwise to word the matter, and yet intend the same thing. This is a
plain Discovery, that they account Magistracy a cumbersom Tree that must be cut
down with all its knotty Branches, as Rulers, Judges, Justices, Law^^rs and
Constables; and this shows them as good Friends to the State as to the Church,
only for the present they see cause otherwise to word the matter; though like
Arius, they still mean and intend the same thing. However they, as yet, neither
sing nor clap their Hands, the Tree is still standing; neither do they clap
their Hands for Joy; for if they should, then might all true Protestants wring
their hands, mourn and lament, they would soon see all things turned upside
down. For Instance, Down with the Scriptures, and up with their Pamphlets; down
with the Ministers and Dispencers of the Gospel, as Witches, Devils, Robbers,
Antichrists, Gormandizing Priests, etc. and up with their Impostors, Deceivers,
and Seducing Teachers; down with Baptism and the Lord's Supper, Instituted by
Christ, and practiced by his Apostles and Martyrs, and all true Christian
Churches, and up with their Women's Meetings, ordained by G. F. down with the
Lord's Prayer, the Ten Commandments, the Apostles Creed, and all that bear the
Face of true Christianity, and up with their Silent Meetings, those Nurseries
of Ignorance, or Silent Universities; A woeful day for Christendom would this
be; which God of his mercy prevent.

The Perfect Quaker. The Counterfeit Quaker. Fox's Mist. p. 77. And as for any
being moved of the Lord to take away your [ i. e. the Priests] Hour glass from
you, by the Eternal Power it is owned. etc. See the Paper against J. P. Aug.
10. 1670. And we also testify, that if any person whatsoever shall act or
speak any thing that is evil, under pretense of a motion from the Spirit of
God, we utterly deny that motion to be of God.

OBSERVATION.

Oh ye People of Wymondham, behold and consider of the pernicious Principles
and dangerous Doctrine of the Perfect Quaker! 1. Charging all such as preach
Christ without, and bid People believe in him as he is in Heaven above, to be
False Ministers; and as such call them Witches, Devils, Thieves, Robbers,
Wolves, Antichrists, Hell Hounds, seeking after their Prey like the mouth of
Hell, Gormandizing Priests, the Bane of Soul and Body of the Universe. 2. That
they deny Jesus of Nazareth, who was born of the Virgin, to be Christ. 3. How
they run down Magistracy as a Cumbersom Tree; and the result was, (as by their
Doctrine appears) that under color of a motion from the Lord they might lay
waste meum and tuum; and with these, and many other horrible Principles they
pressed into the World in the Year 1650. as afterward, and God assisting and
giving me length of days, I may further make appear. But when this Defective
Coin would not pass for True Metal, then the Counterfeit Quaker he gets up, and
appears in the Person of G. W. and some few others, and they tell you, they may
see cause otherwise to word the matter, but yet mean or intend the same thing.
All which considered, I dare appeal to the Inhabitants of Wymondham, yea, to
all Christendom, Whether any Credit ought to be given to their new-moulded,
new-coined and counterfeit Confessions, until they have first condemned by
Public Censure their old Heretical Principles, which tend to overthrow the
Christian Faith.

And whereas G. W. in his Count. Conv. Epist. says, I do hereby sincerely
declare, that it is not for Controversy sake that I am so much engaged therein;
nor am I the beginner of these Controversies, being wholly Defensive, etc.

Although I am not minded to Reply to his Book at present, for as much as I
find that he has taken notice but of part of mine, Entitled, Quakerism
Withering, etc. and what he has, does rather confirm what I have said, than
otherwise; yet I am willing to let Richard Ashby, my present Antagonist, know,
that his Brother Whitehead is false in this also, which at the Dispute I shall
make appear: For he writ against Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Independents and
Baptists, before ever they wrote against him; and ever since has been such a
contentious Scribler, that he has wrote Ten Books against others, to One Book
against him, of any one Man's Writing: And in Nine Months time he wrote Three
Books against me, to one of mine against the Quakers; and two of them without
any fresh occasion given him: With what Face then can this impudent Juggler
appear then in Print, to render himself such a Scandal to his own Fraternity? I
would have said Christianity, but he does not deserve to come so near it;
though he, and his Brethren the Counterfeit Quakers, have so ordered the
matter, as that by their black Art of railing on the Public Ministry, Contempt
of Scripture, despising the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, and the like
Antichristian Principles, they have made such Rents and Divisions in Church and
State, as will take much time to repair: Though I do verily believe, Quakerism
has such a Sandy Foundation, that it cannot stand long, but in due time will
fall, die and wither away: And G. W.'s Practice in writing to Mr. Smithies, Mr.
Archer, and others, to stop me, is a sign to me, that he begins to fear it. As
for my Dedications, I never yet met with any Reproof; but my Books have met
with kind Acceptance. I do not expect that any Man should so concern himself,
as to justify every particular Passage; that is most properly my own business;
and 'twas my Persuasion, that what I wrote was true; which made me submit the
same to my Lord Bishop, and I still abide by it. But for G. W. thus to wait
upon, seek to, and beg the Favor of the Clergy to stop me, is a sign that he
fears their Building is tottering, and that his Cause is at a low Ebb. What!
Seek to the Contemptible Clergy! Such as you account Beasts, Dogs. Wolves,
Devils, Thieves, Robbers, Conjurers, Bloodhounds, Gormandizing Priests, the
Bane of Nations, bred up at Oxford and Cambridge, a Nursery for Baal's Priests,
crying Woe and Misery to the Parliament who uphold them. And what! Do you now
seek to these despised and contemptible Creatures in your Eyes to stop me? Do
you think them so tame and so gentle, as to assist you, who have been
undermining them and their Religion this forty or fifty Years? Oh! mistake not
your selves, but be humble, and retract your Errors, and that is your way to
find Mercy with God, and Forbearance with Men: And this at present I am willing
to present to my present Opposer R. Ashby, assuring him, That as I never
refused to meet his Brother Whitehead when I promised, nor to dispute the
Points in Controversy, on condition that he would have engaged to retract what
I proved on him and his Abetters false and erroneous, so I do now assure R.
Ashby, if GOD permit me Life and Health, not to refuse to meet him at the time
and place appointed.

Fra. Bugg.
May 8. 1694.
POSTSCRIPT.
G. W.
SInce I sent up the foregoing to the Press. on the second reading your Epistle
to your Count. Conv. etc. I perceive how uneasy you are, and how smooth you
appear, as in your Letters to Mr. Smithies and Mr. Archer; and by the tenure
thereof methinks I hear you say, Good Gentlemen, be so kind to us the
distressed and perplexed Quakers, us to stop F. Bugg from writing against our
Errors; for if you cannot persuade him, we know of none that can, he does so
strip us naked, lay us bare, and so effectually unmask us, and take off our
Vizard, that we cannot walk in Masquerade, or two Faces in one Hood, but we are
seen and discovered: And this we, nor our Elder Sister (i. e. Rome) could never
abide. Indeed we cannot deny but we Dedicated our Books to K. Charles II. and
his Council, and to all Rulers in the Christian World, which we never saw nor
spoke to, much less acquainted them therewith: nay, sometimes to our Dear
Friend O. Cromwell, calling him Dear Friend, Noble Oliver, etc. see our Books
Rusticus, etc. E. B.'s Work, etc. 702, 846. and the Quaker Unmasked, wherein we
not only called and compared the Public Ministers to Serpents, Vipers,
grinning Dogs, etc. but boldly told the King and Parliament what they might do,
and what they might not do; how far their Power reached, and the utmost
Confines of it; and that if they went contrary to our Infallible Directions,
all their Proceedings were false and unjust, etc. and we find that Fr. Bugg is
discovering all our Intreigues, anad filling the same Cup to us by a just
retalliation: Insomuch, as that the Pit [which we have been digging for others
this forty Years, by our supplanting and undermining the Christian Religion and
Protestant Interest, rendering both Bishops and Clergy, Magistrates and People
so ridiculous and contemptible, as not to understand tu and vos, or what a
Genitive Case is, as by our Battledoor and Primer is manifest, pretended to be
put forth by our Elder Brother and great Apostle G. Fox, who was but a poor
Journeyman Shoemaker] we are now justly fallen into; and now we see cause
otherwise to word our matter, and not to behave our selves so sawelly as we
have done, when we called the National Ministry, Thieves, Robbers, Witches,
Devils, greedy Dogs, Bloodhounds, Baal's Priests, Gormandizing Priests, etc.
and the Parliament that upheld them, the Beast which carries the Whore; yet
notwithstanding all that, those Books being then wrote by and from the Eternal
Spirit, we cannot retract them; and though we otherwise word the matter now, yet
we Intend the same, are of the same Judgment, yet we must needs beg your
Assistance to stop F. B. for he does so strip us and whip us, he does so
unmask, unvail and discover us, that all People in a little time will see us,
and loath us, and cast us out of their Esteem, as our elder Sister is; and
'twas by the like Treatment she met with from her Apostate Adversaries, Martin
Luther, and others.

Come, G.W. have not I rightly interpreted the Purport of your Letters to Mr.
Archer and Mr. Smithies, and your fawning and flattering Deportment to the Bp.
o^ Gloucester; if not, tell me in your next; for I desire none to stop you; for
the more you write, the more your Hypocrisy and Deceit is manifest, and your
Errors discovered, etc. Well, G. W. let me in ^ew Words answer the Purport of
your two large Letters aforesaid, viz. It is well known to some of you, how
loath I have been to expose you; how I have gone alone to your Meetings, and
told you, that if any Four, Six or Ten of the ablest of your Teachers would
come forth and give me a Meeting, according to your printed Proposals, Epist.
to E. Burrough's Works, viz. To justify what in any tolerable sense might be
warranted by the plain Text of Scripture, and what could not be so justified
(which was written in your Books) you might censure and condemn. Upon this, for
the sake of many amongst you, that are (as I once was) mislead, I should never
have exposed you, though all the Clergy in England had requested it at my hand:
But as they never put me upon writing against you; so I can assure you, they
are far enough from stopping me; therefore you must get other Advocates than
such, who have given me Thanks for my Labor and Service done to the Christian
Religion and Protestant Profession: Neither did Col. Goldwel ever reprove me,
but always approved of the Substance of what I wrote; and approved of my
delivering the Sheet to the Parliament, which was kindly accepted by the
Members; and do believe it was useful to them, who were not so well acquainted
with your juggling Tricks, and deceitful Painting and Glosses as I was, who am
your Friend, though I tell you the Truth.

Francis Bugg.
May 10. 1694.
FINIS.

