THE CHURCH's REQUEST To all her Faithful SONS AND CHILDREN, That they would
now pray for her, and stand by her, and help her what they can; and not forsake
her in her desolate condition, and the dark Time of Popery that is coming upon
her.

Written by Digby Bull M. A. and late Rector of Sheldon in Warwickshire.

LONDON, Printed for the Author; And are to be Sold by J. Whitlock near
Stationers' Hall. 1695.

Psalm CXXII.VI. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem: They shall prosper that love
thee.


THE Royal and Devout Psalmist King David, who was the Composer of this Psalm
(as the Title of it declares) does show, that he was not a Man wholly intent
upon his own private Concerns and Interest, and wholly taken up with his own
Pleasures and Profit and Advancement, as too many now are; but that he was a
Man of a public Spirit, and greatly concerned for his own Land and Nation, and
the Good and Prosperity thereof. And in an especial manner was he concerned for
the pure Worship of Almighty God, being not lukewarm herein, but very fervent
and zealous for the true Religion, and for the Honor and Service of the true
and only God. That he was tender of the common good and welfare of his People
he shows in many instances, and particularly in bewailing the loss of them by
the Plague that God sent upon them, and desiring that they might be spared, and
that the Hand of God might be against him and his Father's House. 2 Samuel 24.17.
And David spoke unto the Lord, when he saw the Angel that smote the People, and
said; Lo, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly: but these sheep, what have
they done? Let thine hand, I pray thee, be against me, and against my Father's
house. So much does he show himself concerned for the common good, and so much
troubled for the loss of so many of his People by the Plague that God sent upon
them. And in an extraordinary manner does he show himself zealous in all
Matters of Religion, and for the pure Worship and Service of Almighty God,
composing Psalms for that purpose, and ordering the courses of the Priests, and
taking great care that they duly executed their Offices and Functions to the
Glory and Honor of Almighty God. And he sought out a place for his sacred
Temple, and intended to build it out of hand, if God had not prevented him, and
told him, that he should leave that work to his Son Solomon; because he had
been a Man of War and shed much blood. Lord (says he, Ps. 132.1. --) remember
David and all his afflictions: How he swear unto the Lord, and vowed unto the
mighty God of Jacob. Surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house,
nor go up into my bed; I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine
eyelids, until I find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty
God of Jacob.

So zealous and intent was he upon this matter, and likewise toward all other
matters of Religion. And for his Zeal especially toward the Worship and
Service of Almighty God, it is, as we may conceive, that he is so highly
commended and renowned in the Word of God, for being a Man after Gods own
heart, Acts 13.22.

And he is not only zealous herein himself for the preserving and promoting of
the pure and sincere Worship of Almighty God, and the good and prosperity of
his Church and People; but does earnestly exhort all others to be so too, and
to pray for the Peace and Prosperity of them; assuring them that those that
should do so, that should bear true love toward them, and seek their Peace and
Welfare, should be well rewarded for all their care and pains herein. And this
he does here in the Text. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper
that love thee.

In which words we have these two parts: I. An exhortation or command to pray
for the Peace of Jerusalem. And II. A promise and assurance of a Blessing upon
such as should bear true love thereto, and seek the Peace thereof. They shall
prosper that love thee.


I. The Exhortation and Precept, wherein we have, first, the Duty that he
exhorts others to, and that is Prayer; secondly, the subject matter of this
Prayer, and that is for Peace; and thirdly, the place for which he solicits
their Prayers, and that is for Jerusalem: Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

First, In exhorting and enjoining them to pray for Jerusalem, we may conclude
that he requires them to use their utmost endeavors in all lawful ways for the
good and happiness of that place, and what he means thereby. And in exhorting
and persuading of them to pray for it, he does thereby mind them, that this was
the best help and assistance that they could yield toward it; that all humane
endeavors are but vain and fruitless without the divine Help and Assistance
and Protection of Almighty God; and that it must be he alone that must protect
and advance it. And so the Psalmist has more fully taught us, that all the
endeavors of Man are to no purpose without the divine Succors and Help of
Almighty God. Psalm. 127.1. Except the Lord build the House (says he) they
labor in vain that build it: Except the Lord keep the City, the watchman waketh
but in vain. All proves but vain and lost labor without his Almighty Aid and
Defense. And says the Psalmist, Psalm. 124.8. Our help is in the Name of the
Lord, who made Heaven and Earth. And the Psalmist affirms him to be the
builder of Jerusalem; Psalm. 147.2. The Lord does build up Jerusalem; he
gathers together the Outcasts of Israel. And he it is that effects and
works this peace that the Psalmist exhorts others to pray for, as we may see,
Psalm. 147.12. -- Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem; praise thy God, O Zion; for he
has strengthened the bars of thy gates; he has blessed thy Children within
thee: He makes peace in thy borders, and fills thee with the finest of the
wheat. He it was that thus blessed and preserved Jerusalem; and while Judgment
and Righteousness were therein, he gave assurance that he would defend and
protect it in a mighty manner; Is. 31.4. -- It was Almighty God that did defend
and preserve this beloved City of the Jews, and that did fill it with Peace and
Plenty, and made it to flourish in all kinds of prosperity: And to supplicate
his divine Goodness in behalf of it in a due and devout manner, was the
greatest service and assistance that they could yield toward the Good and
Welfare thereof. But we may conclude, that in exhorting and enjoining them to
pray for it, he does also exhort and enjoin them to give all the help and
assistance that they were able toward the Good and Prosperity thereof in all
respects: That they should not let their helping hand be wanting in any good
deed that they were able to do for it.

Secondly, We have here the subject matter of the prayer, what he exhorts them
to pray for, and that is the Peace of Jerusalem. And here we have a great deal
of matter comprehended and wrapped up in one word. For hereby he seems to intend,
that they should pray for all kinds of Peace and Prosperity and Happiness to
this City; that Jerusalem might be no ways wanting herein, but freed from all
disquiet and evil, and prosperous and happy in every respect. This he shows in
the ver. following the Text, v. 7. Peace be within thy Walls, and Prosperity
within thy Palaces. This is his own prayer for it; and we may reasonably
conclude that there is as much intended in his exhortation to others. And we
may see that the word Peace is used for all kinds of prosperity and happiness
in the Sacred Scriptures. Deuteronomy. 29.19, says Moses there of him whose heart
should turn from the Lord: And it come to pass when he hears the words of
this Curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, tho
I walk in the imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst; hereby
meaning, that he should escape the curse, and yet do well and prosper. And
says Solomon, 1 Kings 2.33. But upon David, and upon his Seed, and upon his
House, and upon his Throne shall there be Peace for ever from the Lord; hereby
meaning much the same that he has expressed, verse. 45. And King Solomon shall
be blessed, and the Throne of David shall be established before the Lord for
ever. And says Jezebel to Jehu, 2 Kings 9.31. Had Zimri Peace, who slew his
Master? Hereby intending as much as if she had said, Did Zimri do well and
prosper, who slew the King his Lord and Master? And says the Prophet Micaiah
to Ahab, when he went to Ramoth-Gilead to War, 1 Kings 22.28. If thou return at
all in peace, the Lord has not spoken by me; thereby intending as much as if
he had said, If thou return in safety, and well, and with good success. And
this was a common Salutation among the Jews, to wish, or pray God to give them
Peace, that is, all Joy and Happiness. And this our Lord ordered his Disciples
to use, when he sent them forth: Luke 10.5. And into whatsoever house ye enter,
first say; Peace be to this house. By these and many more such like places we
may see, that this word Peace, is used in a general way, for all Prosperity and
Happiness in every respect; For freedom from all Disquiet and Misery; and for a
Prosperous Condition, flourishing in all Joy and Happiness. And indeed Peace
seems to be the very Foundation and Ground work of all Prosperity and
Happiness, and without it there can be no true Happiness, nor solid joy and
comfort to any one.

In praying then for the Peace of Jerusalem, we may conclude. That the Devout
and Royal Psalmist does exhort and enjoin them to make supplication to Almighty
God for the good and welfare of it of all kinds; That Jerusalem might become a
Praise, and the Glory of the whole Earth; that it might become a quiet
Habitation, and enjoy all kind of Peace and Tranquillity: That it might enjoy
all outward Peace, and be free from the Invasions and Assaults of all foreign
and outward Enemies; That it might be so sheltered under the wings of Divine
Providence, that no Foe nor Adversary might come to cast up a Bank, or to shoot
an Arrow against it; And that it might be terrified and disquieted with no fear
nor apprehension of Danger from without.

We may conclude also, that he wills and requires them to pray for all
inward Peace and Quiet among themselves. This he shows in his own Petition,
Ver. 7, saying, Peace be within thy Walls. Hereby then were they obliged to
pray, that Jerusalem might be free from all intestine Broils and Jars among
themselves; That there might be no Factions and Divisions therein to rent and
tear it to pieces, and to do more mischief than a Foreign Enemy; That there
might be no restless Sons of Belial therein to interrupt and disturb the
blessed Peace of their Mother, and to play the Viper, and gnaw through and
destroy the Womb that bare them; That there might be no secret Grudges and
disguised Malice and Heart-burnings among them any ways to threaten and annoy
the happy Peace thereof; But that Jerusalem might be, (as he says Verse. 3.)
builded as a City that is compact together; That it might be firmly united
together with true Love and hearty Good Will, which are the strongest Cement
and Band of all; That in Jerusalem there might be the firmest Concord and
Agreement imaginable, and that all things therein might be carried on with the
sweetest Harmony that could be.

We may also suppose, that he intends that they should pray for all inward
Peace and Satisfaction to every one's Heart and Mind; That there might be no
sorrow and grief of heart and discontent within Men's Breasts to gaul their
Bowels within; but that all might be calm and clear there, and that every Man's
heart might be set at rest as much as could be. This is the sweetest Peace, and
most of all to be valued, and that which must crown and complete all other
kinds of Peace; and therefore we may reasonably suppose, that it is to be
comprehended in their Prayers that they were to make for Jerusalem. We may
conceive that he requires them to pray for the Peace thereof in all these three
respects, and for the good and welfare thereof of every kind; That it might be
prosperous and happy upon all accounts, and might flourish and abound in all
plenty and store, and in every thing that is truly good and desirable: That
they should pray after his own form of Prayer, Psalm. 144.12; That their Sons
might be as Plants grown up in their youth; That their Daughters might be as
Corner-stones, polished after the similitude of a Palace; That their Garners
might be full, affording all manner of Store; That their Sheep might bring
forth thousands, and ten thousands in their Streets; That their Oxen might be
strong to labor, that there might be no breaking in, nor going out; And that
there might be no complaining in their Streets: That they should pray that such
a blessing as God promised by the Prophet Jeremiah, might be accomplished and
fulfilled to them; Jer. 33.10, 11; That there might be heard therein, the voice
of joy, and the voice of gladness; The voice of the Bridegroom, and the voice
of the Bride; The voice of them that should say, praise the Lord of Hosts, for
the Lord is good, for his Mercy endures for ever; and of them that should
bring the Sacrifice of Praise into the House of the Lord. By praying for the
peace hereof; we may conclude, that he requires and enjoins them to pray in
such a full manner as this.

Thirdly, We have here the place for which he requires their Prayers and that
is for Jerusalem. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

This was the great Metropolis and Royal City of the whole Land of Judea at
that time, and in the days of King Solomon; and always afterward was the Royal
City of the Kingdom of Judah, till they were carried into Captivity, for their
great Sin and Wickedness. And here in Jerusalem the House and Posterity of King
David Reigned, and had their Royal Throne; and God himself does signify that
they should Reign here, and that the People should be prosperous and happy
under their Government, if they would hearken to his voice, and keep his sacred
Commandments. This was the Supreme Seat of Judgment among them, where the
highest Courts of Judicature were kept, and where true and impartial Justice
was to be Administered, whereby every one was to be protected and defended in
his just Rights and Liberties: And by the Regal Power thereof, were they to be
preserved from the invasion and annoyance of all Foreign Enemies: And upon the
Peace and Prosperity hereof did their own Peace and Prosperity depend, and
could not well subsist without it. In this City did God declare that his
Servant David should have a Light before him. 1 Kings 11.36. And unto his Son
(that is Solomon's Son) will I give one tribe, that David my Servant may have a
light always before me in Jerusalem, the City which I have chosen me, to put my
Name there. For Solomon's sin in departing from the Lord and following of
Idols; and for the wickedness of the People, did God declare that he would rend
part of the Kingdom from his Sons and posterity, and give it to Jeroboam; but
yet he would let them have a part for David's sake, that he might have a Light
before the Lord in Jerusalem, that is, a Son and Heir of his Family to reign
there in Jerusalem. And although Abijam deserved to have his Posterity deprived
thereof; yet God would have David to have a Lamp there still, and have
Jerusalem established with the Royal Throne of King David. 1 Kings. 15.4.
Nevertheless for David's sake did the Lord his God give him a lamp in
Jerusalem, to set up his Son after him, and to establish Jerusalem. And this is
one reason why the Lord would defend this City from the King of Assyria,
because it was the Royal City of the House of his Servant David: 2 Kings 19.34.
And when God was about to deliver them to be spoiled by their Enemies, he
declares to them, that if they would repent and keep his Commandments, and
sanctify his Sabbaths, he would still grant to them this blessing, that they
should have the Kings hereof over them ruling in great prosperity; and that
they should still be happy under their Government. Jer. 17.25. Then shall there
enter into the gates of this City Kings and Princes sitting upon the Throne of
David, riding in Chariots and on Horses, they and their Princes, the Men of
Judah and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem; and this City shall remain for ever.
And so Jer. 22.3. And the Psalmist here in this Psalm does mention, as a part
of the Prerogatives of this City of Jerusalem, that the Seats of Judgment, and
the Throne of the Kingdom was there; and does hereby intimate, that this was
one reason why they should pray for the Peace and Happiness of it: ver. 5, the
Verse before the Text: For there are set Thrones of judgment; the Thrones of
the House of David. And verse. 8. For my Brethren and Companions sakes, I will
now say, Peace be within thee. We may see that it was upon public respects,
that he enjoins them to pray for the Peace of Jerusalem: And we may conceive
that this was one reason why he requires them to pray for it, because it was
the Regent City, and the Royal Throne of the Kingdom was fixed there, and it
was the chief place where Justice and Judgment were to be executed.

In praying then for Jerusalem, we may conceive that he intends no less than
that they should pray that this City might be advanced and set up on high, and
that the Throne of David might be therein continued, and that he might not want
a Man to sit thereon after him, to sway the Scepter thereof in Truth and
Righteousness: That the Kings hereof might prosper and be Mighty, and that they
might protect and save the People from all their Enemies: That true Justice and
Judgment might be administered from hence, and every one defended in his just
Rights and Liberties: That they should seek and pray for the Peace of Jerusalem
their head City; because in the Peace thereof they all should enjoy great Peace
and Prosperity; as God ordered them afterward to Pray for the Peace of Babylon
upon the like account, when he sent them into Captivity. Jer. 29.7. And seek
the Peace of the City whether I have caused you to be carried away Captives,
and pray unto the Lord for it: For in the Peace thereof shall ye have Peace:
And much more then might they expect Peace and Prosperity in the Peace of their
own City Jerusalem in the days of David and Solomon and the succeeding Kings
thereof. In praying then for the Peace of Jerusalem he does in effect require
them to pray for their whole Polity and Government, and for the Good and
Welfare of their whole Land and Nation, that depended hereupon, and was made
happy in the Peace and Prosperity of this City, and the Throne therein
established.

But farther, Jerusalem was the Renowned City of all the World, that had none
like it upon the face of the whole Earth: for this was the City of the great
King the Lord of Hosts; the City that he had chosen above all others to place
his sacred Name there, and to be the place of his more peculiar Residence here
amongst us Mortals; and here was a Temple then to be built for his Honor and
Service, according to his own direction and appointment, which was to be a
House of Prayer to all Nations; and here had he commanded them to perform his
more solemn Worship and Service; and here he vouchsafed more of his divine
Presence than he did in any City besides. And upon this account especially it
is that the Royal Psalmist exhorts and enjoins them to pray for the Peace of
Jerusalem. God did declare by his servant Moses that he would choose a place to
cause his Name to dwell there, and that they should resort to that place to
perform there more solemn Worship and Service to him there, long before David's
time. Deuteronomy. 12.10 --. But when ye go over Jordan (says Moses) and dwell in the
Land which the Lord your God gives you to inherit, and when he gives you rest
from all your Enemies round about, so that you dwell in safety: then shall
there be a place which the Lord your God shall choose to cause his Name to dwell
there; thither shall ye bring all that I command you, your burnt-offerings, and
your sacrifices, your tithes, and the heave-offerings of your hand, and all
your choice vows, which ye vow unto the Lord. By this and other places in Deuteronomy,
it is plain that God would choose a place for his sacred Name, and that they
were to resort thither to perform their more solemn Worship and Service to him
there. And here at this place were all their Males to appear three times in the
year; Deuteronomy. 16.16. Three times in a year shall all thy Males appear before the
Lord thy God, in the place which he shall choose, in the feast of unleavened
bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles --.

And the Lord did signify to David that he had chosen Jerusalem for this place
where he would put his holy Name. And so he says, Psalm. 132.13 --. For the
Lord has chosen Zion; he has desired it for his Habitation. This is my rest
for ever, here will I dwell; for I have desired it. And Zion was a part of
Jerusalem, and seems to be put for the whole. And unto Jerusalem had David
brought the Ark of God, and put it in the Tent which he had there made for it,
until the Temple was builded; 2 Chr. 1.4. And here had he prepared a place for
the Temple of the Lord, and did intend to build it; but God would have Solomon
his Son to build it, and he builded it in the place that David had prepared. 2
Chr. 3.1. Then Solomon began to build the house of the Lord at Jerusalem in
mount Moriah, where the Lord appeared unto David his Father, in the place that
David had prepared in the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite. And not only
the City and the place, but the very draught of this house of God was showed to
David, and God himself seems to order the fashion of it, as he did of the
Tabernacle in the wilderness, and David delivered the pattern thereof to his
son Solomon; 1 Chr. 28.11. And according to these divine Instructions did
Solomon build this extraordinary Temple of the Lord; and as soon as it was
finished, the glory of the Lord appeared in it; 1 Kings 8.10 --. And here was
he to be more solemnly worshipped than any where else, a great part of his
Worship and Service being appropriated to this peculiar Temple of his. In Zion
it was that praise waited for him; and in Jerusalem was the vow to be performed
to him; Psalm. 65.1. and 116.18, 19. And says the Psalmist, Psalm. 48.2.
Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole Earth is mount Zion, on the sides
of the north, the City of the great King. The Temple here was God's peculiar
house, and to be an house of Prayer to all people; Is. 56.7. And upon this
account of Religion, and of God's Worship and Service it is that Jerusalem is
called the holy City, the City of God, the City of the great King, and God said
to love it above all others. Matt. 4.5. and 5.35. And Psalm. 87.2. The Lord
loves the gates of Zion, more than all the dwellings of Jacob. Glorious things
are spoken of thee, O City of God.

Upon this account especially it is, that the Royal Psalmist requires them to
pray for Jerusalem, because it was the capital City of Religion, the City of
the Lord of hosts, that he had espoused to himself above all others; and his
great Temple of Worship was to be here: for upon this house of God had the
devout Psalmist set his heart and affections, though it was not then built, as
he shows, 1 Chr. 29.3. Moreover because I have set my affection to the house
of my God (says he) I have of mine own proper good --. And upon this account
it is, that he is so much concerned for Jerusalem. And this he declares
himself in this psalm, 122.9. Because of the house of the Lord our God, I will
seek thy good. This is the great reason why he would seek the good of
Jerusalem, and does exhort others to pray for it; because God's House and
solemn Worship was to be here, and his heart was set upon them.

In praying then for Jerusalem, he does exhort and require them to pray for the
good and welfare of the Church of God, that it might enjoy all Peace and Quiet;
and that his Worship and Service might here at Jerusalem be performed in a due
and public manner to his great Honor and Glory; and to the real benefit and
comfort of his Worshippers and Servants: That his Sanctuary and holy Place
there, might not be polluted and profaned by Heathens and unhallowed Persons,
and his Worship and Service corrupted or quite neglected and cast off, and
Religion driven to hide her head; but that Jerusalem might be as a City upon an
hill, taken notice of and admired by all the World, for the solemn Worship of
Almighty God that should there be performed: That they might unanimously Serve
and Worship God there, and that all Nations might flock thither to his
Solemnities, and to join in his Worship and Service: That many Nations might
come and say (as it is Mic. 4.2.) Come and let us go up to the Mountain of the
Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways,
and we will walk in his paths. That God's Ordinances and Worship should there
be duly celebrated and kept where they ought; and with that purity and
devotion and splendour that they ought too: That true Religion might be advanced
and in esteem among them, and that God's Honor and Service might be set up and
exalted above all, and that it might be joy and gladness of heart to them to
see it so.

In praying for the Peace of Jerusalem, he seems to do no less than require and
enjoin them to pray for the good and welfare of their whole Nation, which
depended hereupon; and especially that they should pray for the Good and
Prosperity of the Church, that it might flourish and enjoy all manner of Peace
among them, and that God might be duly served at his Temple, the place that he
himself had chosen.

And now from this Text we may see, that it is our duty to be much concerned
and to pray for our Jerusalem in this manner: That we should bear hearty
good will to our own Land and Nation, and the Israel of God among us; and
especially to our own Church, and that pure Religion among us: That we should
be very zealous in our Prayers for them, and endeavor to preserve them, and to
do them all the good we can in a lawful way. This we are taught by this Text:
For the Psalmist spoke by the Spirit of God, and what he has said here, is to
be an Instruction to us, as well as it was to the Jews. Romans 15.4. For
whatsoever things were written aforetime (says the Apostle) were written for
our learning. And we may see, that under the names of Jerusalem and Zion the
Christian Church seems often to be meant, or at the least to be included
therein. Jer. 33.15 --. In those days, and at that time will I cause the Branch
of Righteousness to grow up unto David, and he shall execute Judgment and
Righteousness in the Land. In those days shall Judah be saved, and Jerusalem
shall dwell safely; and this is his Name whereby he shall be called, The Lord
our Righteousness. And by this Branch of Righteousness, is meant our blessed
Savior, and therefore under Jerusalem, is comprehended the Christian Church.
And says the Prophet Isaiah 2.2; And it shall come to pass in the last days,
that the Mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the
Mountains, and shall be exalted above the Hills, and all Nations shall flow
unto it. And this seems to be a prediction of the times of the Gospel, and this
Mountain of the Lord's house, to be the Christian Church. And says the Prophet
Micah 4.7. And the Lord shall Reign over them in mount Zion, from henceforth
even for ever. But this cannot well be understood of any other Reigning over
them than in the Christian Church: For there is no appearance of God's Reigning
over them now in Mount Zion, taking it literally for that place in the Land of
Judea. And that this Legal and Temple-worship of the Jews at Jerusalem was to
cease, and that God was then to be worshipped after a Spiritual manner, even our
Blessed Lord shows: Jo. 4.21. Jesus says unto her, Woman believe me, the
hour comes, when ye shall neither in th^s Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem
worship the Father. And Ver. 23. But the hour comes, and now is, when the true
Worshippers shall Worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth, for the Father
seeks such to Worship him. The Jewish way of Worship at the Temple was then
to cease; and Jerusalem literally taken was no longer to be God's peculiar
place of Worship above all others, after the Gospel was published and after the
death of our Savior: Nor is it that City literally taken, that we are now
obliged to pray for above all others: But it is the Christian Church which is
now to be accounted the true Israel of God, and to come in place thereof and is
often comprehended in the name of Jerusalem, and meant by it; and for this are we
now to pray. And we may see that Jerusalem is used in a figurative manner for
the Church of Christ. Gal. 4.26, Says the Apostle; But Jerusalem which is
above, is free, which is the Mother of us all. And says the Apostle speaking
of the Christian state of the Church, Heb. 12.22; But ye are come unto mount
Zion, and unto the City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an
innumerable company of Angels, to the general Assembly and Church of the
Firstborn, which are written in Heaven. The Christian Church, which is in
Society with the Saints and Angels above, is the Jerusalem that we are now to
be so much concerned for, and especially for that part of it among us.

By this exhortation and precept then of the devout Psalmist, (though it does
primarily respect the Jews) are we also taught to seek and pray for the Peace
and Prosperity of the true Church of God, especially of that part of it that is
amongst us; and for the Good and Welfare of our own Kingdom and Nation, upon
which our own Peace and Happiness do depend; and to do all the good Offices for
them that we can: For in such a general sense are we to understand the
exhortation and precept here in the Text, as I have showed. And

First, We ought to have a great care that we do no injury and harm to them,
and no ways disturb the Peace of them. In being required and enjoined to pray
for our Jerusalem, for the Church of God, and for the good of our own Nation
and People, we are hereby plainly forbid to do any Injury and Wrong to them.
And it is our Savior's command, that we should be harmless and innocent in all
respects. Mat. 10.16. Behold (says he) I send you forth as sheep in the midst
of Wolves; be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves. And herein
especially are we to be so, in committing no public Offenses and Crimes
against the Church, or good of the Nation. We are to be very cautious and
circumspect, that we do not wilfully offend against the common Good and Welfare
of the Church or State; and to have a great care that we commit no wilful Acts
of Violence and Wrong against them; and that we lend no helping hand to destroy
and overthrow the Protestant Church, and our Good Laws and well-establisht
Go^^^^m^^t. There is no doubt to me, but that the Protestant Church of England
is a true and eminent part of the Church of Christ; and therefore every Man
ought to have a very great care that he does not any ways help to destroy and
pull it down, and to introduce Popery in the room of it. The Protestant
Religion is agreeable to the pure Word of God; but Popery is flat contrary to
that sacred Word in a multitude of places, as you may see in the Protestant's
Letter, and the Book called, the Contrariety of Popery to the blessed Word of
God; and every good Protestant then ought to choose rather to die at the Stake,
than to help to make this change in Religion. And those that do so, may justly
expect the Woe and Curse of God to come upon them for helping to destroy such
an eminent part of his Church. And we are to have a care that we offer no Wrong
and Violence to any of the Members thereof; that we no ways annoy and injure
the very meanest of them. Nor must we help to overthrow our laudable and good
Laws and well Established Government, and to bring the Kingdom under the Popish
Yoke and Bondage again. If we bear that good will that we ought to our
Jerusalem, and would observe this precept of the Devout and Royal Psalmist, we
must refrain from the doing of any of these things; and offer no Violence nor
Injury to our beloved City, or any of the Members of it. And to deter us the
more from doing any Acts of Violence and Wrong to the Church, or any of the
faithful Members thereof, we may see that Woe and Misery is threatened to such,
and like to come upon them. Our Savior pronounces a Woe against the Pharisees
for obstructing the Kingdom of Heaven, and hindering the progress of the
Gospel. Mat. 23.13. But woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites (says
he) for ye shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men: For ye neither go in your
selves; neither suffer ye them that are entering, to go in. And says he, Luc.
11.52. Woe unto you Lawyers; for ye have taken away the key of knowledge; ye
entered not in your selves; and them that were entering in, ye hindered. This woe
is denounced against them, for opposing the Kingdom of Heaven, and hindering
the increase and advancement of the Church of God: And all those that shall now
help to destroy the true Church of Christ, or to do any wrong to any part
thereof, may justly expect to fall under the lash of such a Woe and Curse. And
our Lord denounces a Woe against all such as offend against his Church, or any
of the smallest Members of it, and offer them any injury and wrong. Matthew. 18.6
--. But whosoever shall offend one of these little ones (says he) which believe in
me; It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that
he were drowned in the depth of the Sea. Woe unto the world because of offenses;
for it must needs be that offenses come: but woe to that man, by whom the
offense comes. And to this purpose, Mar. 9.42. and Luke 17.1. The Church is
the Spouse of Christ, and all the true and faithful Members thereof are dear to
Almighty God; and whosoever offers any injury and violence to them, will fire
the wrath of Almighty God against himself, and bring a Woe and Curse upon his
own head. When Saul breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the Church
and Disciples of our blessed Savior, and went to Damascus to bring them bound
from thence to Jerusalem, to have them imprisoned and punished; our Savior
told him, that in so doing he persecuted him; and let him know, that he should
find sharp service in so doing, Acts 9.3 --. And as he journeyed, he came near
to Damascus, and suddenly there shined round about him a light from Heaven. And
he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? And he said, who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am
Jesus, whom thou persecutest: It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.
This was the persecuting of Christ himself, as we see it was resented; and in
such high provocations we must expect to bring the wrath of God upon our
selves. And says St. Paul to the Galatians concerning those that troubled
their Church, Gal. 5.12; I would they were even cut off, which trouble you.
This heavy wish does he utter against such as troubled and molested the Church
of the Galatians. And says he to the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6; Seeing it is
a righteous thing with God to recompense Tribulation to them that trouble you.
This is like to be their Doom, that trouble the Church and are Enemies to it,
and do any violence to it, or the faithful Members thereof. And we may see that
Elymas the Sorcerer was struck with blindness, for withstanding the Apostles,
and seeking to turn away the Deputy of Paphos from the faith, Acts 13.8 --. By
these and such places we may see what a sinful and evil thing it is to do any
injury and harm to the Church of God, or to any of the faithful Servants of
God: And what sharp punishment they are to expect that do so. And according to
our great Wickedness must we now expect to be punished, if we help to destroy
the Protestant Church and to set up Popery, or join with those that do so, and
give encouragement to such an unrighteous and hellish work. And we are not to
expect to go unpunished in our follies and sinful ways if we go about to
overthrow the good Government of our Kingdom, or any ways to disturb the Peace
and Quiet of it. All such offenses are of a public and high nature; and those
that are guilty thereof, must expect to be dealt with accordingly.

And we are also to have a great care that we do not disturb the Peace of our
Jerusalem by making any causless Divisions and Schisms in the Church to rent
and tear it to pieces, and to destroy all the Peace and Quiet thereof. And we
are to make no Factions and Parties in the Kingdom, to make any confusion and
disorder therein. All causless Divisions in the Church are very sinful, and
strictly forbidden in several places in the Word of God. Romans 16.17, says the
Apostle there; Now I beseech you brethren, mark them which cause divisions and
offenses contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. With
great earnestness does he dissuade them from following all such as make any
causless Divisions among them. And says St. James 3.14 --, But if ye have
bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the
Truth. This wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly sensual devilish.
For where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work.
Envying and strife and divisions are productive of nothing that is good; but of
all confusion and disorder, and destroy all the Peace and Happiness of the
Church and Kingdom. And these bring ruin and destruction in the end, as our
blessed Lord has taught us. Mat. 12.25. And Jesus knew their thoughts, and
said unto them; every Kingdom divided against it self, is brought to
desolation: and every city or house divided against it self, shall not stand.
Hence we see a Land and Kingdom is like to be brought to desolation and ruin.
If we would study and seek the Peace of our Jerusalem, our Church and Kingdom,
we must create and promote no Divisions and Factions therein.

And that we may be wholly innocent herein, and not instrumental in
overthrowing and disturbing the Peace and Happiness of our Church and Nation,
we are to have a care that we do not help to bring down the judgments of God
upon them by our own sins and wickedness: That we do not hereby help to cause
the Light of the Gospel to be taken away from us; and justly cause the Lord to
visit our Nation with the Sword or Pestilence, or some other sore and terrible
judgment.

If we bear true Love to our Jerusalem, to our own Church and Kingdom, and
would seek the Good and Welfare of them, we are then to take great care that we
our selves do no injury and harm to them, and no ways disturb their Peace and
Quiet: That we help not to destroy and overthrow them, and to bring in Popery
and the Romish Yoke into this Nation: That we help not to bring disquiet and
misery upon them, by creating and promoting of Divisions and Factions therein:
And that we help not to pull down the heavy judgments of God upon them by our
sins and wickedness.

If we are true Lovers of our Zion, we are carefully, in the first place, to
avoid the doing of any injury and wrong thereto.

Secondly, We are to be highly concerned for our Jerusalem, and to endeavor to
prevent, and to keep off all the evil and harm that may befall our Church and
Kingdom at any time, what we can in a good and lawful way; but things unlawful
must not be attempted, such as the taking up of Arms against Authority. That
little Power that we have, we are to use to a good end, and to stand up for the
good of the Church and Nation, to oppose all the violence and injuries that may
be offered to them, what we can; and when we can do no more, to show our
dislike of such things as are evil and hurtful to them, and to have no hand in
such. Every one in his own Place and Station should oppose, and withstand all
Corruptions and sinful Innovations, and all things that tend any ways to the
Ruin, or to disturb the Peace and Weal of the Church and Kingdom; And
especially are we all to oppose and withstand the Errors and Corruptions of the
Church of Rome what we can, and to give no way for the introducing of them and
the Popish Religion: For that Religion I apprehend now to be coming upon us;
and we Protestants shall be notoriously sinful, if we help to bring it in, and
do not in a mild way oppose it. For the Faith and Truth of the Gospel, and for
the Constitutions and Liturgy of our own Church, and for our Laws and
Government, so far as they are good and agreeable to the blessed Word of God,
(by which we are all to be guided) are we to strive and contend, and willingly
to give way to nothing that shall tend to the overthrowing of them. This the
Apostle shows, that we are to strive for the Faith of the Gospel and the pure
Word of God. Phil. 1.27 --, That ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind,
striving together for the faith of the Gospel; And in nothing terrified by your
adversaries --. By no Terror of our Adversaries are we to be moved to depart
from the Faith of the Gospel and the blessed Word of God. And says St. Jude,
ver. 3 --, Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common
salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you, That ye
should earnestly contend for the Faith, which was once d^livered to the Saints.
For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to
this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the Grace of God into lasciviousness
--. And such there are now like to be, whose errors and corruptions are to be
opposed and withstood by all good and pious Men. And we may see that the Church
of Pergamos is commended for standing for the truth of the Gospel, and not
giving way to be seduced to Apostasy, though it were in a time of great danger.
Rev. 2.13. I know thy works and where thou dwell, even where Satan's seat
is, and thou hold fast my Name, and have not denied my faith, even in those
days, wherein Antipas was my faithful Martyr, who was slain among you, where
Satan dwells. For the pure Word of God, and the Truth of the Gospel are we at
all times to strive and contend what we can, and to stand against all errors
and corruptions that are contrary thereto, though it should be with great
hazard of our Lives. And for the good Constitutions and Orders of our own
Church, and for our own Laws and Government which are agreeable to the blessed
Word of God, are we to show some care and zeal, and not willingly to give way
to have them subverted and overthrown, but mildly to oppose all alterations
therein, that may be destructive to them, and to our Peace and Happiness
therein. The Rechabites are commended for obeying the commandments of Jonadab
their Fore-father, who had set them certain Laws and Commands; and because they
would not depart from them; Jer. 35.6. And much more then ought we to be
zealous for the good Orders and Constitutions of our own Church, and the Laws
and Government of our own Nation; and in a good Christian way to stand up for
them; and to oppose all attempts that are made to overthrow them.

And that we may be the more serviceable to our Church and Kingdom, and
endeavor to prevent all the evil that may befall them; we are to oppose the
great sins and iniquity of the times what we can, that hereby we may endeavor
to prevent the Judgments of God from coming upon them: For Iniquity, when it is
grown ripe, will be sure to bring some Judgment or other. We are to stop the
current of all wickedness what we can, and to endeavor to reclaim and draw all
sinners from their evil ways. This we are to do, both out of Christian
compassion to their own Souls, that we might help to save them, if it may be;
and also to prevent such evil and misery as they will help to bring upon a
place by their wickedness. By all good and lawful ways are we to endeavor to
prevent and keep off all evil and misery that may now, or at any time befall our
Church and Nation.

Thirdly, We are to be grieved and to mourn for all the miseries and calamities
that befall our Jerusalem, our Church and Kingdom. The true Protestant Church
among us are we now to esteem as our Jerusalem, and to account it as dear to us
as our very Lives; and for all the evils that befall it are we to be much
troubled and perplexed. This should be matter of great mourning and lamentation
and weeping to us, to see our Church brought low and under a cloud, and in a
desolate and forsaken condition: To see the blessed Peace thereof to be removed
and taken away, and her Enemies triumphing over her, this should be sorrow and
grief of heart to all her faithful children. And now is the time come that all
good Protestants are to fall to bitter mourning and weeping; For now is the
time at hand, that the Gentiles are to tread under foot the holy City forty and
two months; Rev. 11.2. Now is the time drawing near, that the Beast that
ascends out of the bottomless Pit, will make war against the witnesses of
God, and overcome them; Rev. 11.7: Now I apprehend the time to be at hand, that
Popery shall prevail over the Protestant Church for three years and an half;
and this should call us all to great mourning and lamentation. Nor is it with
dry eyes that I have drawn up these lines. And we are to know, that our sins
are the cause of this misery that is coming upon us; and therefere we have the
greater reason to mourn. We may see that the Jews wept in their Captivity, when
they thought of the desolate condition of their Jerusalem, Psalm. 137.1. By the
rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea we wept when we remembered Zion. And
the Prophets did much bewail the miseries that befell the Church and People of
God. Is. 22.4 --. says the Prophet; Therefore said I, look away from me, I
will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the
daughter of my people: For it is a day of trouble, and of treading down, and of
perplexity by the Lord God of Hosts in the valley of vision, breaking down the
walls, and crying to the mountains. And says the Prophet Jeremiah 4.7, 8; The
lion is come up from his thicket, and the destroyer of the Gentiles is on his
way; he is gone forth from his place to make the land desolate, and the cities
shall be laid wast without an inhabitant. For this gird you with sackcloth,
lament and howl: For the fierce anger of the Lord is not turned back from us.
And Jer. 6.26, says he; O daughter of my people, gird thee with sackcloth and
wallow thy self in ashes; make thee mourning, as for an only son, most bitter
lamentation; for the spoiler shall suddenly come upon us. To mourning does he
call them upon the sight of the evil that he saw coming upon them. And for the
great wickedness of his people, and the Judgments of God that came upon them
for it, does the Prophet lament sore. Jer. 9.1. Oh (says he) that my head were
waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for
the slain of the daughter of my people. O that I had in the wilderness a
lodging place of wayfaring men, that I might leave my people, and go from them:
For they be all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men. And says he, Jer.
13.16 --; Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness, and before
your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and while ye look for light, he turn
it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness. But if ye will not
hear it, my soul shall weep in secret places for your pride, and mine eyes
shall weep sore, and run down with tears, because the Lord's flock is carried
away captive. While there remained some time to provide for their peace and
good, he exhorts them to a reformation and to give glory to God, before the
time of darkness came fully upon them: But if they would not hear, he tells
them that he would sorely bewail their folly and the calamity and misery that
would come upon them. And this God ordered, that they should mourn and weep for
the misery that was coming upon them. Jer. 9.17 --. Thus says the Lord of
Hosts, consider ye, and call for the mourning women, that they may come, and
let them make have, and take up a wailing for us, that our eyes may run down
with tears, and our eyelids gush out with waters. And ver. 21. For death is
come up into our windows, and is entered into our palaces, to cut off the
children from without, and the young men from the streets. And says God to
him, Jer. 14.17 --. Therefore thou shall say this word unto them; let mine eyes
run down with tears night and day, and let them not cease; for the virgin
daughter of my people is broken with a great breach, with a very grievous blow.
If I go forth into the field, then behold the slain with the sword; and if I
enter into the city, then behold them that are sick with famine, yea both the
prophet and the priest go about into a land that they know not. Thus was he to
weep before them for their miseries. And the Prophet shows how Jerusalem wept
for the miseries and sorrows that were come upon her. Lam. 1.2. She weepeth
sore in the night, and her tears are on her cheeks; among all her lovers she
has none to comfort her; all her friends have dealt treacherously with her;
they are become her enemies. And I wish that the Sons of the Protestant Church
would not now so deal with her, and become her enemies. And ver. 15 --. The
Lord has trodden under foot all my mighty men in the midst of me; he has
called an assembly against me to crush my young men. The Lord has trodden the
virgin, the daughter of Judah, as in a wine press. For these things I weep,
mine eye, mine eye runs down with water, because the comforter that should
relieve my soul, is far from me: my children are desolate, because the enemy
prevails. Zion spreads forth her hands, and there is none to comfort her;
the Lord has commanded concerning Jacob, that his adversaries should be round
about him; Jerusalem is as a menstruous woman among them. Thus does he bring in
Jerusalem bewailing her self, and does much lament her desolate condition. And
says he, Lam. 2.11; Mine eyes do fail with tears; my bowels are troubled, my
liver is poured upon the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my
people; because the children and the sucklings swoon in the streets of the
city. In this extraordinary manner was he troubled, and did sorely weep for the
great misery that came upon them and their beloved Jerusalem. And the Prophet
Amos rebukes it as a crime in some of them, that they were not grieved for the
affliction of the People of God. Amos, 6.1. Woe to them that are at ease in
Zion; And ver. 6. That drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the
chief ointments: But tbey are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph. And our
blessed Lord himself wept over Jerusalem, for the misery and destruction that
was coming upon it. Lu. 19.41 --. And when he was come near, he behold the
city, and wept over it, saying, if thou had known, even thou, at least in
this thy day, the things which belong unto thy Peace! but now they are hid from
thine eyes. For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a
trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, and
shall lay thee even with the ground. Thus sorrowful did our blessed Lord show
himself for the great misery and destruction that was coming upon this City,
for the great wickedness thereof; and did most earnestly desire that they would
amend, and mind the things that belonged to their Peace before it was too late;
and was greatly troubled at their carnal security, that they were so
unconcerned in this weighty matter. By these and such places we see, that it is
our duty to be troubled, and to mourn and weep for all the public Calamities
and Miseries that befall our Church and Nation. To see men to grow cold in their
Zeal and Devotion toward Almighty G^d, and to have little or no heart toward
their duty and se^vice toward him; To see the house of God to be deserted and
forsaken, and his Ordinances and Worship to be slighted and neglected; To see
the Church rent and torn to pieces with schisms and divisions, and to see men's
zeal all spent a wrong way in heats against one another; To understand that
Popery is like to prevail over the Protestant Church for three years and an
half, and that the Popish Gentiles are like to tread under foot the holy City
the true Church of Christ for forty and two months; To see wickedness and
impiety to abound every where in the Nation, and Love and Goodness to be
withdrawn; to see the Kingdom divided into Factions and Parties, and to know,
as our Lord has told us, that a Kingdom so divided cannot stand; To see that
our sins and iniquities are grown great, and to know that wrath and judgments
will be sure to be the issue and consequence of them; These things must needs
be matter of sorrow and grief to all good men, and call them to lamentation and
mourning, to see the Peace of our Church and Kingdom in such a manner to lie a
bleeding, and no likelihood that the wounds thereof should be healed. And at
this time the Church of Christ, and our Nation give us too great a cause of
sorrow in this respect.

Fourthly, We are to endeavor to procure all the good we can to our Jerusalem,
our Church and Kingdom in a lawful and Christian way. We are to promote the
peace and prosperity thereof, of all kinds, as much as in us lies: For it would
be but vain to call upon God for his help and succor for our Jerusalem, if we
are so little concerned for it, that we will not vouchsafe it our own help and
assistance, so far as we have power. And the devout Psalmist here does resolve
upon this, that he would do what good he could to Jerusalem. Ps. 122.9. Because
of the house of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good. And the Apostle
exhorts us to seek the good of others: 1 Cor. 10.24. Let no man seek his own;
but every man another's wealth: And much more then ought we to seek the good
and welfare of the Church and Kingdom, which are of such a general concern; and
not to think much to bestow both labor and cost for the benefit of them. And it
is our Lord's command that we should seek the Kingdom of God, and seek it in
the first place. Matt. 6.33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God (says he)
and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you. The
promoting of God's Kingdom and Righteousness among men, is to be our first and
chiefest ^are; and to such endeavors a blessing of earthly things is promised.
And to promote the Gospel, and the pure Religion thereof, is to promote the
Kingdom of God, as St. Paul shows; Col. 4.11. These only are my fellow
workers unto the Kingdom of God. But not only the outward profession of the
Gospel, but chiefly the inward reception of it, and the hearty belief of the
Gospel which produces obedience and makes a life conformable thereto, is the
true Kingdom of God: And so our Savior has told us that the Kingdom of God is
within us; Lu. 17.21. And not only the outward profession of the Gospel, but
especially the inward and hearty embracing thereof should we endeavor to
promote and advance what we can. And the Peace and Prosperity of our Church and
Kingdom should we advance as much as we can, that the Gospel and Kingdom of God
may be promoted therein as much as may be; and that God may be duly worshipped
and honored therein, and that his worshippers and servants may receive true
benefit and comfort thereby. We are to endeavor by all mild and gentle ways to
heal the breaches and divisions that are in the Church, and to allay all
bitterness and animosities that are among us, and to draw all to union and
concord, and to promote love and goodness among all, if it may be. And by all
other lawful means should we seek the good and welfare of our Church and
Kingdom.

And herein especially are we to be assisting to the prosperity and happiness
of our Church and Nation, by leading of ha^mless and righteous and holy lives.
Hereby shall we do the Church and Kingdom the greatest service of all. This
will adorn our Church and Religion the most of all, when all that are of other
persuasions shall take notice what innocent and pious lives the Sons of our
Church lead, and how just and upright they are in all their ways. And hereby
shall we help to procure the Blessing of Almighty God upon us, which is that
which must complete and crown all our Peace and Happiness in every respect, and
make it firm and lasting, or else it will never be done. They are our sins
which withhold good things from us, and hinder the advancem^nt of our Peace and
Happiness, which we must remove, before we can procure good to our selves. This
the Prophet show h, Jer. 5.25 --; Your iniquities have turned away these
things, and your sins have withholden good things from you. For amon my people
are found wicked men --. And King David does show, that the keeping of the
Commandments of God was the way to enjoy the peaceable possession of the Land
of Canaan, and to leave it for an Inheritance to their Children. 1 Chr. 28.8.
-- Keep and seek for all the commandments of the Lord your God, that ye may
possess this good land, and leave it for an inheritance for your children after
you for ever. And this must we do, if we would enjoy the Blessing of Peace our
selves, and leave it for an inheritance to our Children after us. And says the
Prophet Jeremiah 22.3 --, Thus says the Lord, execute ye judgment and
righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor; and do
no wrong, do no violence to the stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow;
neither shed innocent blood in this place. For if ye do this thing indeed, then
shall there enter in by the gates of this house Kings sitting upon the throne
of David --. But if ye will not hear these words, I swear by my self, says the
Lord, that this house shall become a desolation: And so it is like to be with
our Jerusalem. The doing of the works of righteousness is the way to procure
Peace and Happiness to our selves; and herein also shall we be instrumental in
procuring of Peace and Good to our Church and Nation.

Fifthly, We are to pray unto Almighty God for the Peace and Good of our
Jerusalem in every respect. This we are taught by the Text, and what has been
said upon it. All our own endeavors will be but vain and fruitless without the
divine help of Almighty God; and therefore we must address our selves unto him
in earnest prayer, that he would be pleased to grant to us this blessing of
Peace, who is the only giver of it. For the peace and welfare of the whole
Church of Christ upon earth are we to pray; That God would preserve and keep it
in perfect peace, that it might be no ways annoyed, and that the Gates of Hell
(as our Savior has promised, Matt. 16.18.) might not prevail against it; but
that the Kingdom of God might come (as our Lord has taught us to pray) and
might every where prevail, and be firmly rooted in men's hearts: That God would
enlarge the Kingdom of his dear Son, and give him the Heathen for his
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession, according
to that promise, Psalm. 2.8.

But more especially are we to pray for the good and welfare of our Church and
Kingdom, that they may enjoy all manner of Peace and Happiness. We are to make
supplication to Almighty God for the preventing of all judgments and calamities
that may at any time befall them; and to pray according to Solomon's form, 1
Kings 8.29; That his eyes may be open day and night upon them, and that he
would watch over them, and preserve them from all dangers and miseries that
threaten them, and us therein: That he would look down from Heaven (Psalm.
80.14.) and behold and visit this vine, and the vineyard which his right hand
has planted; that it may not be cut down, and burnt up with fire: That he
would set watchmen upon the walls of our Jerusalem (Is. 62.6.) which should
never hold their peace day nor night; but always give warning at the approach
of any evil, that it might be prevented; and to make supplication to the Lord,
that he would defend our beloved City therefrom. And now are we earnestly to
pray unto Almighty God for the preventing, as much as may be, such judgments
and calamities as do now hang over our heads, and which we have justly
deserved: That our Candlestick may not be totally removed, and that God may not
send such a famine upon us, as he threatens by the Prophet; Amos 8.11; Behold
the days come, says the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a
famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord:
Such a spiritual famine of the word of God are we to pray to be delivered from;
and that God would preserve his pure Religion to us, and keep us from all
idolatrous practices, and sinful errors in Religion: That we may be delivered
from the devouring Sword, and that our Land may not be turned into a field of
blood, and a valley of slaughter: That we may not hear the sound of the Trumpet
and Alarm of war, and be commanded (as it is Joel 3.10.) to beat our plowshares
into swords, and our pruning hooks into spears: That our corn may not be given
to be meat for our enemies; and the Sons of the stranger may not drink our
wine, for which we have labored; but that they that have gathered it may eat
it, and praise the Lord; Is. 62.8 --: That we may not (as it is Is. 65.22 --)
build, and another inhabit; and plant, and another eat the fruit thereof; and
that we may not labor in vain, and bring forth for trouble: That violence may
not be heard in our Land (Is. 60.18.) wasting nor destruction within our
borders; but that our walls might truly be called Salvation, and our gates
Praise. To God are we to make supplication that he would not cause the
Pestilence to cleave unto us, nor smite us with any consuming sickness and
disease: That he would not send a famine upon us, and cause us to be smitten
with blasting and mildew, and make the Heaven that is over our head as brass,
and the Earth that is under our feet as Iron; nor give our substance and labor
to be consumed by the locusts and caterpillars and such Armies of his: That our
Church and Kingdom may be preserved from these, and from all other Plagues and
Judgments, that we have justly deserved, are we to make supplication to
Almighty God, that we may endeavor to prevent them as much as may be.

We are also to make our humble and hearty prayers to Almighty God for the
removing and taking away of such Calamities and Evils as our Church and Kingdom
now do, or at any time hereafter shall ly under: That he who is the God and
Father of mercies would at all times look down in mercy upon them, and in his
good time deliver them from all their distress and misery: That there may not
be such a time, when the children shall be come to the birth, and there shall
not be strength to bring forth, (2 Kings 19.3.) when we shall call upon God for
succor and help, and he will not hear us; but that (according to Solomon's
prayer 1 Kings 8.52.) his eyes may be open unto the supplication of his
servants, and of his people, to hearken unto them in all that they call for
unto him: That his Church and Faithful Servants may be preserved in this, and
in all other fiery Trials that shall befall them, and from falling away from
him; and that they may not be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow and misery; but
may find help and comfort from above, when they can meet with none here below:
That God would remove from us all spiritual blindness and carnal security, that
we may know and mind the things which belong to our Peace, before they are
quite removed from our eyes, and it be too late: That we may not be like the
Church of the Laodiceans, of whom it is said, Rev. 3.17, Thou say, I am
rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing; and know not, that
thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked; that we may
not be in such an insensible and miserable condition as this; but may see what
great need we have to repent and amend: That God would do good, in his good
pleasure unto our Zion (Psalm. 51.18.) and build the walls of our Jerusalem:
That he would heal all our dismal Breaches and Divisions, and reconcile all our
Dissensions, which so much disturb our Peace, and threaten us with farther
misery: That he would not prepare more work for the greedy and devouring Sword;
but that we may all study and practice his Gospel of Peace and Love, and that
every man may dwell safely under his vine, and under his Fig Tree, as it is
said that Judah and Israel did all the days of King Solomon, 1 Kings 4.25. For
the removing of these, and all other afflictions and miseries that we are
sensible that our Church and Kingdom do now, or hereafter may ly under, are we
to make supplication to Almighty God, and to entreat him that he would look
down in mercy upon them, and heal all their wounds and maladies in his good
time. And these things we are to pray for according to the Prophet's form, Jer.
14.7: O Lord, though our iniquities testify against us, do thou it for thy Name's
sake; for our backslidings are many, we have sinned against thee: And not for
our own sakes, but for his great mercy's ^ake, and for his dear Son Christ
Jesus's sake, are we to entreat him for the preventing of Judgments, and for
the removing of such miseries and and sufferings as do at any time befall our
Church and Kingdom.

We are also to supplicate the divine Goodness of Almighty God for our Church
and Kingdom that he would be pleased to continue to them such Mercies as they
enjoy; and that he would grant to them such Blessings and good things as they
want and stand in need off; That our Church and Kingdom may enjoy all manner of
Peace and Prosperity in such a full manner as I have before described: That God
would make good to the Christian Church that in the Prophet Isaiah, 62.1 --,
That for Zion's sake he would not hold his peace, and for Jerusalem's sake he
would not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the
salvation thereof as a lamp that burns: That the Gentiles might see the
righteousness thereof, and all Kings it is glory: That it may be a Crown of
Glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of our God: That
as a young man marries a Virgin, so her Sons might marry her; and as a
Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, so her God might rejoice over her: That
God would create our Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy; Is. 65.18 --:
That he would rejoice in our Jerusalem, and joy in his People; that the voice
of weeping may no more be heard in her, nor the voice of crying: That (ver.
25.) the Wolf and the Lamb may feed together; and the Lion eat straw like the
Bullock, and dust may be the Serpent's meat; that they may not hurt, nor
destroy in all this holy Mountain: That such universal Peace and Love may every
where prevail, that men of the most perverse spirits may be overcome by them,
and lay aside all their malignity: That the Lord of Hosts ( Zac. 1.14.) would
be jealous for our Jerusalem, and for our Zion with a great jealousy: That God
would be gracious to our Land, and cause the Gospel to flourish amongst us, and
to take deep rooting in our hearts: That God would cloth the Priests of our
Zion with Salvation (Psalm. 132.16.) and make her Saints to shout aloud for joy:
That the mountain of the Lords house (Is. 2.2 --.) might be established in the
top of the mountains, and be exalted above the hills: and that all nations may
flow unto it: That there may be such an universal willingness and readiness in
all to know and practice their duty, that they shall say, Come ye, and let us
go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he
will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: That our Ministers
and Pastors may be orthodox and sound in the Faith; true and faithful in the
discharge of their offices; and of an upright life and conversation, and so
adorn the Gospel of the blessed Jesus and that holy Religion which we profess:
That God would abundantly bless the provision of our Zion (Psalm. 132.15.) and
would satisfy her poor w^^h bread; and give us all kind of plenty and store in
our Land: That there may enter in by the gates of our City Kings sitting upon
the throne of their Ancestors ( Jer. 17.25.) and riding in Chariots and on
Horses; and Ruling in justice righteousness and mercy: That he would fill our
hearts with food and gladness, and grant us health and prosperity in our Land:
That God would make our Zion an eternal excellency (Is. 60.15.) a joy of many
generations: That our People also (ver. 21.) might be all righteous, and
inherit the Land for ever, and that in all Peace and Quiet: That there may be
heard in our Land (Jer. 33.11.) the voice of joy, and the voice of gladness;
the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride; the voice of them that
shall say, praise the Lord of Hosts, for the Lord is good, for his mercy
endures for ever; and of them that shall bring the sacrifice of praise into
the house of the Lord: That our Land may be blessed with all manner of
blessings; and that we may not be unmindful to return Almighty God, his due
Laud and Praise for the same. Such promises have been made to, and such
petitions have been put up for Jerusalem; and by such may we be instructed how
we are at all times to address our selves to Almighty God in prayer for our
Jerusalem, for the Church of Christ in general, and more particularly for our
own Church and Kingdom. But at this time we have great reason to make our
earnest prayers to Almighty God for the Protestant Church, especially that part
of it with us; and for our own Nation, that they may be preserved from such
judgments and miseries as now threaten them and us, and we have justly deserved
for our great wickedness and abuse of mercies.

Sixthly, We are to rejoice, and to take great pleasure in the Peace and
Prosperity of our Jerusalem, when there is just cause for it; and to praise and
magnify Almighty God for the mercies and benefits that he has granted to her.
The good and welfare of the whole Church, and especially of our own Church and
Kingdom should be matter of great joy and gladness of heart to us; and stir us
up to return God his due Laud and Praise for the same. And this is the Prophets
exhortation. Is. 66.10. Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye
that love her, rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourned for her: That ye
may suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations; that ye may
milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of her glory. And with our
Jerusalem the true Protestant Church should we rejoice, when she has cause to
do so; which when the days of darkness are over, I hope she will have. And
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 106.4 --, Remember me, O Lord, with the favor that
thou bear unto thy people; O visit me with thy salvation: That I may see the
good of thy chosen; that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy nation; that I
may glory with thine inheritance. Like fellow-feeling members are we both to
suffer, and to rejoice with the Church, and all the true and faithful Members
thereof. And says the Psalmist. Psalm. 126.1 --, When the Lord turned again the
Captivity of Zion, were like them that dream: Then was our mouth filled with
laughter, and our tongue with singing. And Psalm. 137.6, says the Psalmist
there; If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth,
if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy. And at every thing that tended
toward the good of Jerusalem, and the pure worship and service of Almighty God,
did the Royal Psalmist King David greatly rejoice, as he shows here. Psalm.
122.1. I was glad when they sa d unto me let us go into the house of the Lord.
Every advancement of God's Church and Worship did much delight and please him;
and so it should do us. And for all the Mercies and Blessings that Almighty God
shall at any time vouchsafe to our Church and Nation are we to be truly
thankful, and to make our hearty return of praise to him for the same. This the
Psalmist does most passionately wish, and shows that men are too negligent
herein. Psalm. 107.8. O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness (says
he) and for his wonderful works to the children of men! And this the Psalmist
exhorts Jerusalem to do, to make a due return of praise for the Blessings
that she had received. Psalm. 147.12 --. Praise the Lord O Jerusalem (says he)
praise thy God, O Zion. For he has strengthened the bars of thy gates; he has
blessed thy children within thee. He makes Peace in thy borders, and fills
thee with the finest of the wheat. And this St. John shows in that vision of
the Elders, that we are to praise and magnify Almighty God for all the mercies
and deliverances that he vouchsafes to his Church. Rev. 11.16, 17. And the
four and twenty Elders (says he) which sat before God on their seats, fell
upon their faces, and worshipped God, saying, we give thee thanks, O Lord God
Almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come; because thou have taken to thee
thy great Power, and have Reigned: That is, because in a wonderful and
miraculous manner thou have preserved and delivered thy Church and Servants,
and defeated and destroyed their Enemies. For all the mercies and blessings
that are vouchsafed to the christian Church in general, or to that part of it
wherein we are more nearly concerned, or to our own Land and Nation are we to
be rruly thankful to Almighty God, and to Laud and Praise him for them. All the
good that befalls the Protestant Church and our Land and Nation is to be matter
of thanksgiving and rejoicing to us. To see the Christian Church enlarged and
exalted on high, and what the Prophet says of it fulfilled in an eminent
manner; Mic. 4.1 --: To see the Christian Church thus exalted above all, and
the Heathen world thus a flocking to it: To see an inclination and willingness
in all men to become obedient to the Gospel, and to practice the things that it
requires: To see Kings to become the nursing-Fathers of the Christian Church
(Is. 49.23.) and their Queens the nursing Mothers thereof, and to bow down to
her with their faces toward the earth, and to bring their riches and treasures
to her: To see the Light of God's countenance to shine upon the true Protestant
Church, and to see that completed, which our Lord says, Rev. 3.9, Behold I
will make them of the synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews, and are not,
but do lie; behold I will make them to come, and worship before thy feet, and
to know that I have loved thee: To see the Protestant Church blessed in such a
manner, and all the Enemies thereof ashamed and confounded in all their
enterprises and designs against it; and instead of triumphing over it, to come
and bow down before it: To see our Kingdom a peaceable and quiet Habitation,
and disturbed with no apprehensions of dangers from without, nor with any
contentions or divisions within: To see Truth and Righteousness to flourish
therein; and to see it blessed with health and plenty: To see all men to study
Love and Peace; and to see us so happy as to be all joined together in one
Worship and Communion, that, as St. Paul says, Romans 15.6, That we may with one
mind, and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: To
see these things fulfilled should be great joy and gladness of heart to us, and
fill our mouths with Songs of thanksgiving to Almighty God for the same. These
things should be our earnest desires, and the subject of our hearty prayers to
God; and it should be great pleasure and delight to us to see them in some good
measure accomplished and fulfilled, That God may have his due Honor and Praise
unanimously returned him every where throughout the whole Christian Church.

Seventhly and lastly, We are to suffer for the Good of our Jerusalem the
Christian Church, when God shall require it of us, and call us thereto by his
divine Providence, that orders all things, and over-ruleth all that is done
here below. Though our blessed Lord has suffered for us, and there is no need
of any more Sacrifice to purge away our Sins, as if there were any
insufficiency in that; For (says the Apostle Heb. 10.14) by one offering he
has perfected for ever them that are sanctified: Yet there remained something
of the sufferings of Christ behind, which were to be undergone by the Apostles
and pious Men afterward for the sake of the Church, in conformity to what our
Blessed Lord had suffered for it. This the Apostle shows, Col. 1.24; Who now
rejoice (says he) in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind
of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his body's sake which is the
Church --. For the sake of the mystical Body of Christ the Church does he show
that he suffered. And says he to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 1.6; And whether we
be afflicted, it is for your consolation and salvation, which is effectual in
the enduring of the same sufferings which we also suffer --. And says he to
Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.10; Therefore I endure all things for the elects sake, that
they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.
And he shows that he did not know but that he might be offered upon the
service of the Church of the Philippians. Phil. 2 17. Yea, and if I be offered
upon the sacrifice and service of your faith (says he) I joy and rejoice with
you all. So highly could he suffer for them, and do it too with joy and
rejoicing. And he exhorts Timothy to be ready to undergo sufferings for the
sake of the Gospel and Church of God. 2 Timothy 1.8. Be not thou therefore ashamed
of the testimony of our Lord (says he) nor of me his prisoner; but be thou
partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel according to the power of God. And
St. John tells us plainly, that seeing Christ has laid down his Life for us,
we ought also to lay down our Lives for the good of others, as Christ has done
for us, though not for an expiatory Sacrifice like his. 1 Jo. 3.16. Hereby
(says he) perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us;
and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. This great act of love and
mercy to us, is to be an example to us, to teach us to show such to others, and
to lay down our Lives for the good of others and of the Church of Christ, when
it will be beneficial to them, and God shall require this service at our hands.
By these and such places we may see that we are to suffer for our Jerusalem the
Church of Christ, when our sufferings will be beneficial to it, if we will not
be wanting in our love and duty toward it. The words of the Text do not fully
declare this, but yet we see that other places of the Scriptures do.

If our hearts are so fully set upon our Jerusalem the true Protestant Church
as they should; and if we do earnestly desire the Peace and Good and Welfare
thereof, as we ought; Then are we to give what assistance we can toward them
by these and such lawful ways as these; And likewise toward the Peace and
Prosperity of our Kingdom and Nation.

II. We have here in the Text a promise and assurance of a blessing of
Prosperity to them that truly loved Jerusalam: They shall prosper that love
thee. All those that did bear true love and hearty good will to Jerusalem the
City of the great King, where his magnificent Temple was, and showed a pious
Zeal for it, and were ready to do all the good offices for it that they could;
they were assured from hence that the blessing of Prosperity should come upon
them, and that they should be well rewarded for all the good acts that they
should do for it. And the Royal Psalmist King David himself is an eminent
Instance of this: For he was inflamed with a very great love toward this place
which God had chosen to record his Sacred Name there; and for the true Worship
and Service of Almighty God; and for the promoting of true Religion among men;
And we see that he was abundantly rewarded with prosperity and good for all the
acts of piety that he showed herein, procuring hereby the blessing of God both
upon himself, and upon his Posterity too. And we may see that others also have
been prosperous and happy, that have had great Love and Zeal for the true
Religion and pure Worship and Service of Almighty God. And ftom hence may we be
assured that the Blessing of God will come upon all those now that love our
Jerusalem, and seek the Peace and Good thereof: That they shall be sure to be
well rewarded that have hearty Love and a pious Zeal for the Protestant Church,
and seek the Peace and Welfare thereof, and of our Kingdom and Nation. From
these words of the Text we may be assured that a blessed reward does await all
such as show a pious care, and do any good deeds toward the Church of Christ;
and in the word of God we have more promises to this effect, assuring us of a
reward both in this life, and that which is to come. And the true Christian
Church being the Heavenly Jerusalem, and the City of God, and the Spouse of
Christ, the Bride the Lamb's wife, Rev. 21.9; We may be sure from hence, that
all the pious acts that are done toward it, will not go unrewarded: For God
(says the Apostle Heb. 6.10.) is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor
of love, which ye have showed toward his Name, in that ye have ministered to
the Saints, and do minister. All acts of piety and love showed toward the
Saints and Servants of God, or any other ways toward his Name, will not be
forgotten, but be surely and abundantly rewarded. Our Lord does assure us, that
such as seek the Kingdom of God, shall have a good portion of the good things
of this life. Matthew. 6.33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God (says he) and
his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you. Such as seek
the Kingdom of God, and yield any succor and help to it, are like to have no
want of earthly comforts and enjoyments, but are assured of them, so far as
shall be good for them. And those that suffer upon the account of the Gospel,
our Lord tells us, are like to be rewarded both here, and hereafter too. Mar.
10.29 -- And Jesus answered and said, verily I say unto you, there is no man
that has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife,
or children, or lands for my sake and the Gospel's; But he shall receive an
hundred fold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers,
and children, and lands, with persecutions, and in the world to come eternal
Life. The parting with any thing for the sake of Christ and the Gospel will be
abundantly recompensed both here and hereafter too. And so says our Lord
concerning those that part with any thing for the sake of the Kingdom of God.
Lu. 18.29 -- And he said unto them, verily I say unto you, there is no man that
has left house, or parents, or brethren, or w^fe, or children for the Kingdom
of God's sake, who shall not receive manifold more in this present time, and in
the world to come Life everlasting. And says he, Mar. 8.35, But whosoever
shall lose his life for my sake and the G^spel s, the same shall save it. These
places do show that what is done and suffered for the sake of the Gospel, shall
be well rewarded: and so is all like to be that is done for the Protestant
Church wherein the pure Religion and Worship of God are preserved. And our Lord
does show that he will account all the pious acts, that are done to his
disciples, as done to himself, and accordingly will reward them at the day of
Judgment, Matthew. 25.34 --. And says he, Matthew. 10.41 --, He that receives a
Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophet's reward; and he that
receives a righteous man, in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a
righteous man's reward. And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these
little ones a cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple, verily I say
unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward. And so, Mar. 9.41; For whosoever
shall give y^u a cup of water to drink in my Name, because ye belong to Christ,
verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward. This assurance does our
blessed Lord give that those shall be well rewarded, that show kindness to his
disciples in all their wants and distressed conditions. And from these and such
places we may be sure, that all acts tending any ways to the good of Christ's
Church, or to any part or member thereof, shall be well taken, and abundantly
rewarded.

And a good and praiseworthy thing it is to do good in a righteous way toward
the Peace and Welfare of one's Kingdom and Nation, and will not wholly lose
it is reward. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, says
Job, 29.13: And the blessing of a Kingdom and Nation is like to come upon such
as do good thereto in a lawful way, and seek to preserve the Peace thereof, and
offer up their hearty prayers to Almighty God for it. The Jews became advocates
to our blessed Lord for the Centurion that had deserved well of their Nation,
and besought him to heal his servant, and our Lord hearkened to their request.
Lu. 7.4 --. And when they came to Jesus, they besought him instantly, saying,
that he was worthy for whom he should do this; For he loves our nation, and he
has built us a Synagogue. Then Jesus went with them --. The praying for, and
showing of love and piety toward the Christian Jerusalem is like to be
abundantly rewarded: And in doing of pious acts toward the Protestant Church
of England, we may be sure that we shall do so toward an eminent part of
Christ's Church, and shall be sharers in the great rewards of all such acts of
piety toward the Church of Christ.

But as a blessing is like to come upon such as love, and do good to the
Christian Jerusalem; So, on the other hand, we may see that great judgments and
miseries are like to befall all those that have evil will thereto, and offer it
any Injury and Wrong. This the Psalmist has not asserted here in the Text; but
it is showed by several other places in the sacred Scriptures. Evil was like to
befall all such as were enemies to the ancient Jerusalem of the Jews, as we may
see. A heavy imprecation does the Psalmist utter against such; Psalm. 129.5 --;
Let them all be confounded and turned back (says he) that hate Zion: Let them
be as the grass upon the house tops, which withers before it grows up --.
And such imprecations are not to be looked upon as private wishes only, but as
dictates of the Spirit of God. And says the Psalmist, Ps. 137.7 --, Remember O
Lord, the children of Edom, in the day of Jerusalem; who said, Raze, raze it,
even to the foundation thereof. O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed;
happy shall he be, that rewards thee, as thou have served us. Happy shall he
be, that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the stones. Destruction was
like to be to them, though God suffered them a while to afflict his people for
their sins and wickedness. And says the Prophet Isaiah, 29.8; It shall even be
as when a hungry man dreameth, and behold he eats; but he awaketh, and his
soul is empty: or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and behold he drinks; but
he awaketh, and behold he is faint, and his soul has appetite: So shall the
multitude of all Nations be, that fight against mount Zion. And says God by
the Prophet Zechariah 12.9, And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will
seek to destroy all the Nations that came against Jerusalem. And Zec. 14.12.
And this shall be the plague (says the Prophet) wherewith the Lord will smite
all the people, that have fought against Jerusalem: Their flesh shall consume
away while they stand upon their feet; and their eyes shall consume away in
their holes; and their tongue shall consume away in their mouth. Such
destruction and misery was like to come upon the enemies of Jerusalem. And from
these places we may be assured, that Woe and Misery is like to befall all such as
do any injury and wrong to the Christian Jerusalem. And we read in the
Revelation of fire coming down from God, and devouring those that compassed the
Camp of the Saints, and the beloved City about. Rev. 20.8, 9. And shall go out
(that is Satan shall go out) to deceive the Nations which are in the four
quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle; the
number of whom is as the sand of the sea. And they went up on the breadth of
the earth, and compassed the Camp of the Saints about, and the beloved city:
and fire came down from God out of heaven, and devoured them. Destruction is
like to be the reward of all such as seek to destroy the beloved City and
Church of God. And our blessed Savior told St. Paul, that in persecuting the
Church he persecuted him; and let him know, that in so doing he should meet
with sharp service; and has let us know, what a heavy doom is like to light
upon such as offend and wrong any of his little ones, that believe in him; as I
have showed before. And from these and such places we may fully conclude, that
woe and misery is like to be their reward now, that do any injury and wrong to
the Church of Christ, or to any of his true and faithful Servants. A most
blessed thing it is to love, and to do good to the christian Jerusalem, the
true Church of Christ; and will be sure to be well taken, and well rewarded:
But the contrary, to do wrong and injury thereto, is very offensive to Almighty
God; and is like to be most severely punished by him.

And now, to draw to a conclusion, Seeing it will be such accepable Service to
God, to seek the Good and Welfare of the Church, and to pray for it, and to do
what good we can thereto; and he will be sure abundantly to recompense all such
service; But that he will be highly displeased with all such as do any injury
and harm to his Church and Servants, and does show that he will most severely
punish them; Let us from hence be warned not to offend herein, and have a great
care that we help not to pull down and destroy the Protestant Church; for those
that do so, must expect the Curse of God to come upon them, and that the
dreadful Woe which is at hand will sweep them away: Let us have a care that we
put not our hand, nor our heart to any thing that shall be prejudicial thereto;
That we no ways disturb the Peace of our Church, and do no hurt thereto, nor to
any of the true Servants of God: But let us show all the acts of love and
kindness thereto that we can; Let us now show our selves faithful Children of
the Protestant Church, and resolve by God's blessed help to live and die with
her, though it should be at the Stake. Let us now make earnest supplication to
Almighty God for the Peace and Good of our Jerusalem, the Protestant Church,
that it may now and at all times be defended from the Enemies thereof; and that
they may not now so far prevail over it, as to root it out and destroy it; but
that his watchful Providence and the Light of his Countenance may now in an
extraordinary manner attend our Church, and all the faithful Members thereof,
in this sad and dark time that is coming upon them, And (as the Prophet
exhorts the faithful Is. 62.7.) let us g^ve ^im no rest, till he establish,
and till he make our Jerusalem a praise in the earth: Let us do all the good
offices thereto that we can, and give all the assistance and help to it in a
righteous way that may be; and think all our care and pains well bestowed about
it, and to our own advantage too. And let us not be unmindful to pray for all
the distressed Members of the Church of Christ, whenever and wheresoever we
understand that they are in any afflicted and suffering condition; That he, who
is the Father of Mercies, would be gracious to them, and send them help and
comfort, and make his face to shine upon them. It is the Apostle's exhortation
( Ephesians. 6.18.) that we should make supplication for all Saints; and especially
then should we make supplication for all such as shall at any time be in
distress. And according to our ability we are to communicate to, and relieve
all the distressed Members of the Church at all times, especially of
Persecution, and when their needs call the most of all for our help, and it is
in our power to succor and help them. This is abundantly showed in the new
Testament; and those that do so, shall be highly rewarded, as I have showed
before. And we may see that good Obadiah took an hundred of the Lord's
Prophets, and fed them by fifty in a cave, where he had hid them, that Jezebel
might not put them to death, when she sought the Life of the true Servants of
God and persecuted them; 1 Kings 18.13. And hereby are we taught to do all such
like pious acts to any of the Members of Christ's Church, and of the true
Servants of God; and let us not be wanting herein, whenever we shall see any
such opportunities of doing good to any distressed Members of the Church of
God. Let us have our hearts bent toward the Christian Jerusalem and the
Protestant Church among us, and do all the pious acts for it that we can; and
then we may hope that the blessing of God will come upon us, and that we shall
be well rewarded for so doing: Then we may call upon God with good Nehemiah,
5.19, and say as he does; Think upon me, my God, for good, according to all
that I have done for this people; and then we may confidently expect that he
will hear our voice, and grant our desires, and abundantly recompense all that
we shall have done herein.

FINIS.

