New Rome Arraigned, And out of her own Mouth CONDEMNED. CONTAINING A Farther
Discovery of the Dangerous Errors, and Pernicious Principles of the LEADERS and
TEACHERS OF THE Foxonian Quakers: Which tend to Overthrow the Christian Faith,
to Obstruct the Jews Conversion, to Encourage Mahumetism, and to Pervert the
Right Way of the Lord; which whether so or no, deserves the Examination and
Consideration of the Christian Ministry of all Protestant Churches, as they
tender God's Glory, and the Good of Souls.

To which is added, Ten ARTICLES of the Christian Faith, wrote by Geo. Keith,
who was Persecuted by the Quakers in Pensilvania for his Christian Testimony.

The Second Edition, with some Alteration and Additions, by Francis Bugg.

Babylon is fallen, is fallen, and is become the Habitation of Devils, and the
Hold of every foul Spirit, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird.

Reward her even as she has rewarded you, and double unto her double according
to her works: In the Cup which she has filled fill to her double.

Rejoice over her, thou Heaven, and ye Holy Apostles and Prophets, [and
Christian Ministers] for God has avenged you on her, Rev. 18. 2. 6. 20.

Licensed, June 18th. 1694.

London: Reprinted for the Author, and are to be Sold by J. Gwillim,
Bookseller, in Bishops-gate-street. 1694.

The Preface to the Christian Reader.
Christian Reader,
There are two things put me upon this Preface: First, Geo. Whitehead and his
Abettors's Inveterate Malice, calling me and others Old cankered Apostates,
Vile Apostates, Self-condemned Apostates, Unruly Beasts, Betraying Judasses,
Wolves, Dogs, Enemies of all Righteousness, Children of the Devil, Devils
Incarnate, Heathens, Atheists, etc. Indeed their Books are so very Malicious
and Defamatory, as well as their private Whisperings and Backbitings, that some
even of themselves have been constrained to give me under their Hands a
Testimony in Writing against the unchristian Treatment which I have met withal;
namely, T. Bird, J. Ellington, J. Mason, W. Belsham, and above Twenty more
Quakers belonging to Mildenhall-Meeting: And yet not worse Language than they
have given the Public Ministry; as Witches, Devils, Gormandizing Priests, etc.
as anon will appear. And whoever discovers their Errors, and displays them in
their proper Colors, must expect to meet with something of this kind: And that
being foreseen, have doubtless been taken for a tolerable Excuse by abler Pens
from stooping to such an Undertaking as this: And thereupon I may the more
rationally expect the more favorable Censure for what might have been done
better by the Learned; it is enough to me to be thought worthy in this great
Work (of discovering the greatest Heresy that ever sprang up in our Age) to be
as the Carpenter's Man, whose Work is to hew off the rough and knotty pieces of
the Timber, to make it more ready for better Workmen.

To be Contentious I grant is an Offense the Scriptures condemn with no little
keenness, whilst it exhorts to contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered
to the Saints. From whence I conceive, that though I contend against Quakerism
with some Symptoms of Zeal, I am not therefore Contentious; nor though I may
retract, yea, write against some Errors I formerly held, and upon Conviction
have forsaken: I am not therefore a Self-condemned Apostate, as G. W. dreams.
If you think me too smart in some passages against Persons, it is against their
Leaders; if against their Opinions, I have from their own Books proved them
Erroneous and Blasphemous, which ought to be reproved sharply: And that their
Opinions are so, I have never refused to make Proof of to their faces, on
Condition when proved they would engage a Retractation; nay, sometimes without
any such Engagement. See Quakerism Anatomized, p. 2. I cannot call Gall and
Poison by sweet and lovely Names, I must alter my Style according to the Matter
and Occasion, or else all will be out of Tune, and no more Harmony than Harp
and Harrow. Bishop Jewel, and other Reformers, they wrote smartly against the
Papists, and most exquisitely displayed their Errors; and yet they protested
they were in Charity, and desired nothing more than that they would have
hearkened to them, and forsaken their Errors. And I do say, nothing would
please me better, than to see this People Condemn what is Erroneous amongst
them, and persevere in the Truth, and the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ,
True God, and Perfect Man in One Person.

Object. But if any Object in favor of them, That though they do not Preach
Christ without (unless since G. K. came over) as he is in Heaven above, nor
believe him to be distinct from his Saints; nor Pray in the Name of Jesus to
God the Father, thereby owning him in his Mediator-ship; nor make Confession of
Sin to God in Prayer, nor beg Pardon for the same: But look at Christ within,
the Light within, his Crucifixion within, his Intercession within; nor a Bible
to be seen in their Meetings, for they are above such Carnal things. Yet they
have among them many good Exhortations, and they own Christ to be the Word of
God, the Power of God, the Wisdom of God; will not this do? Supposing they mean
all to be within, yea, Heaven and Hell, all within, etc.

Answ. The Mahumetans hold Abraham to be the Friend of God, and Moses the
Messenger of God, and Christ the Breath of God. -- And they Punish such as
speak against Christ, whose Religion was not (say they) taken away, but mended
by Mahomet. Heylin's Cosmog. lib. 3. p. 104. And our Savior is called in their
Alchoran, The Word, the Power, the Soul, and Strength of God, etc. The Lives of
the Patriarchs, Printed 1694. See the Word Alchoran.

Insomuch that if the Quakers do not come to this Result, to own the same
Jesus, that was born of the Virgin, smote with Palms of their Hands, Crucified,
Dead, Buried, Rose again, and in the sight of the Galileans ascended into
Heaven, and publicly Condemn their Books, which Teach the contrary, they
cannot deserve the Name Christian, etc.

I am not unsensible what little Arts they have used to blast my Reputation,
that thereby they may obstruct the Service of my Books, but their Expectation
has failed them. Then they Indicted me in London for Printing without License,
yet they do the same. But they say, I put up a Mock-Pillory; I grant I did, and
that to show what they actually deserved upon their own Proposals to Authority.
Did not they erect the Form and Figure of a Child's Penny horning Battle-door
for the Bishops, Clergy, and Gentry to Learn the English of Tu and Vos? Signed
by G. Fox, a Shoemaker, etc. Was not this as great an Affront to them as mine
could be to the Twelve Quakers? See Quakerism Withering, etc. p. 61. But how
did they bestir themselves to Persecute me? How did they run up and down to
great Persons, both on Foot, and by Coach, and all to Suppress me? And had they
had a Jury of Quakers, I had been Cast, but the Jury brought in the Bill
Ignoramus, etc. to the great Satisfaction of the Honorable Court. Thus did
they begin here, as the Quakers did in Pensilyania, who Persecuted G. Keith and
his Friends for their Christian Testimony, notwithstanding their Pretenses that
the Lord has laid it upon them not to go to Law, nor avenge themselves, and
that the disposition of their Nature is not to seck Revenge; for (say they)
such as do are in the Fall, etc. See an Account from the Children of Light, p.
19. And Smith's Primmer, p. 79. Yet these Pretenses are like the rest of their
Sophistry, for had they Power, few should exceed them in Persecution and
Cruelty. For methinks I hear them say, Come, let us say, He is a Pestilent
Fellow, a mover of Sedition, we must use all the Arts we have to stop him; for
he seems to follow the steps of M. Luther, that Apostate Adversary of our dear
Elder Sister. And if he goes on, he will so unvail us, that all People will
know us and our Intrigues: Come, let us bespatter him, and cover him with some
frightful Beast's Skin, and then set our little Curs to bait and worry him, to
abuse and bespatter him in City and Country, etc. This I have found true, which
leads me to the Second thing proposed, etc.

2. A Charitable Essay, etc. p. 7. And now F. B. concerning thy Proposal: -- We
reject thy Challenge, nor that the Number intended on thy side are of the
ablest Priests and Professors, nor do thou produce any Deputation from the
Church-Bishops or Clergy of England. Again, Innocence Triumph. etc. p. 35. If
Fr. Bugg have Letters by him from Ministers, why do they not appear? As to Is.
Archer's Approbation, F. B. cites only an Abridgment, why did he not cite the
whole? Was he so tied up to brevity, that he allowed his Teacher no more room?
-- That Dev. of the Chapter of England, who gave his Approbation of F. B's. Book,
what is his Name? Why does he not appear? And if F. B. has Letters by him of
the same Import, what are their Names? And why do they not appear? Again, G.
W's. Letters to Mr. Smithies and Mr. Archer, If you do not stop F. B. from
Writing, the Cry will be louder, and ascend higher than your selves, etc. As if
he were resolved to Summon them before Squire Pen, late Deputy Governor of
Pensilvania, for he is the highest Quaker, and yet he is not so high (now at
least) but by some Clergymen may be balanced; and what if I say, over balance
him? Will G. W. Indict me for so saying? Well, to the Matter, though I do not
love to expose Persons Names, yet since G. W. thus daringly calls for their
Names, and to come forth; threatening others, that if they stop me not, the Cry
will be louder and higher: As if G. W. only may write, and that without
control, what he please, true or false. And F. B. must be stopped, and who dare
approve of his Books? If so, let them come forth, let us know their Names, and
who they are, etc. Poor Proud Man! I say, this considered, I shall allow Mr.
Archer room for his whole Approbation, and recite the substance of two or three
Letters from some other Clergymen, and the request of three others, besides an
Independent Preacher, that so he may see that both Conforming and Non
Conforming Ministers are not ashamed to appear in favor of what I write, nor
afraid of G. W. who Acts more like a Lord Chief Justice than an Humble Quaker.

Mr. Archer, Minister of Mildenhall in Suffolk, the Town where I dwell, his
Approbation, etc.

AS there is Joy in Heaven over a Sinner converted to God as to his Morals, so
when the Erroneous turn to the true God, as to his Intellectuals, Truth and
Goodness being his Infinite Attributes, the shadow of them (for in the Creature
they are no better) are equally pleasing to their Author. Hence I may show my
Joy, in that my Neighbor Bugg is returned from his Errors, (not as to his
Life, for he was sober ever since I knew him) but as to his Judgment; as a sign
of which he has labored to bring over his seduced Brethren, which, would they
read his Books, might be done; but I fear most of them are of the mind of one
of them that told me, Thou may out-argue me, but shall not persuade me.
However I do own the Substance of this Book i. e. The first Impression.
, as a Defense of those Eternal Truths by which I hope for Salvation, and which
are a Comfort to me in my Pilgrimage. Peace be to those that own them, and the
Lord open the Eyes of such as deny them.

Isaac Archer.


Come, G. W. I have found room to recite my Teacher, verbatim, but I want both
time and room to draw the exact Picture of G. W. who for audacious Insolency,
Pride, and Self-conceit; for Scorn, Contempt, and Envy; for Defaming, Glossing,
Perverting, and Subtilty; for denying what you know to be true, and affirming
what you know to be false: I say, to set forth your exact Picture in these and
other the like Crafty Jugglings and Legerdemain, to trace your Books, to rip
you up, and make a perfect Discovery of your two-fac'd Pretenses and Practices,
it would require a Volume. But I proceed.

A Letter from Dr. Burrel.

SIR, I heartily Congratulate your return to our Church, which doubtless is the
most Eminent for Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline amongst all the Reformed
Churches in the World; I cannot but highly commend your Pious Endeavors for
this End, of which I have received an Account from Mr. Gearing A London
Minister.
: I shall much rejoice in your Success herein -- In order to undeceive them
poor seduced People, having therein displayed many of the Intrigues of their
Leaders.

Your Real Friend, Nath. Burrel.


A Letter from another Divine.

AS nothing is more pleasing to the Eyes than Light, so nothing is more
grateful to the Understanding than the Discovery of Truth; in which respect you
have certainly done a most acceptable piece of Service to your Country, in
unvailing of the Falsehoods, Errors, and Hypocrisies of the Quakers, both
because the Knowledge of the Truth is delectable, and also because Men being
thereby fore warned of the dangers of their Hypocritical Insinuations and
Pretensions might else have drawn them into, may be enabled to avoid the
Mischiefs thereof, for which I think my self obliged to return you my Thanks, I
having received a particular Advantage by your Discoveries. But seeing by your
pains it plainly appears that you aim at the Advantage of Mankind, which is
both the Duty and Honor of all Men, I am thereby encouraged to beg the favor
of a little further Information.

John Milme.


Come, Imperious George, that you may see to your Grief, that the Public
Ministry, both Conforming and Non conforming, are not afraid of your Threats
and Menacings, to stand by me in what is right, (and further I desire no Man) I
may recite the Request of four of them, besides several Gentlemen, and others,
Inhabitants of Wymondham, to renew my Challengs to R. Ashby, one of your
Teachers, which was to prove, That the Quakers deny Jesus of Nazareth, the
Scriptures, Christ's Ordinances, undervalue his Sufferings, exalt your own,
etc. as at large in Quakerism Anatomized, p. 2. Which may fully Answer your
captious Demands in your Essay. p. 7. Viz.

June 4 th. 1694.
Whereas R. Ashby lately wrote to the Inhabitants of Wymondham to beware of Fr.
Bugg's Book, Quakerism Withering, and Christianity Reviving, etc. As containing
Lies, and false Representations, etc. Upon which some of us desired Francis
Bugg to appear in his own Vindication, which he readily consented to, and
renewed his Charge against the Doctrine and Principles of the Quakers, as in
the recited Book, Quakerism Withering, etc. And gave the said R. Ashby a
Challenge to meet him, and a Months time to prepare himself. But the Day being
come, and the said R. Ashby not appearing, as it is said on his behalf, by
Reason of Business at London. Nevertheless, to prevent all Excuses on the part
of the said R. Ashby, we have again requested Francis Bugg to renew his
Challenge, and to give him longer time to prepare himself; assuring him, That
as we shall stand by Fr. Bugg in what he maintains according to Scripture, so
shall we be against him where he asserts the contrary, or mis-cite and falsely
charge the Quakers.

Tho. Wright. William Haws. Rich. Clark. Robert Purt. Roger Gay. William Le
Neve. Lewis Hinton. Jacob Henery. John Henery. Peter Atdam. Richard Smith. And
many others.



And accordingly I renewed my Challenge, pursuant to my former Proposition,
offering to meet him at Wymondham the 18 th. of July, 1694. And sent him per
Post, etc.

And let none think it strange that the Quakers and their Principles are thus
Anatomised and set forth to Posterity: For those Histories that have derived to
us the Knowledge of those Errors and Heresies, which sprang up amongst the
Ancient Christians (as Tares amongst the Wheat) have not been accounted
superfluous, nor their Respect worn out in several Ages. How much the more
concerned should all true Christians be to have the knowledge of those, born in
our own Age, brought forth in our own Bowels? According to Christ's Prophecy,
Mat. 24. 24. For though G. Fox in his Journal, p. 27, 28. 30. 103. 170, 171. 173.
307. 350. 407. 503, 504. pretend to Miracles, as in the Third Table, under the
word Miracle thus, viz. Miracles wrought by the Power of God, (i. e.) She that
was ready to dye, raised up again; The Lame made whole, The Diseased restored,
John Jay's Neck brake, restored, etc. And many other pretended Miracles; yet
not one of them said to be done in the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, as in Acts 3.
6. In the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk: Which is a strong
Argument of their disowning Jesus of Nazareth, and of their confirming their
New Religion in Opposition to that of Christ's. But I have not room to show the
Tendency of those Blasphemous Pretenses of that Impostor G. Fox, which probably
hereafter I may: In the mean while I am,

June 25. 1694. Thy Sincere Friend, FRANCIS BUGG.

The CONTENTS of this Book.
THE Quakers and Papists pretended Miracles Page 2 G. Fox when living in a
Glorified State 4 G. Fox the Quakers Star-branch, etc. confirmed 5, 6. 16 A
Treble Observation on a Triple Quaker 9 Geo Keith's Ten Articles of Faith 14
They value and prefer their Books before the Scriptures 11, 12 The Quakers
Sufferings greater than the Suferings of Christ 9 The Quakers fly from their
Word 21. 23 They say, the Name Jesus belongs to every Member of the Body ( i.
e. every Believer) as well as to Christ the Head 8. 28 Dangerous Consequences
of the Quakers Doctrine 31 A Sign to prove the Quakers Sincerity p. 36 A
Conference between F. B. and S. Cater 39 A Cage of Unclean and Hateful Birds 50
The Prophesies of the Prophets fulfilled 55 A Discovery of the World's Teachers
47 G. Fox his Epistle or Liturgy sent to be read in Churches 43 Tho. Bilney the
Martyr, his Christian Doctrine 59 The Quakers read not Scripture, but their own
Epistles 41 Geo. Keith charges them to hold Dangerous Errors 38 Queries
propounded to the Quakers 65 The Conclusion 68 To which is added the Challenge
to R. Ashby.
Books Written by Francis Bugg.
I. DE Christianae Liberate, or Christian Liberty, etc. II. The Painted Harlot
both stripped and whipped. III. Reason against Railing, or Truth against Falsehood.
IV. Innocence Vindicated, and Envy Rebuked. V. The Quakers detected, and their
Errors confuted, etc. VI. Battering Rams against New Rome, etc. VII. One Blow
more at New Rome, etc. VIII. New Rome Unmasked, and her Foundation shaken. IX.
New Rome Arraigned, and out of her own Mouth Condemned. X. Quakerism Withering,
and Christianity Reviving. XI. Quakerism Anatomized, or a Challenge to Richard
Ashby. XII. New Rome Arraigned, etc. The Second Edition. Besides a Printed
Letter to the Quakers, and a Sheet to the Parliament.
An APOLOGITICAL INTRODUCTION.
Courteous Reader,
THERE is scarce any Sect of People, how erroneous soever they be, but they
have some Advocates, and such too as oftentimes may give just occasion for an
Apology for writing against their Errors; and more especially when they make
such fair Pretenses to the Christian Religion, as the Quakers of late have
done, in diverse of their Books, particularly that entitled, The Harmony of the
Old and New Testament; wherein the Author prefixeth a twofold Preface, the one
to the Christians, the other to the Jews, premising two things, 1st, To wipe
off such Aspersions as have been cast upon them, as denying Jesus of Nazareth,
and the Divine Authority of the Scriptures. Now, how far their Book will answer
this End, unless they make an Ingenuous Retractation of their Errors, this
Treatise may show. 2dly, I have not (says this Author) transcribed the whole of
all those Verses, which sometimes is cited, but only so much as I conceive does
more immediately relate to, etc. Very well: If then he contract the Scripture,
and take what he conceives necessary to the Point in hand, I hope I shall have
the same Liberty, and not liable to Censure for the same thing; a Fault the
Quakers are too much guilty of. And because I would be as concise as may be, I
shall recite their Books, which are generally of two sorts, of two Stamps, and
carry two contrary Faces, contrary Doctrines, contrary Principles, etc. in two
Columns, that as in a Glass their Hearers, if they will but read, may behold
the depth of Hypocrisy, which lie couched in their Leaders: Doctrines not only
liable to deceive them, but the whole World, who take them to mean as they say;
which makes me believe them to be the very Deceivers Christ foretold of Matt.
24 24. for though they come forth pretending to convert the Jews, by their
Proofs that Jesus of Nazareth is the promised Messiah, yet when the Jews come
to know (as that they may by reading their Books, especially their Alcoran,
namely, George Fox's Journal) that they pretend to Miracles, to sinless
Perfection, to Infallibility of Judgment, and contempt of the Writings of Moses
and the Prophets, bringing their own Pamphlets in competition therewith. This,
I say, will tend to harden them in their Infidelity; for ROME, their elder
Sister, pretends to Miracles, Perfection and Infallibility equal with them, if
not beyond them; for they seem to we with Jesus of Nazareth and his Disciples,
and G. Fox and his Disciples follow their Steps in a great measure, as the said
Journal and other of their Books will set forth. And though the Papists will
confess to the miraculous Conception and Birth of Jesus of Nazareth, yet, as
History says, St. Kentegernes's Mother begged of Jesus that she might imitate
his Virgin Mother in the Conception and Birth of a Child. Accordingly, in a
little time, she finds her self with Child, but often protested she never knew
Man A little like M. Fox, the Story you may possibly have hereafter more at
large.
. And soon after St. Kentegerne was feigned to be born. The Papists grant, That
Jesus fasted Forty days; it is said St. Patrick did the like; and St. Ardan is
said to have fasted Fifty days. They grant, that Jesus fed Five thousand
Persons with Five Loaves and Two small Fishes: St. Patrick is said to have fed
Fourteen thousand with one Cow, two Stags, and two wild Boars, and that the
next day the Cow was alive again. They grant, that Jesus turned Water into
Wine, but they pretend to turn Wine into Blood, and Bread into Flesh, after a
few words of Consecration. They grant, that Jesus, and his Disciples in his
Name, healed all manner of Diseases. It Is said, that St. David invited St.
Kined to come to his Synod; St. Kined excused himself, because he was crooked
and lame, whereupon St. David prays him straight and sound. They grant, that
Jesus, and his Disciples in his Name, cast out Devils: It Is said, that a Woman
was dispossessed of seven Devils at Lauretto, by calling on the Virgin Mary for
Help. They grant, that Jesus raised the Dead: It Is said St. Francis makes one
dye, and afterward raised him up, and restored him to Life again. I have read
the like of St. David, St. Patrick, St. Dennis, St. Benno, and others. And the
Quakers, in their Book styled A Reply to the Vindication, etc. say p. 14
Visible Miracles have been done amongst Us, in the sight of the World, etc. The
like Pretenses are in their Epistle styled This is only to go amongst Friends,
as anon will appear: See also G. Fox's Journal, p. 307. And had a large Meeting
at a Constable's House, on whom the Lord had wrought a great Miracle, etc. But
mark, Reader, here is not the Name of this Constable, nor the Town where he
dwelt, nor yet what Miracle it was, whether dispossessed of a Devil; lame, and
made to walk; dead, and raised again to life; deaf, and made to hear; blind,
and made to see; no, nothing that may induce us to believe it: Beside, it is
pretended to be wrought in 1666. and exposed to public view in Print 1694.
which shows it to be a fabulous Story, and can only tend to harden the Jews,
especially if they read the Quakers Golden Calf or Legend of Stories, viz. G.
Fox's Journal. And now I proceed to show the Quakers Books to be of two sorts,
insomuch, that it is hard to know what a Quaker is by his Writing; and yet
forsooth all their Writings are pretended to be wrote by the special Motion of
the Eternal Spirit, and are the Products of Infallibility; which is one main
Reason they cannot retract any Error, how gross and notorious soever.

The Perfect Quaker. The Counterfeit Quaker. David's Enemies discovered, p. 7.
And these (the Quakers) do not call the Letter the Rule, nor Matthew, Mark,
Luke, and John the New Testament and Gospel, as thou ( i. e. Priests) and thy
Generation do, etc. G. Whitehead, C. Atkinson. The Harmony of the Old and New
Testimony, and the fulfilling of the Prophecies of the Prophets, etc.

OBSERVATION.

Reader observe, that though I grant in the Holy Scriptures there was and is
great Harmony, as in the first Impression hereof, printed the Year before
theirs, I have more largely made appear; yet in the Quakers Doctrine there
appears nothing but Discord and Confusion; for G. Whitehead and his Brother
Atkinson they cannot call the Letter the Rule, nor Matthew, Mark, Luke, and
John the Gospel nor New Testament; yet J. Tomkins and W. Penn they can, as
above; which show they can appear with two Faces, viz. G. W. etc. cannot call
it the New Testament, yet to wipe off the Aspertions that have come upon them
by reason of G. W's, etc. Doctrine, J. Tomkins and W. Penn can. Thus, as G. W.
says, they see cause otherwise to word their Matter.

The Perfect Quaker. The Counterfeit Quaker. Dear George Fox, whose Being and
Habitation is in the power of the Highest, in which thou rules and governs in
Righteousness, and thy Kingdom is established in Peace, and the Increase
thereof is without end. Josiah Coal from Barbados, and justified by the
Quakers in their Book Judas and the Jews, etc. p. 44. The Harmony, etc. p. 97.
Jesus shall be great, and called the Son of the Highest; and the Lord shall
give unto him the Throne of his Father David, and he shall reign over the House
of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end. Read Isa. 9.

OBSERVATION.

How is it possible that the Jews should be converted to the Christian Faith by
the Quaker's Doctrine, who attribute that to Geo. Fox, which is only due to
Christ, but rather harden them in their Infidelity, through their Blasphemy.

The Perfect Quaker. The Holy Scriptures. The Examination and Trial of Geo.
Fox, at Lancaster Assize, etc. p. 21 And before I came to the Bar I was moved
to pray, that the Lord would confound their Wickedness and Envy: The thundering
voice answered, I have glorified thee, and will glorify thee again. And I was
so filled full of Glory, that my Head and Ears was so filled full of it, that
when the Trumpets sounded, and the Judges came up again, they appeared as dead
Men under me, Geo. Fox. John 12. 28, 29. Father, glorify thy Name: Then came
there a Voice from Heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify
it again. And the people that stood by heard it, and said it thundered: others
said an Angel spoke to him.

OBSERVATION.

Reader, here is G. Fox's manifest Blasphemy, in assuming a glorified state,
whilst in the mortal body: but this the Quakers have left out of his Reprinted
Journal, p. 290. but in p. 17. G. F. thus says of himself: Now I was come up in
the Spirit, through the flaming Sword into the Paradise of God; -- I knew
nothing but Pureness, Innocence, and Righteousness, etc. And the Power of God
thundered amongst them, and they did fly like Chaff before it. -- At last they
asked me, whether I was sanctified; I answered, Yes; for I was in the Paradise
of God, etc. Thus did he magnify himself Equal with, or Above Christ, who said
to the Thief on the Cross, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.
43. Shall signifies the future tense, but I am is in the present tense. Oh
horrible! surely when the Jews come to see the Quakers Golden Calf, viz. G. F's
Journal, they will not know, if they give equal Credit to that with St. Luke's
History, who is the Messiah, G. Fox or Jesus of Nazareth, the Turkish Alcoran
being not more blasphemous.

The Perfect Quaker. The Counterfeit Quaker. News coming up out of the North,
Title Page, etc.Written from the Mouth of the Lord, from one who is naked, and
stands naked before the Lord, clothed with Righteousness, whose Name is not
known in the World, Risen up out of the North, which was prophesied of, but now
it is fulfilled, etc. Several Petitions answered, etc. p. 60. My Name is
covered from the World, and the World knows not me nor my Name, G. Fox. The
Harmony, etc. p. 111. For Moses truly said, A Prophet shall the Lord your God
raise up unto you of your Brethren like unto me; him shall you hear in all
things. John 1. 10. He (i. e. Christ) was in the World, and the World was made
by him, and the World knew him not, etc.

OBSERVATION.

Thus, Reader, did G. Fox vye with Christ; and Edw. Burroughes and Fr. Howgill,
two of his Prophets, ecchoed back, saying in their Epistle entitled, This is
only to go amongst Friends, p. 19. viz. Thou, O North of England, who art
counted as desolate and barren, and reckoned the least of the Nations Aluding
to Bethlehem, read Micah 5. 2. Matt. 2. 5, 6.
, yet out of thee did the Branch (i. e. G. Fox) spring and the Star arise; --
out of thee did Kings, Priests, and Prophets come forth, which uttered their
Voices as Thunder, and laid their Swords on the Necks of their Enemies. P. 7.
Spare none, neither Ox nor Ass, neither Old nor Young; kill, cut off, destroy,
bath your Swords in the Blood of Amalek, and all the Egyptians and Philistines
Which by Interpretation was all that professed Jesus of Nazareth, and that
called the Scriptures the Word of God, etc.
, and all the Uncircumcised, and hew Agag to pieces; break the Rocks, cut down
the Cedars and strong Oaks, make the Devils subject, cast out the unclean
Spirits, raise the Dead, shut up in Prison, bring out of Prison, cast in your
Nets, launch into the Deeps, divide the Fish gather the Good into Vessels, cast
the Bad away; bind the Tares in Bundles, cast them into the Fire Here is not
only great Miracles pretended, but the Work of the Angels.
. P. 19. The planting of the Lord you are, and his own purchased Possession he
has separated you from the Womb, and has called you out of Kindreds, and ye
are the Royal Seed of the Offspring of the Lord Almighty, and all Nations shall
call you blessed Here is excellent words for themselves, yea, compared to the
Virgin Mary, Luke 1. 28, 48.
, our Enemies are whole Nations, that will not come under our Law, stand upon
your Feet, and appear in your Terror, as an Army with Banners, and let the
Nations know your Power, and the Stroke of your Hand; cut down on your right
Hand, and slay on the left, and let not your Eye pity, nor your Hand spare
Quer. Why then should you be pitied or spared?
, but wound the Lofty, and tread under Foot the Honorable of the Earth Meaning
both Gentry and Clergy, and Church of England.
, and give unto the Great Whore double, and give her no Rest day nor night, but
as she has done, so do unto her, and give her double into her Bosom Quer. Why
may not the little Whore have the Dregs of the like Cup?
, as she has loved Blood, so give her Blood to drink; and dash her Children
against the Stones; and let none of the Heathen Nations, nor their gods, escape
out of your Hands, your Captains are mighty Men, and your Leaders are skilled
to handle the Sword They understand the Plural Number.
and make War in Righteousness against the Beast and the false Prophets: and
cursed be every one that rises not up to the help of the Lord against the
Mighty: the Beast is mighty, and the false Prophet is great, and they keep the
Nations under their Power: but, Oh thou Beast and thou false Prophet, you shall
be tormented together; thou Beast, upon whom the False Prophet sits, whom thou
upholdest by thy Law, and defendest by thy unrighteous power These were the
Usurpers G. W. mentioned, who defended the Chapter of Engl. against the Venom of
Quakerism.
; thy Power is limited, and it shall be taken from thee; and thou shall be
overcome, and the Lamb shall get the Victory, and into the Pit and Lake of Fire
shall you be turned to have your resting place: and thou False Prophet, which
have deceived the Nations, -- thy Judgment is past upon thy Head already, and
the Decree of our God is sealed against thee: thy Smoke shall ascend for ever
and ever Come G. W. do you think the False Prophets, as you count the Clergy,
will help you? no, you may call and cry, weep and wall, but there is no
Advocate among them for you, until you condemn these your impudent Prophecies.
, and of thy Sin there is no Remission, over you we shall for ever rejoice and
sing If so, why do you call and cry to them to stop me from discovering your
Abominable Errors, and showing your Villainies.
, and over your God and your King the Dragon, that old Serpent; cursed be he
and his Memorial for ever.

Reader, pray dwell here a little, and consider first what George Fox says of
himself under the Perfect Quaker, and how amply this Epistle, which was to go
only amongst themselves, confirmed what he said, and compared the North of
England to the Town of Bethlehem, and G. Fox to the Branch, the Star, the Son
of Righteousness; and what Miracles and Prophecies, and Curses this Epistle is
filled with, which bears the figure of your private Sermons, by which they
scared and frighted me and many more from the Public: And now they have
obtained their End, and made Rents and Division in Church and State, in Towns
and Families; now they begin to threaten all that oppose them, as if none must
write but themselves; but their Horns are short, they can only hiss, grin and
bark: Canes timidi vehementer latrant.

The Perfect Quaker. Jesus of Nazareth. The Watch, etc. p. 37. But to the end
of all Disputes and Arguments, I am come; for before they was I am;said Jam.
Parnel. John 8. 5, 8. Verily, verily, before Abraham was, I am.

OBSERVATION.

Reader, this most horrid Blasphemy need no Remark, it is so obvious: It Is like
G. Fox's Saying, That he was before Languages or Confusions were: Yet Whitehead
pretends he has not plain Proof: he still calls for Proof, though confuted from
plain Matter of Fact. I know not his Fellow for Confidence; but I proceed.

The Perfect Quaker.
A Question to Professors, etc. p. 33. Now the Scriptures do expressly
distinguish between Christ and the Garment which he wore; between him that
came, and the Body in which he came; there was plainly he, and the Body in
which he came; there was the outward Uessel and the Inward Life. This we
certainly know, and can never call the Bodily Garment Christ, but that which
appeared and dwelt in the Body. P. 20. To whom do the Names and Titles of Jesus
and Christ chiefly and in the first place belong? Do they belong to the Body
which was took by him, or to him who took the Body? P. 27. Is not the
Substance, the Light, the Life called Christ wherever it is found? Does not
the Name ( Christ) belong to the whole Body, and every Member in the Body, as
well as to the Head? Will. Bayly's Works, in Quarto, p. 306, 307, 308. For they
(his Disciples) loved his Person for the sake of the Frame and Quality of the
Spirit that dwelt in him; or else what was his Person to them (being mean and
contemptible) more than another Person? But for that which dwelt in him they
loved him: Let none mistake, I do not slight it, nor the Person of any of his
Brethren or Children, as they are prepared to do the Will of their Father. The
Sword of the Lord drawn, etc. p. 5. Your Imagined God, beyond the Stars, is
utterly denied and testified against by the Light. And whereas you say in the
8th, That this Christ, the Man of God, is God and Man in one Person, it is a
Lie, etc. G. Fox's Mystery, etc. p. 206, 207, 250, 254. If Christ that is
crucified be not within, and that Christ that is risen be not within, I say that
you are all Reprobates. -- Now, I say, if there be any other Christ than he
that is crucified within, he is a False Christ: and he that has not this Christ
that was risen and crucified within, is a Reprobate: Though Devils and
Reprobates make a talk of him without, God's Christ is not distinct from his
Saints, nor his Body (the Church) for he is within them, not distinct from
their Spirit: And thou say thou art saved by Christ without thee, and so
have recorded thy self to be a Reprobate: And they that profess Christ without
them, and another Christ within them, here is two Christ's. E. Burrough's Works,
etc. p. 149. Query, Is that very Man, with that very Body, within you, yea or
nay? E. B's Answ. The very Christ of God is within us, we dare not deny him. W.
Smith's Primmer, etc. p. 8. Que. How may I know when Christ is truly preached?
W. Smith's Answ. They that are false (Ministers) preach Christ without, and bid
People believe in him as he is in Heaven above; but they that are Christ's
Ministers preach Christ within. The Christian Quaker and his Div. Test. par. 1.
p. 97, 98. The Serpent is a Spirit; now nothing can bruise the Head of the
Serpent, but something which is spiritual, as the Serpent is: But if that Body
of Christ were the Seed, then could he not bruise the Serpents Head in all,
because the Body of Christ is not so much as in any one; and consequently the
Seed of the Promise is an holy Principle of Light and Life, that being received
into the Heart, bruiseth the Serpents Head: and because the Seed, which cannot
be that Body Thus, Reader, you see Christ denied, which confirm all their
foregoing Doctrine, by which they deny Jesus of Nazareth to be the Christ of
God; for, say they, the Seed, which cannot be that Body, is Christ.
, is Christ, as testify the Scriptures: the Seed is one, and that Seed is
Christ. The Sandy Foundation, etc. p. 21. The Justice offended being Infinite,
his Satisfaction ought to bear a proportion therewith, which Jesus Christ as
Man could never pay, he being Finite Christ's Sufferings and Satisfaction
undervalued and made of no effect, if he was Finite, as W. P. says.
; and from a finite Cause could never proceed an infinite Effect, for so Man
may be said to bring forth God, since nothing below the Divinity it self can
rightly be styled infinite. E. B's Works, etc. p. 273. And this is to go abroad
into the Nation, and into the World, -- the Sufferings of the People of God
(called Quakers) in this Age is greater Sufferings, and more unjust than in the
days of Christ, or of the Apostles, or in any times since. The Counterfeit
Quaker.
The Harmony, etc. p. 11. For unto you is born this day in the City of David a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Innoc. Triumphant Introd. We sincerely own,
profess, and confess Jesus to be the Christ. The Harmony, etc. p. 45. Jesus in
his Agony did sweat as it were great drops of Blood, etc. smote on the Head,
spitted on his Face, crucified between two Malefactors. Observation. If the
Counterfeit Quaker were sincere in this his Confession, and as a Testimony
thereof, would retract his Errors, I should be glad: but whilst G. W. says in
his Count. Conv. etc. p. 72. I may see cause otherwise to word the matter, and
yet our Intentions be the same. And The Harmony, etc. considering these
Imputations ( viz, of denying Christ, undervaluing his Death and Sufferings,
contempt of Scripture, etc.) if by any means this may help to clear up Truth,
and wipe off those Aspersions cast upon it. It will not do, they begin at the
wrong end: it is not appearing in Sheeps Clothing only that will now do; G. W's
Paint will not serve, nor all his cunning Glosses; for as Irenaeus, in his
third Book against Heretics very well says, viz. Whilst Heretics speak like
the Faithful, they not only mean otherwise than they say, but clean contrary;
and by their Tenets full of Blasphemy they destroy the Souls of those who with
their fair words suck in the Poison of their foul Opinions. And as St. Paul
says, No marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light:
therefore it is no great thing if his Ministers also be transformed, as the
Ministers of Righteousness, whose end shall be according to their work, etc. 2
Cor. 11. 14. And that it may appear G. W. etc. transform themselves into every
shape, behold their Books, see how they contradict each other, yet they will
justify or excuse all, condemn none. I have not taken a Passage or two only,
but I have traced them in their most approved Authors. You see they call him
that was born of the Virgin a Vessel, a Garment, and say, they can never call
him Christ, and that the Name Jesus and Christ belong to every Member in the
Body as well as to Christ the Head; That his Disciples loved his Person for the
sake of the Spirit which dwelt in him, or else what was his Person to them,
more than another Person? O horrible Contempt! yea, such as preach Christ
without, and bid People believe in him, as he is in Heaven above, are false
Ministers, Devils, and Reprobates, which make a talk of Christ without. God's
Christ is not distinct from the Saints, says G. F. yea, the same Christ that
was crucified and rose again, is within them, and not distinct from them. G.
Fox and W. Penn say, the Seed the Light is Christ, which cannot be that Body,
because not in any Man. In short, they have acquitted the Jews and discharged
Judas, and freed Pontius Pilate of the horrible Crime of putting to death the
Lord of Life and Glory what they can; for as he was God he could not dye,
neither could they spit upon him, scourge him, hang him on a Tree: but him that
they call a Vessel, a Garment, a Man, a Person, him they slew and hanged on a
Tree. Acts 2. 36. Know assuredly, that the same Jesus whom ye crucified and
hanged on a tree, has God made both Lord and Christ. Then not finite, but a
sufficient satisfactory Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole World. Thus have
you made the Apostles false Witnesses, who have charged the Jews with slaying
the Lord of Life and Glory. As to the Sufferings of Christ, the Question still
remains unanswered: I know you now see cause to say his Sufferings were
grievous Sufferings, sweating drops of Blood, yea, great Sufferings. Thus far
G. W. is got; but George, you know there is degrees of Greatness, there is
magnus, major, maximus, great, greater, and greatest of all. Now, the great
Query is, Whether was the Sufferings of Christ or the Sufferings of the Quakers
greatest? Ed. Buroughs says, the Sufferings of the Quakers was greatest: And
G. W. has not yet said the Sufferings of Christ was greatest; no other word
will do; I still pursue the Terms of my Query, and wait to have it answered,
but I find G. W. pinched, and in a great strait, and knows not which way to
wind him: Condemn Ed. Burroughs's Expression as a Lie, that he cannot do for a
World; for he was by G. W. counted a Prophet, a Son of Thunder, one in whom was
the Almighty Power of God; Can such a man lie? Can he err? No, they cannot give
Evidence against themselves, so not fit to be of a Jury, not fit for any place
of Trust in Government, not fit to have yea and nay pass for an Oath. If so,
then if the Jury be most Quakers, they will never give it against themselves: they
are not impartial, they cannot be impartial, they are the greatest respecters
of Persons this day on Earth. E. B. has said, The Sufferings of the Quakers is
greater than the Sufferings of Christ and his Apostles: which is horrid
blasphemous, yea, they thereby undervalue the Sufferings of the Lord of Glory,
and exalt their own as greater Sufferings: This they cannot deny, nor this they
cannot condemn; see the Fruit of Infallibility: having once spoken, whether
true or false, a Lie or a true Story, both must be infallible, they cannot
retract, they cannot confess their Sins to God, how then should they retract,
and acknowledge their Errors? No, not for a World: then down goes
Infallibility, the principal Studd of their new kind of Popery.

The Perfect Quaker, in favor of their own Books.
An Epistle from their Yearly Meeting, 1675. It is our Sense, Advice,
Admonition, and Judgment, in the Fear of God, and the Authority of his Power
and Spirit, that no such slight and contemptible Names and Expressions as that
faithful Friend's Papers, which we testify have been given out by the Power
and Spirit of God, are Men's Edicts or Canons, with such scornful Sayings, be
permitted. Subscribed by W. Penn, G. Whitehead, and others. Several Petitions
answered, etc. p. 30. If ever you own the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles,
you will own our Writings, which are given forth by the same Spirit and Power.
Truths Defense, etc. p. 2, 104. You might as well have condemned the Scriptures
to the Fire, as our Papers and Queries, -- for our giving forth Papers, or
printed Books, it is from the Immediate and Eternal Spirit of God. Several
Papers given out for the spreading of Truth, etc. p. 60, 61, 62. Friends, to
you all this is the Word of the Lord, this is the Word of God. G. Whitehead's
Serious Apology, etc. p. 49. That which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in
any, is of as great Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and greater,
etc.

Renewed Advice to the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, etc. Anno 1693. Dear
Friends, it is advised, that you be careful in spreading all such Books writ in
defense, and for the Service of Truth. -- Record this Epistle in your Quarterly
Book, and sometimes read it for remembrance and notice. B. B.

The Perfect Quaker's Perfect Contempt of Scripture.
Readiness Errand, etc. p. 7. The Letter of the Scripture is carnal, and the
Letter is Death, and kills; and all that do study to raise a living thing out
of a dead, to raise the Spirit out of the Letter, are Conjurers, and their
Teaching is from Conjuration, which is not spoken from the Mouth of the Lord. A
brief Discovery, etc. p. 7. The Priests of the World are Conjurers, raising
dead Doctrines, dead Reasons dead Uses, dead Motives, out of the Letter, which
is Death, raising Death out of Death; Notable Conjurers! P. 8. The Commission
of Baal's Priests came from Oxford and Cambridge, -- the same poisonous
Fountain is filthy, the Streams are no better. Simon Magus would have purchased
the Holy Ghost with Money, -- even the Sir Simons of our Age run to Oxford and
Cambridge, -- Babylon's Merchants, selling beastly Wares, -- the Letter, which
is Dust and Death: really they are Bloodhounds, still hunting and gaping after
their Prey, like the Mouth of Hell. Ja. Naylor's Answ. to the Jews, p. 4, 22,
25. It Is Blasphemy for any to say the Letter is the Word of God; it is the
Devil which contends for the Letter to be the Word of God. The Quaker's Refuge
fixed, etc. p. 17. Whether the first Penman of the Scripture was Moses or
Hermes; or whether both these two, or not one; or whether there are not many
words contained in the Scriptures, which were not spoken by Inspiration of the
Holy Spirit; whether some words were not spoken by the Grand Impostor, some by
Wicked Men, some by Wise Men ill applied, some by Good Men ill expressed, some
by False Prophets, and yet true; some by True Prophets, and yet false, etc.
News coming up, etc. p. 14. Their Gospel is Dust, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and
John, which is the Letter. The Counterfeit Quaker facing round about.
Quaker's Vindication, p. 4. We confess, that the Holy Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament are of Divine Authority, as being given by Divine Inspiration
of God, etc. Count. Conv. etc. p. 26. That we prefer the Holy Scriptures before
all the Books extant in the World. A treble Observation upon a triple Quaker.
Courteous Readers, whether Christians or Jews, what think you? Is the
Counterfeit Quaker sincere? Do you believe that he means what he says, namely,
that the Scripturesare of Divine Authority, and that he prefers them before all
the Books extant in the World? If so, you may believe Transubstantiation. Can
you think, I say, that he believes the Scripture is of Divine Authority, when
he tells you, that Matthew, Mark, Luke and John is Dust and Serpents-mear, and
that the Scripture is Beastly Ware; that it is Conjuration to preach out of
them; that it is questionable, whether Moses or Hermes was the first Penman of
Sacred Writ, or whether either or neither; and that what was spoke by good and
wise Men, was ill applied and ill expressed; and what the true Prophets spoke
was false, and what the false Prophets spoke was true, etc? Answer me: for my
part I cannot; G. W. tells me, I was but a kind of a Quaker; and I think it is
the truest word in his Book; I think I was not above a third part of one, and
that too much too.

Secondly, Do you think he values and prefers the Scriptures before all Books
extant in the World? I think not, my Reasons are many: First, you hear he calls
the Scriptures Dust, Death, and Serpents-meat, Beastly Wares dangerous to read;
see Truths Defense, etc. p. 101. yea, so uncertain, that whether Moses or
Hermes be the first Penman of Holy Writ is a question. But as for what G. Fox,
etc. wrote, their Yearly Meeting testifies it was given forth by the Eternal
Spirit; yea, the same Men that charged their Disciples in the Name of the Lord
not to call their Papers Edicts or Canons, call the Scriptures Death, Dust, and
Serpents-meat; judge Reader which they prefer. Yea, G. W. avouches, that what
is spoke from the Spirit of Truth in any (much more in them) is of equal, nay,
of greater Authority than the Scriptures; judge, Reader, which they prefer.
They say it is Blasphemy to call the Scriptures the Word of God; and that it is
the Devil that so pleads: Yet they say of their own Epistles, This is the Word
of God; judge which they prefer. They say we may as well burn the Bible as
their Papers and Queries; judge which they prefer. Come G. W. what Gloss have
you in store? your Paint begins to vanish, and your Jugglings will not now do.
And as to you that are misled by your Teachers, I exhort you to read the
Scriptures, and pray to God to open the Mysteries of Salvation held forth in
them, that so you may come to have your Judgments rectified. Likewise read G.
K's Ten Articles, which came providentially to my Hand, which being sound and
orthodox; I have exposed them to public view for general Service, desiring
from my Heart that you may receive them in the same love they were writ and now
exposed; yet if you will not hear me, nor receive them, I of all Men may bear
with you, in that I once was as averse to Information as the most of you; but I
obtained Mercy, in that I did not wilfully persist against Conviction, etc.

Some of the Principles of G. Keith and his Friends.
1. That Bodily Sickness and Death came in by the Fall. 2. That Christ has now
in Heaven a Soul and a Body, that is not the Godhead, but the Temple of it, and
most gloriously united therewith. 3. That Christ's Body, that was crucified and
buried without us, rose again without us, and is now in Heaven without us. 4.
That the Man Christ Jesus will come again in that Body without us, to judge the
Quick and the Dead. 5. That there shall be a general day of Judgment, that all
the deceased Saints are in expectation of. 6. That we get not the Resurrection
of the Body, either in this mortal Life, or immediately after Death. 7. That
Faith in the Man Christ without us, as he died for us, rose again, and is gone
into Heaven, wrought in us by the Spirit of Christ, is universally necessary to
make Men true Christians, and Children of God, born of the Free Woman, who have
the Spirit of Adoption, crying Abba Father. 8. That Christ's Obedience and
Righteousness, which he performed in himself, without us, is imputed to us by
Faith, for the Remission of Sins. 9. That Christ is not only God's Elect, but
all that shall be saved from the beginning to the end of the World, are God's
Elect, being chosen in him (not only before they believe and repent, but)
before the Foundation of the World. 10. That all and every one of the Members
of the Church of Christ (who are at age, and can speak) ought to confess with
their Mouths, in the hearing of some of their Fellow Members, the Fundamental
Principles of their Christian Faith, before they can be owned to be Members of
the Church, that by the same, as well as by a Good Life and Conversation it may
be known who are qualified to be Members of our Church: which is Aboundary
Terms and Bond of our Union, the Spirit being the Principal: which may be
easily done by Answering to some plain Questions.

This is a Copy of G. Keith's, etc. sound and necessary Articles of the
Christian Faith, proposed to the Quakers, of whom I wish it may not be said,
Oh, how often would I have gathered you as a Hen gathers her Chickens, but you
would not? but now the things which belong to your Peace are hid from your
Eyes. I remember G. W. queried of me, Count. Conv. p. 15. Whether I, when a
Quaker, denied Jesus of Nazareth to be the Efficient Cause of Man's Salvation?
Answ. I do believe I then did not hold the worst part of Quakerism, as by my
Book de Chr. Lib. etc. (which he so often quotes to justify the Quakers from
what I now charge them with) may be seen, yet I do freely acknowledge, that I
was in great Errors, particularly touching the Point of Justification, for I
then expected Salvation through my Obedience to the Light which the Quakers
taught was sufficient to Salvation. But since it pleased God to open my Eyes, I
believe that Salvation it attained through the Mercy of God in Christ Jesus, by
Faith in the Merits of his Passion, and Obedience to his Precepts.

Again G. W. says, Count. Conv. p. 29. Not reading the Scriptures in our
Meetings; for Worship is no Proof that we have not a Spiritual Worship, nor
Evidence that we disbelieve the Doctrines contained in them. Answ. I do not
give it as the only Evidence, but as a Demonstration; yet if you did in good
earnest believe the Doctrines and Precepts of Christ in the Gospel to be
blessed and holy, as you pretend, you would read the Scripture, and prefer the
Bible before any other Book extant in the World; you would read the Scriptures
in your Meetings, if any Book at all: and if you recommend any Book to your
Friends beyond Sea, it would be the Scripture. But since you do neither, but
instead thereof read and recommend your own Epistles, and that, as you say, for
the spreading of Truth, this is a Demonstration that you do not believe the
Doctrine and Precepts of the Bible to be blessed and holy; and an infallible
Evidence, that you prefer your own Books, Papers, and Epistles before the
Scriptures, unless you be arrant Cheats indeed, to read and recommend that
which you know is worst, and hide and keep from them that which is best: which
I can hardly think.

And as impertinent as G. W. renders my Ten Reasons, I find him not able to
confute them.

As for his Pretense to Pray after the manner Christ taught his Disciples, I
deny it, for it you kept to the manner, though not to the form, you would not
be alone: But let the Reader observe all the Prayers of Steph. Crisp, R. Ashby,
W. Bingly, and others, printed at the end of their Sermons, nay, all your Books
extant in the World, and he will not find this passage, Forgive us our Sins, as
we forgive them that trespass against us: No, nor yet after that manner; for
though you must needs know that you are Sinners, as well as others, and have
transgressed the Laws of God in both Tables See the Cage, p. 50.
, yet you can neither make Confession of Sin to God, nor beg Pardon for
Christ's sake: which not only show, that you do not Pray after the Manner, but
that you do not pray in the Name of Christ to God the Father, as the Mediator
and Intercessor between GOD and Man: which is an infallible Proof, that as you
therein differ from the Faith and Practice of the Primitive Saints and Martyrs,
yea, all Protestant Churches to this day, so you do not believe the Doctrine
and Precepts of the Bible to be blessed and holy, which teach Men so to do:
which is one Reason. Secondly, In that you warn, charge, and command your
Disciples to read and cause to be read in your Meetings, not only in England,
but beyond Sea, your own Papers, Epistles, and Books, whilst you not only lay
aside the Scripture as useless, but declare to all the World, they are Death,
Dust, and Serpents-meat, Beastly Ware, and that such as preach out of it are
Conjurers, Notable Conjurers. Thirdly, Because you say it is Blasphemy to call
the Scriptures the Word of God, and yet allow your own Books that Title, giving
forth, That what is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as great
Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and greater, questioning whether
Moses be the first Penman thereof. Fourthly, A fourth Reason is, because you
deny the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, as Baptism and the Lord's Supper, which
the Scriptures teach, saying, Go teach all Nations, baptising, etc. this do in
remembrance of me, etc. Which the Apostles, Primitive Christians, and Martyrs
practiced, who had the Spirit as much as you, and witnessed Christ's second
Coming as much as you. Fifthly, Your laying aside the use of the Lord's Prayer,
both in Manner and Form, as aforesaid. Sixthly, Your laying aside the use of
the Ten Commandments. Seventhly, And the Apostle's Creed. Eighthly, If you
question, whether Moses was the first Penman of Sacred Writ, and what the
Prophets spoke true or false; you, I say, cannot believe what you question.
Ninthly, You teach, that such as preach Christ without, and bid People believe
in him, as he is in Heaven above, are false Ministers: but the Scripture tells
you, That Christ is risen, and sits in Glory, at the Right Hand of God in
Heaven above. And, Tenthly, Because you rob Christ of his Divine Attributes,
and put them upon your glorified George Fox, calling him the Branch, the Star,
the Son of Righteousness, etc. See your Epistle This is only to go amongst
Friends largely recited in this Introduction, p. 5, 6. which notwithstanding G.
W's Denial is plainly proved to mean G. Fox; yet to strengthen the said Proof,
see J. Whitehead's small Treat. p. 4, 5. After these things, in the year 1648.
God, who had compassion on his People, did cause a Branch to spring forth of
the Root of David, which was filled with Virtue, for the Covenant of Life and
Peace was with him, and he spread and shot forth many Branches, which did
partake of the fatness of the Root; and the weary came to rest under his
Branches: In him also was the word of Reconciliation, which turned the Hearts
of the Children and the Disobedient to the Wisdom of the Just. -- And in the
year 1655. I being a Branch of this Tree, ( meaning G. Fox) the life of its
Root caused me to blossom, and bring forth Fruit, for the Spirit of the Lord
came upon me, etc. I say, G. F's saying that he rise out of the North, was
prophesied of, etc. and the recited Epistle saying, O thou North of England,
who art reckoned barren, etc. and J. Whitehead setting the date of the rising
of this Branch and Star, 1648. and that in 1655. he also becoming a Branch of
this Tree, it is manifest, that what I said in New Rome unm. etc. p, 79, to 87.
was not without warrantable ground, as by the coherence of their Doctrine does
manifestly appear. And since your Books thus interfere, let us prove, whether
they be sincere, or which shall we take to be their Judgment in good earnest?

Answ. That they are not sincere I have already given ten Reasons, but that I
may renew your memory, I will add one more, viz. In all their Meetings for
Worship of GOD they never read one Chapter of the Bible, nor one of the
Epistles of the Apostles, for this thirty years; but it is frequent with them to
read their own Epistles, as herein I shall further show; only one instance for
the present I may recite to confirm you in the truth of their practice, and by
which you may measure great part of their pretenses, viz. Several Papers given
forth for the spreading the Truth, etc. p. 60, 61, 62. Friends, to you all this
is the Word of the LORD, take heed of judging one another (No, take heed of
that; Judge all the World first, and call them all the Names you can invent.)
: To you all this is the Word of the LORD, to spread over all: I charge you in
the presence of the LORD GOD to send this (Epistle) amongst ALL FRIENDS AND
BRETHREN EVERY WHERE to be read IN ALL MEETINGS: This is THE WORD OF GOD. G.
Fox.

1. Pray observe first the design of sending their Books up and down, it is TO
SPREAD TRUTH; and this might be done as well by recommending the reading of the
Scriptures, or some Portion thereof, if indeed they do believe the Doctrine and
Precepts contained therein be holy and blessed; unless they will say, their
Books have a greater measure of holiness then the Scriptures, which in the best
sense they must believe, unless they cheat the World most abominably, to send
them that which they know to be worse, or least for their profiting.

Secondly, You may observe what a Charge is given, viz. I charge you in the
PRESENCE of the LORD GOD to send this Epistle amongst all Friends what to do,
namely, for a Public Liturgy or Form of Divine Service, viz. To be read in ALL
MEETINGS. Well, what Authority had G. F. to impose this upon the poor People,
namely, This is THE WORD OF GOD. Now if they do believe the Doctrine and
Precepts contained in the Bible to be holy and blessed, why do they not charge
their People to read some part of the Scriptures for their Instruction; but
alas! they have disputed against the Scripture being the Word of GOD; but now
you see they style their own Nonsense to be THE WORD OF GOD, and charge their
poor ignorant People as such, to receive it, and as such, to read it, and as
such to send it up and down into all the Countries, and all Places; and who
dare gainsay the mighty Power of G. Fox? Who (as Ios. Coal says) has his
habitation in the power of the Highest, who rules and governs in righteousness,
and his Kingdom is established in peace, and the increase thereof is without
end: and to this W. Penn says well done, or very well, in his Vindication of
this Idolatrous Letter of J. C. to G. Fox. So that you may conclude with
Irenaeus, who in his third Book against Heretics, thus, Whilst Heretics speak
like the Faithful, they not only mean otherwise, than they say but clean
contrary; and by their Tenets full of Blasphemy, they destroy the Souls of
those, who with their fair words, suck in the Poison of their foul Opinions.

Now therefore the best method that I know of, to try whether there be any
sincerity in these cunning Sophisters, G. W. etc. IS to take William Penn's
method with the Papists, who after he had showed their pretense to one thing,
when they were really for another, first said, W. P. Let them renounce their
Errors, and then let us hear what they will say. A short instance of his
method I may recite in answer to the Objection, A Seasonable Caveat against
Popery, etc. p. 3. They (i. e. Papists) are grown so complaisant, as none seem
more exasperated at Persecution than themselves (WHILST THE VERY FATHERS OF IT)
decrying the fierceness of some Countries (WHOSE INCENDIARIES THEY WERE, AND
STILL ARE) and imputing the Blood of poor Protestants to some unwarrantable
Civil soore, (THEREBY ABUSING THE MAGISTRATE WITH THE EXECUTION OF THEIR OWN
CONSPIRACIES) Nay, for all their venerable esteem of the Popes Infallibility,
they have not stuck to censure his roaring Bulls, (THOUGH PROCURED BY THEIR OWN
MEANS) and all that might express their new tenderness, that many unacquainted
with their practices, are ready to believe them what they say themselves to be,
whose Moral is, to have two strings to their Bow, to be ambo dexter, and
furnished with meanings to suit the compass of all occasions. Thus far W. P.

And whoever observes these Quakers turnings and windings in all their Juglings
and Ledjerdemain, will find they tread the same Path, though in another manner;
for who will, or can pretend more plainly to own the Precepts and Doctrine of
the Bible to be holy and blessed; and yet in other Books say it is dust and
death, the Serpents Meat, and that to preach out of them is Conjuration, and
that the Minister of the Letter is the Minister of Death, and that it is
dangerous to read the Scriptures, and so in most things they look two ways,
JANUS like, insomuch that for W. Penn's four Instances of the Papists
Hypocrisy, I could easily give you forty of these Quakers two-fac'd Practices,
looking one way and rowing another: in short, see W. P.'s. Method, and if you
would understand these Quakers aright, use it, viz. p. 35. To conclude, (says
W. Penn) if we would not receive a Thief until he has repented, let the Papists
first Recant his volumous Errors, etc. And so say I, let the Quakers first
condemn their Errors, and these their Books, which contain them, and manifest
their sincerity touching the Precepts and Doctrines of the Scriptures, SO as to
recommend the reading some Portion thereof in lieu of their own Epistles; I say
let them first Recant what is really erroneous, secondly, condemn the Books,
thirdly, make a a solemn profession of some certain and necessary Articles of
the Christian Faith, and then, and not whilst then, they ought to be reputed as
Christians.

As to what G. W. offers in his Charitable Essay, etc. p. 2, 3. in your
Vindication about you Creed cited by me in New Rome, etc. rather confirms what
I say, then otherwise, as will more fully appear by comparing the same with
what follows in this Discourse; as well as show G. W's. twelve Assistants
their great Error and Mistake: And in answer to them, and their blind, false,
and implicit Certificate, I do affirm that what I have quoted as the Quakers,
I will prove theirs, and what I now quote under the Title of ERRORS and
CONSEQUENCES, and in other places, are the Quakers own Books and Writings,
neither do I wrong them: And if the twelve will engage under their Hands,
either to prove what they can justify by Scripture, and condemn under their
Hands what they by Scripture cannot justify; I will take the like number and
meet them on a Months notice at Bishop Stafford, which is more than half way,
and by the Testimony of Scripture let the matter be decided; and if you refuse
this, for shame complain no more of being wronged, neither let your Drudge G.
W. as in his Just Inquiry, etc. p. 14. says as he does, viz. THE LIBELLER HAS
SHAMEFULLY MISREPRESENTED US: as is usual with you and all Heretics to
complain of being wronged and misrepresented, etc. As for instance:

1. Tell the Papists of worshipping Images, praying to Saints, the Sacrifice of
the Mass, that they believe their own Traditions (or Epistles) as firmly as
they do the Bible, that they believe Transubstantiation, Indulgencies, etc. as
drawn up by Pius the Fourth, according to the Decrees and Canons of the Council
of Trent, and the CONSEQUENCES of these their erroneous Principles, and they
will tell you they are MISREPRESENTED.

2. Tell the Arians that they are Enemies to the Divinity of Christ, they will
tell you they are MISREPRESENTED; for say they all that we contend for, is only
for such a moment of time, as may make good the Relation of a Father and a Son.

3. Tell the Nestorians, that they made two Persons in Christ, and they will
tell you they are MISREPRESENTED; for all they designed was to avoid the
Blasphemy, in calling the blessed Virgin the Mother of God.

3. Tell the Eutychians their Error in saying there was but one Nature in
Christ, and they will tell you they are MISREPRESENTED; for (say they) we do
not mean thereby to destroy the Properties of the Humane Nature, but only to
assert that its Substance was swallowed up by the Divine.

And therefore in all Complaints of this Nature, it is necessary to come to
particulars, and to examine with care and diligence the matter complained of,
and then to give Judgment in the Case; and therefore I cannot be thought to
misrepresent you, nor wrong you, if I charge you with Particulars, and those
Particulars too taken and fairly quoted, not out of such Books as have been
wrote against you, (which yet might be true enough) but out of your own
approved Books wrote by your most Authentic Writers solemnly professing to all
the World I would not wrong you, nor misrepresent you, nor, to my knowledge,
have I done it; if you think I have, I have given you a fair opportunity to
make it appear, if you will meet me on the Condition aforesaid; and if you can
show me wherein I have, I further engage to do you Justice by a Public
Reparation: And by these Measures I have proceeded from first to last, and by
the help of GOD I am resolved so to continue as long as I have to do with you.
But one thing by the way I would have you take notice of, and that is this, If
it were enough to be Accused, then none would be Innocent; so on the other hand
none would be guilty, if it were enough to complain of being misrepresented.

July the 25 th, 1693. Francis Bugg.

To write no more, I long since did intend,
But none but GOD knows now when I shall end:
For still I find, when I think all is done,
As much to write, as when I first begun.

NEW ROME ARRAIGNED, And out of her own Mouth CONDEMNED.
The PREFACE.
READER,
EDw. Borough long since put forth a Challenge in the Name of the Quakers,
that they would gladly be manifest to all the World; and in order to it, and to
clear themselves from some Imputations cast upon them, they proposed to meet
and Dispute with any, whether Priests or People, of any Persuasion, yea, or any
one of them, at any Place, and at any Time, and for what Number they pleased,
as by me recited in my last New Rome unmasked, etc. p. 2. Upon which I went to
their Meeting in Mildenhall, Nov. 22. 1691. and there accepted of their
Challenge, and told them, I had a Charge to exhibit against them, if they would
engage to vindicate themselves and their Principles. Tho. Brewster a Quaker,
then present, bad them Answer me with silence. So then I read the Charge to
them, consisting of ten or twelve Errors, as in New Rome, etc. p. 3, 4, 5. and
left a Copy of the said Charge with them, and told them, That if they did not
answer me according to their Proposition, that I should expose them (which I
was loath to do for the sake of some amongst them). But no answer could I get:
After which I printed, etc. and when my Book came out, I went again to their
Public Meeting, and renewed my Charge on the 20th of Nov. 1692. and offered
then to prove it against them, where was present Sam. Cater and John Cade, two
of their Preachers: But still they refused to debate the matter with me, or to
argue the Point fully. I told them I did not come to disturb them; but if they
would set a time, either S. C. and my self singly, or let him take two, four,
six, or ten, and I would take the like number, and we would appoint a
convenient time and place. This they refused, and to this day have declined any
such method, though proposed by them in print; and now at last I have received
a single sheet, styled, A Charitable Essay, etc. which neither they, nor I can
call an Answer; only in p. 8. Twelve of the Duakers sums up in gross four
Particulars by way of Certificate, and at the end thus concludes; viz.
Whereupon we do in the holy fear of Almighty God, and in behalf of the said
People, declare and testify, That all these and all other his (F. Bs.)
Accusations of the same kind, or depending thereupon, are utterly false,
wicked, and malicious, and never so believed, so said, nor so affirmed by us as
charged against us, but contrary to our Persuasion, Principle, and Profession,
etc.

Behold the Answer of these Twelve Elders, is contained in less than half a
Page; and how far their plain Say-so will prevail against plain Matter of Fact,
unless with their own infatuated Disciples, let the wise in heart judge? And in
answer to this said Certificate, I do thus say, That to my knowledge, I have
not set down one Line nor Word as theirs, that is not theirs, nor yet raised
one Argument upon theirs, but may naturally be drawn from the Premises; and if
they think I have, I with the like number will upon reasonable notice meet them
at any place within twenty Miles or more of my dwelling, and produce both Book
and Page, and if they can show me wherein I have wronged them, I will make them
public Satisfaction, on condition that if what I have wrote as their
Principles, be by me so proved, that then they will condemn what is apparently
Erroneous; and as this will be a fair opportunity for them (if they think
themselves wronged, as they pretend) to clear themselves from my Accusations as
they call them; so will they have an opportunity to manifest Francis Bugg to be
both wicked and malicious; yea, and I will also subscribe to this their
Sentance, if I do not clear my self, and fully prove my Charge against them.
But, as a sign that they do not think nor believe themselves so wronged, as
they pretend, although I do not pretend to their Art of Prophesying, yet I do,
and dare pass my word that they will never meet me, and subscribe the Condition
aforesaid. And I have no other reason thus to believe, but that I know first,
it is their way to make a large Protestation of their avowed Innocence, when
Guilty; and that secondly, I know they cannot but be conscious of great guilt
in denying and out-facing such manifest Truths, as in that half Page they have
done. As to G. Whitehead in the Introduction, I have taken some little notice
of him, and what he has said, which is but little, being not a sheet; neither
has he taken notice of the twentieth part of my Book; so that it still stands
unanswered and unshaken by their penny Rattle which they have put forth to
please their Disciples; for something they must say, or the People will cry,
Where is the Answer to F. B's. Book, and so I proceed to the Charge.

THE CHARGE.
F. B's. Charge against the Quakers.
1. The Quakers denies him who was born of the Virgin Mary, who suffered death
upon the Cross at Jerusalem, who rose again the third day, and ascended into
Heaven in the sight of the Galileans, to be Christ the Savior of the World. 2.
They deny the Scriptures, by speaking contemptuously of them, and overvaluing
their own Books. 3. That their Teachers are Deceivers of the People, Favorers
of Blasphemy, Excusers of Idolatry, and of a different Faith from the Apostles,
Primitive Christians and blessed Martyrs, and that their Doctrine tends to
overthrow the Christian Faith.
REMARK.

This is the Charge which I publicly exhibited, this is the Charge I offered
to prove against them, which as it is heavy, so it stood them upon to have
defended themselves, if they had been able so to do, since they had two of
their Preachers present, besides hundreds of People to bear witness what
passed: Nay, though conscious to themselves of being guilty (as that I take to
be the very reason of evading a Dispute) yet notwithstanding it had been for
their interest, if they had been humble, and for Truth and Righteousness, as
they pretend; who upon Conviction of their Errors, ought to have made open
Confession thereof to GOD's glory, as was the practice of the ancient Martyrs
upon a sight of the Papists Superstitions, in which they had walked. However,
since they would not accept of the said Challenge; nor yet meet me according to
my frequent Proposals, nor answer my Book, but come only out with a single
sheet, and tell their People, this is an Answer to F. B's. Book, etc. when
alas! it does not take notice of the twentieth part thereof: I shall now
proceed to prove upon them what I have Charged them with, and that out of their
own approved Books, and Arguments deduceable from them. But let it be noted,
that their ERRORS and CONSEQUENCES under distinct Heads numerically placed,
are taken verbatim out of their own Books, which is plain Matter of Fact,
quoting both Book and Page; but the Remarks and Arguments I draw from them are
my own sense, which how far they agree to Reason and Protestant Christian
Principles, I leave others to judge: And in order thereunto, I first divide my
Charge into three parts as follows, viz.

THE FIRST CHARGE.
F. B's. first Charge.
1. THAT THE Quakers DENY HIM THAT WAS BORN OF THE VIRGIN MARY, WHO SUFFERED
DEATH UPON THE CROSS AT JERUSALEM, WHO ROSE AGAIN THE THIRD DAY, AND ASCENDED
INTO HEAVEN, IN THE SIGHT OF THE GALILEANS, TO BE CHRIST THE SAVIOR OF THE
WORLD.

THE Quakers FIRST ERROR.
The Quakers first Error.
A Question to the Professors, etc. p. 33. Now the Scriptures do expressly
distinguish between CHRIST and the GARMENT which he wore, between HIM that
came, and the BODY in which he CAME; between the Substance which was veiled,
and the Vail which veiled it, Lo I come, a Body have thou prepared me; there is
plainly HE, and the Body in which HE came; there was the outward VESSEL, and
the inward LIFE. This we certainly know, and can never call the bodily Garment
Christ, etc.

REMARK.

By which it is plain that they deny HIM that was born of the Virgin to be
CHRIST; for though they seem to own something which appeared in the Body, as by
the sequel of the matter you will perceive, yet it is plain, and self-evident,
that they call HIM that was born of the Virgin, that suffered Death on the
Cross, who was smote with the Palms of their Hands, spit upon, buffetted, and
run through with a Spear, died, was buried, rose again the third day, etc. but
a Garment, a Vail, a Figure, etc. For say the Quakers, There was plainly HE,
and the Body in which HE came; there was plainly the outward Garment and the
inward Life, etc. And this we declare to all Mankind we can never call this
Body; this Garment that was thus subject to be smote, to be buffetted, to be
perished, to be crucified, etc. CHRIST. But if that will satisfy you, we will
call something that was in that Body, which was never born of a Woman, never
was mortal, never smote, never crucified, nor by wicked hands slain, and hanged
on a Tree; this if it will satisfy you, we will call CHRIST, being the same
which we say is in us: This, and no other, do, or ever did we own to be CHRIST
the Savior of the World.

Now that this is a Fundamental Error, and tends to overthrow the Christian
Faith, I shall prove by the Testimony of the glorious Angels, holy Apostles,
yea GOD himself, recorded in Sacred Writ. And first read Luke 2. 11. For unto
you is BORN this day, in the City of David, a Savior, CHRIST the LORD. And
Acts 5. 30, 31. The GOD of our Fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye SLEW and HANGED
on a Tree: HIM has GOD exalted with His right Hand to be a Prince and a
SAVIOR. Again, Acts 2. 36. Therefore let all the House of Israel know
ASSUREDLY, that GOD has made THAT SAME JESUS, whom ye have crucified, both
LORD and CHRIST. Mark, the SAME JESUS which was thus despitefully used, that
was thus crucified between two Thieves, that was put to this ignominious Death,
viz. hanged on a Tree: The VERY SAME JESUS the Apostle tells you, and assures
all the House of Israel, that GOD exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, to be
both LORD and CHRIST. Again, read St. Mark 9. 7. and Matthew. 17. 5. And there
was a cloud that over-shadowed them, and a voice came out of the cloud, saying,
This is MY beloved SON, hear ye HIM. Again, read Acts 1. 10, 11. And whilst
they looked steadfastly toward Heaven, as HE went UP, behold two men stood by
them in white Apparel, which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing
UP into Heaven? THIS SAME JESUS which is taken up FROM Then not in them in the
Quakers sense; no, no otherwise then by Faith, nor no otherwise to this day;
for Christ said at His last Supper, ME ye have not always; its expedient that I
go away, but when I am gone I will send the Comforter.
you into Heaven, shall so come in LIKE MANNER as YE have seen him go into
Heaven. And Acts 10. 39, 40, 41. the same is again verified of the SAME JESUS.
And thereupon I do affirm and testify, and charge it upon them, in the
presence of GOD, Angels and Men, that they disown and deny Jesus Christ, whom
GOD has ordained to be Salvation to the ends of the Earth, and a propitiotary
Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole World, to be CHRIST: And that there is not
another Name given whereby men shall be saved, than this SAME JESUS; who was so
named of the Angel before he was born of the Virgin, Matthew. 1. 21. Luke 2. 21,
27. who was crucified, hanged on a Tree, rose the third day, and ascended
visibly up to Heaven, and there sits at the right hand of GOD, making
intercession for us sinners, who believe and hope for Salvation through his
Merits, Death, and bitter Passion, and the imputation of his Righteousness, who
was foretold by the Prophets, and in due time was manifest. And this is HE that
Israel by Faith drank of, that the Apostles testified of, whose hands handled,
and eyes saw; and we by Faith do now behold, and by HIS Spirit, the Comforter,
whom HE promised to send, are enabled to believe. And this I further testify,
That from Adam to the days of the Apostles, there never was a Man saved but by
Faith in this Messiah, or Son of GOD, nor since to this day, nor will be to the
end of the World, but by this SAME JESUS who was thus born, who suffered death,
who thus rose again and visibly ascended; for so say the Scriptures: There is
not another Name given under Heaven by which men shall be saved, but by the
Name of JESUS: even as St. Peter often, and very emphatically illustrates,
saying, This SAME JESUS. And this Jesus the Quakers say they cannot call
CHRIST; for though I grant this was H. Penington's great Error, yet as G. W.
says, he was a wise Man and a Scholar; nay, let me add, A Man I believe that
was more simply honest than hundreds of their Teachers; [And how far GOD's
mercy may extend to him and other devout Heathens, I will not determine] yet
Error is Error still, and the Fundamental Truths of the Gospel ought to be
testified to by all true Christians, according to the holy Scriptures.

THE Quakers SECOND ERROR.
The Quakers second Error.
A Quest. etc. p. 20. To whom do the Names and Titles of JESUS and CHRIST
chiefly and in the first place belong? Do they belong to the Body which was
took by HIM; or to him [too hims by the way] who took the Body? The Body has
its Names and Properties. Now the Query is, which was the appointed Savior of
the Father? which was the Anointed of the Father viz. The Light in them, or
Christ that suffered on the Cross. This is the Question, observe his Answer.
chiefly and in the first place? whether the Body prepared, or He [ i. e. the
Light] for whom the Body was prepared? For that which He took upon Him was our
Garment, even the Flesh and Blood of our Nature, which is of an EARTHLY
PERISHING NATURE.

REMARK.

First I answer, The Name JESUS and CHRIST chiefly and in the first place
belongs to HIM that was born of the Virgin, that suffered death on the Cross,
that was buried in the Sepulcher, that rose again and visibly ascended, as in
my last Remark I have already proved, from the joint Testimony of the glorious
Angels, Matthew. 1. 2. Luke 2. 10, 11. and holy Apostles, Acts 2. 36. and 5. 30,
31. and Acts 1. 10, 11. Luke 2. 21, 27. and could by many other places. And
next to their Affirmation, That HIS Body was like ours, of an earthly perishing
Nature, I deny: For said St. Peter, Acts 2. 29, 30, 31. Men and Brethren, let
me freely speak to you of the Patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried,
and his Sepulcher is with us unto this day: therefore being a Prophet, and
knowing that GOD had sworn by an Oath to him, Acts 13. 35.
that of the fruit of his Loins according to the Flesh, he would raise up
CHRIST to sit on his Throne; he seeing this before spoke of the Resurrection of
CHRIST, That his Soul was not left in Hell, neither his Flesh did see
Corruption, Psalm. 32. 11. and 110. 1. By which it is plain, that CHRIST who was
born of the Virgin, who suffered death, and was buried, was not of an earthly
perishing Nature: and as plain, that by their calling HIS Body a Garment, a
Vail, a Figure, etc. and saying it was like ours, of an earthly perishing
nature, that they deny CHRIST and disown HIM; yea, further, that the very Name
of JESUS and CHRIST do not properly belong to HIM, as is implied by the
beginning of their Question, and confirmed by their Resolving their Question,
in saying, For that which he took upon him [meaning his Body] was our Garment,
even the Flesh and Blood of our Nature, which is of AN EARTHLY PERISHING
NATURE. For you must note, these Questions were not proposed to be answered by
others, but a complete Book put forth by way of Question first, and by H.
Penington himself also answered, for the clearing up what they did, or did not
own to be CHRIST; and the Tenor of it runs to own the Light, the Life, the
Substance, something in the Body which was not capable of being seen otherwise
than by the Eye of Faith, nor capable of weariness, of thirst, of hunger, of
buffetting, of scourging, of being crucified, and hanged on a Tree; this in a
confused mysterious sense they will own to be CHRIST; and this is no other than
they dream is in them, and which they attribute to one another, as in the said
Consequences of these their Errors I shall more evidently make appear. Nay,
they say, A Quest. etc. p. 22. Is not this [the Light in them] the same Christ
that took upon him the Body of Flesh, and offered it without the Gates of
Jerusalem, etc. So that consequently so many Quakers, so many CHRIST'S, as anon
will more plainly appear.

THE Quakers THIRD ERROR.
The Quakers third Error.
A. Quest. etc. p. 27. Is not the Substance, the Life, the Anointing called
CHRIST wherever it is found? [or in whomsoever it is found:] Does not the Name
[ Christ] belong to the whole Body, and EVERY MEMBER in the Body, as well as to
the HEAD. So that the Name is not given to the Vessel, but to the Nature, to
the heavenly Treasure, to that which is of HIM in the Vessel. Contrary to the
express Testimony of holy Writ. See Matthew. 1. Luke 2. and 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, and
10th Chapter of the Acts, etc.


REMARK.

Good Reader observe what they teach: First that they cannot call the bodily
Garment Christ, meaning HIM that was born of the blessed Virgin. 2. That this
bodily Garment thus born, etc. they say was of an earthly perishing Nature. 3.
That the Light, the Life, the Anointing, this is called CHRIST wherever it is
found. And to that the Name Jesus and Christ does belong, and that chiefly too;
let it be in G Fox, G. W, G. Smith, R. Sandiland, John Tysoe, Tho. Rudyard, Ez.
Wooly, Chr. Atkinson, W. Warwick, or any other Quaker; for, say the Quakers,
the Name Jesus and Christ does not so properly belong to the Body, as to the
Light, the Substance, the heavenly Treasure, etc. See the second Error. And
upon that foot and bottom, the Quakers having in them the same Light, Life,
Treasure, and heavenly Substance, even the same that took the Body of Flesh,
and suffered at Jerusalem A Quest. etc. p. 22.
, the Name Christ does as properly belong to every Quaker as to CHRIST: yea,
their very words are, Does not the Name [Christ] belong to the whole Body, and
to every Member in the Body, as well as to the HEAD. A Quest. etc. p. 27.

THE Quakers FOURTH ERROR.
The Quakers Refuge fixed, etc. p. 38. by John Whitehead, viz. Nothing which
was mortal was called Christ.

REMARK.

This John Whitehead asserted to Mr. Grantham, as he told me, and since J. W.
acknowledged it in the Book and Place cited: But to do J. W. justice, I ought
to give you his Explanation; for according to G. W.'s. Doctrine, it ought to be
so, though he himself walks by a clean contrary Rule. Well, let us hear J. W's.
Explanation in p. 39. I distinguish between Christ, and the Body of Christ. But
how far this mends his matter, I leave wise Men to consider; for if he mean by
this distinction to separate the Godhead from the Manhood; or Humanity of
CHRIST, I answer thus; That though CHRIST, as he was GOD, he was from Eternity,
and with the Father before the World began, and by whom the World was made; yet
as HE was the promised Seed, ordained of GOD to be Salvation to the Ends of the
Earth, and manifest in due time, HE was born of a Woman, became Man for our
sakes, made like unto us in all things, sin excepted, as St. Peter says, and
was mortal, and suffered death on the Cross, but raised by the mighty Power of
GOD the third day, and saw no Corruption; but in the same Body HE rose He
ascended, and now sits at the right hand of GOD in Majesty on high, as our
Advocate; to whom, with the Father and Holy Ghost, be Praise and Glory for
ever. Yet I take J. Whitehead's distinction according to the coherence of the
Quakers Doctrine, and the Analogy of their Faith, to run thus: As for HE that
was born of the Virgin, who was smote with the Palms of their Hands, buffetted,
spit upon, crowned with Thorns, run through with a Spear, hanged on a Tree,
this was not the CHRIST, this was only a Vail, a Garment, was Mortal; and
nothing, says J. W. that was Mortal was called Christ; not properly at least in
the Quakers Opinion: for, says he, I distinguish between Christ, and the Body
of Christ, which is the Church, and the Light in them the Christ; this I take
to be his meaning. And that it may appear so, I will produce a Text out of
their own Scriptures, I mean out of Jos. Coals Works, p. 332. in answer to John
Newman about the Body of Christ, he thus expresses himself, viz. If by the Body
of Flesh that Christ had, he means his Church, which the Apostle speaks of,
which was the Body of which Christ was Head, and they Members of, then I am one
with him: for his having that Body after his Ascension, I never denied, nor
intend to do: -- And such a Body we own Christ had after his Ascension.

Thus then it appears plainly, that they deny HIM to be Christ who was born of
the Virgin Mary, who suffered death on the Cross, in that they say nothing
which was Mortal was called Christ, and they say, the bodily Garment we can
never call Christ: And when J. W. made his distinction between Christ and his
Body, it does appear by J. Coals Testimony, that CHRIST, after he ascended, had
no other Body but his Church; consequently did not ascend in His Body, which
was seen apparently, Acts 1. 9, 10, 11. So that the Light in the Quakers is the
one only Christ, and the Quakers the Body of Christ: And no other Christ, nor
Body of Christ, do I by their Doctrine find that they own, and thereupon do
Charge them to deny CHRIST who was crucified, dead and buried, but is risen,
and in the same Body ascended, and in the same Body sits at the right Hand of
GOD, never more to die, but ever lives it make intercession for us.

THE Quakers FIFTH ERROR.
Readiness Errand to Damascus, etc. p. 14. Christ is the Substance of all Figures,
and his Flesh is a Figure. G. F.

REMARK.

Reader, pray observe; First they distinguish between Christ and the Garment he
wore, meaning his Body, (which suffered on the Cross) which bodily Garment they
cannot call Christ. 2. They teach that the Names Jesus and Christ, do not so
properly belong to HIM that was born of the Virgin, suffered, etc. as to
something in the Body, the Light, etc. which they say is in themselves. 3. And
that the Light in them is the same Christ which suffered at Jerusalem. 4. That
the Body of Christ is like ours, of AN EARTHLY PERISHING NATURE. 5. That
nothing which was Mortal was called Christ; and consequently not HE that was
born of the Virgin Mary, who suffered on the Cross as an acceptable Sacrifice.
6. That Christ has no other Body but His Church since his Ascension, proved
out of their own Books, which they say are given forth by the Eternal Spirit.
So that the Light in the Quakers is all the Christ they own; and they being (in
their own esteem) Believers, and consequently the Church, Christ has no other
Body, so the Quakers are all and all. 7. That the Flesh of Christ is but a
Figure. Thus have they, what in them lie, overturned the Fundamentals of
Christianity: for Christ was so far from being a Figure, that all Figures and
Types ended in Him, and HE the Substance of them all, as I shall show by the
Prophesies of the Holy Prophets in two Columns.

And whereas G. W. in his A Just Enquiry, etc. p. 2, 3. by his cunning Glosses,
not only vindicates some notorious Errors, but also excuses the Consequences
of them, as not being of a dangerous tendency; and therefore rather than to
trace him in his crooked Path, I shall choose to make it appear that the
Fruits, Effects, and Consequences of these and the like Errors are very
dangerous, in hopes, that as it will tend to strengthen my Charge of their not
owning CHRIST, etc. (if any thing be still wanting to prove it) so will it be a
means to strengthen and confirm others in the Principles of the Christian Faith
against the Prevalency of such Seducers as G. W. etc. are, as by their Fruits
do now appear.

DANGEROUS CONSEQUENCES OF THESE ERRORS.
1. Readiness Errand, etc. p. 8. He that has the same Spirit that raised up Jesus
Christ is equal with GOD. P. 7. And if Christ be in you, must he not say I AM
THE WAY, THE TRUTH, AND THE LIFE. -- The Letter of the Scripture is Carnal, and
the Letter is Death, and kills: All that do study to raise a living thing out
of a dead, to raise the Spirit out of the Letter, are Conjurers, and their
Teaching is from Conjuration which is not spoken from the mouth of the LORD.

2. Several Petitions answered, etc. p. 30. But if ever you own the Prophets,
Christ and his Apostles, ye will own our Writings, which are given forth by the
same Power and Spirit.

3. Truths Defense, etc. p. 101. The Letter which kills is dangerous, and the
Ministers of the Letter are the Ministers of Death, to you, it is dangerous to
read or speak of it.

4. The Sword of the Lord drawn, etc. p. 5. Your imagined GOD beyond the Stars,
and your Carnal Christ, [to say] GOD and Man, in one Person, is a Lie.

5. David's Enemies Discovered, etc. p. 7. And these [i. e. Quakers] do not
call the Letter the Rule, and the four Books, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, the
New Testament and Gospel, as thou and thy Generation do: For Paul said he was a
Minister of the Gospel, and of the New Testament, and not of the Letter, which
thou calls the Gospel and New Testament; thy Ministry is in the Letter which
kills, etc. by G. Whitehead and Chr. Atkinson.

6. A Brief Discovery, etc. p. 7, 8, 9; 10. The Priests of the World are
Thieves, Robbers, Conjurers, Antichrists, Witches, Devils, Liers, a Viperous
and Serpentine Generation, Blasphemers, scarlet colored Beasts, Babylon's
Merchants, selling beastly Ware for a large price, the Letter which is dust and
death; whited Walls, greedy Dogs, really they are Bloodhounds, still hunting
and gasping after their Prey, like the mouth of Hell, barking and raging like
Sodomites. G. F. and others.

7. Truths Defense, etc. O thou filthy Beast, thy beastly Worship, no Prayers
can we send to thee but for thy destruction, thou Man of Sin and Enemy of thou
Hypocrite: O thou impudent and brazen faced, thou art in the Sorcery and in the
Witchcraft, and in the Adultery! O thou slanderous Beast! O thou natural brute
Beast! O generation of Vipers! And here thou Serpent thou art damned openly.
And here I charge thee to be a Witch, and to bewitch the People; a Reprobate,
hated of GOD, a Child of the Devil, an Enemy of Righteousness, the Son of
Perdition. O thou false-hearted dissembling Hypocrite! the Plagues of GOD are
due to thee, and that is thy portion thou child of the Devil, thou blind Sot,
thy Torment is begun, and so fare thee well. But thou art a Conjurer, and
live in Conjuration, thou Enemy of GOD and Man of Sin, for destruction thou
art ordained to go therein; thy fear of it does begin, and the Lake that
burns, and the Pit thou art for to be turned into eternally; but thou live
in Philosophy and Logic, which are of the Devil. G. Fox, R. Hubberthorn.

REMARK.

Reader, Here are some of the Consequences of their erroneous Principles, in
denying the LORD that bought them; for after they had erred concerning the
Faith, and made shipwreck of a good Conscience, and denied Christ, how soon did
they contemn the Scriptures, profane his Ordinances, revile his Ministers: with
design, no doubt, as by the sequel we may perceive, to exalt their own Horn. I
could not well omit some few of their dreadful Names given to the Public
Ministry in general, as elsewhere I have observed: But before I sum them up,
let me add a few more of their Consequences, and a little observe what good
Names and Divine Attributes they gave to each other; for as none ever came near
them for railing and reviling, stigmatizing and abusing their Opposers, as if
Hell was broke loose; so never did any People exceed them in magnifying each
other, exalting one another to the Sky: nay, had they studied many years, they
could have scarce found out worse words for their Opposers, (and better, and
finer; and dilicater words, high praises, and magnifying expressions for
themselves) and even so they have done by the Scriptures, calling them Dust,
Death, Carnal, Husk, Serpents meat, and the like contemptuous Names; whilst
they have invented most excellent Names for their own Nonsensical Pamphlets and
venomous Books, fit to corrupt a Nation, and destroy a Country; as THE WORD OF
THE LORD, A MESSAGE FROM THE MIGHTY GOD, THE WORD OF GOD, A LIVING TESTIMONY,
and a hundred other such like Titles they give to their confused Nonsense to
take the eyes and ears of the weak and unstable.

DANGEROUS CONSEQUENCES OF THEIR ERRORS.
8. The Quakers Challenge, p. 3. The Quakers are in the Truth, and none but
they.

9. Ios. Coal's Letter to G. Fox justified by W. Denn and others. Dear G. Fox,
who art the Father of many Nations, whose Life has reached through us thy
Children, even to the Isles afar of, to the begetting many again to a lively
hope, for which Generations to come shall call thee Blessed, whose being and
habitation is in the power of the Highest, in which thou rulest and governs in
Righteousness. AND THY KINGDOM IS ESTABLISHED IN PEACE, AND THE INCREASE
THEREOF IS WITHOUT END; Judas and the Jews, etc. p. 44.

10. A Battledoor for Teachers and Professors. All Languages are to me (says G.
F.) no more than dust, who was before Languages were. Introduct. Again, p. 214.
And next follows a few words to the whole matter by G. Fox, who is before
Confusion or many Languages were.

11. News coming out of the North, p. 15. I am (says G. Fox) the Door that
ever was, the same Christ yesterday, to day, and for ever. (And Title Page)
Written from the mouth of the LORD, from one who is naked, and stands naked
before the LORD, clothed with Righteousness, whose Name is not known in the
World; risen up out of the North, which was prophesied of, but now is
fulfilled. And p. 14. Your Original is Carnal, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, and
your Word is Carnal, THE LETTER, and your Baptism is Carnal, and your Sacrament
is Carnal, and their Communion is Carnal: Their Original is but dust, which is
THE LETTER, which is death; their Church is dust; so the Serpent feeds upon
dust; and their Gospel is dust, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, which is the I
enlarge the more on this Subject out of this Book, by reason of the impudency
of the Certificates handled by twelve Persons in G. W's. Charitable Essay, p. 8
O dreadful! to deny what they know to be true, is the most abominable thing
that can be. And this I charge upon them as a pack of false Witnesses and
perjured Persons, for their Solemn Protestation ought to be as binding as an
Oath, and the breach of it as punishable.
Letter. Page 34, 35. A voice and a word to all you Deceivers who deceive the
People, and Blasphemers who utter forth your Blasphemies and Hypocrisies, that
tell People of a Sacrament, and tell them it is the Ordinance of GOD: Blush,
blush and tremble, you who live in the Witchery, and bewitch the People.

12. Several Petitions answered, etc. p. 60. My name is covered from the world,
and the world knows not me nor my name. G. F.

13. G. F.s. Great Mystery, etc. p. 77. And as for any being moved of the Lord
to take your [i. e. Priests] Hourglass from you by the Eternal Power it is
owned.

14. A Music Lecture, etc. p. 22. I do affirm that if John [the Apostle] had
said he had been a sinner he had lied. See New Rome unmasked, p. 40. to 49. and
you will see a whole Catalogue of Idolatrous Letters and other Abominations,
which are too large to recite here; for I find I shall enlarge beyond what at
first I intended.

15. Jos. Coal's Testimony of Edw. Borough: viz. That he was a Man endued with
the ALMIGHTY POWER OF GOD, which lived and reigned in him, etc.

16. W. Penn's Testimony for Jos. Coal in his Works. O the soft and pleasant
streams of LIFE IMMORTAL that have run through him to refresh the LORD's
Heritage. And now he is truly ascended above every Trouble.

16. THIS IS ONLY TO GO AMONGST FRIENDS, p. 19. And O thou North of England!
who art counted as desolate and barren, and reckoned the least of the Nations,
yet out of thee did the BRANCH Pray who do you account this Branch, if not G.
Fox, for he came out of the North, and as he said himself, was prophesied of. I
say, who else did you assign these Titles to, i. e. the Branch, the Star, the
Son of Righteousness, was it to G. Fox, or the Light in him? Pray distinguish
in your next. You are excellent at the Art of distinguishing: for till then I
can assign your Attributes to no other.
spring, and the Star arise, which gives Light to all the Regions round about.
In thee the Son of Righteousness appeared with wounding, and with healing. Out
of thee, Kings, Priests, and Prophets did come forth, and laid their Swords on
the neck of their Enemies. Put on your Armor, and gird on your Sword, and lay
hold on the Speer, and march into the field, and prepare your selves to battle,
for the Nations do defy our God, and say, where is the God of the Quakers?
Arise, Arise, and sound forth the everlasting word of War and Judgment, in the
ears of all the Nations. Sound an Allarum, make their ears to tingle: Our
Enemies are whole Nations, a rebellious People, that will not come under OUR
LAW. Stand upon your feet, and appear in your Terror, as an Army with Banners;
let the Nations know your power, and the strength of your hand; cut down on the
right hand, and slay on the left, let not your eye pity, nor your hand spare;
but wound the lofty, and tread down the honorable of the earth: give to the
great Whore double, [and give to the little Whore treble, for she is worthy,
whose Abominations have exceeded all that went before her;] dash her Children
against the stones: and cursed be every one that rises not up to the help of
the LORD against the Mighty. Spare none, neither Ox nor Ass, old nor young;
kill, cut off, destroy; hew Agag in pieces; make the Devils subject; cast out
the unclean Spirits; shut up in Prison, bring out of Prison; cast in your Nets;
launch into the Deep; divide the Fish; bind the Tares in Bundles, cast them
into the fire, etc. * Here was sad killing, cutting and destroying, not to
spare Ox or Ass. It Is well they meant no other than what was within them; as
also all their Miracles are Mysteries, Fancies, Whimseys, all within; your
Heaven, Hell and Devils, all within; their Swords and whole Train of Artillery
within.


REMARK.

Reader, here is Matter enough to write a Volume upon, but having treated
largely upon some of them in my last, I shall only touch briefly upon some of
the Heads, and so leave them to the Consideration of the wide World. First,
Their pretense that such as have the same Spirit which raised up Jesus, are
equal with GOD, I must say it is horrible Blasphemy: yet it ought to be charged
upon them, until they publicly condemn the Book, which has little else in it
but Blasphemy, and false Doctrine, and railing on the Public Ministry. However
it never was corrected by Errata, as is usual, and has gone for a Gospel Truth
above forty years, and as their Principle, if they believe as they write; and
therefore I charge it upon them, until they condemn the said Book. And secondly
their Impudence, in saying, that if we will own the Writings of the Prophets
and Apostles, we must necessarily own their Books: this is of kin to the rest,
i. e. Blasphemy. And thirdly, for them to say, If Christ, the Light in them,
say, I AM THE WAY, THE TRUTH, AND THE LIFE, why may He not speak? I answer: If
they can work the same Miracles He did, and produce as many Prophets that
foretold of G. Fox's coming out of the North, as I shall, that foretold of
Christ's coming, then I shall believe them. Fourthly, What horrible Blasphemy
is it to say, It Is dangerous to read the Scriptures; and to call them Dust,
Death, Carnal, Serpents-meat; as likewise the Ordinances of Christ, and the
Communion of Saints, which Christians ought to hold and believe as an Article
of their Faith. And then fifthly, to call the Public Ministers Witches,
Devils, Conjurers, etc. is very pernicious. Such Books ought to be burnt, as
Jacob Baker, a Quaker, once confessed he would burn it. And sixthly, for them to
hold that they, and they ONLY, are in the Truth, it is the perfect Pharisee. But
for them to write that G. Fox was before Confusion, or the many Languages were,
is monstrous: Such Blasphemies ought to be posted. As likewise Ja. Parnell to
say that he was before Arguments was; and was come to the end of all Arguments,
is notorious. And seventhly, so is it in G. Fox to say that he stands covered,
and neither he nor his name known in the world. O what shall I say! was there
ever such wickedness! And yet here is nothing so bad, nothing so wicked,
nothing so false, so Idolatrous, so Blasphemous. But G. W. can salve it, he can
vindicate or excuse it; nay, more then so, he can procure twelve Witnesses to
say, We (...) declare on the behalf of the Quakers, that what Fr. Bugg says is
(...) and wicked; for they never so believed, so said, nor so affirmed, etc.
(...) being solemnly avouched, as in The holy fear of Almighty God, (...) an
Oath; and if what these twelve affirm be false, then they are perjured Persons
in the eye of the Law, and deserve to be Pillored. And thereupon I charge them
with Perjury, with false-witnes bearing, until they by public retraction
repent, and give Satisfaction. For as you will spare none, neither Ox nor Ass,
old nor Young, no more will I; I will not spare, nor my eye shall not pity
Friend or Foe, which comes up with false Evidence, yea so false, as if they
should say black is white, and white is black. I must say, that as T. G. has
no need to depend on G. W. and that he must know, that G. W. has as little
love for him, as for some he has wrote against, yet I am sorry to see his Name
there. As for the others, many of them have their dependency on the Chair; and
G. W being therein, I marvel not at them, provided their Testimony had been
true; but I am sure it is notorious false; nay, and that they themselves know
it to be false, I will give the World a SIGN, which is this; If they know and
be conscious to themselves that their Evidence is false, they will not come
forth, according to my Proposition in this Book made, to meet me; but if they
be not conscious to themselves of false Evidence, [how false soever it is] they
will come forth to clear themselves, and be glad I give them the opportunity;
and by this SIGN they shall be proved.

Come on you twelve Master Builders, can you read these sixteen Instances, and
not blush, (when you behold your Certificate) and particularly the first,
third, fifth, and eleventh; as also the first, second, and third Errors: I
say, can you read the Passages taken out of your own Books, wrote by your most
eminent Preachers, and yet affirm you never said so, wrote so, believed so, nor
taught so, and not blush? and be horribly ashamed? But I have given a Sign to
prove you, and by it you shall be tried. Again; Can you read p. 77. of G. F's.
Great Mystery, where he justifies Felony, under a pretense of being moved by
the Spirit of GOD, and not blush? What, is all your Zeal gone? or are you
fearful of displeasing G. W. now he is got into the Chair? Can you look on the
fifth Instance, and see how G. W. teaches that the Scripture is not the Rule,
nor Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John the New Testament, but the Letter which
kills, etc. And can you behold his contrary Pretenses in his late Writings,
and not reprove him? can you hear him pretend that he was moved of GOD to write
Judgment Fixed, etc. and that GOD laid a necessity upon him to write that Book;
and that therein the neither consults the Events, nor fears the Effects; and
yet proved to write notorious Lies? And can you thus let him pass, only with
saying he was mistaken? when he fathered all his Lies upon the moving of the
Spirit of GOD, even six Lies in number, and great part of his Matter bottomed
thereupon. Can you hear and read his Excuses and Vindications of the Idolatious
Letters wrote to G. Fox by Jos. Coal, John Audland, John Blaikling, and Sol.
Eccles, and can you be silent at these things? Read my Parallel between the
Papists and Quakers in New Rome, etc. p. 40. to 49. Can you take notice of the
Names he and others have given my self, and such as have opposed your Church
Government, and the imposing the observation of your Women's Meetings, which
some of you are no more in love with, then some of us which wrote against the
mischief of your Impositions? I say, can you behold the Names he, etc. gave us,
viz. Old cankered Apostates, vile Apostates, unruly Beasts, Runagades,
Treacherous Apostates, Apostate Informers, betraying Iudas's, Devils Incarnate,
Wolves, Dogs, Enemies of all Righteousness, Children of the Devil, dark,
Devil-driven, dungy Gods, Heathens, Atheists, etc. See some of the Quakers
Principles and Doctrines, etc. p. 10, 11. for more of this stuff; nay, such
personal defamations and detractions, which has had such an Effect, not only
of our Profession in Religious Matters, but upon our Persons and Employments,
which in time may be further taken notice of; Can you behold all this, and a
hundred things more which I might name which has occasioned a great part of
your Troubles? And can you submit your Necks, your Interests, and all to such a
Makebate, such a continual contentious Scribler, who in nine Months wrote
three Books against me; and since I wrote my last, has wrote three more
against me and others. Are you not sensible what pretenses he makes in his
Books to Charity, to Seriousness, to Sincerity, and yet void of all? Have you
not taken notice of his late little Book (about the great Divisions amongst the
Quakers in Pensilvania) entitled, The Christian Doctrine and Society of the
Quakers, etc. wherein he carries two faces in one Hood, hold with the Hare and
run with the Hound, as the Proverb is; writes against writing; that is his main
design: And if writing be a fault, who more guilty than G. W. for in that Book
he peeps and creeps, he turns and winds this way and that way, hither and
thither, but centers no where, but JANUS like, looks two ways; for he seems to
own Geo. Keith's Doctrine, but dare not own his Testimony, nor him in it: he
seems to blame the Doctrine of Fitzwater, Young and Lloyd, but dare not blame
their Persons, nor give Testimony against their Doctrine, as theirs, they being
of the Foxonian Party, and one with him in the ground, and in those Fundamental
Errors: For said Fitzwater, The Plea, etc. p. 4. God that died in us, and laid
down thy life in us, and took it up again. And Rob. Young affirmed, that when
Christ ascended he was separated from his Body. And Tho. Lloyd, who said, p. 5.
That Faith in Christ without us, as he died for our sins, and rose again, was
not necessary to our salvation, etc.

Now had G. W. been plain, and against these Errors, he ought to have reproved
these Persons sharply, and joined with G. Keith against them in his charging
them with such Damnable Heresies and Doctrines of Devils, as was no where
tolerated in any Christian Society, but only amongst the Quakers: The Plea,
etc. p. 11. I say, had he been sincere he would have been plain, as G. Keith
is, and not to come out so smooth and demure, saying, Why do you thus write?
why do you thus amuse the World, and trouble the World with such bitter
treatment; complaining bitterly of Rents, Schisms, and Divisions. Come on, what
can you say? why do you let him alone? why do you not unmask and discover this
subtle Fox, and uncharitable George, and insincere Whitehead, out of his Hole
and Den? where he lies lurking, writing, and scribbling, and neither studies
Events, nor fears Effects, and make him be plain. And if G. Keith, etc. in your
opinion, who preaches up and holds forth the Death and Sufferings and
meritorious Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, as necessarily to be believed, in
order to our salvation, be right, why then does not G. W. stand by him and his
Friends in this their sound Testimony? But if G. W. be one with Fitzwater and
the Foxonian Quakers, that there is no other Christ than in them, no other
Crucifiction than within, no other Resurrection than within, no other Heaven
nor Hell than within us, as quoted in New Rome unmasked, etc. p. 89. Why does
he not join with Fitzwater, Lloyd, etc. against Geo. Keith, etc. let him be
plain in his next; let him not thus halt between two Opinions: If Geo. Keith,
etc. be right, let Geo. Fox his Books be burnt, and your Epistles burnt,
wherein they do not teach that the Sufferings of Christ, and his meritorious
Death and Passion, and the Imputation of his Righteousness, are necessary
Articles of the Christian Faith, in order to Salvation: No, a thousand of your
Epistles, read in your Meetings, will afford no such Doctrine, nor no
Confession of Sins, nor no asking Pardon for his sake: And why do you suffer
him to complain of bitter Treatments, Rents, Schisms, and Divisions: whoever
treated their Opposers with such bitter Language as the Quakers have done?
whoever made greater Rents and Divisions in Church and States, in Towns and
Families, than the Quakers have done? And why do you let him thus complain of
Though 'twas not for printing sake, but because such printing exposed their
Antichristian Principles and great Divisions beyond the Seas.
printing and troubling and amusing the World with printing, when you know no
People print more, nor take the like care to disperse their Pamphlets when
printed; witness your Orders for sending two of each sort to the Monthly and
Quarterly Meetings in the Country; their sending them out by Pack-horses to
Markets and Fairs, as was the practice of Jos. and Ben. Townsend (to my
knowledge) who send their Epistles to be read in all Meetings in England,
Scotland, Ireland, Holland, Mariland, Barbados, nay, I understand by your last
yearly Epistle, that you have got footing in Germany: why then do you suffer
him to act thus prepostrously, to chide others for his own fault? to deal thus
deceitfully in almost all things you can mention? Are you not ashamed of these
things? what have you not a spark of that honesty you pretend to? if you have,
blow it up, and let it become a flame to burn up this heap of Hypocritical
Rubbish, that at last we may rightly understand what a Quaker is?

THE SECOND CHARGE.
II. THE Quakers DENY THE SCRIPTURES, 1. BY SPEAKING CONTEMPTUOUSLY OF THEM:
AND 2. BY OVER-VALUING THEIR OWN BOOKS.

REMARK.

Reader, this Branch of the Charge is more than sufficiently proved already:
but by reason of some little Argument which passed between me and Sam. Cater
and John Cade, two of their Preachers, at the Meeting, when I exhibited the
said Charge, Nov. 20. 1692. touching the Scriptures, and that thereby their
shuffling, equivocating, and evading may be the more manifest; and particularly
G. W's. twelve Men which he has got to testify on the behalf of the Quakers,
that they never said, never believed, nor never affirmed the Scriptures to be
Dust, Death, Serpents-meat: I say, for this reason (for as I said, I shall
spare none) I may recite an astonishing Confutation of these Infallible
Doctors, etc.

Fr. Bugg. Come, Sam. Carter, will you accept of this Charge, and appoint a
time, ten, twenty days, or a month hence, you and I singly, or if you will,
take four, six, or ten of your side, I will take the like number: Let me know
your Answer, and I will be gone; I do not come to disturb you, but to charge
you with your Errors, etc.


Sam. Cater. There is no end of Disputing with thee, neither shall I undertake
it.


F. Bugg. Why not? If I fail of proof to make good my Charge, you will have the
Victory, and it will tend to the honor of your Cause: And you may be glad of
the opportunity to manifest F. Bugg, since you say he charges you falsely.


S. Cater. Thou may be gone: we have other business to do than to Answer thee.


F. B. Well, if you will not accept of the Charge, nor set a time when to argue
the Point, I shall proceed to read the second part of my Charge, which is your
denial of the Scripture, by calling it Death, Dust, and Serpents-meat, etc.


Observation.

So then I read out of G. Fox his Book, (what follows) the Astonishing
Confutation abovesaid. News coming up out of the North, etc. p. 14. So Dust is
the Serpents meat; their Original is but Dust, which is but the Letter, which
is Death; their Church is Dust, and their Gospel is Dust, Matthew, Mark, Luke
and John, which is the Letter.

S. Cater. I deny that we call the Scriptures Dust or Serpentsmeat.


F. B. But, S. Cater, will thou deny it if you see it in one of your Friends
Books?


S. Cater. Yea, wherever I see it, I will deny it.


F. B. Richard Tilson go and fetch my Box: which he did: I read it as in the
recited Charge, and Sam. Cater took the Book and read it.


S. Cater. Thou said we called the Scriptures Dust and Death, but there is
not the word Scripture in the whole Passage.


F. B. People, I appeal to you, whether Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John be not
Scripture. With that, perceiving S. Cater's Evasion, the People gave a great
shout, and said, Yes, Yes.


S. Cater. Matthew Muck --


F. B. Hold Sam. what Matthew muck, what Muck is that? what, shall we have a
new Gospel?


John Cade a Norwich Preacher, said, Friends, take notice, that as the Bible
grows old, it will moulder and crumble away, and become Dust.

F. B. People, observe; They would not have you think that new Bibles are Dust,
but when they grow old they moulder away, etc. and therefore my Advice to you
is to get new Bibles.


W. Read. Francis, we deny thy words: we have given it in to the King and
Parliament, that we believe the Scriptures was given forth by Divine
Inspiration, and they have accepted of it.


F. Bugg. The more shame for you to be so deceitful, to give in a Testimony so
contrary to your Belief: For if so, why do you not Retract and Condemn your
Books, which are as opposite to what you now say, as Light is to Darkness.


And some few Passages more we had: But if they believe as they write, that the
Gospel, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John be Dust, I wonder with what face they
could appear before the Parliament, until they had first retracted, and by some
public Act have condemned their Books, which throw such Contempt upon the Holy
Scripture. For a further proof of this Charge, see the sixteen Instances.

Object. But possibly some may object, and say, It Is true, you have more then
sufficiently proved your first Charge; and in the proof thereof there is enough
said of their speaking contemptuously of the Holy Scriptures, by calling them
Dust, Death, Serpents-meat, Carnal Letter, killing Letter, Dangerous to read,
etc. yea, and their contemptuous Speeches of the Sacraments, Church, Ministry,
etc. yet the second Branch of your second Charge seems unproved, where you
bring it as an Argument against them of their not owning the Scriptures, and
that they overvalue their own Writings. Now if you have any thing material to
offer, pray do.

Answ. I am very willing (as I always was) to leave things as clear as I can,
and place my Argument upon Matter of Fact out of their own printed Books: And
having already signified that ERRORS and CONSEQUENCES are out of their Books,
and their rejecting the Scriptures and reading the Scriptures in their
Religious Meetings, (if I may so call them) being a Consequent of the second
Error, I shall so call them, viz. both the Titles of their Epistles, and the
Conclusion, enough to signalize their way and manner, and THE DANGEROUS
CONSEQUENCES OF THE Quakers ERRORS.

First, THIS IS ONLY TO GO AMONGST FRIENDS, etc. Directed To the Camp of the
Lord in England, meaning the Quakers. Subscribed Edw. Borough and Fra. Howgill.

Second, To the Flock of Christ every where, to be read in their Assemblies; by
G. Fox. Printed for Ben. Clark, 1681.

Third, To the Children of Light, etc. Directed thus, I desire this Epistle may
be read in the fear of the Lord in your several Meetings. By William Penn.

Fourth, A Salutation of Love from the Spirit of Life, unto all Friends of
Truth, etc. -- Let this be read amongst Friends who are Exiled, or sentenced
for Exilement, when they are met together in the fear of the Lord. Josiah
Coal. Printed 1665.

Fifth, An Epistle to Friends in Holland -- Let this be sent amongst the
Friends in Holland. Jos. Coal. Printed 1667.

Sixth, To the Flock of GOD, gathered out of the World, in the Province of
Mariland -- Let the Copies of this [Epistle] be sent amongst Friends every
where in the Province of Mariland, to be read amongst them in all their
Assemblies, in the fear of the Lord. Jos. Coal.

Seventh, Several Papers given forth for the spreading of Truth, etc. -- I
charge you in the presence of the Lord God to send this amongst all Friends and
Brethren EVERY WHERE, to be read in all Meetings: To you all this is THE WORD
OF GOD, G. Fox.

REMARK.

Thus, Reader, I have given a few Instances of their way and manner of sending
their Epistles to be read in their Meetings, both in England, Holland, and
Mariland, and were it needful, I could give you a hundred more; which shows
that they give their own Writings the preferrence, as well as that they lay
aside the use of the Scriptures in their Meetings; and no marvel if the
Scriptures be Death, Dust, Carnal, Serpents meat, and if it be Conjuration to
preach out of them, and if the Ministers of the Scriptures be Ministers of
Death, and if it be dangerous to read them; as were they (as by the Quakers
esteemed) Dust, Death, Serpents-meat, it were surely dangerous to read them;
for who would feed upon Dust, and Death, and Serpents-meat; this could no way
nourish nor strengthen, but corrupt, poison, and putrify the Minds of such as
are most exercised in reading them; and that so it is, in their Judgment: For
if it were wholesome to read them, and that they believed them to be given
forth by Divine Inspiration, as they to the Parliament have pretended, to serve
a Turn, why do they not read the Scriptures, or sometimes a Chapter, or
sometimes one of the Apostles Epistles in their Meetings? as that they do not,
nor never did; nay, I challenge all the Quakers in England, whether ever their
Ministers recommended so much as one Chapter to be read in any of their
Meetings for Worship these forty years, much less charged them in the presence
of the LORD GOD to read such a Chapter, or such an Epistle, as wrote either by
the Prophets or Apostles: And if they cannot, let it be a Sign for ever that
they deny the Scriptures, first by contempt thrown on them, and next by their
practice of laying them aside, and reading their own Epistles; and let it rest
upon Record, as a witness against their deep Hypocrisies, and let it be a
Testimony against the false Pretenses and Perjury of the twelve false
Witnesses. Nay, and not only in their own Meetings, but let me give you one of
G. Fox his Epistles sent to the Public Churches to be read, and received as a
New Liturgy, (only they rejected it, and kept to the Bible) It is thus
Entitled,

TO ALL THE PEOPLE WHO MEET IN STEEPLE HOUSES IN ENGLAND, AND ELSEWHERE.

Page 2. So all you that have the Letter in England, and calls a Steeple-House
a Church, and do not Worship God in Spirit, therefore to you all this is sent a
Message from the Lord Jesus Christ, in England and elsewhere, into all the
Steeple Houses, or elsewhere to be read: And God is the same, he is a Spirit,
and his Spirit is drawing from all Steeple Houses now, where it is ruling: And
they [the Clergy] tell People of a mediate Call, so they are in their
Witchcraft and Whoredom; Christ is not in the Letter, nor the Life is not in
the Letter. This mediate staff has reigned long in the Cage of unclean Birds.
Now in this our Age, we [Quakers] who have the Spirit which gave forth the
Scriptures, which the Apostles was in; and this is to go abroad in all
Steeple Houses in the Nation, and their High places, and through the World,
that they may come to God from them.

REMARK.

Now had the Christian People of England been as tame as the Quakers, they had
an opportunity put into their hands, to have had a new Liturgy, a new Religion,
a new Gospel, yea, and a new sort of Manisters too, such as they are; yea, all
new; new Meeting Houses, as fine as some Churches: For if this Epistle, which
was sent to be read IN ALL STEEPLE HOUSES, and elsewhere, yea, TO GO THROUGH
THE WORLD, had taken place, we should have had all things turned upside down: A
new Christ too, and a new Scripture too; not one made of Dust, Death,
Serpents-meat, but one given forth by infallible G. Fox, who as he said
himself, (News coming up out of the North, etc. p. 1.) was Written from the
Mouth of the Lord, from one who is naked, and stands naked before the Lord,
clothed with Righteousness, whose Name is not known in the World, risen up out
of the North, which was prophesied of, but now it is fulfilled. And p. 20. Clap
your hands and be glad, for the Lord Jehovah will reign, and the Government
shall be taken from you pretended Rulers, Judges, and Justices, Lawyers and
Constables; all this Tree must be cut down, and Jesus Christ will rule alone. I
say, had this super-excellent Epistle of G. Fox taken place, and been read and
received, and the Letter, [viz. the Scripture] thrown aside, we should not only
have had a new Religion, a new Liturgy, a new Scripture, and new Ordinances, as
they call their Women's Meetings, but new Rulers, or rather no Rulers, but the
Light in G. Fox, no not so much as an outward Judge, and outward Justice, an
outward Lawyer, or an outward Constable; all things should have been new: And
why not? if G. Fox was such a King as the poor Quakers deemed he was. Witness a
Letter from Barbados to him by one of their ablest Ministers, namely Josiah
Coal, and which they justified; see Judas and the Jews, p. 44, 45, 46. viz.
Dear G. Fox, who art the Father of many Nations, whose Life has reached
through us thy Children, even to the Isles afar off, to the begetting many
again to a lively Hope, for which generations to come shall call thee blessed,
whose being and habitation is in the power of the highest, in which thou rulest
and governest in righteousness, and THY KINGDOM IS ESTABLISHED IN PEACE, AND
THE INCREASE THEREOF IS WITHOUT END.

Thus, Reader, have I answered the Objection, and proved my Charge more then
sufficiently; but in regard they have such false Witnesses at their beck to
justify G. W. and to back his Work with the most notorious Lies that men can
be guilty of, I am forced to dwell longer upon the proof then otherwise I need
to do: And now I proceed to the last part of my Charge, viz.

THE THIRD CHARGE.
THAT THEIR TEACHERS ARE DECEIVERS OF THE PEOPLE, FAVORERS OF BLASPHEMY,
EXCUSERS OF IDOLATRY, AND OF A DIFFERENT FAITH FROM THE APOSTLES, PRIMITIVE
CHRISTIANS, BLESSED MARTYRS; AND THAT THEIR DOCTRINE AND PRACTICE TEND TO
OVERTHROW THE CHRISTIAN FAITH.

REMARK.

Reader, Not doubting but that in the proof of the former two Branches of my
Charge, I have proved this also, yet if any thing be wanting, possibly before I
conclude I may supply the vacancy: However, remembering that in E. B's. Works,
p. 223. there is a Book, entitled, A just and lawful Trial of the Teachers and
Ministers, etc. I shall turn the Title of E. B's. Book upon the Quakers, and
say, A just and lawful Trial of the Teachers of the World (I mean of the
Quakers) whereby they are examined, and out of their own mouth, and by their
own practice CONDEMNED; and being brought to the Bar (to use E. B's. words) of
Justice, these things are truly charged against them, and proved upon them, and
by the Testimony of the Scriptures they are found guilty, etc.

THE PROLOGUE.
Having thus inverted the Title of his Book, I shall endeavor to prove, that
first, the Quakers to be of the World; and secondly, their Teachers to be the
Ministers, the false Teachers who of old were prophesied of, who should bring
in damnable Heresies, denying the Lord that bought them, yea, deceivers of the
People, false Apostles, and deceitful Workers, who by their subtle twisting and
twining, intermixing gross Errors with some more general Truths, transform
themselves into the likeness of the Ministers of Christ: But as Christ said, Ye
shall know them by their Fruits; and to me they were first discovered by their
fruits, as by my Book De Chr. Liberate, etc. and that entitled, The painted
Harlot stripped and whipped, etc. does appear: And secondly by their false Doctrine
and pernicious Principles, as by my Book, New Rome unmasked, etc. also appears:
For in my young years I was carried away by their dissimulation, and being long
trained up and educated in their way, and they often, as a Decoy, exhorted us
to obey the Light and Spirit of GOD in our own hearts, and to observe the
dictates of our Consciences; to abstain from evil, and pursue what was good,
and to follow the leadings and guidance of the Light within, which was
sufficient to lead to Salvation, etc. And this being a general Truth, and a
Duty upon all Christians, and no less than the Public Ministry does, yea, and
ought to exhort too: But still, when all this is done, and I am as obedient to
the Light as I can, yet it is but my duty, I must not, as they have taught,
place Salvation there; I say, as by the Public Ministry I am instructed to
obey the Dictates of my Conscience, to abstain from Evil, and follow that which
is Good, according to the Rule of GODS Word revealed in the Scripture; yet as
they teach, and I believe, I ought not to lean upon my own Obedience for
Salvation, and as the Quakers do, account it sufficient: But with that worthy
Martyr, Dr. Robert Barns, say, Acts and Mon. p. 610. I believe in the holy and
blessed Trinity, that created and made all the World: I believe that without
Man's Will or Power Christ Jesus was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and took
Flesh of the blessed Virgin Mary, that HE suffered thirst, hunger and cold,
[which as he was God he could not do; mark that old Friends] and other Passions
of our Bodies, sin excepted, according to the saying of St. Peter: And I
believe that this his Death and Passion was the sufficient Ransom for [my sins,
and] the sins of the whole World; and I believe that through his death he
overcame sin, death, and hell, and that there is no other Satisfaction unto the
Father, but his Death and Passion only; and that no Works of Man did deserve
any thing of GOD, but only Christ's Passion touching our Justification: For I
know [said this humble Martyr] that the best Works that ever I did is impure
and imperfect.

And according to the Faith of this worthy Martyr the Public Ministers teach,
and I believe; not but that Dr. Barns was a good Man, walked circumspectly, had
great regard to the Dictates of his Conscience, and the Guidance of the Light,
abstained from that which was evil, and followed that which was good, and every
way, as became a good Man, as completely as the most perfect Quaker in England,
notwithstanding their high boasting; yet you see he did not lean upon his own
Deservings, but upon the Death and Passion of Jesus Christ, even the Merits of
HIS Death, who suffered thirst, hunger, and cold; who was born of the Virgin,
and made like unto us, sin excepted, etc. nor did he pretend to a sinless
Perfection, as the Quakers vainly boast of, but humbly acknowledged that the
best Works that ever he did was impure and unperfect; and this made him rely
and lean wholly upon the Merits of another, even the Sacrifice of that
Immaculate Lamb, Christ Jesus, his Death and bitter Passion, which the Quakers
never preach up as necessary to believe. Search all their Epistles read in
their Meetings, hear all their Sermons, if ever you hear such a Passage as came
from this humble Martyr, I will be your Bond slave.

And thus have I given an additional Proof that the Quakers are of a different
Faith from the Martyrs, and all true Christian Churches I do except G. Keith
and his Friends, as in New Rome unmasked, p. 69, 70, 71.
; and when I came to understand these their Fundamental Errors, which was
after I had wrote three or four Books against them, in reproof of their
Hypocrisy, about outward Ceremonies, Church Government, their pretending to
preach, write, suffer, and do all things freely; when alas, it was all but a
cheat! they took Money, Gifts, and Reward for all; nay sometimes, as in the
Instance of Sam. Cater, 10 l. where they suffered not 10 d. See New Rome, p.
54. to 68. I say, after I had thus been brushing at the outside or skirts of
Religion for some years, it pleased GOD in mercy to open my understanding, and
to show me by the Rule of Holy Writ, and through the Assistance of His Holy
Spirit, the Quakers great and Fundamental Errors, and then I could not be
silent, (but that too, for the sake of many amongst them, who have a Zeal, I
bear them record, though not according to knowledge) but was constrained to
unmask their blind Guides, who have caused them to err: And if in my Zeal
against their pernicious ways I seem to exceed, they of all People may bear
with me. And now to the Trial, now to the Examination, Who are the true
Ministers and the false? who are the Worlds Teachers? [Alluding to the Quakers
distinction, whose Maxim is, to call all but themselves of the World, or the
Worlds People, or the Worlds Teachers, etc.] and who are the Ministers of
Christ? And though I dare not pretend to know Gods People, so as to give an
infallible Character of another Man's state, as the Quakers G. Fox's Great
Mystery, etc. p. 33, 82, 107.
do yet I hope to make a truer Description than they have done: But for this I
must have a Rule, and that Rule must be the Holy Scriptures, and by the evident
Testimony of that let my Work stand or fall.

A DISCOVERY OF THE WORLDS TEACHERS.
1. The Quakers, who teach that the Names JESUS and CHRIST, do not properly
belong to the Body that suffered upon the Cross at Jerusalem, nor preached it
up as a necessary Article of Faith, to believe that Salvation is obtained
through the Merits of his Death and Passion. They are of the World, they are
the Deceivers and Antichrists.

2. The Quakers, who teach that the Name Jesus and Christ belong to the whole
Body, and to every Member in the Body, as well and as amply as to Christ the
HEAD, are of the World, and Deceivers.

3. The Quakers, who teach that the Body of Christ was of an earthly perishing
Nature like ours, are of the World, and Deceivers.

4. The Quakers, who adore Mortal Men, and give those Divine Attributes to
Geo-Fox, due only to CHRIST, are of the World, and Deceivers.

5. The Quakers, who teach that he that has the same Spirit which raised up
Jesus Christ, is equal with GOD; and which Spirit they pretend to have, and by
it give forth their Epistles, etc. and therefore of the World, great Deceivers,
and horrible Blasphemers.

6. The Quakers, who teach that Josiah Coal, being dead, is ASCENDED, and that
IN Edw. Buroughs, whilst living, was THE ALMIGHTY POWER OF GOD, and that the
FULLNESS dwelt in him of Grace and Virtue, are of the World, and gross Idolaters.

7. The Quakers, who teach that Geo. Fox's coming out of the North naked, not
known, prophesied of, writ from the Mouth of the LORD, etc. are Deceivers,
Impostors, and of the World.

8. The Quakers, who teach that the Gospel is dust, Matthew, Mark, Luke and
John, which is the Letter (say they;) and that such are Ministers of the Letter
are Ministers of Death, which is Serpents-meat; that say the Sacraments are
dust, etc. are of the World, and great Deceivers.

9. The Quakers, who teach that it is as justifiable to burn the Bible, as the
Books wrote by Geo. Fox, Geo. Whitehead, and others of their way, are Decivers
and impudent Impostors.

10. The Quakers, that teach that the Scriptures are uncertain, and that what
the true Prophets say is false, and what the false Prophets said is true; what
good men spoke therein is ill applied, and what wise men spoke therein is ill
expressed; and that whether Moses or Hermes was the first Penman of the
Scripture, is uncertain; they are false Apostles, deceitful Workers, and their
Doctrine tends to overthrow the Christian Faith.

11. The Quakers, who teach in one Book, that the four Books, Matthew, Mark,
Luke and John, are not the New Testament, not the Rule for Christians to walk
by; and teach in another Book lately, that the Scriptures are the New
Testament, Holy Scriptures, etc. are Deceivers, carrying two Faces in one hood,
looking two ways, JANUS like; these are Ambodexters, and of the World.

12. The Quakers, who teach that preaching out of the Scriptures is
Conjuration, are of the World, and Blasphemers.

13. The Quakers, who teach that they have a Spirit beyond all the
Forefathers, and thereby know not only who are Saints, who are Devils, and who
are Apostates; but also that none need to give them discerning or judgment in
any Case, or on any Occasion, but that at ALL TIMES they are furnished both
with Discerning and Judgment, are of the World, Deceivers, Deluders, and
Impostors, etc.

14. The Quakers, who teach that their own Books, Epistles, or Writings, are
THE WORD OF GOD, are of the World, and Deceivers.

15. The Quakers, who require and charge their own People, and that in the Name
of the LORD, to read their own Writings, Epistles, or Books in their Meetings
for Worship, and never so much as request their hearers to read any Portion of
Scriptures in the said Meetings, are Deceivers, Supplanters, and Deluders.

These Doctrines I charge upon the Quakers, as deduceable from their printed
Books and Epistles, and from which Errors they can never purge themselves, but
by unfeigned Repentance, and a public Retraction and Condemnation of the same.
And it is to be feared their Pride is so great, and that they are so fixed upon
their Principle of Infallibility and Perfection, that they cannot, but will
rather strive to cover and gloss over things. However, I presume I have given a
fair Description of the Worlds Teachers: and now let me tell you who are the
true Ministers.

16. Those are true Ministers of Jesus Christ who preach Repentance and
Remission of sins in the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, and Obedience to the
Commands of GOD, according to the Rules of the Gospel, recorded for our
Learning in Holy Writ.

But E. B. says, p. 233. -- I do believe there was never such a Generation of
Teachers as these [i. e. Priests] are; that ever took such wicked courses; to
their shame (says E. B.) do I rehearse it.

Answ. This is very uncharitable, as well as false in Fact: and it looks the
worse, in that it is rehearsed by such a Generation of Teachers as are amongst
the Quakers, who exceed all that ever went before them, professing
Christianity, the Papists ONLY excepted, both in Idolatry, Blasphemy, and
Superstition, yea, and other gross Enormities, of which I could give a large
List: a few for Example sake I shall mention, as in the Cage, where I have laid
Superstition and Immorality together, heaps upon heaps, plain enough for your
view; if not, I can yet lay these and many more plainer, though I delight not
in it, were it not to humble you, and to let you see, notwithstanding your
proud boasting of Perfection, and that you, and you ONLY are GOD's People, and
all besides you of the World, Heathens, etc. that there is cause enough for you
to make Confession of your Sins, and ask Pardon too. I very well know how
Retrograde you run, and how cross and thwart, not only to the practice of the
Saints in all Ages, but even in this Age, with respect to the Christian
Doctrine; and how you have in little minute matters, affected an odd kind of
singularity, whereby you have separated your selves in Religious Matters, as
well as in Habit, Manners, etc. As first, for any kindness, you will not say, I
thank you, but which is tantamount, I accept of thy love. You will not put the
Hat off, but nod, bow, or conjue, etc. crying out against fine Clothes, dainty
Dishes, lofty Horses, Coaches, etc. until you could get them; yea the Woe (said
you) was to such as so did: But now who exceed you in fine Clothes, [except a
little Lace or Ribbons, which for crosness sake you forbear] dainty Dishes,
lofty Horses, goodly Houses, brave Coaches, fine Perriwigs, and what not? nay,
even both Ministers and People: witness London, Bristol, Stoak, Erith,
Northampton, and many other places. You pretend you cannot for Conscience sake
pay to the Trained Solers, and yet can pay ten times the value toward the
carrying on a vigorous War against France. But for the LORDS PRAYER, the
APOSTLES CREED, or TEN COMMANDMENTS, not one of them in all your Books; no,
they are too low and mean for your proud Lucefering Minds to teach. Nay
further, as a Fruit of your Doctrine, that the Name JESUS and CHRIST do as
properly belong to your Believers, as to HIM that suffered at Jerusalem, you do
give the Name of Emmauel and Allalujah to your Children: As to Emmanuel, it was
by the Prophet foretold to belong to CHRIST; Isai. 7. 14. Behold, a Virgin
shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his Name EMMANUEL; which, being
interpreted, is GOD with us, says St. Matthew, Cap. 1. verse. 23. And thus do
you manifest your Doctrine by your Fruit: as likewise Allalujah, an Attribute
of Praise, due only to GOD, as Rev. 19. four or five times mentioned, as well
as in diverse other places; yet these Names your chief Leaders have given
totheir Children: But GOD has and will stain your Pride more and more, and
make you at length see cause sufficient to confess your sins to GOD, and ask
Pardon for the same, and that for Jesus Christ his sake, who died for our sins,
and rose again for cur justification, as the Evangelist says 1 John 1. 9. If we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness, who was the Propitiatory Sacrifice for our
sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole World; who now sits
at the right hand of God as an Advocate and Intercessour, in the same Body in
which he ascended in the sight of the Galileans; read 1 John 2. 1, 2. Acts 1.
9, 10, 11. Luke 24. 51. Mark 16. 19. at the right hand of GOD in Majesty on
high.

Babylon is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of Devils, and the
hold of every foul Spirit, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird.

For her SINS have reached unto Heaven, and GOD has remembered her Iniquities.

Reward her, even as she has rewarded you, and double unto her double,
according to her works: in the Cup which she has filled, fill to her double.

Rejoice over her thou Heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for GOD has
avenged you on her, Rev. 18. 2, 5, 6, 20.



1.
HERE lie the Men, behold and view them well,
You know their Names, and where they use to dwell;
You know their Parts, you know their Fruits also;
If these be Saints, LORD whether shall we go?
2.
If not? why should you not Confession make,
And Pardon beg for Jesus Christ his sake?
Are you too proud? or do you still disdain?
Or do you say, such things with us are vain?
3.
Behold, I say, and mark the Prophets well,
They did Confess, the Scripture does us tell,
Their Sins to GOD, and begged his pardon too:
If you were humble, you would do so too.
4.
And now observe, all you that do pass by,
And notice take, how coupled they do lie:
For as they live, and no Confession make,
Even so they die, which makes my heart to ache;
5.
Yea and lament, when that I lay to heart
The sad estate of such as do depart,
Depending on their own Righteousness,
Their own Deserts, and outside Holiness.
6.
I say, behold, how grovelling they do lie,
And cross, yea cross, all cross to all, and why?
No Man can tell, nor they a Reason give,
Why they so cross should be to all that live.
7.
Pretenses great they to Religion make,
Though cross to all, some think for crosness sake.
In practice cross, yea in their Fruits also;
In Manners cross, in Faith and Doctrine too.
8.
Cross to the Saints, cross to the Prophets too:
Yea, cross to all, till they themselves undo:
For who so cross as they, who when convict
Will still persist, their Errors not retract.
9.
Remember then that Babels Walls are shaken,
And her own Birds in her own Net are taken:
As in the Cage, you may perceive right well,
Such hateful Birds as have no parallel.
10.
Who though they boast of a sinless Perfection,
As without sin, so no need of Confession:
Yet in each Pair, you certainly may find
A Bird unclean in Body and in Mind.
And now let me proceed to strengthen what I have said in the Discovery of your
Errors, who are called Quakers; and not only so, but by many Scripture Proofs
demonstrate and set forth to you the Excellency of the Christian Faith, which
may be a means (if you will peruse what I have wrote for your Instruction) to
show you your great mistake, and that in Fundamentals too; and to inform your
Judgments, and to clear up your Understandings in the Principles of the
Christian Religion. And as I have taken great pains herein, and thought no
labor too much; so I do assure you, nothing would more comfort me, than to see
you humble, and to come to a sight of your Errors, and to use the means
appointed of GOD for your Relief: And therefore follow the Example of the
blessed Martyrs, who were in great Errors, and thought themselves not too
good, nor too high, nor to holy to acknowledge their Mistakes and confess their
Errors, as in my last Book I have at large showed, from the Example of Dr.
Robert Barns, Bishop Latimer, Martin Luther, and others, who in humility made
Confession of their Sins, of their Errors, and of their ignorant Zeal; and
then magnified the goodness of GOD, in discovering to them his saving health.
And why should you be over confident? why should not you examine the Scriptures?
Come try a little, lay all prejudice aside; though you may not believe me, whom
your Teachers have prejudiced you against, yet believe the Scriptures I have
quoted, and let my Arguments have place amongst you, so far as they are
bottomed on the Authority of the Scriptures, and no further, I entreat you. I
know you have been told much about G. Fox, of his coming out of the North, of
his being clothed with Righteousness, Prophesied of, etc. but alas! this is
without bottom. Indeed, after he came out of the North, I know that J. Coal, J.
Audland, Fra. Howgill, Edw. Borough, Sol. Eccles, Jo. Blaikling, and abundance
more, called him the Great APOSTLE, some that true PROPHET, whom John said he
was not: others the Branch, the Star, the Son of Righteousness, and Father of
many Nations, and that his Life reached through us to the Isles afar off; and
that his BEING and HABITATION was in the POWER of the HIGHEST, in which he
RULED and GOVERNED in RIGHTEOUSNESS; and that HIS KINGDOM was ESTABLISHED in
Peace, and that of the INCREASE thereof there was NEVER to be an end. And
although these Men gave witness to G. Fox, yet not as the Prophets gave witness
to Christ; for the Prophets foretold of Christ's coming, of his Death and
Sufferings, of his Kingdom and Government, of his Rule and Dominion; I say,
these things, nay all that CHRIST did and Suffered the Prophets foretold of.
Besides, it is plain by G. Fox's Doctrine, Example and Practice, how he
interfered with Christ, his Doctrine and Practice in many things; particularly
in his Book styled Gospel Liberty, etc. p. 7. where he calls the LORD's PRAYER,
OUR FATHER, etc. the Common Prayer, or A Common Prayer, etc. Printed 1668. by
which Expressions, and his and the Preachers Example, the use of that Prayer
has been wholly laid aside by them, though it be so clear that all may
understand it, so short that any may learn it, so full as to take in all our
wants, and so exact as to show us what we should be, as well as what we should
ask: O what a resemblance it bears to the Author thereof! who was the highest,
and lowest, the greatest and the least, GOD and Man, who knew best what form of
Prayer suited his Disciples, and all that obey their Doctrine* But it teaches
one thing which G. Fox never taught you, nor do your Leaders teach you, nor do
you practice it your selves, that is, this Confession following, FORGIVE US OUR
SINS, AS WE FORGIVE THEM WHICH TRESPASS AGAINST US, etc. this your Teachers do
not do, this they do not teach you to do, and this I presume is the main Reason
why your Leaders have laid aside this most excellent Form of Prayer taught us
by Jesus Christ himself, who is the wonderful Counselor, and best knew what
was fittest for us. Again, your Teachers have laid aside, and you also by their
Example, the Apostles Creed, I BELIEVE IN GOD, etc. which Tertullian calls the
Rule of Faith, (as well as the Scripture) and says, it was instituted by De
Praescr. l. 1. c. 13. It is also called the Rule of Faith by Origin.
Christ. And the Ancients quote this Creed, as well as Scripture, to confute
Heretics, and seems to have given it the same honor, because it is indeed the
same thing, called therefore the Compendium of the Gospel, and the Epitome of
the Holy Scripture. And all this I could prove to you, if you had the
Scriptures in that esteem you ought to have, and would abide the Decision
thereof, acknowledging it to be a sufficient Rule to square your Actions by,
both with respect to Religious Exercises, and the Affairs of Human Life.

Thus does it more and more appear, that as G. Fox and his Preachers would seem
to justle CHRIST out of his Place, and rob Him of his Honor, so has their
Doctrine and Example overturned the Exercise of these two Christian Duties, as
well as other Ordinances and Precepts instituted by CHRIST, and by his
Apostles; and thereby have they declared to all the World, that they differ in
Faith and Practice from the Primitive Christians, Saints and Martyrs in all
Ages; and the Reason is plain; for if they do not believe in HIM that was born
of the Virgin, who suffered and rose again; nay, cannot call Him CHRIST, but A
Vail, A Garment, A Vessel, etc. How should they say this Creed, if they do not
believe that he is risen? yea, and that the SAME JESUS is ascended, and now
sits at the right hand of GOD in the SAME BODY in which he ascended, according
to Acts 2. how should they say this Creed, if they do not believe the
Resurrection of the Body out of the Grave at the day of Judgment? How should
they say or teach others to say this Creed? And therefore I exhort you to read
the Scriptures, and though your Teachers have told you that F. Bugg is a Beast,
a Dog, a Wolf, an Enemy of all Righteousness, a Child of the Devil, yea a Devil
Incarnate, etc. What then? did not the unbelieving Jews call Christ a Devil,
and have they not called the Public Ministry, yea all, without restriction or
limitation, Thieves, Robbers, Witches and Devils, etc. what then? never regard
that, but as I said, read the Scriptures, and take my advice no farther than
the Scripture warrants it, and so far my Soul for yours, you are safe; but if
your Teachers have begotten such an ill opinion of me, as that you will not
take my advice, as they have against the Public Ministry, that you will not
hear them, yet I am persuaded what I have wrote will be of service to your
Children, yea and your Childrens Children; and if so, why should I not proceed
to discover your Errors? that so the blind may not always lead the blind, but
that you may become wiser than your Teachers, and see for your selves; I am now
speaking to you the hearers among the Quakers, who have a zeal, I bear you
record, though not according to knowledge, and your Leaders have been
instrumentally the cause of your Errors and Blindness: O consider of what I
say, and be considerate and cool! I am not angry as ye suppose: If I be sharp,
it is my zeal for the Truths of the Gospel, which your Teachers have defaced.
And therefore bear with me; I pity you, I lament for you, whether you believe
it or not. They tell you that none was ever converted to GOD by outward and
external hearing Firebrand. etc. 2d part, p. 87. G. F. and J. B.
: though the Scripture says that Faith comes by hearing. O consider and peruse
what follows, and the Lord give you an understanding heart.

The Prophesies of the Holy Prophets fulfilled and accomplished in and by our
blessed LORD and Savior Jesus Christ -- Hear the words of our Savior --
Search the Scriptures, they are they which testify of me, Joh. 5. 39. These
are the words which I spoke unto you, whilst I was yet with you, that all
things must be fulfilled which was written in the Law of Moses, and in the
Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning ME. Luke 24. 44. The Scriptures cannot
be broken. Joh. 10 35. It is easier for Heaven and Earth to pass, than for one
Tittle of the Law to fail till all be fulfilled.
PROPHESIES FULFILLED. Isa. 7. 14. THerefore the Lord himself shall give you a
Sign, behold, a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and they shall call his
Name Immanuel. Matthew. 1. 23. BEhold, a Virgin shall be with Child, and shall
bring forth a Son, and they shall call his Name Immanuel, which (being
interpreted) is GOD with us. Isa. 8. 14. -- And he shall be for a Sanctuary;
but for a stone of stumbling, and for a rock of offense to both houses of
Israel, for a gin and for a snare, etc. V. 15. And many among them shall
stumble, and fall, and be broken, and be snared and taken. Matthew. 2. 16. And
whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken; but on whomsoever it shall
fall it will grind him to powder. Micah 5. 2. But thou Bethlehem Ephratah,
though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall come
forth unto me THAT is to be Ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been of
old from everlasing. Matthew. 2. 16. And thou Bethlehem in the Land of Judah, art
not the least among the Princes of Judah; for out of thee shall come a Governor
that shall rule my people Israel. Psalm 2. 2. The Kings of the Earth set
themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together against the LORD, and against
his Anointed, saying, etc. Matthew. 26. 3. Then assembled together the chief
Priests, and the Scribes, and the Elders of the People, unto the Palace of the
High Priest, who was called Caiaphas. See also Matthew. 27. 1. Jer. 31. 15. Thus
says the LORD, a voice was heard in Ramah, Lamentation and bitter weeping:
Rachel weeping for her Children, refused to be comforted for her Children,
because they were not. Matthew. 2. 18. In Ramah was there a voice heard,
Lamentation and weeping and great mourning; Rachel weeping for her Children,
and would not be comforted because they are not. Isa 53. 7. He was oppressed,
HE was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth. HE is brought as a Lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so opened HE not his
mouth. Matthew. 26. 63. But Jesus held his peace; And the High Priest answered
and said unto him, I adjure thee by the living God that thou tell us, whether
thou be the Christ, the Son of GOD. Matthew. 27. 14. Jer. 16. 16. Behold, I will
send for many fishers, says the LORD, and they shall fish them, etc. Matthew. 4.
19. And he said unto them, follow me, and I will make you fishers of Men. Isa.
61. 1. The Spirit of the LORD GOD is upon me, because the LORD has anointed ME
to preach good Tidings to the Meek: he has sent ME to bind up the broken
heart, to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening the Prison to them
that are bound. Matthew. 11. 5. The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the
Lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor
have the Gospel preached to them. Isa. 53. 12. Therefore will I divide him a
portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong, because
he has poured out his soul unto death, and he was numbered with the
Transgressors; and he shall bear the sins of many, and make Intercession for
the Transgressors. Matthew. 27. 38. Then were there two Thieves crucified with
him, one on the right hand, and another on the left. See also John 19. 18. read
also Acts 10. 35. Therefore let all the House of Israel know assuredly, that
GOD has made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both LORD and Christ.
Acts 5. 30, 31. The GOD of our Fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged
on a Tree. Him has GOD exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a
Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. Isa. 42. 1.
Behold my Servant whom I uphold, mine Elect in whom my Soul delights: I have
put my Spirit upon him, he shall bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles. Matthew.
12. 18. Behold my Servant whom I have chosen, my Beloved in whom my Soul is
well pleased: I will put my Spirit upon him, and he shall show Judgment to the
Gentiles. See also Matthew. 3. 17. Isa. 62. 11. Behold the LORD has proclaimed
unto the end of the World, say ye to the Daughter of Sion, behold thy Salvation
comes; behold his reward is with him, and his Work before him. Matthew. 21. 5.
Tell ye the Daughter of Sion, behold thy King comes unto thee meek, and
sitting upon an Ass, and a Colt the Foal of an Ass. Psalm. 118. The Stone which
the Builders refused is become the Head of the Corner. This is the LORD's
doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. See also Isa. 28. 16. Matthew. 21. 42.
Jesus said unto them, did ye never read in the Scriptures, The Stone which the
Builders rejected, the same is become the Head of the Corner. This is the
LORD's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. Psalm. 110. 1. The LORD said
unto my LORD, sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine Enemies thy
Footstool. Matthew. 22. 44. The LORD said unto my LORD, sit thou on my right
hand, until I make thine Enemies thy Footstool. See Acts the second at large.
Psalm. 41. 9. Yea, mine own familiar Friend in whom I trusted, which did eat of
my bread, has lift up his heel against me. Matthew. 26. 23. And he answered and
said, he that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, the same shall betray me.
Zech. 13. 7. Awake, O Sword, against my Shepherd, against the Man that is my
Fellow, says the LORD of Hosts: smite the Shepherd and the Sheep shall be
scattered, etc. Matthew. 26. 31. Then said Jesus unto them all, ye shall be
offended because of me this night: for it is written, I will smite the
Shepherd, and the Sheep of the Flock shall be scattered abroad. Isa. 40. 3. The
voice of him that cries in the Wilderness, prepare ye the way of the LORD:
make strait in the Desert a highway for our GOD. Matthew. 3. 3. For this is he
that was spoken of by the Prophet Isaiah, saying, The voice of one crying in
the Wilderness, prepare ye the way of the LORD, make his paths strait. Isa.
50. 6. I gave my back to the Smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off
the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting. Matthew. 26. 67. Then did
they spit in HIS face, and buffeted HIM, and others smote HIM with the palms of
their hands. Isai. 53. 4. Surely he has born our grief, and carried our
sorrows; yet we did esteem HIM smitten of GOD and afflicted. Matthew. 8. 17. That
it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Isaiah the Prophet, saying, HIMSELF
took our Infirmities, and bare our sicknesses. Isa. 35. 5, 6. Then shall the
lame Man leap as an Heart, and the Tongue of the Dumb sing: for in the
Wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the Desert. Matthew. 11. 5. The
blind received their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the
deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have the Gospel preached to
them. See Matthew. 15. 30. Psalm. 22. 18. They part my Garments amongst them, and
cast lots upon my Vesture. Matthew. 27. 35. And they crucified him and parted his
Garment, casting lots, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the
Prophet; They parted my Garments among them, and upon my Vesture did they cast
Lots. Psalm. 22. 8. He trusted on the LORD that he would deliver him; let him
deliver him seeing he delighted in him. Matthew. 27. 43. HE trusted in GOD, let
Him deliver Him now, if he will have Him; for HE said, I am the Son of GOD.
Psalm. 78. 2. I will open my mouth in a parable, I will utter dark sayings of
old. Matthew. 13. 35. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet,
saying, I will open my mouth in a parable, I will utter things which have been
kept secret from the foundation of the World. Jer. 7. 11. Is this House which
is called by my name, become a Den of Robbers in your Eyes, etc. See Isa. 56.
7. Matthew. 21. 13. And said unto them, It is written, My House shall be called
the House of Prayer, but ye have made it a Den of Thieves. Psalm. 72. 10. The
Kings of Tarshish and of the Isles shall bring Presents, the Kings of Sheba and
Seba shall offer Gifts. See also Isa. 60. 6. Matthew. 2. 11. And when they were
come into the House, they saw the young Child, with Mary his Mother, and fell
down and worshipped Him: And when they had opened their Treasures, they
presented unto Him Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh. Dan. 9. 24. Seventy weeks are
determined upon thy People, and upon thy holy City, to finish thy
Transgressions, and to make an end of sin; and to make Reconciliation for
Iniquity, and to bring in Everlasting Righteousness, and to seal up the Vision
and Prophecy, and to Anoint the most Holy. See Isa. 40. 10. Luke 24. 27. And
beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, HE expounded unto them in all the
Scriptures the things concerning Himself: And they said one to another, did not
our hearts burn within us whilst HE talked with us by the way, and whilst HE
opened to us the Scriptures. Zach. 9. 9. Rejoice greatly O Daughter of Sion,
shout O Daughter of Jerusalem; behold thy KING comes unto thee; HE is just,
and having salvation, lowly, and riding upon an Ass, and upon a Colt, the Foal
of an Ass. John 12. 15. Fear not Daughter of Sion, behold thy King comes
sitting upon an Asses Colt. Isa. 40. 11. HE shall feed His Flock like a
Shepherd, HE shall gather the Lambs with His Arm, and carry them in his Bosom,
and shall gently lead those that are with young. See also Ezech. 34. 23. John
10. 11. I am the good Shepherd; the good Shepherd gives his Life for the
Sheep. Isa. 9. 7. Of the increase of HIS Government and Peace there shall be no
end upon the Throne of David and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to
establish it with Judgment and with Justice, from henceforth and for ever: the
Zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this. See also Dan. 7. 14. Micah 4. 7.
Psalm. 110. 4. John 12. 34. The People answered Him, we have heard out of the
Law that Christ abides for ever: And how say Thou, the Son of Man must be
lifted up? Who is this Son of Man? Psalm. 109. 8. Let his days be few, and let
another take his Office. See Psalm. 41. 9. Acts 1. 17, 18. For he was numbered
with us, and had obtained part of this Ministry. Now this Man purchased a Field
with the reward of Iniquity; and falling headlong he burst asunder. Isa 9. 7.
Of the Increase of his Government and Peace there shall be no end upon the
Throne of David and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with
Judgment and with Justice, from henceforth and for ever, etc. Luke 1. 32, 33.
HE shall be Great, and shall be called the Son of the HIGHEST; and the LORD GOD
shall give unto HIM the Throne of HIS Father David: and HE shall reign over the
House of Jacob for ever and ever; and of HIS Kingdom there shall be no end.
Mal. 4. 2. But unto you that fear my Name shall the Son of Righteousness arise
with healing in his wings, etc. See Isa. 9. 2. 42. 7. 43. 8. 49. 9. Luke 1. 79.
To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, to
guide our feet into the way of Peace. Number. 24. 8. GOD brought HIM forth out of
Egypt, HE has as it were the strength of an Unicorn: He shall eat up the
Nations, HIS Enemies, and shall break their Bones, and pierce them through with
HIS Arrows. See Hosea 11. 1. Matthew 2. 15. And was there until the death of
Herod, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the LORD by the Prophet,
saying, Out of Egypt have I called my Son. Psalm. 88. 8. Thou have put away Mine
Acquaintance far from Me; thou have made Me an Abomination unto them; I am shut
up and I cannot come forth. Matthew. 26. 56. But all this was done that the
Scriptures of the Prophets might be fulfilled: Then all HIS Disciples forsook
HIM and fled. Zech. 11. 13. And the LORD said unto me, cast it unto the Potter:
a goodly price that I was prized at of them. And I took the thirty pieces of
silver and cast them to the potter. Matthew. 27. 9. Then was fulfilled that which
was spoken by Jeremiah the Prophet, saying, And they took the thirty pieces of
silver, the price of HIM that was valued, whom they of the Children of Israel
did value. Mal. 3. 1. Behold, I will send my Messenger, and HE shall prepare
the way before ME: And the LORD whom ye seek shall suddenly come to HIS Temple;
even the Messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight in, behold he shall come,
says the Lord of Hosts. Matthew. 11. 10. For this is HE of whom it is written,
behold, I send my Messenger before THY face, which shall prepare THY way before
THEE. Isa. 5. 3. 9. And HE made his Grave with the wicked, and with the rich in
his death; because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in HIS
mouth. Matthew. 27. 60. And laid it in his own new Tomb, which he had hewn out
of the Rock: And he rolled a great Stone to the door of the Sepulcher, and
departed. Psalm. 69. 21. They gave ME also Gall for my meat; and in my thirst
they gave ME Vinegar to drink. Matthew. 27. 48. And straitway one of them ran and
took a sponge, and filled it with Vinegar, and put it on a Reed, and gave HIM
Vinegar to drink. Exodus 12 46. In one house shall it be eaten; thou shall not
carry forth ought of the flesh abroad out of the house, neither shall ye break
a Bone thereof. See also Numb. 9. 12. and Psalm. 34. 20. John 19. 36. For these
things were done that the Scripture should be fulfilled: A bone of HIM shall
not be broken. Numb. 21. 9. And Moses made a Serpent of Brass, and put it upon
a Pole: And it came to pass, that if a Serpent had bitten any man, when he
beheld the Serpent of Brass he lived. John 3. 14. And as Moses lifted up the
Serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up. See also
John 8. 28. Deuteronomy. 18. 15. The LORD thy GOD will raise up unto thee a Prophet
from the midst of thee, of thy Brethren, like unto me; unto HIM ye shall
hearken. Acts 7. 37. This is that Moses which said unto the Children of Israel,
A Prophet shall the LORD your GOD raise up unto you of your Brethren, like unto
me, HIM shall ye hear. Jer. 23. 5. Behold, the days come says the LORD, that I
will raise unto David a righteous BRANCH; and a King shall reign and prosper,
and shall execute Judgment and Justice in the Earth. See also Jer. 33. 15.
Zech. 3. 8. and cap. 6. v. 12. John 1. 45. Philip finds Nathanael, and said,
We have found him of whom Moses in the Law and the Prophets did write, Jesus of
Nazareth the Son of Joseph. Acts 10 43. To HIM gave all the Prophets witness,
that through His NAME, whosoever believes in HIM shall receive remission of
sins.

All things that are written of ME have an end, says Christ. It is sure and a
convertable Rule, nothing was done by Christ, but it was foretold: And nothing
was ever foretold of Christ by the Prophets, which was not done, and which was
not fulfilled. It would take up some years to compare the Prophets and
Evangelists, the Prediction and the History, and to Discourse at large how the
one Foretells, and the other Answers. HE, CHRIST must be Apprehended, it was
fore-prophesied; The Anointed of the LORD was taken in their Nets, says
Jeremiah; But how? HE must be sold: For what? Thirty Pieces of Silver: And what
must those do? Buy a Field; all foretold: They took thirty pieces of silver,
the price of Him that was valued, and gave them for the Potters field, says
Zachery. By whom? That Child of Perdition; that the Scripture might be
fulfilled. Which was he? it is foretold, He that eats Bread with me, says
the Psalmist. But what shall his Disciples do? Flee from Him; so says the
Prophecy: I will smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be scattered, says
Zachary. And so on. O consider of these things, and lay them to heart, you that
say you cannot call HIM that was born, that suffered Death on the Cross,
CHRIST; but call HIM a Vail, a Figure, a Garment, a Vessel. What? did the
Prophets foretell that a Virgin should conceive, and bring forth a Vail, a
Garment, or a Figure? O ye Blasphemers! Is this your Scripture Language you so
often call for in opposition to the word Trinity and Sacraments, as if indeed
you had been zealous for the Scriptures? Ye Hypocrites; what can you not call
Him Christ? only a Figure; HE who was the Substance of all Figures and Shadows,
in whom they end, and were but Types of HIS coming? Christ is the end of the
Law; what Law? the Ceremonial Law; it was referred to HIM, observed of HIM,
fulfilled in HIM, abolish't by HIM. It Is plain, that those Jewish Ceremonies
looked at CHRIST; Circumcision, Passover, the Tabernacle, both outer and inner,
the Temple, the Laver, both the Altars, the Table of Shewbread, the
Candlesticks, the Vail, the Holy of Holies, the Ark, the Pot of Manna, Aaron's
Rod, the High Priest his Order and Line, his Habits, his Inaugurations, his
Washings, Anointing the Sacrifice, etc. These had their Virtue from CHRIST,
Relation to HIM, and their End in HIM. What would you make Christ only a
Figure, a Vail, a Garment, who is the Substance of all Figures, and Shadows,
and Types; HE whom the Prophets foretold of; HE who fulfilled all which was
written of HIM by the Prophets? What, can you not call HIM CHRIST? O ye
Blasphemers! And now you cry out and say, What do you meddle with the dead? (i.
e. G. Fox) why do you print, and amuse, and trouble the World? what are you
ashamed to hear of your Blasphemies? are you ashamed to hear your pernicious
Principles discovered, and your damnable Heresies rip't up, and laid open? Is
not Pilate dead? many Idolatrous Popes dead? what then? must we not continue
their Crimes, and show their Villainies? Is not Arius dead, and many Heretics
dead? must we not therefore write against the Arians, and show the tendency of
his pernicious Principles, which grow as Seeds sown by the wicked one. But by
Whitehead's Learning we must not remind the World of these Idolators and
Persecutors, that others may be aware of such as hold the same Tenets? What
does your Profession begin to stink, as Geo. Keith truly says, and become
nauseous to your own Noses; then use just means to bury it, by a genuine
Retractation, or else call for no silence; for if you do, I will join with
Bishop Hall in the saying of that Heroical Luther, CURSED BE THE SILENCE THAT
HERE FOR BEARS. For I am not now, as M. Luther once said, writing against the
Papists, picking at the Rind, but plucking at the Root, even at the Foundation
of your Errors, and that makes you angry, and fret, and chafe: But all is to
no purpose; no peace so long as the whoredoms of Jezebel remain. Repent
therefore and amend, that is the way to find mercy with GOD. Retract and
renounce your Errors by some public and general Act, and that is the way to
silence the Pens of HIS Servants; or else it will be as Mr. Penyman lately told
you in your Meetings in London, viz. That a fire is kindled that cannot be
quenched, for the burning is of the great and mighty GOD. But why do I talk of
Repentance, since in Scripture I find Confession is the forerunner of
Repentance, and Confession you cannot abide, as I have already observed: For
let any man read a thousand of your Epistles, and they shall not find one
Confession of Sin, nor asking Pardon for Christ's sake: And let any man go to a
thousand of your Meetings, and they shall never hear any one of your Ministers
make Confession of Sins, and beg Pardon for the same; which is enough, if no
more could be said against you, to prove you of a different Faith and practice
from the Prophets and Apostles, Saints and Martyrs, and all good Christians to
this day; as well as to show that you are in the steps of the Pharisees: Read
Luke 18. 11, 12. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, O. GOD, I
thank thee that I am not as other men, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or
even as this Publican: I fast twice in the week, I give tithe of all I possess,
etc. Here is the perfect Pharisee and the perfect Quaker, in perfect Unity:
Here is no Confession of Sin, here is no asking Pardon for Sin, nor no smiting
upon the Breast, saying, God be merciful to me a poor sinner, as the Publican
did. And that I may not leave this without a President, for I love to keep to
matter of fact, pray take a view of one of the Quakers Prayers in print, I mean
that perfect Pharisee G. Whitehead, in his Book Judgment fixed, etc. Thou
know, O Lord, that though thou have endued me with a Christian Spirit, and
with Faith, Patience, and Rejoicing under all my Sufferings and Tribulations
for thy Names sake -- yet Thou have also endued me with a Spirit of righteous
Judgment, Understanding and Zeal for thy holy Name, etc.

And though this Prayer contains near five Pages, yet not one word of
Confession of Sin; not a word of begging Pardon for Christ's sake; but like the
proud Pharisee, Thou have endued me with righteous Judgment, with
Understanding, with Zeal: He is not as other men. And read all their printed
Papers, and you will find them of the same tendency, and not like the Prayers
of GOD's People in any Age or Generation, as in my last New Rome, etc. I have
largely made appear from the Example of the Prophets, Apostles, and worthy
Martyrs: To whom let me add one Example of worthy Thomas Bilny, as in Fox's
Acts and Mon. p. 467, 468. O mighty power of the most High, which I also
MISERABLE SINNER have often tasted and felt, etc. And when this Prayer was
ended, he in the next Page goes on thus: Verily when the New Testament was
first set forth by Erasmus -- I bought it by the Providence of GOD, and at the
first reading, as I remember, I chanced upon this sweet Sentence of St. Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 15. It is a true saying, and worthy of all men to be embraced, that
Christ Jesus came into the World to save sinners, of whom I am the chief and
principal. This one Sentence, through GOD's Instruction, did so exhilerate my
heart, being before wounded with the Guilt of MY SINS -- And THEREFORE with ALL
MY WHOLE POWER I TEACH that ALL MEN should first acknowledge their sins, and
condemn them; and afterward hunger and thirst after righteousness, etc.

O the Christian temper and heavenly frame of this worthy Martyr, worthy our
Imitation: First, He acknowledged himself a miserable sinner, and therefore the
fitter Object for Mercy. Secondly, O how he rejoiced at the Confession of St.
Paul, who not only acknowledged himself a sinner, but the CHIEF of sinners,
that thereby he might magnify the rich Mercy of GOD in Christ Jesus: He was
not like Solomon Eccles, who in his Music Lecture, p. 22. said, I do affirm,
that if John (the Apostle) had said he had been a sinner, he had lied. No, no,
this Martyr did not account St. Paul a lier, though he would have had as much
reason; for St. Paul came not behind the chiefest of the Apostles: Well, but
this is not all; but as St. Paul was thus humbled to make this Confession, and
thus joyful at this worthy saying, that Christ came into the World to save such
penitent sinners, so this worthy Martyr resolved to make it a Rule in Divinity,
saying, And therefore with all my WHOLE POWER I teach, that ALL MEN should
ACKNOWLEDGE THEIR SINS, etc.

Thus have I showed the practice of the Martyrs; and if you read the Scriptures
in the Margent, you may find it suitable to the practice of GOD's People from
the Psalm. 51. 2, 3 and 90. Job 7. 20. Lam. 3. 41, 42. Isa. 64 6. Dan. 9. 4. to
the end. 1 John 1. 8. 1 Timothy 1. 15. Romans 7 Luke 11. 4. 1 King 8. 46. to 49.
Psalm. 32. 5. Jer. 14. 20. Jam. 5. 16. Eccles. 4. 26. Prove. 28. 13. Neh. 1. to
the end. Ezra 9.
beginning, the Quakers only excepted, who manifest themselves thereby, (as
well as in an hundred things more that I could mention, if need were) that they
have a Spirit not beyond, but contrary to the Spirit of the Prophets, Apostles
and Martyrs, yea, and all true Christians to this day.

And although I am not designed to strive much about words in answer to your
Glossings, but rather choose to rip up and discover your Errors, and to load
you with the fruit of your doings, yet I would in your next have you show me a
Reason why you have not answered my former Queries, and Mr. Archer's Query. I
remember G. F. put forth a Book, styled, A Primer for the Doctors and Scholars
of Europe, etc. Anno 1659 wherein is contained Two thousand four hundred thirty
four Queries, demanding, What was a Genitive Case, a Dative Case, a Participle,
an Adverb, an Interjection, a Dipthong, a Vowel, etc. on purpose to bring
contempt upon Learning and the Learned, as cited in Battering Rams, etc. I have
showed more at large: But O how he strutted, and vaunted, and boasted, like
Goliath of Gath, saying, Come out of your Holes and Dens, draw your Weapons if
you have any worth the drawing; for the little David's, [i. e. Quakers] are
risen, who have the Slings, the Baggs, and ths Stones, etc. And therefore come
forth [ye Scholars] into the open field, there to be tried with the little
David's, and let us see if your Tongues can wag, etc,

And if you refuse to answer my former Queries, yet let me prevail with you to
answer these following, viz.

Query 1. Why did you in your Book, The Trumpet of the Lord, etc. cry, Woe to
such as were called Master and Mistress, Sir, etc. And that drank Wine, eat
dainty Dishes, wore Silk and Velvet, that had Waiting-men and Waitingmaids,
that rode in Coaches, and high and lofty Horses, etc. since it is now common for
the Quakers to call and be called Master and Mistress, Sir, and to drink Wine,
eat dainty Dishes, were Silk and Velvet, and Perriwigs, etc. to ride in Coaches
and as lofty Horses, and rich Houses as any Body (your Circumstances
considered) and to have Waiting-men and Waiting-maids. Does not this argue an
Apostasy? Or is it only lawful to the Quakers, and under the woe in others?

Query 2. Why do you refuse to pay two pence or four pence toward the
reparation of the Militia Arms, and yet can pay ten shillings toward carrying
on a vigorous War against the French King? Is not this like your pretending it
unlawful to fight, and yet excite, stir up, and encourage Oliver, his Officers
and Army to fighting? saying, O Oliver Cromwell, thou should have invited all
Nations on Earth to come in and join with thee. Let thy Soldiers go forth with
a free and willing heart, that thou may rock Nations as a Cradle, etc. more
largely recited in Battering Rams, etc. p. 3. Do you not in both these
Instances delude the World? or like the Pharisees of old, strain at a Gnat, and
swallow a Camel?

Query 3. Why do you refuse giving respect to your Superiors, when at the same
time you exact it of your Servants and Apprentices, making them stand bare
headed before you in your Houses and Shops: Is not this Hypocrisy?

Quest. 3. Why do you make such a noise against all other Ministers, calling
them Hirelings, when you take money not only for preaching, writing, etc. but
for suffering, as in the case of Sam. Cater, who took 10 l. for Suffering,
where he did not suffer 10 d. as in New Rome unmasked, etc. p. 60. to 90.

Query 5. Why cannot you present to King William and Queen Mary, one Public
Address in five years time, as well as to the late King James the Second, six
in four years time?

Query 6. Since you say, That visible Miracles have been done amongst the
Quakers in the sight of the World: Reply to the Vind. etc. p. 14. And since you
say, We have Thousands at our Meetings, and none of us dare speak, a word, but
as we are eternally moved of the Lord: A true Account, etc. p. 18. These two
Assertions I further charge upon you to be notoriously false; and therein, as
the Scripture truly says, you tell lies in Hypocrisy.

Query 7. Whether it be not a sign of great Ignorance in your Deciples, that
not one in a thousand of twenty years old and under, can say the LORD's Prayer,
the Apostles Creed, and Ten Commandments: and if so, whether you do not nurse
up your People in Ignorance, and thereby manifest your Affinity with your Elder
Sister, who says, Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion: And that until you have
condemned your Books; which call the Doctrines and Ordinances of Jesus Christ,
the four Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, Dust, Death, Serpents-meat,
you ought not to be reckoned sincere, in pretending that the Doctrines
contained in the Bible are holy and blessed? Answer these few Queries in
plainness; and let us know what you hold and believe in these things queried:
and answer my former Queries also.

COme Quakers all, and answer to my Charge,
I have not time to draw it out at large:
For if I had, and should the same design,
For every Error I could draw out nine.
Your Books are full, and your Epistles all
So swelled therewith, even Errors great and small,
Such as no Sect, save yours, that is known to me,
Afford the like, this I do clearly see;
And could be glad to see you them Retract,
Condemn and Censure, yea with all my heart:
I have no pleasure them to enumerate,
But rather mourn for to behold your State.
And were it not that others might be warned,
And you your selves precaution'd and forewarned,
I silent should remain for ever, and
Enjoy my self in this my native Land.
Search the Scripture, as CHRIST himself advise
With reverence, and them you will highly prise:
The Prophesies fulfilled you will find,
Which may confirm and satisfy your mind.
For they do teach that Salvation's in none
So rightly placed, as in HIS Name alone;
Who of the Virgin in due time was born,
Who lived and died for Man's Salvation.
Read Acts the tenth, and every Chapter there,
And Paul's Epistles too, which do declare
The Prophets too, yea, holy Men of old
Avouch the same, it cannot be controlled.
Answer my Queries too, or you will be blamed
As not able, or else quite ashamed:
It is but fit that you should now discover
Your Principles, and no longer smother.
Wherefore come out of your closs Dens and Holes
Into the Light, and not lie hid like Moles
Under the ground; or like the Night-blind-Bat,
Avoid the Light: this is a dismal state.
Come forth, I say, appear in the field,
Put on your Weapons, yea also your shield;
For shame, I say, remain no longer mute,
Nor cowardly, or fearful to dispute.
Remember how you to the Bishops call,
To learned Doctors, yea, to the Clergy all,
For to come forth and meet you in the field,
As if so armed, as not designed to yield.
What are you stormed! what are you put to flight!
Or are you weak, or are you in a fright?
Where Is now your Stones, your Slings, your Sword, your Bag?
Where is your Tongue, why does it not now wag?
Where is your Zeal? where is your boasting now?
What is it lost? or do you not know how
To answer me; or to defend my Charge?
What will you then if I shall them enlarge?
The Conolusion by way of Exhortation.
FRiends, Let me exhort you to beware of the Doctrine of the Pharisees, [I mean
of the Quakers] which is Hypocrisy. I have read of the Heresies of the
Gnostics, Nicolaitans, Donatists, and others, but none seem to me to be those
Christ foretold of, Matthew. 24. 24. which should, if it were possible, deceive
the very Elect, so evidently as the Quakers; for how have they prevailed; how
have they deceived high and low, noble and ignoble? and yet to me it seems
easy to write a History of their rise, growch, and progress, of their Church
Government, and that MONSTER, Women's Meetings, how, when, and by whom, and by
what Authority carried on; and how the Spirit of Persecution has been amongst
them from the beginning; sixty six in number of G. Fox's Party against sixty
seven of John Stoy and John Wilkinson's Party, Quakers against Quakers, Council
against Council, until Geo. Keith, one of their most Learned Preachers, has
been constrained to testify against their Errors, charging them with Damuable
Heresies and Doctrines of Devils, yea, even such as no Christian Society would
tolerate. And I knowing these things also cannot but warn all People to beware
of their Glossings and deceiveable Paintings.

For they will direct you to the Light, bid you be obedient to it; tell you
it is sufficient to lead you to Salvation; that its teaching is above Councels,
above Churches, above Fathers and Scriptures: but in all this they act but the
part of a Juggler, it is only to decoy you over to them; they do not so think
that thus advise and counsel you; for if you refuse Conformity to their Orders
and Prescriptions, alleging the Light, to which they directed you, does not
lead you thereunto; pleading to be left to the Grace of GOD in thy self; they
that thus at first directed you to this Light, will now tell you your Plea is
Sordid, Ranterism, and pernicious to the Christian Religion: See their Book,
styled, A brief Examination of Liberty Spiritual, etc. p. 3, 11. For as it is
false Doctrine to teach that the Light, being obeyed, is sufficient to lead to
Salvation; for then your Obedience is meritorious, and Christ died in vain; so
do they not believe it sufficient by their rejecting your Plea: wherefore be
impartial in your search, take the Apostles advice, Prove all things, search
the Scriptures, and hold fast that which is good. A wise man, says Solomon,
will search out a matter. And what is of more concern than the Christian
Religion. God of his mercy confound all Errors, and manifest all Impostors and
Deceivers, and give the Victory to his Truth, and Glory to his Name.

Amen.
Mildenhall, Sept. 20. 1693. Fra. Bugg.


