De Christiana Liberate, OR, Liberty of Conscience Upon it is true and proper
grounds ASSERTED and VINDICATED. And the Mischief of Impositions, amongst the
People called Quakers, Made Manifest.

In Two Parts.

The First, Proving, That no Prince nor State ought by Force, to Compel Men to
any part of the Doctrine, Worship, or Discipline of the Gospel. By a Nameless,
yet an Approved Author, etc. The Second, Showing the Inconsistency betwixt the
Church Government Erected by G. Fox, etc. and that in the Primitive Times:
being Historically Treated on. To which is added, A Word of Advice to the
Pencilvanians.

By Francis Bugg.

Mat. 15.9. But in vain do they Worship me, teaching for Doctrine the
Commandments and Traditons of Men. London, Printed for the Author, and are to
be sold by Enoch Presser, at the Rose and Crown in Swithins Alley, at the East
End of the Royal Exchange, 1682.

AN EPISTLE Dedicatory TO H. N. Knight
Honored Friend,
WHereas accidentally (or rather as I hope, the Event will show,
providentially) I met with a small Tract Wrote many years since, but by whom, I
know not, there being no name to it, Entitled, Liberty of Conscience Asserted
and Vindicated, etc. being the 1st. Part of this Treatise: and having found it
upon perusing, such an Eminent Piece upon that Subject (at least in my
apprehension) that I thought my self obliged to Publish the same, both for the
Information of the Magistracy, and such with whom the Execution of the Penal
Statutes is left and committed: and also in favor of the Nonconformists in
general, even of all Persuasions amongst Protestant Dissenters, who desire to
live a quiet and peaceable Life under the Government, who for Conscience sake,
cannot Conform to the Established Rules, Orders, Cannons, and Constitutions,
and other Ceremonies of Prelatical Institution for Worship and Discipline, and
yet do, and desire to live a peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty under
the Government; in both which respects, if diligently read and perused, I am
persuaded it will be of good Service and Information.

And when I came to a Resolution to Publish the same, I thought it my Duty to
Dedicate it to thy self, of whose Moderation I have had many years Experience,
and of thy Christian Charity toward such as differ from thee in some Points of
Religious Matters, of which I can produce many Witnesses, to wit, all my
Friends in the County of Suffolk, who lately stood Convict of Recusancy in the
Exchequer, wherein thou did not act the Part of the Proud Pharisee, who
Salute their Brethren only; nor yet of the Priest, who can without any sense of
Pity easily pass by, without taking any notice of the Suffering of others;
nay, often times are the Cause of their Sufferings: But like the Merciful and
Sympathizing Samaritan, took notice of our threatened Ruin, and prevented it,
etc.

I am not unsensible, that many, yea, very many, are against Liberty of
Conscience, and especially those of the Spirituality (so called) as a Thing
intolerable and unsufferable, and not for the Kings Interest; and their
Arguments for Force and Compulsion, and Corporal Punishments to be inflicted on
the Nonconformists, are not a few; insomuch as that they too much resemble
proud Haman, who in his Address to King Ahasuerus, cried out in great Enmity,
and said, There is a certain People scattered abroad, and dispersed amongst the
People in all the Provinces of thy Kingdom, and their Laws are diverse from all
People, neither keep they the Kings Laws; Therefore it is not for the Kings
profit to suffer them, etc. As in Esther, the 3d. and the 8th. And for a full
Replication to all their Arguments, Either against Liberty of Conscience, and
the free Exercise of it, in Matters purely Spiritual, and a Christian
Forbearance, and mutual Condiscention to such as differ from them in some
Ceremonies and other Notions in Church Discipline and Order, AND FOR Corporal
Punishment, Impositions, and Antichristian Force upon Conscientious Dissenters
for some Differences in Matters of Oppinion, I refer them to the First Part of
this Treatise, wherein, in my Apprehension, the Answer lies ready to all their
Alligations. Thus having discharged my Duty to my Country in general, and to
thee in particular, I conclude, and rest a Lover of Peace, desiring the
Continuance of it in this World, and that which is to come, both for my self,
Neighbors, and as many as pursue it. And Remain thy Friend in what I may or
can.

Mildenhall, the 25th. of the 12th. Mo. 1681. F. B.

Liberty of Conscience Upon it true and proper Grounds Asserted and Vindicated.
The First Part.
AMongst all the endowments bestowed upon the Sons of men, nothing is to have a
higher price and value put upon it, than that we call Conscience, because of
the immediate reference it has to the pleasing or displeasing of the great
God, and those more noble concerns of a better life; and also the irresistible
Influence it has upon our selves, to determine our well or ill being here.
CONSCIENCE is an Ability in the Understanding of man, by a Reflect Act to judge
of himself in all he does, as to his acceptance or rejection with God; this is
the inward Rule he has to walk by: And it is but reasonable to believe, mankind
bound to steer their course, by what (upon the utmost improvement of their
understandings) they know, and believe best.

The proper seat of Conscience is in the Understanding, and is no other thing,
but this Reflect Act of our knowledge back upon our selves, dictating to us
God's liking or disliking what we do, as good or evil: This ability is more or
less, according to the suitable light God affords to our understanding, either
inwardly or outwardly, whether natural or divine; and is indeed to each man,
the Rule of all other Rules God is pleased to govern him by; for whether it be
by natural Light or divine Revelation, still the utmost bounds of his
Conformity lies in the knowledge and conception he has of it, and of his duty
in reference unto it. So that the information of the understanding is still the
guide of the Conscience; for when we become once convinced that this or that is
Gods will, my understanding reflects back to my self, and tells me, This is my
Duty in reference to it, and so comes in upon each man the obligation of that
we call Conscience; which is indeed so unavoidable a Reflection, suitable to
the conviction and impression the understanding lies under, that no man has
power in himself, if he would to escape it; Conscientiam non esse judicium
theoreticum, quo verum a falso simpliciter discernitur, sed puncticum, quo
particulariter illa cognitio applicatur ab homine ad illud, quod ipsi vel
bonum, vel malum est, ut sit interna Regula, dirigens voluntatem: Ames. de cas.
Consci. That there was at first in Adam a clear and perfect knowledge of God,
and of himself, is not to be doubted; and that there was this Reflect Act in
Adams knowledge, that he fully viewed and beheld himself, and knew in what a
happy estate God had made him, is also clear; and that this exercise of his
knowledge also, in a way of Conscience, he had to tell him, he was accepted of
God, and did well in whatsoever he did; but that equal reflection of man's
Understanding, both toward good and evil, allowing the one, and condemning the
other, was first introduced when he did eat of the Tree of knowledge of Good
and Evil; which was so called by anticipation, because by the sin committed in
eating of it, Adam, who knew nothing before, neither in himself, nor any other
Creature, but what was perfectly good, came to the miserable knowledge of good
and evil. Evil, before he could not know; for till he had sinned, there could
be no such thing presented to his view; but in that act of his sinning, he saw
the greatest Evil, and the root of all other Evil; what was Good also, by his
fall he came to know in another manner than before; for before he knew it only
simply considered in it self, but now as it stood in a direct contrariety and
opposition unto Evil. That perfect knowledge man had at the first so far
retains, since the fall, its excellent nature, as to be a distinguisher between
Good and Evil, and a constant witness for God in his soul, and by secret
reference to what he was at first, tells him what he still ought to be: And
this is the thing we call Conscince, which as it is the best thing left in man
by far, since the fall, so it is the noblest and worthiest thing the world has
left in it, and which above all others ought to be cherished and valued, as
that whereby God is most acknowledged, each man in his own breast most quieted
and settled, and mankind best enabled to live peaceably in society and converse
together.

That it has continued amongst men ever since the Fall, is plain, if we
consider, that even in the darkest times of divine Knowledge, before any Law
from God was written, this knowledge men had of themselves, in reference to
God, was a Law unto them. Their natural light, derived to them from their first
creation, dictating to them what they ought to do, and what not, and enabling
them to pass a judgment upon themselves, of their due behavior toward God;
and this the Apostle in the Epistle to the Romans calls Conscience, which will
either excuse them, or accuse them in the great Judgment day, when the secrets
of men's hearts shall be made known.

There be since man's fall two things eminently left in him; A sense and
knowledge of God, though remote, and that two ways: first, by Instinct in his
very composition and constitution, God making him at first in his own Image:
and secondly, by the use of his reason, in beholding the works of creation and
providence, which he does daily behold, and converse with, and which do
eminently preach God unto him; the other thing is a sense of pleasing or
displeasing God, by doing what his understanding tells him is good or ill, and
this is to each man a Law; so Paul in that place of the Romans tells us, That
those that have not the Law written, are a Law unto themselves, and do by
nature the things contained in the Law.

When afterward men came to be under a law written, and the knowledge of Gods
mind concerning man was more clearly revealed, every man came to have a larger
view of his duty, and clearer reflection upon himself in reference to it, and
so came to have a more enlightened Conscience, suitable to the enlargedness of
his understanding in his walking before God.

This then being premised, that man's perfect knowledge which he had at first,
does still retain a taste of, and a discerning principle between good and evil,
and does enable a man to judge of himself, in reference to his pleasing or
displeasing of God, by the one and the other; and that every man has more or
less in him of that we call Conscience; (unless in some particular cases,
whereby often endeavoring to resist and oppose Conscience, God in just
judgment takes away the use of it) and that Conscience is wholly regulated by
the understanding, and the light thereof.

We will consider, First, That men do, and always have differed in their
understandings and apprehensions, and so in their Consciences about divine
things, and their duty to God. Secondly, what the grounds and reasons are, upon
which men come to differ: And, Thirdly, How far men are to be tolerated, and
indulged one by another, in such variety and difference of knowledge and
conscience. For the first, we shall find it too obviously plain, so to have
been in all times; A man must have some ill will, either to himself or his
Reader, that should spend much time in the proof of it. If we look into those
early times, before any Law was written, though all men had one common instinct
of God in their nature and being, and had the same outward Mediums of the
knowledge of God, which were the works of Creation and Providence; for there is
no place where their Voice sounded not, yet doubtless the various Apprehensions
of God, and of man's duty to him were very great; some improving those common
Rudiments of Divinity, to more reverent thoughts of a Deity, and a more sober
virtuous way of living, by their natural light; and others so far degenerating
from them, as that when they know God, and might have known more of him, they
glorified him not as God, but turned the glory of the true and incorruptible
God into mock-Deities, of Birds and Beasts, and so came to be given up to all
manner of Evil. Such who lived in those days, and were by dreams, visions,
voices, and otherwise particularly enlightened, had other kind of apprehensions
of God, and principles of Conscience suitable thereunto; which yet could reach
no further than themselves, nor be obliging to others farther than they could
justify those divine discoveries in their own nature, or by the credit of
their own testimony gain belief, and persuade men thereunto.

When afterward the Law came to be written in Stone, which was from the
beginning written in the Heart, and was in truth no other than a transcript of
the Law of Nature, and the Light thereof; yet what great variety do we find in
the Exposition of it, and what various Principles derived from it? he is a
great stranger to all Rabbinical Learning, who knows not the wide compass of
the Jewish Debates and Controversies. And since the times of the largest and
fullest Revelation of the Mind and Will of God in the days of the Gospel, do we
not see, that knowledge has multiplied Division? What great variety of
thoughts have arisen amongst men, not only concerning those more obscure
Notions of the Order and Discipline of the Gospel Church, but of most of the
other Doctrines and Truths of Religion? And so general have the
mis-apprehensions been, that have possessed men in these things, that sometimes
we find in the Christian Church, Truth shut up, and thrust into a very narrow
Corner; and sometimes an Athanasius, and some very few opposing the torrent of
mistakes, with which the generality of Christian understandings were possessed.
And still the variety of men's Apprehensions have produced the same variety in
several sorts of Consciences, and the effects of it. If we seriously ponder the
reasons of these things, we shall find them to come under several heads, in the
viewing of which, we may arrive at some satisfaction, in the second thing
proposed, which is to know, how such uneven, disproportionate Thoughts,
Opinions and Consciences come to be amongst men.

The first and great account that may be given of it, is this: An innate
infirmity in the Soul of man since his fall, not to be able always to make a
right judgment of things, but to receive various impressions in the
understanding faculty (by reason of the infirmity and imperfection of it)
according to all the several accidents and circumstances relating to its
information, and the object it is conversant about. Adam in his naming the
Creatures, and what-else he did before the fall, was not capable of a mistake;
but man since lies very open to all delusion and deceit, being not able always
to represent to himself in his understanding-faculty, all those things that
should be known to make up a perfect judgment, nor if he could do so, were he
able by the intrinsic strength of that faculty, perfectly and infallibly to
judge of what should evidently appear before him; nor lastly, to remain fixed
in any determination, being not only subject to alter and change by seeing
farther, and having more presented to his view than what he at the first knew,
but also in his own nature now, become mutable and apt to change in his best
and truest resolves: And from such a womb of infirmity, it is not hard to
conceive what various and differing thoughts may be born.

Secondly, The great variety there is of suitable means to operate upon such a
weakness in the Soul, and to prevail over the Infirmity of men's understanding,
to lead them in several Paths. This we shall easily find, if we consider the
several postures and conditions mankind is settled in, as to Education,
Company, Studies, and many such accidential matters, by which the minds of men
are variously seasoned and engaged in their apprehensions; and so come to have
differing foundations laid of Conscience, according to impressions received
thereby. And where (as in most it is) very weak and ordinary motives prevail,
and no larger compass is taken to settle the judgment, than those accidential
means that first prevail with us, yet as positive an obligation of Conscience
arises from such things, as from any whatsoever; there can be no persuasion so
impotent, but may meet with some capacities, over which it may easily have
dominion, and the bounds of such men's knowledge, though never so mean, must
needs be a rule to the Conscience; so that to imagine all men's Minds and
Consciences should be the same, is to imagine all men to be educated a like,
all Company to talk a like, and all Books to be written a like, and that all
other things, that work upon the minds of men, should all concenter to
inculcate the same thing.

Thirdly, Besides all this, there is an inbred disposition in the Souls of
men, according to the Bodies they dwell in, to apprehend and believe diversely
of things, without any other outward help to such a variety; some men being
naturally prone to believe some things, and others to imbibe those of a
contrary Nature; and this is to be found without much difficulty, in the
several constitutions and composures of men, where we shall find their thoughts
and opinions holding great correspondence with, and bearing much proportion to
their natural inclinations and tempers, and at several times several thoughts
prevailing, according as the concommitant Humors of nature are predominant in
them; so that let a man but phylosophically view over the diverse humors in men's
Bodies, such as make men choleric, phlegmatic, or the like, and the wonderful
mixture of those humors, in the various Temperament of them, and he will not be
much to seek for the various Thoughts, Opinions and Consciences that are in the
World; and to force men out of these, through any door than that of the
understanding, and means suited thereunto, is to force them out of their very
nature and existence; that Soul in man that was at first Lord over the Body,
and could receive no sophistication from it, takes now a great tincture from
thence, and savours much in all its operations of the vessel it is kept in.

Lastly, Let us seriously ponder the wonderful variety there is in that inward
divine illumination, afforded to men more or less, as God pleases, by which
their judgments and consciences are in several measures settled and determined:
As nothing can give us a clearer account of that variety there is in the World,
in divine things, so nothing can be more prevailing upon us, to have compassion
upon men severally informed and persuaded, than when we consider, God affords
divine light severally to them, as he pleases, and gives it in what
proportion, little or much, seems best to his Wisdom; and by making men of
several growths and statures in divine knowledge, does seem to let us know, he
would have men of several sizes and seize in that kind, to live quietly
together in the World.

These things being able, in some measure, to discover to us the grounds of
these disagreeing Principles we find amongst men, we will go on to the third
and chief thing we have in pursuit by this discourse, which is a serious
Enquiry, How far men are to be Tolerated one by another, whose Judgments and
Consciences about Divine things are found to differ.

Conscience in it self considered (being nothing else but the Understanding
under such a kind of Exercise, as is before described) is such a thing as can
by no means come under any possibility of Force or Restraint, beyond its own
Bounds, and is as much out of the reach of all humane Power, as the Soul it
self is, and therefore is chosen of God to be the Witness, which he gives to
himself amongst the Sons of men, of their due behavior toward him, and is a
thing neither in the power of others, nor in the man himself; no man can point
out what another shall believe, nor can he choose out his own Belief; but still
the Understanding gives in its testimony by the Conscience, though in actings
the Will may sometimes prevail against it. This is that which chiefly differs a
man, as to his relativeness to God, from other Creatures, and is that whereby
God keeps up his solemn claim of Soveraignity over us, in our own breasts, by
such means as we can no way oppose nor avoid. This Dominion of God was never
delegated to any substitute upon Earth, nor was there since the World began a
judgment entrusted in any hands over the Consciences of men, nor was it indeed
under a possibility to be, since no man, nor men, with the existence of humane
Power, could ever come to know the state of another man's Conscience, nor the
manifold Circumstances (only open to a divine Eye) relating to it; and
therefore does Paul himself to the Corinthians wholly disclaim the exercise of
such a Power.

The simple actings therefore of Conscience abstractedly considered, are not
capable of a forcible impression from without; nor need any man fear the loss
of liberty of Conscience in that sense of it, nor reckon himself under an
obligation to any indulgence for it, since a donation of it from any, will with
no more reality afford it to me, than a restraint from them will any way
actually take it from me.

That which will (as most proper and genuine to the present enquiry proposed)
come under consideration, will be, How far the products and effects of
Conscience, in men's actings in pursuance of it, are to be indulged, and how far
restrained; and this will all come under two Heads:

First, How far men are to be suffered to do, or not to do those things which
they say they are in Conscience obliged to do?

Secondly, How far men are to be urged by commands to do such things which they
say they are in Conscience obliged not to do?

That a punctual clear Answer to these Questions will be a Travel of great
peril undertaken, none that have any way versed themselves in such
Controversies will deny, and therefore the better to secure our progress
herein, it will be necessary chiefly and principally to reflect upon the
Magistrate, and the Power he is entrusted withal; this method will carry its
own evidence sufficiently with it: If we consider the power that mankind has
over each other, is exercised by him, and that the success of this notion, and
the influence both of freedom and restraint depends solely upon him, and that
the power of Princes and Magistrates do actually bind and loose in matters of
this nature; I say, if we consider this, we shall soon make a discovery, that
(finding out what the Magistrate may do, and what he may not do in Religious
affairs) will give us a determination of this matter. In the prosecution of
this, these several things shall be attempted:

First, To make it evident, that Magistracy is an Institution grounded upon the
Light of nature, and how far he may and ought to proceed by that both
negatively and positively in these things.

Secondly, That a Magistrate by becoming Christian receives no addition of
Power to what he had before, only stands bound to an improved exercise of his
Power, suitable to the light he then receives.

Thirdly, To discover some eminent mistaken extremes about the Magistrates
Power in Religion, which have miserably involved us.

And Lastly, To show how far the Magistrate, under the Gospel, should and ought
to act about Religion, and wherein he is not to interpose his Power, the right
stating whereof is the true and solid Foundation upon which all true Liberty of
Conscience is built.

For the first of these, That Magistracy and Government is an Institution
grounded upon the Light of Nature, is easy enough to be made appear, the first
rise of it being in Families, where it was wholly natural and paternal; and
therefore it is that the first Commandment, wherein all subjection to Superiors
is commanded, is comprehended under the Obedience of Children, required to
their Parents, that being the first Magistratical Power exercised: That first
Power and Authority God gave Adam, upon the Fall, over the woman, being a
distinguishing Power between the two Sexes, and not properly any Magistratical
Power relating to a Community. After there came to be several divided Families
in the World, they found a necessity of a Power, that might have a larger and
farther extent than that in each Family; which could be no otherwise grounded,
than by a joint and common consent, God having not by particular designation
appointed any to rule over the World; and no one Family could claim a right to
rule over another, nor could the first born in any family exercise any Power,
or extend his Dominion farther than that particular Family: The reason whereof
seems plain, because that paternal Power which is originally in a family, is
not successive; there is no succession of that power Parents have over their
Children, and Masters have over their Servants (which is the ground of
Family-Government) farther than those relations still reach; Hence it is the
Power a Parent might exercise in his Family, as a Father and a Master, he
cannot exercise upon any of his Kindred, or other collateral Relations in any
degree further, and therefore that kind of Dominion must needs rest
circumscribed within the bounds of each particular Family; and that more
extensive Government of many Families together, was by a joynt-coalition and
agreement of them, dictated by the Light of Nature for general good; there
being scarce any thing a more necessary direction of Nature for man's own
Preservation and Good, since his Fall, than to associate himself in a Community
under one common Government.

How the Light of Nature did at the first operate upon men, to convince them of
a necessity to join together in a subjection to Superiors, and how greatly
their interest lay in such a subjection, relative to such a public Dominion,
we may somewhat discover, if we consider, First, That the Earth was at the
first the Gift of the great Creator to the Sons of Adam, and what every man
first possessed was his own, and whatever he could by his labor produce from
it (the same Law that is to this day, to the first Discoverers of any
unpossessed part of the World:) Now the only way to preserve men in such a
Propriety, and to make good that first Law of Gods donation, was to have by
common consent a public power to take care of it, and restrain the violence
and exorbitant injustice, that would otherwise have filled the World.

Secondly, When private differences came to arise between man and man, between
cause and cause, it would prove imposible to end any strife, while each man
would be a Judge in his own case, and therefore it was found impracticable for
men to live without a third Judgment, which did necessarily point them to a
Magistrate.

Thirdly, Man was not only a sociable Creature in himself, made to live in
society, and prompted by particular inclination to it, but each man came to see
men had common Concerns one with another, and Interests of a public nature,
beyond the bounds of their own particular Families; and there could be no way
found out to capacitate them, to enjoy those common advantages they might
afford each to other, but by imbodying themselves together, and creating a
public Relation each to other in one joynt-society, the very being of which
must needs lie in having one to rule over it, and to exercise that public
care, requisite to its preservation, to which no man's private power or concern
either could or ought to lead him.

Lastly, The sensible good each Family found in that Paternal Regiment
exercised within it self, might well induce them to fall into that more
general; and to unite themselves under one Political Father, in whose care and
protection they might live secured.

These and many other necessary inforcements upon the common sense and
experience of men, induced the power of commanding, and the reason of obeying.
That God that afforded to each Creature a capacity large enough for its own
preservation, did not leave Man without sufficient light to discover this great
Engine of his safety and happiness. Well may we then look upon the power of
Magistracy, as the greatest and most transcendant of all humane things, and pay
the due tribute of all Reverence and Obedience to it, as being the Sovereign
Power of God, exercised in a way of Vicegerency amongst men, and that wherein
the peace and quiet of mankind is most necessarily included?

The Law and Light of Nature, having thus from the beginning placed the
Magistrate in his Throne, the same also did lead and guide him to the exercise
of his Power, by bringing him under this obligation, to do whatsoever should be
found necessary to the good of mankind, both in their private and public
capacity, and restrain whatsoever is destructive to it; this as it brings
Princes and Magistrates to a tie of duty, so is the donation of this Power
exceeding large and ample.

The First thing in which the power of the Magistrate is naturally exerted, is
in his own preservation, wherein his Power is Paramount to all pretensions
whatsoever; As in Nature each man's supreme Law lies in self-preservation, who
is bid to love his Neighbor but as himself; So politically in Magistracy the
preservation of it self in its Power and Prerogative, and the exercises
thereof, is the first thing it is led to look after; he is to preserve himself
in order to that preservation he is to afford to others. 'Twere very absurd to
suppose a Magistrate bound to tolerate any thing destructive to his being, no
pretense of Conscience is here to be suffered, it is a practice against the Law
of Nature, it is to pretend Conscience to annihilate mankind; God has not, nor
will not promulge Laws to interfere one with another, nor will he ever reveal
any thing against the standing Law of Nature [it being the remains of man's
excellent creation at first] but what shall heighten and improve it to a
further perfection. Herein therefore Princes and States are sufficiently
secured by a power inherent in their very being, that no abused pretensions of
a Liberty for Conscience can ever invade or disturb them.

Secondly, The extent of the Magistrates power reaches to a total suppression
of all moral evil, and encouragement of all moral good; and that for these
Reasons: First, moral evil is an abomination to every man's Conscience, and
therefore ought to be much more so to the Magistrate, who has the only power
of suppressing and punishing it: Secondly, moral evil and vice is most
injurious to mankind, and destructive to that well-being and quiet the
Magistrate is bound to provide for.

Thirdly, It brings down sensible and visible Judgments upon Persons and
Societies, with a voice easy enough to be heard by any natural ear, and
therefore the Magistrate by the very Light of Nature, is loudly enough called
upon to suppress it. This we have clear enough set down in the 13th of the
Romans, where the Magistrate is said to be a terror to evildoers, and a
praise to them that do well; the Magistrates power is there fully asserted, but
it seems to be but the same power he had before, his Commission seems only to
be renewed with the same power he had from the beginning; that the Apostle
there speaks nothing of the power of Magistrates, beyond what the Light of
Nature gives them, seems to be very clear in two things: First, in that he
instanceth in the present Roman power that then was; and Secondly, because he
sets down nothing that the Magistrate is to do, but what the Light and Law of
Nature does directly guide him unto; That the Apostle speaks of Magistracy in
general, is plain, and that he speaks of it in the present instance of the then
Roman Power, is as plain; now if all that belongs to the Magistracy in the
abstract, had not been complete in the Roman power, as to the right of it, the
instance had been no way proportionate nor right. The Apostle writing to Rome,
no doubt intended to declare the Principles of the Gospel to be such, as taught
all subjection to the Emperor; he says, The Powers that be, are ordained of
God, speaking in the present sense of those that then were, and he says, For
this cause pay you Tribute; that is, the present Tax you pay the Roman Emperor
is upon this very account; so that he carries on the instance of Magistracy all
along in the Roman Heathen power. Secondly, he speaks of nothing to be done by
the Magistrate, but what the Light of nature dictates, and what was the duty of
the Emperor then to do; to execute wrath upon him that does evil, and to
encourage those that do well; wherein he is a Minister of God to us for very
much good. By this we see then, this farther power of restraint in the
Magistrate, in his natural constitution, that being to suppress all moral evil,
and encourage virtue, he is bound not to suffer, upon any false pretensions of
Conscience whatsoever, any practices that discourage the one, or fall within
the guilt of the other.

These forementioned and unquestionable generals do contain in them the
negative and positive execution of the Magistates natural power, in things
purely moral and political. How far he is by the Light of Nature obliged about
the Religious concerns of his Subjects, and wherein the Light of Nature lays an
Arrest upon him, not to proceed, that so the due liberty of each man's
Conscience may be secured, will come under a more pertinent consideration, in a
following part of this discourse. We see by these things, the Magistrate
negatively empowered in an ample manner in his first constitution, over all
things relating to the moral and political good of mankind. The Light of Nature
excludes all such Principles from the least toleration, which make men cease to
be true Subjects to the State, or good Common-wealths-men in relation to
others: Liberty of Conscience is best secured by disclaiming such who neither
by natural or divine Law, can make any just pretense to it; It Is only to be
given in things divine and supernatural, such as neither destroy nor disturb
the civil and political Interests and Rights of men.

The second thing proposed about the Magistrate will have no hardship to make
appear, That a Magistrate by becoming Christian has no addition of power to
what he had before.

Magistracy is the same, and as legitimated amongst Heathens as Christians. A
Magistrate, when Christian, exercises the power he had before otherwise, but
receives no addition of power to his Office; Christ in the Gospel has made no
alteration in Magistratical Power, nor has he given any addition to it, when
exercised by Christian hands; but a Magistrate, when Christian, is bound to
exert his power in a way suitable to the light he then has: He that has no
other than the light of nature, has as much power about Religion as if he were
Christian, and is to take as much care of the Souls of his Subjects, suitable
to that Light, as any Christian Magistrate is to do, suitable to his. The power
a Parent has over his Child, a Master over his Servant, a Prince over his
Subjects, is no more when they become Christian than it was before, only that
power must be otherwise exercised, according to that improvement of light
Christianity brings with it. All natural and moral Power was the same from the
beginning, though God was not pleased to set that power distinctly in a Law
written, till long after the light of nature gave a plentiful information about
these things: The duty of all such relations, in the performance mutually of
them amongst men, is greatly furthered by the Light of the Gospel, but the duty
is still the same; several things do evidently evince this general Truth.

1st, All natural and moral Relations belong to men as men, only so considered,
and not as Chrstians, and are fully complete and perfect amongst mankind, both
in the power of the one, and the duty of the other, without any reference to
any Persuasion in Religion, or other Qualification whatever.

2dly, It appears from hence, because whatsoever the Gospel reveals to be the
duty of such relations each to other, we find practiced by the light and law of
nature from the beginning, these things being of absolute necessity to uphold
the frame and policy of mankind, God had naturally endowed them with a
sufficient discovery of his mind about them.

3dly, It appears to be so, because Christians are obliged by the Laws of the
Gospel to give the same obedience, and perform the same duties in these
Relations, to Unbelievers, that they are to Believers; the Gospel speaks of
these things without distinction: Subjects are commanded to obey Heathen
Magistrates in all things lawful [and we are to obey Christian no farther;]
Servants are commanded, with the utmost duty of Servants, to obey unbelieving
Masters; and so Wives to be subject to unbelieving Husbands; all which declares
these Relations perfectly inherent in mankind, as such, and no way relative to
any other Qualification whatsoever.

These two preliminary considerations of the Magistrate; 1st, That he has his
original in the light and law of Nature: 2dly, That his power and being is
thereby perfect and complete, and that Christianity gives no addition of Power
to such an Office, will much further the right stating the chief and last thing
proposed, How far a Christian Magistrate, under the Gospel, is empowered
negatively and positively in these things? Before I proceed to which, I shall
come to the third thing intended, which is, To show how some eminent Mistakes
about the Magistrates Power in Religious things, have involved us into very
destructive and pernicious Extremities: A Prospect of which may be had in these
three things, into which the various writings and discourses of that subject
have chiefly issued themselves.

First, Some do make the Magistrate the sole Judge of all Spiritual matters;
ascribe to him the power of settling what Government he pleases in the Church,
appointing Officers in it, determining all differences in Religious things,
suppressing by his power all Errors and Heresies, and superceding all matters
that appertain to the Gospel.

A second sort, with an equal warmth, affirm the Magistrates Power in Religious
things, but say, It Is never to be exercised but in a perfect subservency to the
Church; and that whatsoever the Church determines, he is bound to execute by
the temporal Sword, as the great Law of Christ.

A third sort, as wide of the Truth as either of the other, say positively, The
Magistrate has nothing at all to do in Religious concerns, that he is a mere
civil Officer to take care of men's civil Interests, and has nothing to do with
things of a spiritual nature.

That all these Principles have produced hurtful effects, and that the truth
lies distant from them all, will be found in a distinct consideration of them.
The first does little less than revive in the Magistrate now, much of that
power Christ himself, and the Apostles by his delegation, exercised at first,
in settling the Gospel Church; and unless it can be punctually made appear,
where in the Gospel Christ has substituted the Magistrate to exercise such a
dominion over his House, it will soberly be found a dangerous Intrenchment upon
his Kingly Office; it is one thing to take care of the execution of what Christ
has already settled, and another to make Laws and Customs about those things:
This opinion, as it is by many late Writers maintained, dissolves all
Ecclesiastical Regiment, and annexeth the Government of the Church to the civil
Power, or indeed drowns the Church into the State, or at least mixes them as
much or more than they were mixed together under the Judaical policy. What ever
Government the Magistrate settles, cannot be Ecclesiastical, but Civil, if it
be Foreign to what is already divinely appointed; if it be not, then its not
the settling, but the executing of what is already settled, unless you will say,
that Christ entrusted him to settle the Ecclesiastical Government of his
Church; and that will seem not a little strange, that the Magistrate, who is no
spiritual Officer set in the Church, nor cannot himself administer in executing
the least thing within it, should have such a supreme Power over it. Either
Christ and the Apostles did settle a Government in the Church, or they did not;
if they did, the Magistrate, as well as others, is obliged by it; if they did
not, but that it is left to the Magistrate, he has a greater power, at least in
the exercise of it, than ever they had: For if we suppose, they had power to
settle a Government, but did not think fit to exert that power, but left it to
the Magistrate, his power in the execution of it is greater than theirs. It Is
much that the infallible Wisdom of Christ and his Apostles could not better
find out an order for the Gospel Church than to leave it to the mercy of every
Magistrates discretion; and it is equally to be wondered at, that an Officer of
such necessary importance to the Church, as to settle the Government of it,
should be wanting when the Gospel was first planted, and every thing ordinary
and extraordinary belonging to it, was presented to accompany the Glorious
Presence of Christ upon Earth, and which might any way contribute to rear up
the Fabric of the New Testament Church. It Is much that such an Officer of so
absolute concernment, as this Opinion makes him, should not be in the Christian
World for three hundred years together. If we will seek the meaning of this
providential disposal of things; may we not soberly think it to be, that the
Gospel was a thing wholly founded upon Spiritual Power, was complete therein,
and needed not any Temporal power to contribute to its perfection?

This impowering the Magistrate with a Superlative Authority, in settling what
relates to the Government of the Church, supposes this, That the Scripture
has revealed no Truth that is binding in this matter, but this, That what the
Magistrate pleases to settle in every place, that is right, [and this I am
sure the Scripture has no where revealed] and so we are like to have as many
distinct Governments, as there are States and distinct Kindgdoms in the World;
it is strange, those that are for exact Uniformity in any one Church, should lay
a foundation of such confused multiplicity in the Church Universal.

Either we must suppose, Christ was not faithful to reveal all that concerned
the Government of the Gospel Church, which God entrusted him with, or else that
it was the Will of God there should be no more revealed, but that all should be
transiently left to the Magistrate. To say the first, were but to urge
Blasphemy for Reason; if the second, it is to empower an Officer in such a
necessary and weighty matter, whose very being in the Church, with an ability
to do it, had a futurity of three hundred years to come. During all which time,
if Christ and the Apostles settled no Government in the Church, and there being
no Christian Magistrate that could settle any; How could the Church then come
lawfully to have any? If it be said, Where there is no Christian Magistrate,
every Church may use their own discretion; then it is plain, the Government of
the Church under the Gospel, has no other bottom, than what every Magistrate,
and every particular Church pleases; and so not only Magistrates, but
Churches, and indeed all the World may be their own Carvers in this weighty
matter; It Is very hard to be credited, that the Government of the Church, which
does so greatly relate to the preservation of the Truth of Doctrine in it,
should be left to such floating uncertainties.

Besides, this Position makes all that part of the Gospel, which lies in
Precept and President about the Rule of the Church, and what was by the
Apostles then practiced and commanded, to be of no use to us, nor obligation
upon us, farther then the Magistrate pleases; it is to give him a dominion over
that part of the Scriptures, and opens a door to make him (as some have fully
done) Lord over the whole New Testament.

Two things are usually said to prop up this Power in the Magistrate.

First, That there is nothing positively determined in the Gospel about these
things; because the Gospel being to take place throughout the whole world, no
one frame or Model of Government could be composed, that would conveniently fit
all Persons and Places where the Gospel might come to be received and settled;
and therefore the Wisdom of Christ has left things of that nature wholly
undetermined.

This is a thing taken for granted, and wholly without any Divine Ground to
warrant it, and is in the reason of the thing it self insufficient; for we find
nothing in command or practice by the Apostles in settling the Christian
Churches, but what will agree with any Nation or People in the World. He that
will say, That the Order of the Gospel, as we there find it practiced and
required, will not agree to any place; may with as much reason, if not more,
say, That the receiving of the Gospel it self, in the general belief of it,
will not agree to that place.

These things make it evident, that the Order and Discipline we find settled in
the Gospel-Churches in the Apostles time, must needs fit every place and
people, and can do no hurt any where.

1st, It highly intends to heighten and complete the duty incumbent on all
Moral and Natural Relations; that which Christ has appointed to preserve order
among Christians as Christians, will never hinder, but farther it amongst men
as men.

2dly, The power upon which Christ's Rule, settled in his Church, is founded, is
wholly Spiritual, it can never do any Violence to mankind, nor clash with any
humane power, because that is the Boundery of it.

3dly, The thing designed and attained by the Order of the Gospel Church, is no
more than to preserve men in a regular capacity to enjoy all Christ's
Institutions; and therefore he that will say, This Order will not suit any
Nation, must say in effect, None of Christ's Institutions will agree to that
Nation.

4thly, There is nothing in Christ's Government of his Church, that is properly
relative to the Political Government of a State, or does any way determine the
form of it, but it may be equally exercised under any Government whatsoever.

The Religious policy of the Jews did highly relate to the State, and was
commixed with it, and the same Government of that Church could not have been
without a suitable conformity of the State to it, and so could not well reach
beyond that Nation, and peculiar Country and People. But the Gospel Church, and
the Rule of it, is grounded upon quite other terms, and has its first
Principle in that saying of our Savior, Where ever two or three are met
together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them; And there is no place nor
people under the Sun, but where, with much advantage, the order of the Gospel,
as well as the Gospel it self, may be introduced.

A Second thing made to prop up this power in the Magistrate, is, Because of
the wonderful difficulty we find in the New Testament about matters of this
nature. This I acknowledge should put us upon much enquiry, and great
indulgence to each other, but I cannot yield it a good reason to establish a
visible Judge to settle a Civil Pope; for at last upon the same grounds it will
be found out, that the Scripture in Doctrinals is obscure too, and so the
Magistrate must be likewise an Umpire in those things, and finally in all. Were
once all these Carnal Interests, and Political Concerns that are now twisted
into the Government of the Church, laid by, it would be found a thing very
feasible to deduce from Scripture Precept and Example, (limited to no
particular case in the reason of it) a systeme of Ecclesiastical Rule,
sufficient for the obtaining all the holy and good ends designed by the Gospel,
and completing men in a Spiritual Society, as an Organical-Church; and if a
Church can be so constituted (which is a thing in it self of no harship, if men
would be contented with the simplicity of the Gospel, and Christ's wisdom in
these things) as that Church will be most pure, as having nothing of humane
make in it, so it will perfectly annihilate all those pretended necessities for
the interposition of humane Authority about such things.

If the Magistrate has likewise a farther power to suppress all Errors and
Heresies, and to establish by force the Orthodox Truth (the Rule of which must
needs be what he thinks to be so) this will inevitably follow, that there can
be never any such thing, as Liberty of Conscience in any case, or upon any
terms in the world, under a Christian Magistrate, he sins if he suffer to
tolerate any thing but what he thinks punctually right.

If he be the proper Judge entrusted, first to judge, and then to execute his
Judgment with the Temporal Power; all Liberty, to whosoever is not of his mind,
is perfectly gone: This is no other than to make the Magistrate's Power a mere
Inquisition; And by this means a Christian Magistrate will prove a mavelous
hurt to much of the Church where he governs; for, unless you will suppose all
the Truth, and all sound Christians to be included in what he establishes for
Orthodox, if there be any Truth, or true Professors of Christianity amongst all
the other Opinions he persecutes, they are sure to be sufferers, and it will
ever fall out, that all those that are not of the Magistrates Opinion, had
better live under one of Gallio's temper, than under a Magistrate so practicing.

These large positions about the Magistrates Power have no visible ground for
themselves in the Gospel; and when it is said, the reason of it is, because
there was no Christian Magistrate till long after, and so little mention is
made of his Authority in these things, there is nothing said that can be any
way satisfactory, because what Power soever any shall exercise in or over the
Gospel Church, to the end of the world, must have its rise and derivation from
what was then established by Christ and his Apostles. However, they are sure of
a popular acceptance:

1. Because they bring us to a visible Judge, and a humane certainty, which
most men had rather be at, than a laborious inquiry after divine Truth, in the
way God has revealed it in the Scriptures.

And 2. Because they are positions that land us in a very safe harbor, and
free us from any danger of suffering about those things; he that thinks it his
duty to be always of the Magistrates Religion, is so secured in that duty,
that no Religion can possibly ever hurt him; and whoever thinks the Magistrate
is Gods substitute, to determine all matters of Religion, as he pleases, must
needs think it a duty to be of his mind.

The second Extreme about the Magistrates Power, is in asserting the Magistrate
to have ample concerns about Religion, and a power sufficient entrusted to him;
but the manner in which it is to be exercised, is in a punctual suberviency to
the Church; that is, they are to determine, and he is to execute; they are to
be his eye, and he is to be their hand: As the first Extreme debaseth the
Church, and all Ecclesiastical power under the Magistrates feet, and makes him
the sole Lord of all, so this in another extreme makes the Magistrate a Slave
to the Church; this is an unreasonable Imposition upon him, and gives him less
liberty than each private Christian ought to have, to oblige him to put a civil
Sanction, and execute by his Authority whatever the Church decrees, whether he
judge it to be right or no; this is only to make him a Sword Bearer to the
Clergy: This is the great Engine, by which the Church of Rome has inslaved so
much of the World; Antichrist could never have been settled in his Throne, if
Kingdoms had not thus given up their power to him. How shamefully upon this
pretense, that the Civil power must be subject to the Ecclesiastical, have the
Popes of Rome brought Kings and Emperors, not only to employ their power as
they pleased, but to suffer all the scorns and indignities from them
imaginable? The story of what Hildebrand did to the Emperor Henry, and many
others, do abundantly show this. The truth is, the carnal Conjunction of the
Temporal Power with the Spiritual, is that which has made all Ecclesiastical
Regiment odious and unsavory in the nostrils of the world in all Ages, and
has had no other effect, but to enable the Clergy, under a pretext of the
power of the Gospel, to trample (by the power of the World) mankind under their
Feet. That the Civil Magistrate ought not to employ his power in such a
sub-ordination, let these things be considered:

First, This is to suppose, either an insufficiency in that Spiritual Power
which Christ did at first leave in his Church, or else that he fails in that
Promise of being with them to the end of the World, and continuing his
Presence, to make his Laws effectual for the end they are intended: Christ has
appointed the means of Converting men to the Gospel, to be the preaching of it
to them: If you will compel men by the Civil power to become Converts, it
plainly intimates, we judge Christ's way insufficient, and use the other as what
we judge a better. As Christ has appointed Preaching the Gospel, as the great
means to bring men into the Church, so he has appointed Excommunication, as
the great means to cast offenders out of the Church; and force is as
unreasonable in the one as in the other. The outward advantages a man has by
becoming a Christian, lies in the enjoyment of all Christ's Institutions; and
the punishment of all Gospel-crimes, lies in being cast out from those
privileges, and undergoing the weight that Christ shall lay upon the
Conscience thereby. When a person is excommunicated, to deliver him over to the
Temporal power, to be corporally punished, must either be, because we think
Christ's punishment in that case not enough, or else, because our own animosity
prompts us to go farther. Chrysostom. Sermon. de Anathem. has a pious and prudent
saying, Dogmata impia, and quae ab Hereticis profecta sunt, arguere and
Anathematizare opertet, hominibus autem parcendum, and pro salute eorum
orandum; that is, We must confute, and pronounce Anathema to the wicked
opinions of Heretics, but we must spare their Persons, and pray for their
Salvation.

Secondly, This way alters the manner of Christ's rule under the Gospel, which
is in the Spirits and Consciences of men; It Is much of Christ's glory to rule
his Subjects under the Gospel by a Spiritual power; it is that power makes a man
a Christian; it is that power in all Gospel Institutions, that keeps men in
their due obedience unto Christ, and it is that power carries the sting of the
punishment, when men are cast out of the Church: it is indeed that power does
all under the Gospel; and to bring in the Temporal Sword, is to make the
weapons of the Gospel, not mighty through God, but mighty through the
Magistrates power, and wholly to alter the nature of the Gospel, and all its
Institutions; it is to arm the Church with Weapons Christ never gave her, and to
make her a Military, rather than a Spiritual Society.

Thirdly, Suppose but this truth, That all Churches, even the purest, are in
the execution of Christ's Laws, fallible and liable to mistake; this Doctrine
has a mavelous tendency to bring the Magistrate under great transgression,
and each Christian under a possibility of such bondage, as the Gospel no where
imposes on him: If a man be unjustly cast out of a Church, and the Magistrate
proceeds against him, he executes an evil Sentence, and does it blindfold,
being by this Doctrine an Officer no way competent, nor in any capacity to make
a judgment of the truth or error of it, and so cannot possibly escape a greater
sin. A Christian unduly cast out of a Church, has this security against such a
proceeding, that Christ will never ratify it upon his Conscience; but by this
manner of execution, he is sure, whether the Sentence be right or no, to fall
under as heavy an outward suffering, as the Magistrates Sword can inflict upon
him. And by this means it will come to pass, that men shall be more dangerously
concerned in their Lives and Estates, by being in the Church, than by being
Members of any Society whatsoever.

The third Extreme in this matter, lies amongst those, who say, That the
Magistrate has nothing at all to do about Religion: This lies very wide from
truth, and cannot in such a general Position be made good, if we consider:

First, That every man in the World, as he is a Creature? and a Subject to the
great God, is bound in his station, and in Gods way, to promote his honor, and
endeavor that his Will may be done in the World; it would be strange that the
Magistrate who is his chief Officer, should be no way concerned to see the
Laws, which God gives the World, put in execution, by the Persons, and in the
manner he has appointed it; it is not to be imagined, that he that has the
complicated relation of a Christian, and a Magistrate to others, should have no
care relative to their Spiritual good, 'twere to say the Magistrate must not do
that which every man else in the World is bound to do.

Secondly, God never since the world began, trusted any with the care of men's
bodies, but he entrusted them likewise with some care of their Souls: If we
look over all the Natural and Moral Relations in the world, such as Parents,
Masters, General of Armies, we shall ever find it so; Men are to be ruled over
as Creatures, that have immortal Souls to be chiefly cared for; and they are to
be ruled over as such who have a special relation to God, and a homage to pay
him, above all the rest of the world; a rule over men without some respect to
this, would denominate mankind into Brutes.

Thirdly, To say the Magistrate has nothing to do about Religion, is to deny
what has been practiced by the Light of Nature before the Law, was practiced
under the Law, suitable to that dispensation, and both commanded and commended,
and is to be practiced under the Gospel, suitable to this dispensation, and is
foretold as a blessing so to be, and in fact has been so ever since there has
been a Magistrate Christian in the world.

Having thus considered these hurtful Extremes about the Magistrates Power, the
last thing to come under consideration, will be the due bounds of a Magistrates
Power under the Gospel, that is, How far a Magistrate, being Christian, may
improvedly exercise his natural power for the advantage and benefit of the
Gospel, and wherein he stands bounded and obliged not to proceed? The
preserving a right state whereof, through the torrent of these Extremes, will
be of singular moment to the matter in hand.

We have seen, that the power of a Heathen and a Christian Magistrate differs
nothing at all in kind: A Heathen Magistrate has the same right, and is bound
to do as much in Religion as a Christian, only the one having more knowledge of
God and his Mind, is bound improvedly to exercise his power accordingly: the
first thing a Christian Magistrate stands bound to do for the good of Religion,
is to afford the Churches all negative good, that is, to remove all Oppression
from them, and all things that do any way hinder them to enjoy the Institutions
of Christ; he is to give them rest, that they may be edified, and walk in the
comforts of the Holy Ghost, and lead quiet and peaceable Lives, in all
godliness and honesty: This, as it is a special blessing the Church does not
often enjoy, so it is one chief part of that benefit it receives by Christian
Rulers: And this the Light of Nature will easily guide a Magistrate to do for
any Religion, of the truth of which he is persuaded. In the Affirmative, he is
not only to see that the Gospel be preached, and all under him fully instructed
in the truths thereof, to unite all Christians, and as much as in him lies,
preserve peace in the Church, to encourage those he finds most zealous,
constant and sincere in the profession of the Gospel, and by his own example to
lead forth his Subjects in all sound Orthodox Profession and Practice: But to
comprehend all in one, he is to endeavor in a Gospel-way to see all the Laws
of Christ put in execution, and as much as in him lies, see his Will done in
the World; he is so far from being bound to execute, only what the Church will
have him, that he is to over-see their proceedings, and to take care, as
Christ's chief Officer in the World, that all things in the Church be duly, and
according to Christ's appointment administered. The Apostles words are general
and full, Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers: Wheresoever the
highest power is, it must needs be so, unless you will have a highest, and a
highest, which will breed inevitable confusion; the Civil power bidding a man
do one thing, and the Ecclesiastical another, it has ever in fact been so; but
under the Roman Church, where the Emperors were made believe, that 'twas the
highest piece of Religion, voluntarily to yield up their Power to the Church,
and submit to her direction for the use of it, which at first they confessed
was inherent in the Emperors, and not in the Church. Before the Law, not only
the Power, but the Exercise of the Priesthood it self, naturally fell into the
Magistrate: 'Twas so in Noah, in Abraham, and in Melchizedeck, who was a King
and a Priest. 'Twas so in Moses, the Regal and Sacerdotal power were both in
him, till they were by God divided between him and Aaron; ever since which time
the exercises of Magistracy and Ministry have been, and are to be distinct.
'Twas so likewise amongst the Heathens; Homer tells us of Princes and Heroes,
that Sacrificed and performed the Worship to the gods. In Rome 'twas manifestly
so, the first Roman Kings did the like. Since Magistracy and Ministry has been
distinctly exercised, still the Inspection and Regulation of Religion, and the
Officers Ecclesiastical, have been in the Magistrate. Under the Law 'twas
plainly so. Under the Gospel, so soon as there was a Christian Magistrate that
could exercise such a Power, we find it so. The right was the same in the
Heathen powers (which happily was the ground of Paul's Appeal unto Caesar)
though they could not then exercise it. There is nothing more plain, than that
there may be a Right, where there is not an Ability to exercise it. Constantine
and the Christian Emperors after him, till the Church of Rome had cheated them
into subjection, took upon them the care and oversight of all Religious
things, and to see all Christ's Laws executed. Constantine used to call himself,
The general Bishop, to take care that all things were duly performed in the
Church. Amongst our selves we reap the Advantage of our Kings and Princes care
and concern, in that enjoyment we have of the Protestant Religion. This shows
the great weakness on the one hand, of such who say, the Magistrate has
nothing to do with Religion; and the perfect mistake of those on the other
hand, who would have the Magistrate wholly Subordinate to the Church; and the
third extreme in those, who would place the Magistrate in so supreme a Power,
as upon the matter, to do what he pleases; will be sufficiently enervated, if
we consider, That as the Magistrate is to see that executed that Christ has
appointed in Religion, so he is to bring in nothing of his own; he is
punctually tied up, neither to add nor diminish, neither in the matter nor the
manner; his business is to see Laws executed, not to make Laws nor change Laws;
Christ has no where granted any such Commission, either to the Magistrate, or
any else upon Earth; and therefore we come to a right state of the Magistrates
Power, when we consider him as Gods chief Officer in the World, directed by the
Light of Nature, as well as otherwise, to see that which God reveals to be his
Will, put in execution: And that which comes particularly to the present matter
in hand, That he does it under the Gospel in the manner Christ has appointed:
The manner Christ has appointed being as positively obliging as the matter;
and therefore the Temporal Sword, when it is used by Magistrates in the concerns
of the Gospel, is the Dead Fly that corrupts all their otherwise very laudable
endeavors. Nor need it seem strange, that a Magistrate should have the care
and oversight of that wherein he is not to use the Temporal power; as he is to
endeavor to see that done by others under the Gospel, (as the Administration
of the Sacraments, and the like) which he is not to do in his own person, so he
is to see that done by the Spiritual means Christ has appointed for it, which
he is by no means to force the doing of by the Temporal power. He that thinks
the Magistrate cannot be useful to the Church without the Temporal power, may
with as good reason say, That all other powers in the Church are useless, where
there is not the Temporal Sword to execute them. All Societies of men are under
the Regulation of the highest power, but yet may act, and ought to do so by
distinct and proper ways, and by means suitable to each. A College of
Physicians in a State, are under the Regulament of the highest Power, and yet
it were very absurd to force them to give Physic, as a thing in it self both
unnatural and unreasonable. The case is much more so in the Church, nor can any
instance fully reach it, because the Church is a distinct thing of it self, and
has Powers proper and peculiar to it, in which it is so complete, that it can
subsist without the Magistrate, as it did in the primitive times. The Civil and
Ecclesiastical Power are things perfectly in themselves distinct, and ought in
their exercise to be kept so. The highest Power governs men, as men, by the
temporal Sword, but as Christians by the spiritual, and by seeing all things
done in Religion by those spiritual means Christ has appointed; all which
means he may make use of, though exercised by other hands than his own, and
still in a subordination to him, as Christ's chief Officer in the World, who
has the Charge incumbant upon him, to see all that Christ has commanded duly
put in execution: But the Magistrate himself, with the Power proper to him,
which is the temporal, is not immediately to act any thing in the Church; what
he does is in a collateral way: that were to bring a new Officer into the
Church, and a Power new and foreign to execute the Gospel, contrary to the
nature, and totally destructive to the being of it. The Magistrate has ways,
such as Christ thought sufficient, to promote the good of Religion, and
propagate the growth of the Gospel, without drawing the civil Sword, which will
make no more impression in spiritual concerns than it will do upon a Ghost that
has no real body. In the execution of those he ought to acquiesce, but if not
content therewith, he will use the civil Power to force men to believe and
worship according to his Light, and will take Offenders in the Church, and
punish them by his temporal Power; what is this but to lord it over Gods
Heritage, and to make the Gospel Church, and being a Member of it, a thing of
greater, outward, carnal, fear, bondage and subjection to men, than ever the
Law was? This use of the temporal Power is the sting that wounds all liberty of
Conscience, and totally overthrows it. If the Magistrate where I live be an
Arrian, a Socinian, or in any such Error, while he enforces this but in a
Gospel way, and in Christ's way of enforcing Truth, only by instruction and
persuasion, this does not mortally wound me, this does not Petere jugulum of my
liberty to keep to the Truth; but if he come to establish it by the civil
Power, and by that suppress all else as Error, my liberty in a differing
persuasion is totally gone. The admitting the Magistrate to use the temporal
Power in executing his judgment about Religion, hurries every man out of the
world that is not of his mind; for whatsoever will make a man an Heretic, will
bring a man to the Stake; and every Opinion that is not the Magistrate's, must
needs make a man so. If Christ has enjoined the temporal Power to be used, it
must have its utmost effect, not only upon Heretics within, but much more upon
those that are Infidels without the Church: If the Magistrate be appointed to
use such a power, he must not tolerate any thing upon any terms, nor exempt it
from the lash of that power. Where will he find a Rule in the Gospel to bear
with some kind of Heresies, and not with others? He must not make submitting to
a civil Penalty, to compensate for an Heresy, unless Christ had appointed that
as the punishment of it; that is a selling of sin, and making a bargain for
iniquity, for his own advantage and profit.

That therefore which the Magistrate under the Gospel may not do (and without
him I am sure the Church cannot do) in which negative restraint upon him, all
Liberty of Conscience is comprehended, and the Freedom Christ has so dearly
and fully purchased, comprised; and which is chiefly intended to be made good
by this discourse, shall be declared in this following Position, which is,

That no Prince nor State ought by force to compel men to any part of the
Doctrine, Worship or Discipline of the Gospel.

The proof of which shall lie in the Reasons following:

First, It Is a thing against the light of nature so to do; and if the
Magistrates Power be grounded in the light of nature, then to do a thing
against that light of nature must needs be very Heterogeneal, and wholly out of
his compass; it must needs be against the common Light and Reason of mankind,
to force me to be believe a thing wholly out of the compass of my knowledge and
capacity, and which nature reveals not to me. Such are all Gospel Truths, they
are not like the matters of the moral Law, but they are things purely
supernatural, and of divine Revelation, such things as from the beginning of
the world eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor never entered into any man's
heart to conceive of; these things the Apostle says, (...); A man with all the
endowments of nature discerns not, because they are spiritually discerned. No
man can call Jesus the Christ, but by the holy Ghost. Will you punish a man for
not having the holy Ghost, that is no way in his power to get, but is like the
Wind that blows where and when it lists? It Is a strange contradiction to our
common reason, to force men about things wholly unknown to them, and out of
their own power. If Force should be used at any time, it should be to bring men
from Paganism to Christianity, for without that we cannot be saved; but when
once Christians, we may be saved under different apprehensions; and yet we may
not force a man to be a Christian, 1st, because it is unlawful; and 2dly,
because it is impossible. It Is not lawful, because it is not Christ's way of
making Christians, nor a means by him appointed for that purpose: 2dly, It Is
impossible, because force upon men will never beget or change Principles or
Opinions. And as we should not force men at the first to the Gospel, because
till God reveals it we are wholly ignorant of it, so we should not force men
that are under the Gospel to any thing they believe not; for they are as great
strangers still to every farther attainment of knowledge in the Gospel, till
God please to reveal it, as they were at first to the whole; and therefore the
Apostle calls us to patience in these things one with another, till God please
to reveal himself. The light of nature must needs condemn that practice, for
another to force me about such things, wherein my own eternal good or ill is
only concerned; where it is not to be imagined, that I can have any aim but my
own Salvation, and can hurt none by my belief but my self. When I have used
rational suitable means to inform another, I ought to acquiesce, it being not a
supposition to be made, that a man would willingly design that which he knows
will be his own ruin, and which will hurt no body but himself. He that forces
me to a Religion, makes me hate it, and makes me think, there wants reason, and
other evidence to evince it. Nature abhors compulsion in Religious things, as a
spiritual rape upon the Conscience. No man by the light of nature was ever
angry with another for not quitting his Conscience till his judgment was
suitably informed, because every man finds it an impossibility in himself so to
do. That which some say, That though we may not force men to believe, yet men
may be forced to the outward means of believing, is very little to the purpose;
for if by outward means, they mean a bare outward act, distinct from any
Religious Worship, no doubt Superiors may command it; but if they mean any
Religious means, if the means be such as my Conscience is not satisfied in, I
ought not to be forced to it; if it be such as I am satisfied in, force is
altogether needless, and it belongs not to this Discourse.

Secondly, To use force in Religion, is wholly unlawful in any hand whatever,
because it is no means appointed by Christ to bring about any Gospel end: For
the Magistrate to enforce the Laws of the Gospel by temporal power, or compel
men into the Gospel by such a power, is to act without the least Precept or
President, and to induce an Engine to execute the Gospel, contrary to the
nature of Christ's Kingdom (which is not of this world) and contrary to the
nature of all Gospel institutions. The Magistrate, as he should be careful to
see the Gospel put in execution; so, in the manner, Christ in his wisdom has
appointed for the doing of it, which is by his own Institutions, and his own
invisible power operating and working with them: The great Rule of the Gospel,
is a rule of the Spirit in the hand of Christ as Mediator; and it is a Rule in
the hearts and spirits of men; and to set up a Rule by any humane power, over
any part of the Gospel, is highly to derogate from that mediatory dominion of
Christ; nay, to use force, is not only to act without, but against the declared
mind of Christ. Does not Paul positively deliver this, That the Weapons of the
Gospel are not carnal, but spiritual, and mighty through God? It Is not Faggots
and Halters, but spiritual means, by which men are both to be brought in and
cast out of the Gospel Church. It Is hearing, and not forcing, by which Faith is
wrought. The sword of the Spirit is the weapon by which Christ does all; yea,
by which he will destroy Antichrist, the greatest Gospel-enemy the world has
produced.

Among all the arguments that are brought to prove the Compulsatory Power of
the Magistrate under the Gospel, the greatest weight is laid upon the Practice
of the Kings of Israel and Judah, and what they did under the Law in compelling
men to the Worship of God then established. In the due consideration whereof,
we shall find the truth in hand no way invalidated, and that what was then done
by the Kings of Israel and Judah cannot reasonably be made a Rule to
Magistrates now under the Gospel; and that the Analogy will no way hold, may be
made appear both from the different station and posture those Kings were in
from all Magistrates now, and also from the different condition of the Church
then and now, and many circumstances peculiarly relating to both.

First, The worship and policy of the Jews being in it self typical and
representive of what was to come hereafter, their Government was likewise so,
and in their Kings very eminently; that David and Soloman did very plainly in
the type represent the Kingly Dominion of Christ, none will deny; and it is as
plain, that the very Throne of David it self, upon which the succeeding Kings
of Judah sat, was likewise so, there being that Prophecy long before, That
the Scepter should not depart from Judah until Shiloh came; and therefore the
Power David and Solomon, and the succeeding Kings of Judah (for amongst the
Kings of Israel, after Solomon, we find not one concerned for the true Worship
of God) who were of the lineage of David, exercised, had a peculiarity in it,
that is not applicable to any Magistrate now.

Secondly, God was pleased in those times, upon all eminent occasions of
reformation in his Worship, and proceedings of that nature, to send Prophets to
declare his positive mind, and to put an end to all doubts that could be about
such things; nay, some of the Kings themselves were Prophets immediately
inspired, and did not only take care of the Worship established by Moses, but
did themselves by divine Authority bring in things of a new Institution into
the Worship of God; this David did, and Solomon, in bringing Music into the
Temple, and settling the courses of the Priests, and were divinely inspired to
write part of the holy Scriptures. No Magistrates now can pretend to any such
power in themselves, nor have they any such extraordinary direction to guide
them, but are punctualy obliged to whatever Christ has revealed in the Gospel;
and therefore in this respect the Analogy no way holds good.

Thirdly, The state of the Jewish Church and Commonwealth was such, as wholly
differed them from all others, since that was a Church and a State in the very
constitution of them mixed together; none could be brought into one, but he was
a member of the other; nor could a man be cast out of the Church, but he was
thereby cast out of the State; to be outlawed and excommunicated, was there
amongst the Jews the same thing. Grotius expresses it well; At that time
(says he) the Wisdom in Divine and Humane Law was not divided; and he proves
it by this, As the Magistrate did intermeddle in Church Affairs, so the Priest
did intermeddle in Cvil things: For (says he) the Priest was a Judge, and did
not only give Judgment in Sacred, but in Civil Affairs, being the best
Interpreter of the whole Law. And says the same Grotius further, That the
Priest had Magistracy. This alone may be proved in Deuteronomy. 17.8. That he is to
dye, who obeys not the Command of the Priest. It Is most clear also, That Eli
was chief Priest in Israel, and chief Judge in Shiloe. It Is not any way to be
avoided, but that the Civil and Ecclesiastical Power lay then interchangeably
mixed; and with as equal reason may we bring Magistracy into the Ministerial
Power of the Gospel, from what the Priests then exercised, and their example,
as to bring such a power in Religion into the Magistrates under the Gospel,
from the parallel of what those Kings did then. Besides, the Magistratical
power was so absolutely necessary to the Jewish Church-Policy so mixed, that it
could not be upheld without it, the very Municipal Law of the Nation was their
Religion: He that was chief in the State, must needs be Head of the Church.
They were a Holy People, living in a Holy Land, appointed to Worship in one
Holy City, and in one Holy place of that City, and to offer upon one Altar in
that Holy place. The Church of the Gospel is totally of another nature,
perfectly distinct from the civil State, can well subsist without a relation to
it, and is no way intermixed in its Concerns with it; And therefore to say all
Magistrates now must do as those did that governed such a mixed complicated
Church and State in one, carries no proportion at all of reason or equity in
it, more then if a man should argue from a Par ratio, that what Moses did at
first amongst the Jews (who was King in Jeshuron) that Kings may now do amongst
Christians under the Gospel.

Lastly, What was then done was by Gods command, and was in a way suitable to
the frame and state of the Church the Jews were imbodied in, and lay chiefly in
bringing men from Idolatry to the Worship of the true God: (for in differences
between Sect and Sect amongst themselves, there was nothing that we find, done
at any time, they continued till our Saviors time;) and putting such a kind of
Worship in execution, as lay in outward carnal Services, and was in every
minute particular, exactly set down and determined. First, The state of the
Gospel Church now is wholly differing from what that was, and is settled upon
clear other grounds and principles. Secondly, Here is no command in the Gospel
for the Magistrate to do any thing of that nature. Thirdly, Let it be granted
as truth, that in parity of reason, because Magistrates were appointed to take
care of Religion then, they are to do so still; it must of necessity be granted
also, that they must do it by the means appointed by Christ under the Gospel,
as they did heretofore, by those God appointed under the Law. It is an
Inference very infirm, That because the Kings of Israel and Judah compelled men
by Gods own appointment, to acknowledge the true God, and forsake Idolatry,
therefore Magistrates now may not only without, but against Christ's commands,
and the whole tenor of the New Testament, compel men to the Spiritual Belief
and Worship of the Gospel. The truth is, the civil Power of the Magistrate is
no means of Christ's appointing, for the carrying on of the Gospel; the Gospel
in the very nature of it, carries an Antipathy in it to all outward force.
Instead of all the temporal promises, and corporal punishments under the Law,
Christ makes this Declaration, He that believes shall be saved, and he that
believes not, shall be damned; That Is the Language of the Gospel; Christ sets
Hell and Wrath to come before men, and by his Spirit working upon, and
convincing the Conscience, works more admirable effects upon men that way, than
all the outward punishments in the World could ever bring about; The Word of
Christ is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged Sword; and can
divide between the Soul and the Spirit, the Joints and the Marrow, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the Heart. We have in the Hebrews a
very perfect account of Gods dealing with men under the Law, and now under the
Gospel, and the plain difference in the manner of the one and the other, Heb.
10.28, 29. He that despised the Law of Moses, died without mercy, under two or
three Witnesses: Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought
worthy, who has trodden under Foot the Son of God, and has counted the Blood
of the Covenant an unholy thing, and done despite unto the spirit of Grace?
Here is the highest offense imaginable against the Gospel; and the punishment,
as it is clear in the next Verses, is not Corporal, but Spiritual and Eternal,
and to fall into the hands of the living God himself to execute it. He that
broke Moses's Law, fell but into the hand of man, and suffered corporal death;
but this offense under the Gospel brings a man to fall into the Hand of God for
eternal death. The sorer punishment he speaks of, cannot be outward or
corporal, for there can be no sorer punishment of that kind, than what was
inflicted under Moses's Law, to put a man to death; and therefore he speaks of
another punishment in the nature of it. So Piscator upon the place (Graviori
supplicio scilicet Eterno) the Supreme Punishment under the Law was inflicted
by Moses upon the Body, suitable to that outward state of things; that sorer
Punishment for Offenses under the Gospel, according to the nature of it, is
inflicted by God himself upon the Soul eternally: And so the kinds of the
Punishments under the Law and the Gospel, suitable to the offenses relating to
each, are here clearly distinguished.

Those Scriptures that are usually urged out of the New Testament, to justify
compulsion in the Magistrate, and corporal punishment for spiritual offenses,
are of so little cogency, and so apparently wrested from their native sense,
that every eye may (if unprejudiced) perceive it. I will instance in two or
three of those chiefly insisted on by Mr Prinne, and those who earnestly
contend that way. Ananias and Saphira were struck to death by Peter; therefore
corporal Punishment is to be inflicted under the Gospel. Who is there that does
not see that whole business to be miraculous and extraordinary, as the healing
the Lame and the Blind was? First, the punishment is wholly extraordinary; and
secondly, the ground of it so: For it was upon a Judgment passed on Hypocrisy,
and Evil latent in the heart, However, if we will continue that Power to any
now, we must (I hope) derive it to the Church, and not to the Magistrate.
Another Scripture earnestly urged, is that of our Savior; Luke 19.27. But
those mine Enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring them
hither, and slay them before me. This speech relates to the Parable before,
which is of a noble man going into a far Country, to receive a Kingdom, and to
return, and then to take an account of all his Servants, what they had done in
his absence. What can be more clear, than that this Parable is spoken to set
forth Christ's ascension into Heaven, and his return to Judgment in the end of
the World? And this place is a clear Prophetic expression of that Judgment
Christ will then execute upon his Enemies, both Jews and Gentiles. The words of
Calvin upon this place are very express this way, and indeed, it is not possible
to interpret yet any other: His words are these; In this second part he seems
specially to reprove the Jews, yet he touches all, which in the abscence of
the Master do bend themselves to fall away. And Christ purposed not only to
terrify such with denouncing of horrible Vengeance, but also to keep his in
faithful obedience; for it is no light temptation to see the Kingdom of God
shaken by the faithlesness of many. Therefore, that we might remain quiet
amongst so many tumultuous stirs, Christ says, That he will come again, and
will be revenged at his coming, of that ungodly falling away.

Another Scripture pressed to serve for the proof of this, is that wish, not
command, of Paul's, in Gal. 5.12. I would they were even cut off that trouble
you. This makes as little for the purpose as the other: Some amongst the
Galatians highly pressed the observation of the Jewish worship upon them, in
Circumcision and other things; the Apostle bespeaks them to a
Gospel-punishment, in the Jewish Language; Casting-out under the Gospel, comes
in the room of Cutting-off under the Law; the Apostle means a Gospel-rejection
under the Jewish terms of cutting-off, which was oppositely expressed to those
that pressed the observance of the Law. So Beza upon the place; Paulus ad
pelliculae sectionem alludit, quam ipsi urgebant. And a little after, Possumus
istud de Excommunicatione simpliciter intellegere, qualis fuit illa incestuosi
Corinthij. Nothing is more usual, than to express Gospel-matters in the Typical
Language of the Jewish Church. So the Saints are called Priests; their Alms
Sacrifices; and we are bid to eat the Passover. And so in that famous place of
our Savior, where he bids us, If an Offender refuse to hear the Church, to
count him as an Heathen man and a Publican. It Is nothing but a Gospel-Precept
expressed in the Jewish dialect: Of as little moment, or less, if it may be to
the purpose in hand, are the other Scriptures insisted on. Let the New
Testament be but fairly dealt with, and suffered to enjoy its own native sense,
and we shall not find a word to countenance the execution of the Laws of the
Gospel by Temporal force, nor to inflict upon any man corporal punishment, for
a Spiritual offense committed in the Church. Our Savior directly tells Pilate
[and Paul to Timothy calls it a good confession] That his Kingdom is not of
this World; (he means, no doubt, the Kingdom of the Gospel) and therefore his
Empire would no way invade Caesar's; though the Jews told Pilate, If he let
Christ go, he was none of Caesar's Friend. His meaning was, That his Kingdom,
as Head of his Church, was a Spiritual Kingdom, distinct from the World: and
that as God governed the World by the Temporal power, in the hand of the
Magistrate; so Christ governs his Kingdom by the Power of his Spirit, and by
Officers and Institutions wholly different and distinct from the World, and
suitable to such a Dominion. Nothing since Christ's Ascension has more
disturbed the Christian World, or brought more disorder into Religion, than
mixing those two Dominions in their distinct powers, that of the World, and
this of the Church together: It Is absolutely necessary to keep these Powers
distinct and several. The Magistrate will be most useful to the Church, by
keeping the civil Power in its due bounds; and the Church will be most safe and
secure in the use of its Spiritual weapons. Let the Sword of Justice govern in
one, and the Sword of the Spirit in the other, and men will be most happy in
both.

That the Laws made to punish Offenders corporally under the Jewish Church, are
not now to be executed without making our selves debtors to the whole Law,
sufficiently appears. Take an Instance in that Law about putting Idolaters to
Death, where, if we consider the circumstances attending it, we shall find it
impossible, nay, unlawful now to be executed: Whosoever tempted another to
Idolatry, was not to be concealed, but the Person tempted was obliged to kill
him himself, whether he were his Brother, Son, Wife, or whatever Relation it
were. In the 13th of Deuteronomy. verse. 9. Thou shall surely kill him, thy hand shall
be first upon him, and then the hand of all the People, and they shall stone
him. And afterward we find there, whole Cities of Idolaters are to be raced to
the ground, and their Children and Cattle utterly destroyed. These are Laws
that cannot be now executed under the Gospel; nay, they are forbidden; for we
are bid to walk in Wisdom to those that are without, to do good to all men, and
to give no offense, neither to Jew nor Gentile. Nay, Believing Husbands and
Wives are bid to live with their Unbelieving Relations, in hopes to convert
them. Who can avoid, seeing that these Punishments, as well as Promises were
relative to that People, and that state of things, to preserve them from the
rest of the World, and expired with the distinction of Jew and Gentile.

Thus I have endeavored to oppose the Magistrates using the civil Power to
force Religion under the Gospel, First, because it is against the Light of
Nature; And secondly, it is not only without, but against the Command of the
Gospel so to do. Famous is that saying of Tertullian to Scapula; It
appertains unto the Authority of the Law of Man and Nature, that every man
Worship as he thinks good; and one man's Religion does not hurt nor profit
another: Neither is it any piece of Religion to enforce Religion; which must be
undertaken by a man's own accord, and not through Violence. So thought
Turtullian anciently. So says Lactantius, Who shall enforce me either to
believe what I will not, or not to believe what I will? So says Cassdor,
Religion cannot be forced. And Bernard has an excellent saying to the same
purpose; Faith is to be planted by Persuasion, not obtruded by Violence. Bid
tells us, That here in England, so soon as King Ethelbert was converted by
Austin the Monk, he made a Law, That none should be compelled to Religion,
having understood, that Christ's Service ought to be voluntary, and not
compelled.

A third Reason against using Force and Compulsion about things under the
Gospel, is, Because it is not adequate to the Malady; for if the meaning be to
make a man forsake Error, and embrace the Truth, it is no Remedy suitable to the
Disease, nor will it ever reach such a Distemper, or effect such a Cure. The
Disease lies in the Soul, and in the Understanding; the compelling and
punishing the Body will never help it; the end will be wholly lost: A man can
never be forced to alter or embrace an Opinion; he may deny it, or conceal it:
But if he had a desire, through fear, or other slavish considerations, to do
it, yet he cannot, and so a man is compelled to an impossibility. This usually
makes Hypocrites, and at last Atheists, but never makes a right Convert: So the
Souls of men this way are endangered, the Devils Interest promoted; but neither
the Salvation of Souls, nor the Honor of God, by enlarging Truth, any way
furthered. He that uses no other Medium, but force to me, makes a Lion and a
Mastiff-Dog as capable of converting me, and giving Laws to my Understanding,
as he. We are bid to restore Persons fallen into Error, by a Spirit of
Meekness, considering our selves, lest we also be tempted. So Paul to Timothy;
The Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle to all men, in Meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give
Repentance. No man ever yet did any good to himself or others, by forcing a man
against the Law of his own Light and Reason. How many that through fear and
oppression have gone against their Light, have repented openly, to the shame
and disgrace of those who violently obtruded Principles upon them, contrary to
what was natively and properly their own.

Take amongst many, one famous instance, recorded by Socrates in his
Ecclesiastical History. The Emperor Valens, by threats and menaces to
confiscate and banish him, made Elusius Bishop of Cyzicum turn Arrian, and
approve the Decrees of the Council of Arminium: The effect of it was, Elusius
presently fell into horror of Conscience, openly at Cyzicum recanting what he
had done, crying out of the Emperors unjust cruelty, and made all men loath
such a proceeding. A late Author undertakes to justify the use of Force in
Religion, from the Opinion of Saint Austine, whose Opinion at first, as is well
known, was, That it was no way lawful to use Force to men of differing Opinions
in Religion. The retraction of that, and the change of his mind was occasioned
by a particular accident at Hippo; and it may be, if we consult all
circumstances, we shall find his last Opinion had more need of a retractation
than his first; and yet at last he is very positive against all capital
punishment, his words are, Nullis tamen bonis; It Is a thing says he, that
pleases no good man, that any Heretic should be put to death. We may see by
this, how men do curtail and enlarge these things according to their interests
and particular affections, and set bounds at their own pleasure; some are for
one kind of temporal severity, and some for another: and so when we leave the
Scriptures, that give no direction for any, we lose our selves, and wander as
the fancies and interests of men lead us. But the Authors words are these:
Though Force (says he) will not remove the Error, yet it may prevent its
spreading; though it does not take away the Cause, yet it hinders most of the
mischievous Effects. The mischievous effects of an Opinion is considered, as it
relates to a man himself who is possessed with it, and as it relates to others
who may be by him infected with it: Force does in no wise hinder the spreading
of an Opinion; for if a man be punished for declaring to others what he thinks
is right, and he thinks himself bound in Conscience to declare, others are more
easily taken, and by his Sufferings made more pleased with his Notion, and
sooner become his Proselites. In the other case, he that forces me to deny my
Opinion, sins in doing it, but I sin likewise if I comply with him: for such
mischievous effects, as relate to the Person himself possessed with an Opinion,
hinders them not at all, unless you can convert him by it; for it either
confirms him in one Error, or leads him into a worse: If he stand it out and
suffer, he will be the more rooted in his persuasion by it, and be apt to
think, want of Arguments brings men to Club-Law: If he comply against his
Light, he runs then into an apparent and certain evil that way. But the Author
proceeds, and tells us, In a little time it will remove the cause of the Error:
That is to say, Forcing men, if you do it long enough, will convert them; and
the reason he gives, is this, Because Paul ranks his Heresies amongst the works
of the Flesh; and it is not seated so solely in the mind, but that it has
often no sublimer motives then other sensual transgressions; and as outward
considerations are sometimes the cause, so they may be the cure of it. That
ever any man did change an Opinion, first or last, by being forced, since the
World began, is without instance, and impossible in the nature of the thing to
be: One says well, You may as well cure a man of the Cholick by brushing his
Cout, or fill a man's Belly with a Syllogism. These things do not communicate
in matter, and so neither in action or passion. But Heresy is a work of the
Flesh, so is every mistake of the Soul; Heresy is a work of the Soul rather in
mis-believing than mis-doing; it is a thing in Opinion, rather than Fact. The
Apostle, in Galatians 5. where Heresy is reckoned amongst the works of the
flesh, does not put the distinction between works of the flesh, as things
outwardly acted, opposite to what is inwardly believed; but by the flesh he
means the corrupt and carnal mind, opposite to the Spirit of God; for he says
plainly in the Verse before, The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the Flesh. By the Flesh there, he means the corrupt state of man in
Soul and Body; so that Heresy may be a work of the flesh, and yet purely
seated in the mind: Every corruption in the mind is a work of the flesh, and
yet as it is there only, is in some sense a thing spiritual and speculative. But
says he, Outward considerations are sometimes the cause of an Opinion, and may
be sometimes the cure of it. If outward considerations, suitable to a
conviction of my understanding, have wrought upon my understanding, and made me
really believe a thing, there is then no proportion at all of reason, to say,
That force, because it is an outward thing, wholly incapable of working upon my
understanding, may make me as well disbelieve it. And if those outward
considerations he means, have not really convinced me, then it is not my
Opinion: Either outward considerations are the ground of such Opinions, or they
are not; if they be, they will best discover themselves in their effects: such
causes are best so known, and only so known, and those effects will be obvious,
if they be evil, to a due punishment; if they be not the cause of them, it is
first, a superlative want of Charity, to make our selves evil Judges of other
men's hearts, and then an eminent piece of injustice to punish men upon such a
false supposition. He that will take upon him to judge the grounds of any man's
Principles which he knows not, may make any Opinion have what Original he
pleases. It Is a most absurd thing to believe, any man for outward respects
should suffer all reproach and persecution: You may as well say, all the
Martyrs suffered only to set up a Pillar, and get themselves a Name; it is
obvious enough to any impartial eye, those outward considerations are more
probably to be men's temptations that go another way.

Fourthly, No man under the Gospel ought to be compel^ed to believe or practice
any thing: [and if not to believe, then not to practice, for the practice ought
to correspond with, and be but the counter-part of the belief; it is strangely
unreasonable to require uniformity in the practice, where there is variety and
difference in the Judgment; it is to bid a man go directly against his Light;
it is miserable to rend a man into two pieces, his Conscience in one part, and
his outward man and practice in another part: God arrests him, and draws him in
a way suitable to his rational Soul one way, and men by means wholly contrary,
another: Who, think we, has the greatest right; and whether is it better to
obey God or man in such a case? Those that thus impose upon men, do what in
them lies to ruin them eternally,] I say, it is not reasonable to compel men to
believe or practice; (for practice should suppose belief) because God tells so
very often, He only accepts a willing Service in his Worship, and abhors all
other; God detests the smell of a Sacrifice, where the heart is not, where the
heart is far from him; and it is impossible it should be near him, where a man
is compelled directly against his own judgment. How much does the beauty of the
Gospel lie in this, that Gods People are made by him a willing People, and that
God has his Creature wholly in his Service? Such are the Converts of the
Gospel, where every man is in his rational Soul so satisfied, enlightened and
convinced, that he does all freely: It Is a severe thing to enjoin me by penal
Laws to worship God in a way I neither like nor he accepts; which he does not,
though it be what he has appointed for the matter; if I come not in the manner
he has likewise appointed to it, I shall neither please him, nor advantage my
own Soul. This was the case of the Jews, when God hated their solemn
Assemblies, and said, Incense was an abomination to him. It Is usually false
worship that needs force; 'twas Jeroboam that upon Politic grounds began to
force a Religion, and it is said of him, He made Israel to sin, by compelling
them to Dan and Bethel. If men intend to make Converts to God, they must not do
more for him, than he does for himself; he never violates the liberty of the
rational Soul, but approves things to the understanding; if they under this
pretext intend to make Proselites to their own power, it is very sinful.

Fifthly, The practice of Christ and the Apostles, positively contradicts this
course; they could have commanded what power they had pleased, if that had been
the way of settling the Gospel in the world: Christ would have no Fire come down
from Heaven, but that of the Holy Ghost; nor no Sword used in the Church, but
that of the Spirit; he bids them Teach all Nations, Baptizing them, etc. that
is his way of initiating men into the Church; Not as the Spainards Convert the
Indians, who leave them no choice, but to be Baptized or Murdered. Men are
first to be enlightened, and then led into conformable practice. Paul prays for
men, That the Eyes of their understandings might be enlightened: And our
Savior, when he preached, called for an eye and an ear, to hear and discern
his Doctrine. It Is no matter for either, where force is the Medium. This
deserves to be very well weighed, that the Apostles never urged the Truths of
the Gospel in their infallible Ministry of them, upon farther or other terms
than Persuasion and Ratiocination, and give every man freedom of debate, and
counted it a noble thing in the Bereans, to examine the Scriptures, Whether the
things they preached were so or no. After all means used, every man was left to
his own Light. Paul professes he was not Lord over any man's Faith. The truth
is, that part of the Soul where Faith and Conscience is seated, cannot be
reached by any compulsion; and therefore force reaching but to outward
practice, there can be no other end of it but to make us suffer, or else
practice contrary to what we believe.

Sixthly, Forcing men to a Religion which is wholly supernatural, and imposing
Principles upon them, which are out of the compass of Moral Light, as all
Gospel-Principles are, supposes a perfect infallibility in the Imposers, and
the thing imposed, or else it is strangely unreasonable; to force men against
their own Light, to be guided by ours, unless we are sure we cannot mistake, is
a strange absurdity. There is some excuse for being guided by a mistake of our
own, if it be the best light we have; but there is no excuse for being guided
by a mistake of another man's. Three sorts of men there have been in the world,
eminent for Imposition in Religion, and common discretion taught them, that the
necessary support of such Imposition must be a pretended Infallibility in
themselves and their Doctrines. Such were the Jewish Rabbis of old, who had so
deluded the People, that Luther tells us, The Jews thought they were bound to
believe what their Rabbis taught, though they should say, The Right hand was
the Left, and the Left the Right. Such also was Mahomet and the Mufties, who
impose all upon the ground of Infallibility; Mahomet at the first laying this
down as a Maxim, That there was to be no debate nor discourse of what he
prescribed; and his Mufties subdue the People by carrying on the same ever
since. Grotius gives a very full account of this in his Book of the Truth of
Christian Religion, Sect. 3. Famous for Imposition are the Popes and Priests of
the Roman Church, and they with the Hammer of Infallibility beat down all
Opposition. That Is a refuge never fails to justify things against Scripture,
Reason, and common Senses of man; That the arrogant assumption of
Infallibility, since the time of Christ and his Apostles, is nothing else but a
political Cheat upon the World; God by his Providence, in fact, as well as
otherwise, has made it clear to us, since those who pretend to it, have as
often contradicted each other, and erred, even in the Opinions each of other,
as any People in the World: God in his just Judgment leaving those that pretend
to be so much above all men, to appear as weak, and as depraved men, as any the
world has. But Imposition, where Infallibility is not pretended nor claimed,
must needs be but weakly underset. He that imposes a Religion upon me, intends
I should take his Light instead of my own: Imposing a Religion upon me,
supposes a duty in me of perfect subjection, or else it is ridiculous, and
signifies nothing. Admitting a man to use his own Light in judging, destroys
the being of Imposition in Religion, upon any tolerable grounds of Reason; and
no body is to be obeyed in whatever they command, but those that are
infallible. Whoever it be, the Church or the Magistrate, that confesses
himself fallible, must needs admit a possibility of mistake, and so gives
ground unquestionable, to reason and consider what is offered to me; and to
what purpose will that be, but farther to ensnare me, if I must necessarily
obey? and unless I discover the weakness and mistake of what is put upon me, I
may refuse it.

Amongst the Protestant Churches, where Infallibility is not claimed, and this
Doctrine taught, That if any man command any thing sinful [of which every man's
Conscience is likewise acknowledged the Judge] we are to suffer passively, and
not obey actively. There can be no other success of Imposition, but to make me
suffer for being an honest man, and following the Light of my own Conscience;
for if the thing enforced be according to my own judgment, forcing me to it is
needless; if it be not, I am bound by Principles, acknowledged by all, not to
obey, and so the event must needs be my suffering in performing my Duty. Nay,
suppose further, that the thing enjoined be Infallible in its own nature, and
the Person enjoining it be so in that very act, yet till I am convinced in my
reason of both those, they are to me as if they were not so, and I shall never
upon that account yield implicit obedience; and when I am convinced of such an
Infallibility, my own Reason, without any other motive, forces me into
subjection, as that which is best for me. No man can or ought to command me to
alter my Judgment and Conscience, guided by the best Light I have, till he can
show me, that as I am fallible, so he is infallible, and that he is so in that
act of imposing a Religion upon me, my own light is more safe to me than any
other man's, that is not so entrusted, and is but equally fallible with my self,
though in knowledge never so far above me. He that owns, he may be mistaken as
well as I, and yet would have me obey what he commands, against what I believe,
would at the same time make me both a sinner and a fool; a sinner to God, and a
fool to my own Reason; a sinner to depart from my own Conscience, by which God
expects I should be guided, and by which I shall hereafter be judged; and a
fool to eat by another man's taste, and to part with my own Reason, without any
assurance of being guided by a better. A Magistrate imposes Uniformity in
Religion, acknowledges himself not infallible, but that he may be under
mistakes, acknowledges likewise, that no man is bound to obey him actually in
any thing sinful; acknowledges that the Judgment of what is sinful, lies in
every man's own Conscience, as to his particular actings, and that every man's
Conscience, though erroneous, is to be followed till better informed. Take the
coherence of these things, which are all granted Truths amongst us, and the
result will be twofold; 1st, That a man that cannot in Conscience conform to
such an imposed Uniformity, as thinking it sinful, is punished for doing what
is acknowledged to be his duty. 2dly, there can never be any other end in
forcing Uniformity, where such Principles are taken for granted, but to bring
such men into suffering, who resolve to keep their Integrity.

Seventhly, Every man in the World is to be a Judge for himself in all matters
of the Gospel Religion, and so ought not to be forced to believe or practice
any thing he is not convinced of. To what end is preaching or discoursing to
men, but that they may judge of what is said? A man being obliged to answer for
himself, he must needs be so to judge for himself. And this Foundation once
laid, upon which many of our most irrefragible Arguments against the Papists
are built, all pretensions of imposing upon men, contrary to their own
Judgments and Consciences, will with apparent reason fall to the ground: For if
I stand obliged to God, as a creature by him enabled and fitted so to do, to
make a Judgment within my self, according to the measure of Light I have, of
all things I believe or practice in Religion, then I can never come under an
obligation to obey any Commands that compel me against my Light, nor ever to
follow the Judgments of others, farther than I am convinced by it, and it
becomes my own. Now to make this evident, that every man under the Gospel is
bound at last to judge for himself, in all things relating to God and his own
Soul, let these things following be considered:

First, Every Person in the World is under a Scripture-command, To prove all
things, and hold fast that which is good; Whatever comes from Ministers by way
of instruction, or from Magistrates by way of command, it is a duty to give a
due respect to it, and seriously to way it, and at last, by the best Light we
have, to make a judgment of it, and settle the Conscience about it; but no way
are we bound to follow blindfold, whether we like it or not: To prove and
examine, shows a necessary use of Reason, and an act of the Understanding, in
weighing and pondering, and to hold fast in choosing and determining. We are
bid, To obey God, rather than Man: That Command can never be put in practice,
but by judging what is of God, and what is of Man; and it must necessarily
refer to a judgment of our own; for all men's pretense is, that what they enjoin
is of God.

Secondly, Every man is bound to do, whatever he does in Religion, in Faith;
for that the rule is positive, Whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin; he that
doubts is damned if be eat: To do an action in Faith, is to do it upon a
judgment made within himself, that what I do, is that I ought to do, and that I
perform my duty therein. And herein I must necessarily be my own judge, no
other man's Faith can so serve my turn, as to excuse me from sin: If any thing
be commanded me contrary to my own judgment, I can never obey it in Faith, and
so never obey it without Sin. The ground of all Faith lies in the information
and satisfaction of the Judgment; without the concurrence of that, no action in
Religion can ever be done in Faith, and so never be done as it ought to be
done. And therefore it is that the Apostle pronounced him happy, that
condemns not himself in the thing that he allows. A man through an
Erroneous Judgment may do a thing in Faith, and yet do it sinfully: his Faith
will not excuse him; but yet he is bound to exercise Faith in every thing he
does. He that does any thing without Faith, sins in it: he that does an ill
action in Faith, has an excuse for it; thereby a tanto, though not a toto; so
that in the one, Faith lessens the sin of the action, and in the other, makes
it completely good.

Thirdly, Every man must needs be a Judge for himself, because God will accept
or not accept, and deal with him here and hereafter, according to what his own
judgment was, and his suitable conforming himself thereto. For this we have a
plain Scripture; Every man shall give an account of himself to God: Every man's
Understanding is his Talent, God expects he should employ it, and not hide it,
and accordingly deals with men; Where much is given, much is required; and
where little is given, little is required. Whence comes the satisfaction of
Conscience in this World, but that while we walk sincerely according to our
Light, we rest satisfied of an acceptance with God, and we find accordingly,
God accepts such, and abhors an Hypocrite. That God will hereafter judge men
according to the knowledge they have, and the Judgment they make within
themselves, the Scripture is every where clear: He that knows his Masters will,
and does it not, he shall be beaten with many stripes. God will judge men out
of their own Mouths, and out of their own Breasts; if then God deals with men
here, and judges them hereafter according to the Light they have, it is that
sure that should be the Rule of our living. To say, I did what others bid me,
and never judged within my self what God required from me, nay, when I was
convinced, he required the contrary from me, will be but a poor excuse, when
men's Consciences shall come upon the Stage to do the Office of excusing or
accusing in that great day. Our Divines say very right, when they tell us,
Every man's Light is to be his Guide: If it be false and erroneous, he lies
under sin, because it is his duty to be better informed; but till he is so, it is
his duty to puruse that light he has, as the lesser evil.

Fourthly, To say a man is not to judge for himself, is to unman him, and
change him from a rational Creature to a Bruit: What has God lighted such a
Candle in man (as knowledge and understanding) for, but to judge and discern
by, and be a guide to him? God that has given a man an ability to judge, does
he ever forbid, nay, does he not always enjoin the use of it that way? Besides,
it is impossible that a man (supposing him a rational Creature) should consent
any thing without passing first an act of his Judgment upon it. He that yields
up himself to the Infallibility of Rome, passes a Judgment first, that it is
best to do so; and therefore when men are persuaded to join themselves in the
Roman Church, and trust wholly to that, in believing whatever the Church
believes, they are first admitted to judge, that it is best to do so; and are
made first Judges for themselves, before they resign up their Judgment to
others; to what end else were all Persuasion and Reasoning about such matters?
The Papists, while they profess against this private judgment as a detestable
thing, that every man should be a Judge for himself, they cannot deny, but that
every man is actually so; and therefore Bellarmine flies to this sorty shift, he
says, Before men are in the Church, they must judge for themselves, but when
they are once in the Church, they must resign themselves to her Infallibility.
The English of which is, That before a man is a Romanist, he may use his
Reason, but after must be led and driven like a Bruit. And the truth is, a
Church constituted with an implicit Belief, under an imposed Infallibility,
differs little from a dumb Herd of Cattle. Either in such a case I make use of
my Reason, or I do not; if I do not, I cease to be a man under the denomination
of a rational Creature; if I do, I must necessarily be a Judge for my self; for
if I am guided by another judgment than my own, as that I think best for me,
there is as clear an act of my judgment in so doing, as if I were punctually
directed by my own.

This we call knowledge in men, God has given to taste Principles and Notions,
as the Mouth tastes Meats; take away once the use of this taste, and you take
away the noblest accomplishment of a man: You make a man, created in honor, if
he do not understand, like a Beast that perishes; as the Eye guides the Body,
so the judgment of the Understanding guides the Soul; force a man once from the
use of this, and you betray him into a dark Chaos of slavery and brutish
subjection, and render him an object fit for the same scorn and contempt that
Sampson found when he had lost his two Eyes. By these things we may plainly
discern, that the necessity of every man's being a Judge for himself in divine
things, is grounded both upon Scripture and Reason; and that it is not only
lawful, but a positive duty, God expects the performance of, and obliges every
man living to. And this being so, for any Power on Earth to compel men to
believe or practice contrary to their Judgment and Conscience, must needs be
both unlawful and unreasonable.

Lastly, The ill success Force and Imposition in Religion has ever had, and
which it has a necessary tendency to have, may very well make us out of love
with it; there can possibly be no other effect of it, but either to debauch men
in their Consciences, or bring violent Persecutions upon their Persons and
Estates. If the first, those that impose, bring a guilt upon themselves, and
partake of the sin, as being the great occasion and causers of it: So did
Jeroboam when he made Israel to sin, the guilt stuck to himself, as well as to
the People. If the second, men are sufferers from men, for doing their duty to
God, and part with their Estates, because they cannot with their Integrity; and
in this case the Punishment falls upon the Sufferers, but the Guilt still upon
the Imposer. Either a Magistrate, imposing in Religion, is to be obeyed in
whatsoever he commands, or not; if he be, we shall then excuse those that
obeyed Jeroboam, and cast reproach upon all the Martyrs that have suffered for
refusing the sinful commands of Superiors. If they be not, there must be then
some judgment when they are to be obeyed, and when not; and that can be no
other than every man's own Conscience: And if every man's own Conscience, and the
light of it is to be his Rule, by which he is to judge, then whenever I refuse
to obey a command in Religion, because my Conscience tells me, it is sinful, I
am plainly punished for doing my Duty, and following that Light God has given
to guide me. Nay, suppose my Conscience be erroneous, it is confessed by all,
it is a sin not to follow it till better informed; and if so, I am sure it is
likewise a sin to force me out of it. Conscientia quamvis errans semper ligat
ita ut ille peccat qui agit contra Conscientiam quoniam agit contra voluntatem
Dei quamvis non materialiter and vere tamen formaliter and interpretive, Ames.
de cas. Con. If we look upon this practice in the Roman Church, where it is in
its Meridian, what a Massacre of Souls has it made? What Darkness and
miserable Ignorance is grown up in the Laity by it? And amongst the Clergy,
what Pride, Corruption and Tyranny? Where it has been practiced in the Reformed
Churches, it has introduced nothing but Divisions and Animosities, and the sad
effects of them; those who have been freed from the Roman Imposition, and
enlightened in the Protestant Truths, being less able to endure Imposition than
any; being by their departure from Rome, furnished with Principles that do
wholly overthrow any such Power, by whomsoever exercised. How little hurt would
variety of Opinions about Religion do in the World, if it were not for this?
What hurt could any man's Opinion do me, if he used no other Weapons than
Reasoning and Discourse? It Is the Imposing Opinions makes them pernicious and
troublesome to the World, and makes every Party strive to get the Magistrate on
their side that they may suppress the rest, and turn Religion into a worldly
Interest. Religion troubles no body as Christ left it, but as men make it. By
this practice, men of differing judgments in Religion can never live together
in the World, nor enjoy the great advantages they might afford one to another
in civil concerns, and in Religion too, so far as they agree, because their
Consciences will not let them come up to the practice of an imposed Uniformity
in all things. How different from this were the thoughts of Paul? he bids us
join together, so far as we agree; and in other matters wherein we do not
agree, to wait till God shall reveal himself to us. What an unreasonable thing
is it, to oblige Christians either to suffer, or follow all the changes made by
human Powers in Religion, upon what worldly or political ends soever, to have
the Conscience floating about at the Magistrates pleasure, as his property,
which is only God's peculiar? Those that lived in the days of Henry the 8th,
Edward the 6th, Q. Mary and Q. Elizabeth, had occasion enough to experience
this, who must either have withstood a conformable practice with suffering, or
else surely have been sometimes out of the way.

But that which should put us perfectly out of all charity with the use of
Force in Religion, is, when we consider, the true Worship of the Gospel can
never be established by it. You may establish a false Worship, or a formal
outside Worship, but never make such Worshippers as Christ speaks of, when he
says, The true Worshippers under the Gospel are such who Worship the Father in
Spirit and in Truth. You may establish a false Worship, that is, a Worship of
men's appointing; for if they be but outwardly obeyed in what they institute,
they look no farther. Jeroboam's business was to keep the People from
Jerusalem; if they came but to Dan and Bethel, he cared for no more; he little
minded the Religion he had set up, for he made Priests of the meanest of the
People; his end was Political, to bring men into subjection to himself. You may
also establish a formal Worship, you may by force make men hypocritically
conform to the outside of true Worship; you may force men to the Sacraments,
but without they be qualified with those Praerequisites God requires, instead
of performing an acceptable Service, you force them to commit a great Sin.

That you cannot by force establish the right Gospel Worship, appears by these
two things: 1st, It Is a spiritual Worship; and 2dly, It Is a voluntary Worship.
First, It Is a Spiritual Worship; there is no one part of Gospel Worship lies in
the bear outward performance of any duty: The Word (said Paul) did not profit,
because 'twas not mixed with Faith. In hearing, praying, receiving Sacraments,
and all others, there is more required than the bare outward act, it is Faith in
these things, and that which is Spiritual in them, that gives them an
acceptance before God; and that men cannot be forced into: you can never compel
into that which is purely Spiritual. Secondly, It Is a voluntary Worship; the
Gospel is a Proclamation made to every one that wills, to eat and drink of
the Bread and Water of Life. It Is the very evidence of Christ's Power under the
Gospel, That his People are made a willing People; and therefore the Service of
the Gospel cannot be forced: It Is a contradiction to say, That may be well done
by Compulsion, that ought to be freely and voluntarily done.

Two things are with great vehemence opposed to this, and which do indeed
contain the greatest show of Reason for Compulsion in Religion, of all the
Arguments brought for it. 1st, it is said, That compelling men to the outward
means of Religion, is a way God often uses to work inward Conversion. 2dly,
That though it do not so work, yet a bear outward compliance is acceptable to
God, and blessed by him. And for this the example of Ahab's humiliation, and
the Ninevites Fast is brought.

To the first, I say, That somethings under the Gospel are as well Moral as
Religious, and have a foundation in the light of nature, as well as in the
institution of the Gospel; and to these, men may be commanded by the
Magistrate. As Hearing is an act purely moral, as well as divine, a man may be
enjoined to hear the Gospel preached without being forced to give his assent to
it. The Light of nature guides the Magistrate to instruct his Subjects in
whatever he thinks for their eternal good; and the light of nature obliges
every man to hearken to every providential Instruction God affords, and
improve it for his good. A man that is only commanded to hear and receive
Instruction, is dealt with as a rational Creature, and forced to nothing; the
judgment is still left in himself. A man may hear, and be no way concluded;
hearing is in order to choice and determination. But such things as are purely
of a Gospel institution, and are perfectly supernatural; to these, men may not
be any way compelled, nor can we ever expect a blessing upon it; First, Because
instruction, and not compulsion, is the way Christ has appointed to bring men,
and fit them to partake of all Gospel Ordinances. Secondly, Because a man
joining himself to the Gospel, and partaking in the Ordinances and Worship of
it, upon no other ground but compulsion, and is in his heart all the while
either ignorant of it, or against it, sins in all he does; and therefore though
God can overruled the sins of men to good ends, yet must not we do evil that
good may come of it, nor anticipate Converts to the Gospel by undue means. God
can work men's conversion by any means, or without means, but yet we are bound
to seek men's conversion by such means as God has appointed for that end, and
left us under an obligation to prosecute.

Mr Prynn, who is earnest for compulsion and corporal punishment under the
Gospel, when he is told, That it is not a way to make Converts, and to work
upon the understanding; Replies, That corporal sufferings, afflictions and
pressures upon the outward man, are an usual means of Gods sanctifying and
saving men. It Is true, a means that he overrules, and a means he reserves in
his own hand, to use as he pleases, but no means appointed in the Gospel for
us to use, and so we cannot expect the concurrence of Gods operation, which can
only make it effectual upon it. Because God many times sanctifies the pain and
sickness of men's Bodies, and the sufferings and losses in their Estates and
Reputations, to the saving of their Souls, we may not (I hope) bring these
things upon men for that end, because they are not means God has entrusted us
with the use of; nor has indeed any outward force upon the body a natural
tendency in it self to alter a man's mind, but rather the contrary; but God by
his influence upon it, can overruled it that way; and unless it be by him a
means appointed, that so we may expect such an operation, it is both unlawful
and unreasonable to make use of it. In short; if by compelling men to outward
means, be meant, only to compel a man to a bare outward moral action, and such
are all things relating to instruction, men may be commanded to it: If by means
be meant, a Religious Gospel means of Christ's institution, and purely relating
to the Gospel, such as the Sacraments, and the like, no man ought to be
compelled to them, nor can we expect any good from such a Compulsion, farther
then as God is pleased to bring good out of evil.

For the second thing, That though compulsion do not work real Conversion, yet
an outward conformity, though there be nothing else, is pleasing to God: That
is, That to compel a man by force to profess he believes that which he no way
believes, and to practice that which he no way likes, is a Reformation God
approves of, this I utterly deny; unless it can be made appear, that God is
pleased with Hypocrisy, accepts the outward Man, where the heart and the
inward Man is far from him, and has no better means to bring men into the
Church, than unreasonable compulsion, which must needs beget an unreasonable
Service. As such a Conformity can never please God in the persons conforming,
so neither in the persons imposing. Not in the persons conforming, because they
do it not from a right Principle, nor to a right end, they do it either without
knowledge ignorantly, or against knowledge unwillingly. Besides, he that comes
to partake of any Gospel-Ordinance in an undue manner [which he must needs do,
that comes only by compulsion] sins in the very act: He that receives the
Sacrament without a due qualification, sins in the very act; and therefore such
Conformity may satisfy men, but can never please God. Not in the persons
imposing, because they do not execute any Law of Christ's in so doing, and
therefore it will be said, Who required this at your hands? The forcing an
outward Reformation in manners is quite of another nature, that the Magistrate
may and ought to do, and is a thing highly pleasing to God, a thing taught by
the Light of Nature, commanded by God so to be, and a thing that is well done,
both in those that command, and those that obey; when the bare outward act of
evil is restrained and forborne, and the contrary commanded and practiced. The
forcing men to refrain from the practice of gross evil and wickedness, though
they do it in Hypocrisy, has a wide difference from the forcing men to perform
Gospel-Duties in Hypocrisy. Moral Actions are positively good and evil in
their own nature; Gospel-Duties performed are only so, as they are
circumstantiated. And therefore the two Instances of Ahab and the Ninevites
will no way fit this matter: What was done by the Ninevites, for ought appears,
was well done, with all the circumstances that should make it to be so; for our
Savior says, They repented at the Preaching of Jonah.

What Ahab did, will be clearly differenced in two things; First, it was a
voluntary action; And Secondly, it was only a Moral action. 'Twas voluntary,
for it arose from the dictates of his own Conscience, upon what the Prophet
Elijah said to him. And Secondly, it was purely a Moral act, his Humiliation
was no other; He himself was an Hypocrite, and his Service was hypocritical and
abominable in the sight of God; yet the outward act of his Humiliation was in
it self good, and God rewards it with an outward blessing. That men may be
compelled about actions Morally good and evil, is out of doubt, and that God
does likewise with outward blessings and judgments reward and punish Moral good
and evil, is also plain. But herein lies the difference of forceing men in
things Moral and things Divine: In things Moral, the action in it self, however
circumstantiated, is positively good or evil. Things of Divine Institution are
quite otherwise; there the manner of the performance makes the action good or
evil. He that sacrifices an Ox, is as if he killed a man; he that kills a
Lamb, as if he cut off a Dogs neck: Where the manner of performing the command
is not observed, as well as the bare outward act of performance. And so in all
Gospel Duties, the Institutions of Christ, as Baptism, the Lords Supper, and
the rest, the actions themselves in those things are not simply good; nay, they
are accidentally evil, unless they have all the due circumstances attending
them; the goodness of those things depends wholly upon Institution, and there
the manner, as well as the matter, must be punctually observed. Nay, the manner
of doing such things determines the matter of them; for if they be performed in
their due manner, the Action is good; if not, the Action it self is sinful.

Having thus far endeavored to establish this Truth, That the exercise of
force by the hand of the civil Power, is ho means appointed by Christ, either
for settling or regulating the Churches of the New Testament, and is a thing in
its own nature altogether unreasonable so to be; And that Princes and
Magistrates under the Gospel should employ their care, to see the Laws of
Christ's Kingdom put in execution, in the way and manner he himself has
appointed, and ought to rest themselves satisfied therewith, as that which his
infinite Wisdom has provided, and to leave things that are purely
Gospel-offences to Gospel-punishments, as most adaequate and proper; knowing
well, that if after such punishments inflicted, Errors and Heresies shall
continue in the Church, Christ will overruled the Being of them for holy ends
and purposes, acccording to that of Paul, There must be Heresies, that those
that are approved may be made manifest; which though it be no good ground to
indulge Heresy, from any punishment Christ has appointed for it, yet it is a
very good ground to satisfy our selves upon, after all Christ's means used, and
to stop us from all violent and irregular proceedings, when we consider, That
Christ will extract good out of such evil, and turn such things to his own
Glory, and the good of such as are sincere. I say, having endeavored the proof
of these things, that the plainest Truths of the Gospel ought not to be
enforced upon men, much less those more doubtful and obscure, concerning
Discipline and Order [of the obscurity of which there needs no other evidence,
than that the holiest, wisest, and most impartial men have in all Ages differed
about them.] How may we lament over the present Imposition of the Ceremonies,
now enjoined amongst us in England, which are no part of Divine Truth, nor any
of Christ's Institutions, but things perfectly Humane in their creation, and yet
are enforced by the civil Power upon the practice and Consciences of men. If
Christ did not appoint his own Laws to be enforced upon the Church, but to be
received and executed by the influence and operating power of the Holy Ghost,
concurring with them; How little pleased will he be to have Laws and Rules made
by others, to be so enforced? If it be neither reasonable nor warrantable for a
Magistrate to enforce the Truths of the Gospel in his own sense of them, How
much less is it so to enjoin things in the Worship of God, wholly framed by
men, and of their devising? Those, as being Divine, are in their own nature
infallible and certainly true. These as being Humane, are liable to all Error
and Mistake. How unmerciful a thing is it, and how unlike the Primitive
Christians, to make such Ceremonies a Rule of the Churches Communion, which
used to be nothing but the Creed? That a man now only out of Conscience to God,
and without a just imputation of either Faction or Folly, or any other designed
end, may very well become a Nonconformist to these present imposed Ceremonies,
has been often evinced.

These things may afford us some prospect into those grounds upon which Liberty
of Conscience ought to be asserted, and also the due and natural bounds of it.
When men discoursing of this Subject, are enumerating what parties may be
tolerated, and what not. What Fundamentals are necessary to be believed to make
a man a capable Subject of this Liberty, and how far the punishment is to be
inflicted upon men for matters of this Nature, are to proceed, and where to be
terminated; they do but lose themselves, and come to be involved with
inextricable inconveniences, and do usually little more then discover their own
particular inclinations and interests; and at last often end in this
Determination, That none are fit to be Indulged, but such as are punctually of
their own belief and persuasion. The general Laws of Nature, and the general
Laws of the Gospel, are the best Umpire in this Case: As the first renders it a
thing unreasonable, so the other makes it unlawful to tolerate any thing upon
any pretense against the common Light, and the common Interest and natural good
of mankind. And so on the other hand, it is equally as unreasonable and as
unlawful, to force men about things wholly Supernatural and purely Spiritual;
and so are all the matters of the Gospel, which lie seated in men's Belief and
Persuasion, in reference to their own Eternal Condition: and as they have no
proper relation to Humane Concerns, so they are in Aliena republica, and are
only cognizable there, and only to be dealt with by such Spiritual means and
punishments, as Christ in the Gospel has appointed for that end.

Hear the Opinion of the Learned Alsted, on this subject at large: De pace
Religionis (ut vocant) seu de Liberate Religionis, seu de bono Autonomiae: An
and quatenus concedi possit a pio Magistratu. Concerning Liberty of Religion,
and how far it may be granted by a pious Magistrate, he says, That though the
Magistrate be to defend but one Religion, even that which he judges to be Truth
by the Word of God, yet none ought to be compelled to that by outward force,
but every man's Conscience to be left at Liberty. Et nonnunquam diversaram
Religionum exercitium, si non publicum, saltem privatum, aut clandestinum ex
singularibus causis permittendum esse statuimus; Atque hoc demum sensit pacem,
and concordiam externam seu politiam inter Orthodoxos and non Orthodoxos, saepe
etiam Hereticos simul colendam, ab ipso pio Magistratu procurari, and posse and
debere existimamus. And he gives these three following Reasons for his Judgment.

Prima nititur generalibus illis Scripturae dictis, quae justiciam, and
charitatem, studiumque pacis and concordiae sero nobis omnibus commendant: and
ne quid aliter adversus proximum statuamus, quam qualiter nobiscum agi vellemus
diserte praecipiunt. Denique at conscientiis suam libertatem concedamus, and
dissentientes in negotio Religionis amice toleremus, omnino mandant, Mat. 5.7.
Romans 12.14. and alibi.

Secunda petitur ab exemplis sapientium and piorum Regum, tum in veteri, tum in
novo Testamento, etc.

Tertia ab ipsa naturali Equitate, itemque adjuncta utilitate, quam etiam
experientia quotidiana fere comprobat. Nam praeterquam quod aequissimum est, in
causa Religionis ab omni vi and coactione externa abstinere, ipsis etiam rebus
publicis ut ita fiat, omnino expedit, atque conducit; quippe quae alioqui
facillime turbarentur, ut intestinis bellis, ac mutuis lanienis tandem
considerent: prout hactenus in multis Europae provinciis, Gallia praesertim and
Belgio, accidisse novimus. Cum contra in Germania, Helvetia, Polonia, and alibi
locorum, in quibus Religionum libertas hactenus indulta fuit, istis discordiis
and lanienis non fuerit locus. Ergo resipsa per se licita, and bona est, etiam
si per accidens abusus aliquis accidere possit, Alst. de Eccl. Lib. 4. Cap. 14.

What can be said with more truth and soberness about this matter?

LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE The Magistrates Interest: Or, To grant Liberty of
Conscience to Persons of Different Persuasions in matters of Religion, is the
Great Interest Of all Kingdoms and States, and particularly of ENGLAND.
Asserted and Proved.
HAving thus far considered those things, which do most immediately reflect
upon the Magistrates Duty, in allowing a due Liberty to each man's Conscience,
We will in the next place consider how far his Interest engages him this way.
That it is the great Interest of all Protestant States, and particularly of
England, To give Liberty to men of differing Apprehensions in the Protestant
Religion, is evident, if we consider, That a Prince or State, by imposing the
Principles of any one party in Religion, makes himself of that party, and
engages all the rest against him. It Is no way prudent for a Prince, when his
Subjects consist of many differing Judgments, to resolve to have them all of
one mind, (a thing impracticable) or else to be their declared Enemy and
Persecutor; it is a ready way to interrupt his own quiet and repose, without any
other effect: for he will never by force and violence unite them in one
Opinion, those differences will rather be fomented, and all Animosities arising
thereupon, and men rather fixed and confirmed by such Persecution, than any way
removed from their Principles by it. It Is not the having several parties in
Religion under a State, that is in it self dangerous, but it is the persecuting
of them that makes them so. First, It puts them all under discontent, and then
unites them together in such discontent; Thuanus, a wise Statesman, says,
Heretici, qui pace data factionibus franguntur, persecutione uniuntur contra
Rem Publicam. Those who in their Principles largely differ from each other,
when they come to be all bound up together in one common Volumn, and linked in
the same chain of Persecution and suffering, will be sure to twist themselves
into an united Opposition, to such an undistinguishing severity: Whereas the
thing in it self rightly considered, so many divided Interests and Parties in
Religion are much less dangerous than any, and may be prudently managed to
balance each other, and to become generally more safe and useful to a State,
than any united party or interest whatever. He that is suffered to enjoy, under
a State, the freedom of his Religion, when differing from the public
Profession, has not only the common tie of a Subject upon him, for his
protection as a man, but the cumulative obligation, and thanks to pay for his
Indulgence as a Christian under such a Character. Subjects in such a posture,
as they will ever be studious of an opportunity to testify their grateful
fidelity, and by some eminent service to lay up a stock or Merit, that may
secure their future quiet; so they will be, of any, most careful not to forfeit
so pleasing an Indulgence, by falling under a public displeasure. A Prince in
such a state of things, by making himself a common Father to the whole
Protestant Religion, though made up of some differences within it self, will be
secured not only of that common Homage of Obedience and Subjection, but with
it, that more noble, of the Hearts and Affections of all his Protestant
Subjects. To say any party in Religion is disaffected to a State, and therefore
not fit for such favor, when such disaffection, if it be, does plainly arise
from the Severity of the State against them, in that case; the reason why
favor should not be showed, is removed by showing of it: For, as persecuting
men for their Religion, must necessarily disgust them; so giving them the
freedom of it must needs equally oblige them. It Is no true measure to take of
any parties in Religion, to say the one are better Subjects than the other,
when the one are favored and countenanced, and the other still kept under and
oppressed: There is no reason, but to believe there is an equal Tendency in all
to love that Prince or State, where they find favor and protection; it is a
common disposition runs in the blood of all men; and by how much the Principles
of any party are less taking and plausible, the less dangerous still is that
party; and as they will need favor more than others, so they must needs lie
proportionably secured to a State, by the Obligation is put upon them.

Take it for Truth, which is commonly affirmed, That all such for whom Liberty
is at any time desired, are men full of Faction and full of Error: For the
first, it is certain, Persecution will not only continue, but foment such
Faction, and give it a plausible pretense to justify it self upon; whereas a
Liberty granted in matters of Conscience, will either wholly win such men to a
due and hearty Obedience, as finding themselves in a posture they cannot expect
to mend, or else will lay them open to such apparent justice for punishment,
and bring them under such a general contempt, as shall leave them stripped of all
pretensions, and render them wholly inconsiderable. It Is mavelous prudence to
separate between Conscience and Faction, which can never be, but by a Liberty
of the one, that so they may distinctly punish the other: He that has liberty
granted to worship God according to his Conscience, and yet is not satisfied,
but continues troublesome, makes every body ready to be his Executioner, and
makes that discovery, which could never have been made before; that Faction was
his end, and Conscience but the pretended means; such men will not only lie
open to the States just severity, but to the hatred of all men who do generally
dislike ill actions most, when they come from men of the best pretensions.

Punish men for their Religion, because you judge them Factious, and mix all
together, and you fall into this double Error; Either you punish men for
Faction that deserve it not, and so, besides a piece of Injustice, do what you
can to make those Enemies who are not, nor would not be so; or else those that
are so, you give them the pretense of Conscience to justify themselves in
whatever sufferings comes upon them. When people differing from the public
Religion meet to worship God, and are seized and punished for so doing, the
Magistrate says, He punishes for Faction; they say, They suffer for Religion.
And all People who see the actual punishment inflicted, for things relating to
Conscience and Religion, will be sure to believe and pity them, and be ready
to condemn the State. A due Separation, as it is best to be made, so 'twill only
by a Liberty given, be obtained. He that intends nothing but to give God the
Homage of his Conscience, will have freedom to do it; and he that under that
has other ends and aims, will be justly punished for it: But for a State to
imbibe a general belief, that all who differ from the State-Religion, are
factious to the civil Power, and not to be suffered, and so to punish them as
such, and if they be not so, to tempt them thereby to be so, is to do an act of
injustice to them, and to forfeit their own prudence toward themselves.

For the Errors you may suppose men possessed withal; as an eager Persecution
is apt to make the Professors of them think them more than ordinary Truths, and
themselves some great men in maintaining them; so it makes others seek after
that, when driven into a Corner, which were it in the open Streets no man would
regard. He that preaches and writes under restraint, that restraint begets him
readers and hearers, that would else pass through the World with very little
notice taken of him; things difficult and hard to come by, carry some weight in
men's expectancy: Foolish and absurd Opinions are only put to Nurse by
Persecution, and by that made to have something in the concerns and fears of
others, which has indeed nothing in it self. The hiding men by a keen pursuit
after them, in the profession of such things, keeps them alive; whereas if they
were openly preached, written, and discoursed of, the folly of them would
appear such, as not only others, but the men themselves would be ashamed and a
weary of them: Besides, punishing men for Religion, where there are several
parties, lays a Foundation of endless troubles and perpetual feuds: for that
ill Opinion and anger, which makes one party, when prevaling to suppress and
punish the rest, propagates still the same anger and dislike in the parties
punished, and begets by such provocation a certain resolution to retort the
same again, and a readiness to embrace all opportunities to effect it; whereas
that party that once gives liberty to the rest, buries all those Evils, and
unites all in the common union of their own interest and security. 'Twill be
impossible to find out a way for men of differing Judgments in Religion to live
together, and enjoy the common advantages, which as men they may afford one to
another, unless they exercise an Indulgence to each other, in that variety they
stand in as Christians. Where there are many differences, and a State denies
any Liberty, but strictly imposes the State-Religion upon all, the case always
falls out to be, that the earnest desire of that we call Liberty of Conscience,
lies glowing in the Embers of men's discontent, and is a thing in it self so
popular, a thing of so great evidence of Reason, when it may be discoursed upon
equal terms, and so much the concern of every man, but the present Imposer,
that it is very apt to kindle and flame out, and upon any strait or emergency of
State, either by Foreign War, or Domestic Division, to make such an
Earthquake as may endanger the whole: It Is most prudent in a State to give
Liberty, when there is least power to demand it; those may be gained by giving
it, that may prove dangerous in forcing it: To force and pen men up in such
things is wholly unnatural, and will, like Wind penned up in the Earth, or the
Sea shut up by Banks, break out at one time or another with the greater
violence. Liberty in Religion was never yet denied in a Protestant State, but
it had first or last a mischievous effect: To instruct men in Protestant
Principles, and then to put a Yoke of Uniformity upon them, has no more
proportion in it, than to educate a man at Geneva that is to live at Rome, and
to breed him a Calvinist, whom you intend for a Papist.

Were there no other reason to make a Prince or a State out of love with
punishing men for Religion, and matters of that nature, this were sufficient;
to consider such punishment ever falls upon the most honest of his Subjects in
every differing party; men of loose juggling principles and unsound hearts will
be sure to escape the Net; only the sincere plain-hearted man, that cannot
dissemble, is caught; 'twas the device against Daniel heretofore, they knew, in
the matters of his God, 'twas easy to deal with him, because in those he would
not upon any terms dissemble.

This has Three ill Effects always attending it.

First, It disobliges the best sort of men in every party, whom the State
should most cherish and engage; whatever is said to the contrary, those that
are the truest Subjects to the Great King, will be also found the best to his
Vicegerents here: It Is a strange Heterodox kind of policy, to make all the
honest sincere men in a Nation of every party, but that one the State adheres
to, the object of the States displeasure, and to make Laws that can have no
other effect but their Suffering.

Secondly, All standers-by, the generality of a Nation looking on, must needs
be dissatisfied, to see a plain honest man, upright and punctual in all his
dealings amongst men, punished merely for his Conscience to God; and because he
will not comply to save himself, which nothing but his Conscience can lead him
to, and by parting with which he may at any time purchase his quiet; in such a
case common Ingenuity begets pity for him, if not Proselites to him, and great
dislike of the course taken with him.

Thirdly, Though it be a secret, yet it is a very sure and certain way of
bringing National Judgments upon a People; no doubt God takes great notice of
the punishing men, merely because they are true to him; for so every man is,
that is true to his Conscience, though it be erroneous. Upon no other account
was it that Paul justified himself before the High Priest, in saying, He had
walked before God in all good Conscience to that time. His meaning was, He had
gone according to his light, as a thing pleasing to God, though otherwise, as
to the matter, his Conscience was erroneous, and his Judgment misinformed. And
he tells us afterward, That he obtained Mercy from God, because what he did
against the Church was done Ignorantly, and in pursuance of the best Light he
then had.

The punishing men merely for following the pure dictates of Conscience, is no
doubt the true cause of many National miseries; And a State should be careful
to avoid this, as they would preserve their own safety and welfare. If we look
into that which naturally occasioneth several Opinions in Religion, it is that
which a Prince should for his own Interest highly encourage, and that is
Knowledge; for no doubt, as Knowledge increases, it expatiates it self into
variety of Thoughts and Principles; and as it enlarges all other Sciences, so
Religion. Knowledge is the Glory of a Nation, and that by which all matters of
concern to it, as War, Trade, Policy, and every thing else is highly enlarged.
It Is the high Honor of a Prince to govern a Wise and a Knowing People, as well
as a Great People; It Is an impotent piece of Policy, and equally destructive to
all public Interest, to say, Subjects must be kept ignorant, as to say, They
must be kept poor. They are Maxims only fitted for a Tyrant, and such who only
govern for themselves, and calculate all Interests, at they concenter in their
own, and by so doing make themselves their own Idols. Nothing damps all Noble
Undertakings amongst men of Conscience like Imposition in Religion; it makes
them hang down their Heads, it makes them heartless in their Callings. If they
are denied freedom in Religion, men of Conscience will care little for any
thing else. Solomon tells us, A wounded Spirit no man can bear. He that carries
a taint of trouble in his mind about these things, is impotent in every thing;
it is Liberty in Religion that breeds the noble and generous minds. Let a man
know his duty to God, and have freedom to perform it, and that man will have
Wisdom and Courage above any man. Imposing Religion upon men has never other
effect than either to lull men asleep into implicit ignorance, and so make them
as sottish and useless Members of a State, as they are of the Church, or else,
where it meets with Knowledge and Integrity, sinks men under the greatest
grief, and provokes them to the greatest dissatisfaction. If we look amongst
our selves, who be they that desire favor in this particular? And who be they
that will be gratified and engaged by it, but every where men of Religious
Principles? And are they not generally the sober and serious men that bring
good to a Nation? Are not they in all Callings and Trades generally most
industrious and thriving? Are not they most saving in their Expenses, and every
way, either in War or Peace, most useful and serviceable? It Is debauched,
loose, expensive people that over-live their Estates, and neglect their
Callings, that help to pull a State down; such men will be sure to Conform to
any thing, that secures them in present Luxury: It Is the Sober, Serious,
Religious sort of men that every way make a Nation prosperous; to discontent
such, and to put them into one common Dungeon of imputed Faction and actual
Persecution, will never be found any right measure of a true National Interest.

Several things with great Evidence, seem to plead for Moderation and
Indulgence here in England.

First, The Number and Quantity of those concerned, as well as the Quality, is
such, that it can be no way prudent to discontent them upon that which will no
way compensate the inconvenience; there can be no good Policy to leave so many
men mixed every where, even in the highest places of the Nation under
dissatisfaction, without the least effect, but the reproach of imprudence in
doing it; and to put a disgraceful distinguishing Character upon them, as men
unfaithful to the State, only because they cannot comply with some Ceremonies
(as the case is general amongst us) and worship God just in the public way, a
thing of no more intrinsic concern to the State, than to have all men of the
same Opinion in a disputed point of Philosophy, and a thing of as equal
likelihood to be attained. A Subject that gives the same Testimony of his
Fidelity to his Prince that others do, and behaves himself in all civil
Concerns as a faithful and profitable Member of the Commonwealth, and yet is
looked upon as a public enemy, and made the object of public anger, because
he cannot in every Circumstance comply with the public Religion, is without
doubt very severely and impolitically dealt with. As every Subject has an
Interest in his natural Prince, so has the Prince in every Subject, and should
be like the true Mother that would by no means divide the Child. To take such a
course is to furnish out a party ready; for whoever first makes a disturbance,
nay, its to tempt men so to do, by seeing a party so prepared.

Let Liberty of Conscience be once fitly given, and the Root of all men's hopes
and pretensions, that desire public mischief, is pulled up, and the King will
be the greatest and the most beloved Prince that ever yet sat upon the Throne.

Secondly, We shall never have a flourishing Trade without it.

1st, Because the pressure in these things falls generally more upon the
Trading sort of men, than any in the Nation; we may see it in the great City,
and in all Coporations; It makes many give over Trading, and retire; It makes
others remove into Holland, and other Foreign parts, as it did heretofore from
Norwich, to the irrecoverable prejudice of our Cloathing-Trade upon the like
occasion; And it certainly prevents all Protestant Strangers to come to live
and trade amongst us. It puts great Advantages into the hands of the Hollander
every way, who have not a better Friend in Europe than Uniformity in England.
As Liberty of Conscience here is that they fear above any thing, so it would
insensibly more weaken them than all the Victories we have obtained over them.

2dly, Men will never trade freely where they do not live and converse freely:
Where a man is afraid to be watched to a Conventicle, and most of the time he
serves God is fain to hide himself; no man will choose to live so if he can
avoid it: Every man that cannot conform to the public Religion, lying under
the lash of the Law, will prudently shun both Business and Company, will never
lay out his Estate where it is in any man's power to do him a mischief. A man
conscious to himself that he cannot comply with the Law, will avoid meddling
with any thing, and choose privacy as his best security. This we have had a
sufficient demonstration of in the Papists, who for many years, ever since they
lay under the lash of the penal Laws, have been of little use to the Nation,
have retreated from all public Commerce amongst us, kept their Money by them,
sent their Children abroad, and disjoined themselves from all the public
concerns of the Kingdom.

3dly, It Is the King of England's true Interest to become Head of all the
Protestant party in the World; and he will never do that, but by first making
himself a common Father to all his Protestant Subjects at home. That it is his
Interest to head the Protestant party abroad, is plain, because being the
greatest and most powerful of all Protestant Princes and States, he will
necessarily draw them into a dependence upon him, and desire of Protection from
him; by which not only the Protestant Interest in it self will be much secured
by being so united and conjoined, but the King of England also will receive a
great Accession of Power, by the Influence he will have on so great a part of
Christendom, which he may make use of, not only to secure the Protestant
Religion against the common Enemy of it, but to advantage himself every way, by
the great respect and interest he will have in all Protestant States.

To bring the Protestants into an Union amongst themselves, will be of
advantage to every Protestant-State, but to none so much as England: First,
Because England naturally becomes the Head of such a Union: And secondly,
Because the Designs and Practices of the Popish party ever since the
Reformation, have lain and will lie more united against England than any
Protestant-State, as supposing that the chief Support of all the rest; and
therefore England can never be truly safe, nor secured in its proper Interest,
but when it is environed with all Protestant-States adhearing to it, and
depending upon it. How sadly England has miscarried, when it has espoused any
other collateral Interest but the Protestant, has been too obvious ever since
the first Reformation: England has been always greatest at home, when it has
been the greatest Defender of the Protestant Faith abroad. Now if the King will
thus rightly state his Interest abroad, he must begin the work at home; if he
persecute and keep under any of his Protestant Subjects at home, those of their
Opinion abroad will never put themselves under his protection: As he must make
no distinction in Christendom, but Protestant and Papist, so he must make no
other amongst his Subjects at home. He that imposes any one Opinion amongst
Protestants, and will tolerate no other, makes the distinction to be still
between Protestant and Protestant, and makes himself but Head of a Party
amongst them, and will never so head the Protestant Interest as to oppose the
Popish party with it, or unite the Protestants so under him, as to make them
acknowledge him for their Head.

Whoever would be Head of all the Protestant Interest, must have no common
Enemy but Popery, and concenter all there: Imposing Conformity to the Opinion
of any one Protestant party upon all the rest, is but to make himself so much
the weaker by every Dissenter, and is indeed totally destructive to the very
being of such a thing.

First, Liberty of Conscience is the best way to secure us to the Protestant
Faith, and to prevent a relapse to Popery; the Protestant Religion will be
fastest rooted by exerting fully the Principles of it, and a throughout
adhearing to them: By our practice in dealing one with another, to deny those
Principles by which we justify our Separation from Rome, is the ready way to
make them return thither again. Teach men, that there is no man nor men under
any one denomination since the Apostles time, that are infallible in delivering
Divine Truth. Teach men, that the Scripture is the only Rule of Religion, and
let them read it: Tell them, they are to follow no men farther than they follow
that Rule; and that every man is Judge according to the best Light he has of
that Rule, and how far other men comply with it, and differ from it: And that
every man is bound to behave himself toward God, according to the Judgment he
shall so make within himself: All which are Protestant Principles and Eternal
Truths. And then collect the sense which these Principles issue themselves
into, and how unreasonable will it then appear to force men to comply with the
belief of others, contrary to their own? And when you have bid them use their
Light and Reason to punish them, because they will not oppose it, and go
against it; How can we otherwise justitie forcing men, where such Principles
are avowed, but by a flat denial of them, and recurring to those Popish Weapons
of the absolute Power of the Church, and her uncontrolable Authority? And so by
condemning others, that upon the exercise of their own Light and Reason now
differ from us, condemn our selves, who upon the same at first departed from
Rome. When we oppose the Church of Rome, we justify our selves upon the very
same Arguments, by which Dissenters now amongst our selves make their defense
against us; And when we dispute against them, we take up the same Arguments the
Papists use against us: There is scarce any considerable Argument urged of late
for Conformity and Imposition, but if you trace it to the Seat, you shall find
it in Bellarmine or Suarez. The truth is, he that cannot endure to have any
differ from him in Opinion, about the supernatural Truth of the Gospel, and
will have no toleration of several persuasions of that kind; and thinks it
destructive to mankind, and the being of every State, to suffer any so to be;
That man is a Protestant by mistake, and will find himself at home in his
Principles no where but at Rome. The farther we remove in our Reformation from
the Practices and Principles of the Church of Rome, and live upon our own, the
less like we are to return to it. If we make use of their Arguments and
Principles at one time, we may come to use them at another, and at last espouse
them altogether; and what serves our turns at some times to oppose others, may
at last prevail upon our selves. And so it is in our Practices, reserving any
of their Ceremonies, may at last bring us to some of their Doctrines. He that
keeps a Holyday, is within a step of praying to that Saint for whose sake he
keeps it, especially if he have the wit to consider why he keeps it. He that
kneels and puts weight upon it, is in a fair way to adoration; and he that is
for joining the Cross with Baptism, may come to do it after Grace, and cross
himself in time. 'Twas Bishop Bonner's observation, when he saw the
Reformation, and how many of the Popish Ceremonies were retained, being asked,
what he thought of it? If they like (says he) the taste of our Broth so well,
they will eat of our Beef shortly.

Secondly, Liberty of Conscience is the great means to diffuse Gospel-knowledge
in divine things, and that is the best and surest way to bar out Popery, and
lock the Door upon it forever. Ignorance is the great and only preparative for
implicit subjection. Christendom cannot (I dare say) afford an instance that
ever any State or People, where Divine-Knowledge by Liberty of Conscience, and
a Liberty for the Gospel was once spread, were in the least danger of turning
Apostates to Popery, but have grown daily more and more into a detestation of
it, and generally almost every man amongst them carrying a Weapon in his
understanding to defend the Protestant Cause.

Were Liberty of Conscience granted in Italy and other Popish States, we should
soon see the Mitre totter upon the Popes Head, and probably see as fair
Churches there as in any other part of Europe. 'Twas observed in the Wars of
the Low Countries, that when ever any Catholic began to look into the Bible,
he was not long-lived in the Roman Profession.

Thirdly, Liberty of Conscience will breed men up with an irreconcilable
dislike to all Imposition in Religion and Conscience, and so unite them in a
general abhorrence of POPERY, as the grand Mother and Author of it all
Chistendom over: All Principles and Parties born from a Liberty given in
Religion, have an Antipathy in them to that Romish Yoke, and do naturally unite
against the Popish Religion, as the grand and common Enemy of them all.

Let Liberty of Conscience once be given in a Protestant-State, and though
there be never so many differences amongst themselves, yet men of all
persuasions will concenter in that. He that has the freedom of his Religion
will be concerned to defend it, and look upon Popery as the great Grant he is
in danger of. Experience and Fact, the best of all demonstrations, do evidence
this. Take a view of those places where Liberty of Conscience has been most
given, and you will find there the greatest aversion to Popery that is in any
parts of Christendom.

It Is in other places, where other Methods of Imposition and Persecution are
used, that compliance with Popery has been attempted, and projects set on foot
to compound the Protestant and the Papists into an Agreement.

It Is Imposition in Religion sweeps the House, and keeps the Nest warm for
Popery: Liberty of Conscience mortally stabs it; where that is once given, it
may be said to the Pope, as it was to Belshazzar, God has numbered thy Kingdom,
and finished it; And the place where he once Tyrannized, shall know him there
no more.

Lastly, If the Church of Rome understand their own Interest, as we have good
reason to believe they do, this Case is determined to our hands: for upon every
occasion since the Reformation, both in Germany, France, Swisserland, and all
places where Liberty of Conscience has been endeavored, the Popes have toto
animo, every way opposed it, and declared it a thing perfectly destructive to
the Church, and such, as wherever it was suffered, would destroy the Roman
Faith; and in that Maxim, I believe their Infallibility is not much to be
denied. Some are so much otherwise-minded, that they believe Liberty of
Conscience will be the ready means to induce Popery again amongst us; The
Reasons of it seem invisible, unless it be done by some new Rule of contraries:
It must either come to pass by giving Liberty in general to Protestants of
differing persuasions, or else by giving Liberty to the Papists themselves, as
included in a general Liberty.

For the first (I hope) it appears evidently to have another tendency.

And for the second, The giving Liberty to the Papists themselves amongst us,
no man well informed, can imagine that they should be included in any such
Liberty.

First, Because in their Practice amongst us, they refuse to give that public
assurance every Subject ought to give of his Fidelity that expects the favor
due to a Subject.

And secondly, Because their Principles are such, that if they understand their
own Religion, they can never be good Subject to any Protestant State: He that
knows not this, knows not the ROMAN RELIGION. And to prove it so by Fact;

Amongst very many other Instances, let what was done here in the time of Queen
Elizabeth to her, and at the same time in France to Henry the Fourth, forever
lie upon Record against them. Nor can a Papist ever become a true and hearty
Subject to a Protestant Prince, but by that act he cease to be so. And as
common Justice does deny them all pretentions to Liberty, so common Equity
opposes them; for as both they and their Religion abhor giving Liberty to any
but themselves, so is their practice accordingly; for they never give Liberty
to a Soul living, that differs from them, where they are able and dare deny it.

To say, That Liberty of Conscience can have no other effect, but to tolerate
damnable Heresies, and all kind of Sectaries, which is the usual way of
discoursing it; and so to enlarge into all kind of Satirical Rhetoric upon
that Topic, is to put a Bears skin upon it, and then to bait it. 'Twill be to
impose a thing of a very hard belief upon me, to say, That Truth never gains by
Liberty, and that the Imposer is always in the right, and the Sufferer in the
wrong; especially considering, he that thinks me an Heretic, another thinks
him so, and a fourth thinks us all so; and all the while we are all of us weak,
imperfect, fallible men, sitting in judgment, and sentencing one another: And
there can be no other end of it, but that he that is strongest makes himself in
the right, and destroys the rest. When ever Truth comes to suffer by
Imposition, as many times it does, and comes afterward to be so acknowledged,
the evil of such Imposition carries its own evidence.

But suppose such Truth never gets any good, and Liberty should be only to men
under Errors and Mistakes, 'twere not fit then to deny it, that is, 'twere not
fit then to impose upon them; for Liberty is nothing but a Negative upon Force
and Imposition: If we consult the good of such men themselves, so lapsed into
Error, and desire their Conversion, Force and Imposition is no way to it; If we
consult our own Security, there is no danger at all can come by it; for as long
as such Errors lie in the understanding, and are only conversant about
supernatural things, they have no reference at all to the being or well-being
of Mankind, as such: What hurt does an Error in Religion do me in my Neighbor,
that is otherwise an honest and good man? He is rather in that an object of my
Pity and Instruction, than of my Anger.

If we desire to have all men of our Opinion, because we think we are in the
right, it is a very commendable thing; and if we do it with such a public
Charity, we shall use only such Christian means as naturally conduce to bring
it about. But, if through the Pride of men's Hearts, and the Intention of their
own Exaltation thereby, they will have every body of their Opinion; and because
they cannot convince and persuade them, will therefore force them, and trample
upon them, that is an Odious Super-intendency.

To say, That upon a prudential Account, Liberty should never be allowed in a
State, because it is that which will unite Parties, and bring them to a
Consistency amongst themselves, and so render them much more dangerous, is to
say a thing upon a great Mistake. For common Experience shows us, That nothing
unites Parties more amongst themselves, than a hot Persecution; For does any
thing bring them so much together as that? It Is like a great Storm that drives
Cattle, that are scattered about, altogether, and brings them to meet in one
common shelter to save themselves.

Ridly and Hooper agreed in the Goal, that would hardly have disputed
themselves Friends.

There is no Bond of Union amongst Disagreeing Persons like PERSECUTION: The
common Concern of their Security then begets Correspondency, Acquaintance, and
such Intercourse and mutual Assistance, as endears them above any thing one to
another.

And for the Danger there may be of any Party, there is nothing sure so like to
remove that, as indulging them with a Liberty: The best way to be secured
against the discontent of any Party, is to remove the Cause of such Discontent;
and the best way to be out of fear of them, unless you can totally destroy
them, is to oblige them, and so at once to engage and win them over, and
thereby disband our own Fears.

A late Author tells us, with particular Remark, That Maecenus heretofore gave
advice to Augustus, That upon no terms he should endure such who would bring in
any strange Worship into the State. I believe it, and 'twas such kind of Advice
(no doubt) that caused the Ten first Persecutions.

Methinks the Author should have remembered, That that advice would have kept
Christianity out of the World. For if we follow the Track of such Policy, we
shall find, that what we now say against Tolerating Dissenters amongst our
selves, the Papists first said, and do still say against us all; and if we go
one step higher, the Heathens said the very same against the Christian Religion
it self, and thought it a Factious, Fanatic Project of sick-brain'd men, and a
thing not to be endured, that men should not content themselves with the same
Godds that the rest of World worshipped and acquiesced in. It Is a sad thing,
and much to be lamented, that the Protestants should take up the Dregs of those
Politics, and make use of them one against another, upon very small difference
amongst themselves.

The same Author, in another part of his Book propounds this Question:

If diverse ways of Worship (says he) be allowed in a Nation, what shall a
Prince do? If he keep any men of any Profession or Party out of Employment for
their Opinion sake, he disobliges that Party: If he bring all men indifferently
alike into Employment, if he be of any Party himself, he will disoblige his own
Party, who will expect Pre-eminence in that kind; and so in Conclusion, by
endeavoring to please all, he will lose all.

This is a Knot very easily untied. I will suppose a Prince strict in the
Profession and Practice of what he thinks is the Truth; and the more strict
Personally he is, the greater will the favor of Indulgence appear to those
that differ from him: But there is no necessity that he should make a Party of
those who are of his Opinion, distinct from the rest of his Subjects: It Is
below his Greatness, and besides his Interest so to do; they will soon become
like the Sons of Zerviah, and in time grow to be too hard for him. Those that
are of his Opinion, he may think them (in his private judgment) better
Christians than others; but there is no Policy so to distinguish them, as if
they were thereby better Subjects than others.

All men in a State are to give one Common Assurance of their Fidelity; and
such who are allowed a Liberty in their Religion, when differing from the
public Profession, the Political end of it is, to make them good Subjects; and
the end of that must needs be, to make them serviceable to their Prince: And
there is no Reason to doubt, but that they will be so, and eminently so,
because they lie under an Obligation to his Favor, those of his own Opinion
are not capable of.

A Prince should seat himself in his Throne with an equal Political Aspect to
all his Subjects, and employ them as their fitness for his Service qualifies
them: There is no Reason to narrow and limit a Prince to any Party, or to let
any Party grow into such a Praedominant Opinion, as if the Prince were confined
to them.

No man's bare Opinion in such things should qualify him for an Employment, nor
no man's Opinion ought to put a Negative upon him in that kind: that is for a
Prince after he has obliged all his Subjects to him, to lose the use of a great
part of them. Let a Prince but choose men to serve him, whose Ability and
Fitness carries the evidence of his Choice, and other Exceptions will soon
vanish. It Is below the Greatness of a Prince to have any Subject to pretend to
Employment upon any score but his Judgment of his fitness for it.

The King of France has often with good success employed his Protestant
Subjects; Nay, has often trusted the Command of his whole Army in the hand of
the Protestant, and yet feared not the disobliging of the Popish Party, or
being thought a man of no Religion for so doing. It Is a most Absurd and
Impolitick thing, because men differ in some divine supernatural things, to put
them under such Characters, as to make them unuseful one to another in all
other humane things.

Let a Prince once give Liberty of Conscience, and he obliges all Parties to
him, and makes them wholly depend upon him; the Tenor of their Liberty will be
a Tenor in Capite, and Quam diu se been gesserint; and for employing men, and
dispensing favors to them, let all Parties with a due subjection lie under the
Prerogative and Sovereignty of his pleasure.

Two things are with much earnestness usually Objected against the Grant of
Liberty:

First,

That it is unbecoming the Zeal and Concern a Magistrate should have for the
Truth of Religion to give Liberty to any thing but what he thinks to be so; and
that such a Lukewarmness, as Liberty to several Opinions supposes, does no way
become him.

Secondly,

That giving Liberty to men of several Opinions, is the way to Propagate and
Increase them, and is of great danger to a State.

For the First:

It is very fit that the Magistrate should espouse what he thinks to be the
Truth, and keep himself to the strict Practice of it, and use all lawful means
to possess others with it; let him use all the means Christ and the Apostles
used to convince and convert men; but let him not lay Violent hands upon men's
Persons, because he cannot satisfy their Understandings: That Is Zeal without
Knowledge, and Religion without a Rule, either in Reason or Divinity: That is
to run into so wide an Extreme from Laodecean Lukewarmness, as to become like
Paul before his Conversion, who says of himself, That he was Mad, Persecuting
the Church.

To say, A Magistrate is Lukewarm in Religion, because he will not Force men to
his Opinion, is to say, He is Lukewarm because he will not do a thing that
Christ has no where required of him; and to do a thing that is to no purpose
to do, for that very end for which it is done.

Tolerating men has no more in it, than not Forcing men: It Is only a Negative
Favor, there is nothing Affirmative in it. A Magistrate will never be charged
with Lukewarmness in Religion, that makes use of all Gospel means to promote
Truth, and that he may do, and yet never violate the due Liberty of any man's
Conscience.

If we consult the Ancient Practice of the first Christian Magistrates, we
shall find it plain, That Liberty of Conscience was given by the Christian
Emperors. Constantine did it fully. Eusebius in his Life time tells us, That he
made a Decree in these words, Vt parem cum Fidelibus, ij qui errant, pacis and
quietis fruitionem gaudentes accipiant. It Is true, he banished Arrius; but let
any man consult the Ecclesiastical History, and he shall find Arrius so
Factious and Base a Person, that there needed no part of his Opinion to be the
cause of his Exile. Gratian the Emperor made likewise a Decree for Liberty in
Religion. The Jews had granted by all the Emperors, the same Rights with other
Christians. Jovinian and Valentinian, most Noble Princes, suffered Christians
of several Persuasions to enjoy their Liberty: Of this, Grotius in his Book De
Imp. Sum. Potes. Circ. Sac. Cap. 8. takes particular notice, adding these
words, and says, which is more to be Noted, The Emperor did not only permit
Jmpunity to Disagreeing Sects, but often made Laws to order their Assemblies.

Liberty therefore in Religion is not either so new, or so strange a thing, or
so great a Monster as men would make it. State-Religions are not always
Infallibly true; Truth sometimes keeps men from embracing them, it does so in
many parts of Christendom; and in that case a Negative Restraint upon the
Magistrates compulsion, is the only shelter of Truth. The Wisdom of Christ, who
has forbid the use of the Temporal power under the Gospel, about Religion,
has left things best. For if a Magistrate be in the right, he may promote
Truth, as far as in the nature of the thing, and by Christ's appointment, it
can be promoted; If he be not in the right, where the Temporal Power does not
interpose, men are secured in the profession of Truth, and not hazarded in
refusing a public Error.

He that would have the Magistrate force all men to his Religion, will himself
be burnt by his own Principles, when he comes into a Country where the
State-Religion differs from him: To say, He is in the right, and the State that
does it in the wrong, is a miserable begging the Question. If one Magistrate be
to do it, all are to do it, and there can be no other Rule of Truth and Error
in that case, but what they think so. If a Magistrate be once admitted to
punish with Death, what is really and truly in it self an Heresy, he may and
must by the same Rule, so punish every thing he thinks so: Where shall the
Definition of Heresy terminate? And who shall set the Magistrate bounds in
such a case? Misinformation, Passion, or some sinister Interest can only lead
men into such Principles, which tend to nothing but to make Religion disturb
the peace and quiet of all Mankind; and as one says well, To bring Christians
to a Butchery one of another, and to make a mere Shambles of Christendom.

For the Second Objection:

That giving Liberty to several Parties, Increases them, and makes them
dangerous to a State.

First, It Is very fit, that wheresoever you will suppose Errors to be sprung
up, all the means Christ has appointed for that end, should be used to
suppress them, and reclaim men from them: Let their Mouths be stopped with
sound Doctrine, and spiritual Censures; the only Question is about the use of
the temporal Power in such things: And Experience tells us, That since the
World began, to this day, Principles and Opinions in the Mind were never
extinguished by the punishing the Body: That old Saying verifies it, Sanguis
Martyrum, Semem Ecclesiae.

Nay, there is nothing under the Sun to promote an Opinion in Religion, like
making men suffer for it: The Constancy and Courage of men in suffering for an
Opinion, will sooner persuade men to it, than all the Discourses and Sermons in
the World.

If the Magistrate take a Violent course to root out all different Opinions in
Religion, such as the Emperors heretofore, when Heathen, took with the
Christians, and the Popish States, where they are able, do at this day with the
Protestants; besides the Cruelty of it, with which he will besmear himself, he
will miss of his end, and find a Succession of those Principles in others,
rising out of the Ashes of those Destroys, as it used to be said heretofore by
the Martyrs;

Quoties morimur, toties nascimur. If he take a mild and more gentle way of
Persecution, he only exasperates them, and then leaves them armed with all
possible Discontent to hurt him.

Consider the giving Liberty under these two Heads.

First, The giving of it to several Opinions and Parties, where they are
already actually existing.

And Secondly, The giving Liberty so, as will occasion and produce such Parties
and Opinions.

For the First; Where there are several Parties in Religion already in being,
and diffused all over a Nation, as the case is with us, there is no way to
secure them, but to indulge them; for they are by their Number outgrown the
Political part of Persecution.

For the Second Consideration of Liberty, the giving it so as will naturally
produce several Principles and Opinions in men; he that would prevent that,
must give no Liberty to the Protestant Religion, must not let the Bible be read
by the Vulgar: There is no way to keep out several Opinions in Religion, but an
implicit ignorant Subjection to an imposed Infallibility, and to do as the
Turks do, who will not have any Learning or Discourse amongst them of Religion,
for that very Reason, because they will have no Religion but Mahomet, nor no
Learning but the Alcoran: Such Policy to Murder men's Souls, is hatched in Hell!

The Art of Printing was at the first thought dangerous, because it was looked
on as a thing like to introduce several Opinions in Religion. Cardinal Woolsey
in a Letter of his to the Pope, has this Passage about it:

That his Holiness could not be ignorant what diverse Effects the New Invention
of Printing had produced; for as it had brought in and restored Books and
Learning, so together it has been the occasion of these Sects and Schisms
which daily appear in the World, but chiefly in Germany, where men begin now to
call in question the present Faith and Tenants of the Church, and to examine
how far Religion is departed from its Primitive Institution. And that which
particularly was most to be lamented, they had exhorted the Lay and Ordinary
men to read the Scriptures and to Pray in their Vulgar Tongue. That if this
were suffered, besides all other dangers, the common People at last might come
to believe that there was not so much use of the Clergy; for if men were
persuaded once they could make their own way to God, and that Prayers in their
native and ordinary Language might pierce Heaven, as well as in Latin, How much
would the Authority of the Mass fall? How Prejudicial might this prove unto all
our Ecclesiastical Orders? Lord Herberts History of Hen. 8.

Liberty of Conscience lies as naturally necessary to a Protestant State, as
Imposition to a Popish State; he must be a good Artist that can find a right
middle way between these two. It Is the Glory of Protestant-States, to have much
of the Knowledge of God amongst them, and that variety of men's Opinions, about
some less weighty and more obscure matters of Religion, as it much tends to a
discovery of the Truth of them, so it no way breaks the Bond of Protestant
Union, where men generally agree in the same Rule of Religion, and in all the
chief and necessary Fundamentals of Salvation. Liberty of Conscience in such
States, as it is their true and genuine Interest, and without which they will
but deny themselves those advantages they might otherwise arrive at; so with
the forementioned Boundaries, can never prove hurtful or dangerous, there being
always a just distinction to be made between those who desire only to serve
God, and such who pretend that, to become injurious to men.

And thus we have seen, that not only Religion but Reason, not only Duty but
Interest, do invocate Princes and States in this particular: To whom it may
fitly be said, in the words of the Psalmist, Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings;
and be instructed, O ye Judges of the Earth.

FINIS.
De Christiana Liberate, Or the Mischief of Impositions amongst the People
called Quakers, Made Manifest. Showing The Inconsistency betwixt the Church-
Discipline, Order and Government, erected by G. Fox, and those of Party with
him, and that in the Primitive Times. Being Historically treated on. WITH A
Word of Advice to the Pencilvanians. And is the First Part of Naked Truth.

By FRANCIS BUGG.

GAL. 6.12. As many as desire to make a fair show in the Flesh, they constrain
you to be Circumcised, etc.

GAL. 5.1. Stand fast therefore in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not again entangled in the Yoke of Bondage.

GAL. 5.2. Touch not, taste not, handle not, etc.

London, Printed for the Author, 1682.

An EPISTLE Dedicated to the Noble BEREANS Of this Age.
HAving by the Book prefixed, laid before the Magistrates, and others
concerned, a clear Demonstration, and many weighty Arguments for Liberty of
Conscience, to all Protestant Dissenters, who desire to live a peaceable Life
under the Government. I am now come to treat on the Religious Differences
amongst us the People called Quakers, and therein to vindicate the
Christian-Quakers (who retain their Primitive Principles) and defend their Plea
for Liberty of Conscience from the Calumny and Reproach which the Innovators
have put upon both it and the Pleaders thereof; as if the Tendency thereof was
to introduce Looseness, Ranterism, or the like sort of Abominations; all which
we detest and deny: And in the Introduction to the Accus. etc. they have
Sentenced William Rogers to be no Quaker, by which they mean, no Christian; for
if I may be in their account a true Christian, and yet no Quaker, then what
damage is it to be no Quaker: So that as the Baptists and others (about the
Year 72. by their Dialogues, and otherwise) rendered us no Christians, because
our Creed lay not literally in their 8th. Article of Faith: So does the
Apostate and Innovator endeavor to Unchristian the true Christian-Quaker. And
the two principal Reasons that can be alleged against us, are; First, our
Nonsubmission and Nonconformity to the New Order of the Women, Erected by G.
Fox, and Confirmed by a London Yearly Meeting. And Secondly, That their way of
compelling, and Antichristian way of Proceeding to bring to, and force a
Uniformity, is by us slighted and contemned, and published in Justification of
our Plea for the Liberty of the exercise of our Conscience in Matters
Spiritual. I say these two are the grand Reasons for which they render us no
Quakers, and (as I said) consequently in their Esteem, no Christians. Whereupon
we, the Caluminated Abettors of the Cause of Truth, can do no less than call to
you, the BEREANS of our Age, not to believe every wandering Book that is put
forth against us, but read and examine the Matter, and before you pass
Judgment; see what we can say for our selves in Defense of our Christian-Plea
for Liberty of Conscience: and for which Reason, I choose to Dedicate the
Ensuing Tract in the first Place to you, expecting your Impartial Examination,
etc. For as William Penn very well says in his Epistle to you, the Noble and
Examining BEREANS, (who usually hear both Sides,) in the Front of the Book,
Entitled the Christian-Quaker, and his Divine Testimony Vindicated, etc. So we
find it Experimentally, viz. The Insatiable Thirst of men after Religious or
Civil Empire, has filled almost every Age with Contest -- There is something
in Man that prompts to Religion, and such as stand not in the TRADITIONS of
Men, nor any mere Formality. But Man, that he may not loose the Honor of a
Share -- with an unwarrantable Activity, so Adulterates by an Intermixture of
his own Conceptions with their Divine Dictates, and purer Discoveries; SO
Sophisticates, that at the last they become more his own Workmanship than the
Truth's: And so fond is he of this Child of his Brain, that like some Ancient
Tyrants, he will rather cut his way to the Throne by a violence upon all others
Consciences, than not put a Crown upon Its HEAD.

And how far these Tyrannical Proceedings have been used by our New Spiritual
Lords, may in part be seen by this following Discourse, which to you the
Searching BEREANS, I choose first to Dedicate the same, who am a real Lover of
your Example, and a Member of your Society.

Francis Bugg.

The PREFACE To The READER.
THe Main Thing intended by this Discourse, is to show the Mischief of
Impositions, on Tender Consciences, in Matters Spiritual; that so, the same
being discovered, may be laid aside as a Burden some Thing, and for time to
come avoided, and Christian-Liberty, instead thereof, introduced to all
peaceable Subjects in every Nation. That this has been the principal End of
all Sound Protestant Writers, as well as of the Author of the First Part of
this Treatise, [Whose Name I know not, nor in what Form of Religion, nor
amongst what Society of People he walked; but yet his Judgment upon this
Subject, is my Judgment,] I can produce many Authors, as well from Ancient and
Modern History, as Sacred Writ: wherefore to attempt the same, is no new thing.

But as it has been the Work of the Protestants to show that the Pope may Err,
nay, has often Erred, etc. So is it may Business at this time, to show that G.
Fox may Err, and which compared with W. Rogers his Book, does plainly show that
he has often Erred, etc.

And as the ancient Protestants Work has been to show that Councels may Err,
and that Synodical Assemblies may Err, nay, have often Erred.

So it is my Concern at this time, to show that our Yearly Meeting, and other
Synodical Assemblies, and that the Second-days Meeting may Err, nay, have often
Erred.

And now I will show you a Parellel betwixt the Treatment which the Protestants
met withal from the Hands of the Papists for their pains; and betwixt the
Treatment that W. R. T. C. and others have met withal from the Hands of G. F.
and those of Party with him, for their pains, and I expect no better Reward:
For I know they will be very angry, yea, dreadful angry, to see their Rood of
Grace, or Graceless, as well as Lifeless Image, brought forth to the Peoples
View in its Proper Dress, in all its Imperfect Parts and deformed Shapes; as I
have done; showing the several sorts of Metals it is made up with, and the ill
composed Ingredients therewith Tempered to make it stand; and when all is done,
it is so Lame of it is Feet, and se benumbed to the Toes End, that it must and
will fall as soon as ever Implicit Faith and Blind-Obedience [the Papists Old
Crutches] do but take away their Hands from it, etc.

First, In Order to a Discovery of the Papists, Tindal, Frith; Barns, and other
Protestants wrote many Books under several Titles, but the Papists caused them
to be suppressed, calling them Pernicious and Damnable Herisies, and Burned
Richard Bayfield, and Imprisoned Thomas Green for dispersing the Books wrote by
Luther, Zuinglius, Frith, and others.

2dly. In Order to make a Discovery of G. Fox and his Party. W. R. T. C. and
others have wrote several Books; but G. Fox and his Party have caused them to
be Suppressed, so far as their Power reached; advising and cautioning Friends
not to read them, which is a doing otherwise than they would be dealt by; (See
W. P's Epistle to the Bereans in the Front of the Christian-Quaker and his
Divine Test. etc.) Nay, they have Excommunicated J. B. for spreading some of
them, etc.

3dly. Again the Papists hold that the Church of Rome can never Err, -- And
next, that the Pope, whatsoever he does, may never be called in question. These
two Points being granted, the rest are sure. -- Next, the Pope is exempted from
all Laws of Man. -- Again, no man may Accuse the Pope, for his Acts are excused
(as Sampsons Murders, the Jews Robberies, and as the Advoutures of Jacobs
Sons) whereupon St. Bernard said, the Bishops were not Doctors, but Deceivers;
not Feeders, but Defrauders; not Prelates, but Pilates. And this is called the
Castle of their Church: See The Defense of the Apology of the Church of
England, page 563. and 494. quest. 9. Cunct. 3. etc.

Again, What is done and agreed upon at a Quarterly, Yearly, or Second-days
Meeting, is Infallible; and being once upon Record, is Irrevocable; because it
was done by them, not as Persons in their single Capacity, or as Men: But as a
Body, and as a Church, nay, the Church of Christ. And again, Whatsoever G. Fox
does, may never be called in question: Nay, it is impossible to Interdict him,
or lay an Impeachment against him, so as to have a hearing by a Meeting rightly
Constituted, as may be seen by the 4th. and 5th. Parts of the Christian-Quaker,
etc. So that the Exemption of G. Fox from the Stroke of Justice is manifest.
Again, No man may accuse G. Fox, let his Crime be what it will; for if he does,
let him look for it, he shall suffer the greatest Penalty that G. Fox and his
Party (that Privy Council) are capable to inflict upon him; as may be seen in
this following Parellel, which I shall transcribe at large, betwixt the Papists
Cursing Thomas Bennet for writing Papers, and cleaving them upon their Church
Doors, wherein he called the Pope Antichrist; and the Invectives against
William Rogers and others, for writing Books, and dispersing the same, and
reading and and owning the same wherein G. F. is Detected: whereby it is
manifest, not only that his Crimes be excused, etc. but by reason thereof, many
of our Preachers grow Deceivers instead of Doctors, Defrauders instead of
Feeders, etc. See the Christian-Quaker Distinguished, etc. In Five Parts: and
the Seventh Part, etc. And Babels-Builders Unmasking themselves, the 1st. 2d.
3d. and 4th. Parts, etc.

Now for the Completing this Parellel, read the Papists Curse against good
Thomas Bennet, who afterward was Burnt, etc. for setting up Papers, which
called the Pope Antitichrist, etc. Even with Bell, Book, and Candle; as I find
it in Fox's Monuments, in the Eighth Book of the continued History of the
Blessed Martyrs, etc. page 311. 312. in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, etc.

The Manner of the Papists Cursing Thomas Bennet, for Publishing and
Manifesting their Error, before he was Burnt for the same.
THe Manner [Saith the Historian] of the Cursing the said Bennet, was
mavelous to behold. Then said the Prelate: By the Authority of God the Father
Almighty, and of the Blessed Virgin Virgin Mary, St. Peter and Paul, and of the
Holy Saints, we Excommunicate, we utterly Curse and Bann, Commit and Deliver to
the Devil of Hell, him or her, whatsoever he or she be, that have in spite of
God, St. Peter, whose Church this is, in spite of all Holy Saints; and in spite
of our most Holy Father the Pope, Gods Vicar here in Earth; and in spite of the
Reverend Father in God John, our Diocessor, and the Worshipful Canons, Masters,
and Priests, and Clarks, which Serve God daily in this Cathedral Church, fixed
up with Wax such Cursed and Heretical Bills, full of Blasphemy my (See the Old
and New Pretense) upon the Door of this and other Holy Churches within this
City: Excommunicate plainly be he or she, plenally, or they; and delivered over
to the Devil, as perpetual Malefactors and Schismatics; accursed may they be,
and given Body and Soul to the Devil; Cursed be they, he or she, in Cities and
Towns, in Fields and Ways, in Paths, in Houses, out of Houses, and in all other
Places, Standing, Lying, or Rising, Walking, Running, Sleeping, Waking, Eating,
Drinking, and whatsoever Thing they do: besides, we separate them, him or her,
from the Threshold, and from all the good Prayers of the Church, from the
Participation of the Holy-Mass, ( No Spiritual Communion then; no, no more than
for J. B.] from all Sacraments, Chapels, and Altars; from Holy Bread, and Holy
Water [All pretend to Holiness, Holy, Holy] from all the Merits of Gods Priests
and Religious Men; and from all their Cloisters; from all their Pardons,
Privileges, Grants, and Immunities, which an the Holy Fathers, Popes of Rome
have granted to them. And we give them over utterly to the power of the Fiend;
and let us quench their Souls if they be dead, this Night in the pains of Hell
Fire, as this Candle is now quenched and put out [and with that he put out one
of the Candles] And let us pray to God, if they be alive, that their Eyes may
be put out, as this Candlelight is [So he put out the other Candle] And let us
pray to God, and to our Lady, and to St. Peter, and St. Paul, and to all Holy
Saints, that all the Senses of their Body may fail them; and that they may have
no Feeling, as now the Light of this Candle is gone [And so he put out the
third Candle] Except they, he or she, come openly now, and confess their
Blasphemy, and by Repentance, as in them shall lie, make Satisfaction unto God,
our Lady, St. Peter, and the Worshipful Company of this Cathedral Church. And
as this Holy Staff now falls down, so might they, except they repent and show
themselves. [And One first taking away the Cross, the Staff fell down] But
Lord, what a Shout, and Noise there was; what terrible fear, what holding up of
Hands to Heaven, that Curse was so terrible.

Now this fond, foolish Fantasy and Mockery being done and played; which was
to a Christian Heart; a thing most ridiculous, Bennet could no longer forbear,
but fell to great Laughter, but within himself, and for a great Space, could
nor cease; by the which thing the poor Man was espied: for they that were next
by him, wondering at that great Curse, and believing it could not but light on
one or other, asked good Bennet for what cause he should so laugh? My Frieds
(said he) Who can forbear, seeing such merry Conceits and Interludes played of
the Priests? Strait way there was a noise heard, Here is the Heretic, Here is
the Heretics; Hold him fast, Hold him fast.

Now see the parellel betwixt the Papists using Thomas Bennet, (who was soon
after burnt) their Power considered, and the Darkness of that Age; in which a
Cloud of Error and Vail of Darkness had covered the generality; and the Usage
of George Fox and his Party, to William Rogers and his Friends, for almost the
same Reason, viz. Detecting George Fox, etc. Considering (I say) they are a
Suffering People themselves; no Law to assist them in their Church Censures;
and the Light of the Gospel breaking forth, etc. to the Illumination of the
generality, etc.

That is to say,

A Gatalogue of the hard Words, censarious Language, bitter Invectives, and
severe Judgment, passed upon William Rogers, and his Friends, by George Fox,
and those of Party with him, as may be found in the several Books put forth
against him and others; approved on by the Second-days Meeting in London: to
which I have affixed the Titles and Pages of the said Books, etc. Whereby their
Usurped Authority is manifest under the Notion of THE CHURCH, THE CHURCH, THE
CHURCH, Viz.

An Exalted Diotrephes -- The Accuser of the Brethen -- Hellish Jealousies --
One driven out from the Presence of the Lord, Unsavory Salt -- Heady, Wilful
-- Highminded, Unruly, Passionate, and Furions -- This miserable Man W. R. --
who through Vnwatchfulness, Disobedience, and Rebellion against God, (which is
as the Sin of Witchcraft) -- The unclean Spirit and Adversary of Man's Soul; the
old Accuser of the Brethren having now the Rule in him (meaning W. R.) and over
him, makes War through him against the Lamb and his Followers -- Rude, Insolent
-- His profane speaking concerning the Power of God; -- but from the Spirit of
Antichrist; the cruel, outrageous, deadly, hellish Spirit, or Image of
Jealousy; a murmuring, complaining, dividing Spirit; a rending, tearing
Spirit; a dark, jealous Spirit; a loose, gainsaying opposite Spirit; a proud
exalted Spirit; a contemning scornful Spirit; a self-concested Spirit; a
turbulent, willful, froward Spirit -- This cursed Spirit of Satan is now
entered into the Heart and Soul of William Rogers, and such of his Abetters as
own the Printing and Publishing his wicked Book aforesaid -- And are become
twice dead, plucked up by the Roots: and through Perverseness, Paevishness, and
Cross-spiritedness, enter into the way of Cain, and Spirit of Korah, and his
Company, -- of which Number and sort is William Rogers and his Adherents -- who
have attempted such manifest Rebellion against Good pure Power -- A cross
Cankered Spirit -- Fallen Antichristian Instruments -- And which I. say, be
Co-workers with the Prince of Darkness -- where the Firstborn of Death Rules,
and Reigns without any good Order -- Of that Seed and Spirit, yea, are joined
to, and led by, against the very Heart of God, and his Light, and Life, in
which his People live with him in.

The Titles and Pages of the Books that afford these bitter Invectives, here
follow, etc.
Dyotrophes Exalted, page 1. 16. 7. 17. 11 Accuser, etc. Title Page, Introduct.
An Epistle or Caution, page 4. 9. Title Page. Humph. Woolwick his Epistle, page
9. 11. This with much more, that I might have collected; as, Rotten Heart,
Painted Sepulcre, Ranter, Old cankered Apostate, Child of Hell, and the like;
but this may serve to give a Relish of their Proceedings, and complete the
Parellel.

And now Reader, Why may not I publish what I find (upon due Search and
Examination) Erroneous in them, as well, and more justifiable too, than they
thus to vent their Passions against the peaceable People among them, because
they cannot conform to George Fox his Laws? What, Have G. F. etc. got the Keys,
only, in that little Cabinet of Council, Ellis Hooks his Chamber, Viz. The
Second-days Meeting in London? What, Have they got a Pattent for all Gospel
Privileges? Is all Power looked up, Viz. In the Church, I mean, a Yearly
Meeting, a Second-days Meeting, a Quarterly Meeting; I mean, a Meeting of Men,
and a Meeting of Women apart from the Men. Must we give up all our Concerns,
both Spiritual and Temporal to the Judgment of the Men's and Womens-Meetings, as
they say in Barbados? What, Shall we not manifest the Mischief of Impositions?
Shall they Preach False Doctrine, and teach for Doctrine, the Traditions of
Men, and shall we be afraid to reprove them? Unmask and discover them, for fear
of a few Invecttives? No, but we will slight them, as honest Bennet did the
Papists Curse, and still hold, maintain, and assert Christian-Liberty; which we
in the Beginning pleaded for, and admitted the same to each other, in Things
which God by his Servants, the Prophets and Apostles, had not set a Limit;
believing, that as the Kingdom of Heaven stood not in Meats or in Drinks, nor
Carnal Ordinances, so did it not come by Outward Observation; but that as many
as fear God, and keep his Holy Commandments, are fenced and secured from hurt
by Threats and Censures of Men.

For in a steady Belief of Christ's Word, and in confidence of his Power and
Protection, let all truly Conscientious Christians trust; who said, Mat. 5.6.7.
Chapters (which contain his excellent Sermon on the Mount) That as many as hear
these Sayings of Mine, and do them, he it is that built on a Rock. And yet no
Women's Meetings set up by Him, or so much as counseled to in the manner G. F.
and the New Zealots have devised. And he that hears my Sayings, and does them
not, it is he that will find himself uppn a Sandy Foundation. Although he
conforms never so exastly to G. Fox his new Model of Government. Here is the
distinction made by Christ, who is Head of the true Spiritual Church; His
Mystical Body, made up of Living Members, universally scattered in all
Countries, Languages, Professions, and People, who fearing God, and being
faithful to that Discovery they have of him, are, and I believe, shall be
accepted of him.

And the largest Commission that ever Christ gave his Desciples and Apostles,
was, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. Where he said, Go teach all Nations, Baptizing, etc.
bidding them observe whatever I have commanded you. (Mark have commanded) He
did not commit the Peoples Observation to what the Apostles should command; no,
no; neither did Paul desire to assume it; but said, Follow us, as we follow
Christ, etc. But what I have commanded you, that bid them observe; for all
Power is committed to me, and I will have the Government of my Chozen People;
and since they have such an Esteem of this my visible Appearance, by reason of
the Miracles and Wonders I do; I have told them, that it is expedient for me to
go away; and then he that is with them shall be in them in a more large manner,
as they wait for my Appearance in their Hearts.

And as many as have regard to the Commands of Christ, and live in Subjection
to Christ their Head, they are in Unity, tho they may disobey what George Fox
has prescribed; for he is not the Prophet that we are to hear in all things:
no, no, Christ Jesus is he, Blessed and Magnified be his most Holy and Powerful
Name for ever: Says my Soul. Amen.

Now, forasmuch as there is a Possibility through the Assistance of Christ's
Holy Spirit, which is given by Measure to us, to enable us to observe and do
those his most excellent Sayings; which is (as Athanasius says in his Apology)
the Perfection of a Christian: I would ask, Whether he may be capable to be in
Unity with the Church, Body, and Spouse of Christ, although he may not observe
George Fox his Orders; VIZ. Not submit to the new Order of the Women.

But if George Fox and his Party shall stiffly stand to it, That the
Women-Meeting is of Divine Institution, and therefore no Conformity, no Unity:
I then would ask them, Whether Christ was deficient either in his delivering
himself to that Honored Auditory, or in his Memory? And if in either, then in
which did his Deficiency consist? And who did he constitute in his room to
supply that Defect? Which no Christian can admit that there was any Defect,
etc. Whether a visible Head, namely, George Fox, or some other, to whom we
should have an Eye; at whose Mouth we should receive the Law in these Gospel
Times? If you say No, as you dare not say otherwise, then I make this reply,
not at all granting a Deficiency in Christ Jesus: That then his Spirit, or a
Manifestation of it, is given to every man to profit withal. By which Rule; I
have my proper Gift, and to my own Master I shall stand or fall: Who art thou
then that Judge another Man's Servant? Is not thy Name and Appearance
Antichrist, what Pretense so ever thou may have? I know thou cryest up Holy
Orders, Good Orders, Church Government, with abundance of fair Pretenses, and
Specious Shows, as if thou were the very Spouse of Christ, and intendedst some
special Reformation. But alas! thou art Jezabel, that painted Harlot, who art
gone a Whoring from thy Husband, decking and priding thy self with his Jewels
and Ornamenns, fitting like a QVEEN, and saying, I AM, AND THERE IS NONE
BESIDES ME. But Blessed be the Lord, the Light has discovered thee, and made
thee manifest; wherefore return and repent, that thy Backslidings may be
healed. And this is my Desire for you all, who begun in the Spirit; decrying
all Lifeless Forms and Traditions of Men; Outward Rules and Directories,
Imposition and Compulsion, Formality and Idolatry. But Alas! the Scale is
turned, the Scheme is changed: for these Things which you formerly testified
against, you are now found in the Practice of: Building again the Things you
once destroyed: thereby making your selves Transgressors, etc.

I shall conclude this Preface in the Words of William Penn elsewhere, etc.
Having thus Historically Introduced my Discourse, not out of ill will to any,
God knows; but in perfect Love to all, that the very truth of Things may be
brought to Light, in order to a more clear Understanding of that Controversy
which is now on foot, etc. This with much Sincerity I do dedesire that Truth
may Triumph over. Formality, and Conviction be the ground of our Conformity.

Francis Bugg.
Milden-hall, the 11th. of the 1st. Month. 1681.
CHAP. I.
Treats of Principles of Truth, Received and Believed in the Beginning, with an
Epistle about Marriage, and other Things; not as a Form to walk by, but as
Advice suitable to the Nature and Tendency of the Testimony of Truth Received
and Believed, etc.

THat in the Beginning, the Inshining Light of Christ Jesus, by his Heavenly
Spiritual Appearance in the Hearts and Souls of his People, was our Principle,
the very Foundation Principle, and Corner Stone in our Building, there are yet
many Living Witnesses: and our Work and Labor in that day was to turn Peoples
minds thereunto, as to the more sure Word of Prophesy; whereunto as many as
took heed, did well; and that there was Sufficiency in it (being obeyed) to
lead to Salvation. And as our Minds came to be turned to this Inward Teacher.
And as we came to experience the Virtue and Excellency of this Holy Unction, so
we held a public Testimony thereof to others, that they might thereby be
provoked to make trial thereof, that so they might have the Witness in
themselves, and see for themselves, and taste for themselves; and to this Word
nigh in the Heart, were we committed and recommended, suitable to the Doctrine
and Ancient Prophesies of Christ Jesus our Lord, and his Blessed Apostles and
Prophets: and in that Day, How did our Harmony sound in our Assemblies? And how
did our Love abound one toward another? And our Zeal for the Holy Name of our
God. In this stood our Unity; in this stood our Fellowship, even in that Inward
Testimony which God committed to us to bear for his Names sake; here was the
moving Cause of our Love to God and one toward another; even the Inward
Testimony or Manifestation of his Spirit, which God in his Infinite Love has
given us to profit withal: persuant to his former Promises to our Fathers by
his Prophets, saying; I will give Him for a Light to the Gentiles, and to be my
Salvation to the Ends of the Earth: I will give him for a Commander, and a
Leader to my People Israel. And as we came to believe this Report, and to
experience the fulfilling of these Promises; and to be Witnesses of the Virtue
of this his Blessed Appearance; so we declare to others, that they also might
believe, and have Fellowship with us therein: and the more we came thus to be
Spiritually-minded, and Spiritually-exercised; and the more we came to take
delight therein, and to meditate therein, the more the Lord manifested his Love
unto us, and his pure Power amongst us, and became a Hedge about us, and a Wall
unto us, and gave us Favor in the Sight of the People; Blessed and Praised be
his Holy Name for ever.

And in that Day, when others would boast of their Church Authority, and Church
Discipline, Useful Ceremonies, Comely Orders, and Decent Vestments, etc. We
told them the Spirit of God was the Foundation of our Church, as well as the
Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles: That Christ Jesus, the Second Adam,
the Lord from Heaven, who is a Quickening Spirit, was Head of our Church,
Lawgiver to our Church; on whose Shoulders the Government and Authority of our
Church is laid; yea, the Hedge and Pale of our Church; and able to preserve our
Church: and in this Faith we lived and walked in pure undefiled Love:

If any said to us, Lo here is Christ, in this Ordinance, or in that
Observation: We told them, Nay, Christ is within; and there they must wait to
know Him, except they were Reprobates: for the Kingdom of Heaven is within; and
there they must wait to receive the Earnest of it: for it comes not by Outward
Observations. This we told People: this we proved to the People out of the Holy
Scriptures. This upon all occasions we testified to all People, Professor and
Profane, Bond and Free, Noble and Ignoble.

When they told us of their Articles of Faith, and how many they had, and of
the Scripture being the Rule, etc. We told them, That Faith was the Gift of
God, and to be waited for; and that Faith was the Evidence of things not seen;
and that although in the World there were Faiths many, and Lords many, yet to
us there was but one Faith, and one Lord Jesus Christ, who was the Author of
that Faith. And that although the Scriptures were good, and a true Declaration
of those Things which were most surely believed by the Apostles, and by us
ought to be believed, yet not the only Rule. But still the Spirit of God, which
was the First Principle, the Foundation Principle, the Palc, and only Hedge of
the Church, and Sanctified People of God; so likewise it was the Rule of Life
and Practice first, and before any other Rule, and always had the Preheminency
in our Testimony from the Beginning.

And if any question the Truth of what I have here affirmed, then for Proof
thereof, I refer them to the Testimonies of Isaac Pennington, Edward Borough,
George Bishop, etc. Published by T. Crisp; together with the Writings of
Francis Howgil, Richard Hubberthorn, and many other Ancient Friends, etc.

And in that Day, if any Brethren gave forth a Letter of Advice and Counsel for
the Help and Information of the weak, and lately Convinced. It was so worded,
as that Christian-Liberty was preserved, and the People not Imposed upon beyond
their Freedom. And that it was so, I shall prove by an undeniable Instance in a
Letter of Advice from the Brethren in the North, about twenty Years since,
containing twenty particular Things, wherein Advice and Counsel is given, yet
SO as to leave them to their Freedom, and not to impose them further than
Friends to whom they wrote, could receive them, or see a Service in them, as is
evident, both from the Title or Direction of the said Paper, and also from the
Closure and Conclusion of the said Letter, both which I shall here insert; as
also that Clause or particular Advice about Marriage, which is the seventh
particular thing wherein Counsel is given in the said Paper or Letter of
Advice. That is to say,

The Elders and Brethren sends unto the Brethren in the North these necessary
Things following; to which, if you in the Light wait to be kept in Obedience,
you will do well. Fare you well. --

This is the Title or Direction of the said Letter of Advice: now follows the
7th. Particular, which is about Marriage, etc.

That as any are moved of the Lord, and in his Light called to take a Brother
or Sister in Marriage (Marriage being honorable in all, and the Bed Undefiled)
let it be made known to the Children of Light, especially to those of the
Meeting of which the Parties are Members, that all in the Light may it witness
to be of God: and being in the Light made manifest to be of God, let them be
joined together in the Lord, and in his Fear, in the presence of many
Witnesses; according to the Example of the Holy Men of God in the Scriptures of
Truth recorded: which was written for our Example and Learning; and that no
Scandal may rest upon the Truth, nor any thing be done in secret; but all
things to the Light brought, that Truth may triumph over all Deceit: and that
they who are joined together in the Lord, may not by Man be put asunder, whom
the Lord has joined together: That there may be a Record in Writing,
witnessing the Day, Place, and Year of such things, to be kept in that Meeting,
the which the one, or both of them are Members; under which Writing the
Witnesses may subscribe their Names, or so many of them at may be convenient,
for the stopping of the Mouths of Gainsayers, and for the manifesting of the
Truth to all who are without.

This is the seventh Particular, mentioned in the said recited Epistle of
Advice to the Brethren in the North, which in number were twenty: wherein it is
manifest, what regard they had to the Practice of the Holy Men of God recorded
in Scripture: and yet by the Conclusion of the said Epistle, it is manifest,
that they were far from limiting Friends, in that Day, to a prescribed Rule or
Form, and that under the greatest Penalty too, that they were able to inflict;
as of late days has been the Practice of George Fox and those of Party with
him, as hereafter will be manifest: see the Conclusion of the said Letter of
Advice; which is as follows, Viz.

Dearly beloved Friends, these Things (meaning the 20 Particulars advised to)
we do not lay upon you as a Rule or Form to walk by: but that all with the
measure of Light, which is pure and holy may be guided, and so in the Light
walking and abiding, these things may be fulfilled in the Spirit, not from the
Letter; for the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives Life, etc.

Thus the Reader my see, That in the Beginning, our Advice by Letter did concur
with our public Testimony, and both with the Scriptures, and Evidence of the
Spirit in the Hearts of the People; to winch our Ministering Friends in that
Day, both by Word, Epistle, and Doctrine, desired to be made manifest; for they
then did not desire to exercise Dominion Gentile-like, etc.

CHAP. II.
Manifests an Alteration and Change: Shows the Woman's Charter for their
Jurisdiction: Sets forth the Grant and Confirmation made at a London
Yearly Meeting, 1675.

I Am now come to manifest the Alteration and Change, and the cause of
Divisions amongst us about Matters of Faith, and the Exercise of it,
Church Discipline, and Conformity to it: whereby William Penns Saying in his
Address to Protestants, page 149. is fulfilled, Viz. For all Societies are to
govern themselves according to their Institutions and First Principles of
Union: where there is Violence upon this part, Tyranny, and not Order is
introduced. Now since Persuasion and Conviction began all true
Christian-Societies, All Christian-Societies must uphold themselves upon the
same free Bottom, or they turn Antichristian, etc. And for proof that we so
find, and by woeful Experience know there is an Alteration and Change, and
Violence done to our First Principles of Union, I am now about to manifest: and
in order thereunto, I shall here insert George Fox his New Order (which was
wrote about the Year 71.) for Womens-Meetings, to be held distinct from Men's
Meetings; and was confirmed afterward by a general Council, or Yearly Meeting,
etc. VIZ.

Dear Friends,
TO whom is my Love, in that which changes not; it would do well, and be of
Service for you to have a Womens-Meeting, as they have in other, Parts; that
the Women may come into the Practice of the pure Religion, which is to visit
the Fatherless and Widows, and to see that all be kept from the spots of the
World; and so, the Lord Jesus redeeming you by his Spirit, out of the Old Adam;
in the Fall, into the Image of Gods Righteousness and Holiness, that Man was in
before he fell; in which you are all Helps Meet to the Men, in Righteousness
and Truth, and Holiness and Justice, and the Wisdom of God, and you may assist
and inform the Men of Necessities, in what you cannot do your selves: for Man
and Woman being both in the Power and Seed of Christ, they are both Helps Meet:
and so it would do well for the Women to have a distinct Meeting by themselves,
as it is in other Places, and to set that nothing be lacking: then all is well
amongst you, that you all may be perfect and complete in Christ Jesus your
Heed: holding Him from whence you have Understanding and Wisdom to order all
things toh is Praise and Glory: and when you do see that all is well, and
nothing is lacking to honor God, that all may be kept out of that which
dishonors Him; and all may be kept in your Testimony of Jesus, and to see
that nothing is lacking outwardly in Gods House, in his Family; who have the
Mind of Christ, to do good unto all, especially the Household of Faith: and when
you see that all is well, then whose mouth the Lord opens in the Women's
Meetings (...) praise and confess him to his Glory, they are to be obedient, as
it is in other Womens-Meetings: so once a month to have a Womens-Meeting in the
County, Town, or other Places convenient; then the other Neigbouring Women may
come, and go home, they Meeting together about the tenth Hour of the Day. And
so they may keep a little Stock among themselves, to help the Poor, and those
that be in necessity; and what they cannot do themselves, they may inform the
Men of all the poor Widows, and poor Men's Children, that are fit to go to be
Apprentices, and to Services to Friends, that they may be trained up in the
Fear of God, and in the New Covenant [He might have said, in the New-Governmet]
that they may be the Children of the New Covenant, where all may come to know
the Lord, who is Blessed for ever. Amen.

George Fox having thus laid a Foundation on for the Womens-Meetings, distinct
and apart from the Men, to be once a month, at the tenth hour of the Day; and
to get a little Stock by them, under many specious Pretenses and Fine
Coverings; insomuch that many began to assemble and to meet together
accordingly, in several Parts of the Nation: yet there were also very many that
waited to see the End and Purpose of their so meeting, it being a New Thing;
and also knowing that the very Papists, at their raising and first ordaining
the several Orders of Friars and Religious Nuns, were not without as fair
Pretenses, and fine flourishing Shows as this Grant or Order of George Fox for
the ordaining these Womens-Meetings: so that after a little season, several
Friends perceiving that these Women thus assembled, aspired after the comely and
beloved Apple of Rule and Government: they showed their Dislike, and it began
to be too hard for George Fox to carry them on, on his own sole Authority; so
that at a Yearly Meeting, or General Council held at London; in the Year 1675,
the said Grant or Order was strengthened and confirmed in all Points, and with
as much Policy as ever the Learned Bishops or grave Senates used to Establish
their Monarchical Governments, etc. And that the Reader may be assured of the
Truth thereof, and that it is not of my own devising, to accuse him. and that
the Author of the Accuser, etc. in Answer to W. R's Book, may not say to me, as
he in page 86. Viz. Howbeit W. R. produces not any now Prescriptions, Methods
Rules, Orders, and Forms of Church Government -- Now says the said Author of
the Accuser, etc. Now he should have produced some new Orders and Forms of
Church Government Introduced amongst in since that time (meaning the Year
1673.) to prove his Charge of Apostasy and Innovation against G. F. and those
he calls his Party, etc. And Page 133. We affirm that his (meaning W. R.)
crying out Impositions, Form of Church Government, Orders, Prescriptions, etc.
in general, is no Answer, nor any Proof of his Charge of Apostate and Innovator
against us: let him either specify (says this notable, as well as confident
Author of the Accuser, etc.) the Particulars thereof, that he condemns us for,
as Apostates, and that we practice as Church Discipline, or else for ever be
ashamed, etc. -- And Page 3. And what New and Unchristian Doctrines and
Practices are they (meaning G. F. and his Party) fallen into, we find no Proof
nor Discovery thereof in all his Books, etc. And Page 128. of the said
confident Author of the Accusers, etc. We do profess seriously (a notable
serious George, if we may believe him) we see no real Cause or valid Reason our
Opposer (meaning W. R.) shows for the great Noise and Rumble he makes about
Outward Laws, Prescriptions, Orders, Edicts, or Decrees, Outward, Form of
Government, Apostasy, Innovation, Impositions, Lording over Faith, over
Conscience, etc. whilst he shows us no unjust, no unlawful nor uncomly Order
or Proceedings amongst us as a People, nor yet gives us any Instances or
Catologue of those Impositions, Innovations, New Doctrines or Practices brought
in and received amongst us, which are inconsistent with our First Testimony, to
the Light and Grace of God within, and Teachings thereof, etc.

I say, things considered as practiced amongst us, I marvel that the said
Author, which is said to be G. Whitehead, should have the Confidence thus to
call for a Proof, to call for a Catologue of the New Orders that are Introduced
amongst us; when he at the time of his Writing, could not be ignorant of the
Things complained of by W. R. who, it is probable, thought there was no need to
produce such Proof, such a Catalogue, and such manifest Instances to prove the
same, and that none would have the Confidence, or rather Impudence to deny such
Things as are every Month put in Practice amongst us. But as I said, that be
may not say so to me, I will bring him both Proof and President; and if he will
call them a Catologue, he may. But first the Confirmation of the Foundation of
the Womens-Meetings; (Namely, George Fox his Order above recited) by a General
Council held at London, Anno, 1675.


Concerning Propounding Marriages. London, the 27th. of 3d. Mon. 1675.
IT is our Judgment, that for better Satisfaction to all Parties, that there
may be due time for Inquiry of clearness of the Persons concerned, it is
convenient that Marriages be at twice propounded to the Meetings, that are to
take care therein; both to the Men's and Women's Meetings, where both are
Established before they are accomplished; and when Things are cleared, that the
Marriage be accomplished in a Grave and public Assembly of Friends and
Relations.


Observations.
And now set the Authority and Confirmation of the Woman's Meetings, and how G.
F. his pretended Motion is corroborated and strengthed. I am necessitated to
transcribe more of the Transaction of this notable, if not Universal Council,
than I am willing, lest G. Whitchead should again call for a Proof or Catologue
of their new stamped Government. etc.

Concerning Men's and Womens-Meetings.
IT is our Judgment and Testimony in the Word of Gods Wisdom, that the Rise and
Practice, Setting up and Establishment of Men's and Womens-Meetings, in the
Church of Christ, in this our Day and Generation, is according to the Mind and
Counsel of God, and done in the ordering and leading of his Eternal Spirit; and
that it is the Duty of all Friends and Brethren in the Power of God in all
Places, to be diligent therein, and to encourage, and further each other in
that blessed Work; and particularly, that Friends and Brethren in their
respective Countries, encourage their Faithful and grave Women in the
Settlement of the said Meetings; and if any professing Truth, shall either
directly or indirectly discountence (a notable Warning; and little obeyed,
except by G. F. his Men of War) or weaken the Hands of either Man or Woman in
the Work and Service of the Lord, let such be admonished according to the
Order of the Gospel; and if they receive it not, but resist Counsel, and
persist in the work of Division, we cannot but look upon them, as therein, not
in Unity with the Church of Christ, and Order of the Gospel. Therefore let
Friends go on in the Power of God, and in that Work for Him, his Truth and
People, and not to be swayed, or hindered by them or their Opposition.


Observations.
Behold the difference between this Decree, and the Letter of Advice and
Counsel in the First Chapter of this Treatise, that has a particular relation
to the Scripture, and the Practice of the Holy Men recorded therein: but this
is wholly a stranger to any such Authority; yet that was not proposed otherwise
than Advice and Counsel, and not as a Form or Rule to walk by, notwithstanding
there was so much in it to justify the pressing of it; both as being bottomed
on Scripture Authority, and the Practice of the holy Men of God recorded in
Scripture; but this no relation to Scripture Authority, Precept, or President;
no relation to the Example of the holy Men of God recorded in Scripture, nor
any Command of God or Jesus Christ, who is Head of the true Church, and
Lawgiver too: but notwithstanding the Authors of this Decretal Order, are
peremptory and positive, none must refuse a Compliance, none must
discountenance the Observatition of it directly or indirectly; for if they do,
they are not to be looked upon in Unity with the Church; that is, not to be
looked on as Christians and Members of Christ's Church, and so at once made
Heathens, by this new fashoned Edict.

But to make good Provision against any that shall yet dare to slight this new
Model or new found Method of Church Government, or call in question their Power
or Authority. See what a strict and severe Admonition is uttered forth, even as
if it had come from the Popes Council of Jesuits and crafty Friars; I Know that
some will be mighty angry and sore displeased with me, for transcribing so much
of their hidden Mysteries; but in my apprehension, there is no reason for it:
for if Womens-Meetings be of such Excellency, and their Government and
Jurisdiction so virtuous and amiable, as that whoever comply and yield
obedience to them, are in the state of Salvation, and within the Pale of the
Church, and capable to be in Spiritual Union and Fellowship with the Brethren.
But on the contrary, such as do not countenance them, but either directly or
indirectly weaken the hands of such Womens-Meetings, they are to be looked upon
as out of the Unity of the Church: I say, if it be so, Why should not the
Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Independants, Baptists, etc. know of them, how to
erect them spedily; I will not say, the Papists, for I perceive by Richard
Richardsons Ingredients, that they have something like it, Viz. their
Nunneries, etc. But if it be a mere Imagination of their own Brain; and an Idol
of their own erecting, Why should it not publicly be brought to Light? and
made as manifest as the Lord Cromwell made the Papists great Idol, Viz. the Rood
of Grace (which had goggling Eyes, and would smile when a good Gift was offered
to it) when he caused it to be brought to Pauls-Cross, where the People tore it
all to pieces, in King Henry the Eigth's Time; which did not a little vex that
infallible People. So then take it which way you will, and it does not amount
to a publishing in Gath, and a telling in Askelon, suitable to that made
mention of by David, etc. But to return, let us hear what shall be said to such
as transgress this Ordinance, this notable, not Scriptural, but Anti-Scriptural
Edict, VIZ.

It is our Sense, Advice, Admonition and Judgment in the Fear of God, and the
authority of his Power and Spirit, to Friends and Brethren in their several
Meetings; that no such slight and contemptible Names arid Expressions, as
calling Men's or Womens-Meetings, Courts, Sessions, or Synods; that they are
Popish Impositions, useless and Burthen-some; that faithful Friends Papers,
which we testify have been given forth by the Spirit and Power of God, are
Men's Edicts or Cannons, or embracing them, bowing to Men. Elders in the Service
of the Church, Popes and Bishops, with such scornful Sayings, be permitted
among them, but let Gods Power be set upon the top of that unsavory Spirit
that uses them, etc.


Observations.
This Admonition thus stamped with the Name and Authority of Gods Divine Power,
is enough to put any man to a stand, and to admire their Confidence;

First, To erect a new Model of Church Government; even such an one as no one
Society from Noah's Flood, to this Day ever practiced: and to bring all into a
Subjection to this New Discipline use these high and lofty Expressions: and yet
this is not all; but now they are resolved to secure their Interest; and the
way to do it, is very notable. First, To make a Law, that the Churches
Testimony is to be recorded: and the Condemnation of Transgressors, except they
come and acknowledge their Fault. That Part of this Yearly Cannon I may
subscribe, and then leave it, as having taken enough to show the Author to the
Accuser, a Proof of their Innovations and manifest Apostacies, and Degeneration
from the Nature and Tendency of the Epistle, mentioned to be wrote to Friends
in the North, in the First Chapter of this Treatise, etc.

Concerning Recording the Churches Testimony, and the Party's Condemnations.
etc.
THat the Churches Testimony and Judgment against disorderly and scandalous
Walkers, also the Repentance and Condemnation of the Parties restored, be
recorded in a distinct Book, in the respective Monthly and Quarterly Meeting,
for the clearing Truths Friends, and our holy Profession to be produced, or
published for that end and purpose, so far only, as in Gods Heavenly Wisdom
they shall be needful; and it is our Advice in the Love of God, that after any
Friends Repentance and Restoration, he abiding faithful in the Truth, that
condemns the Evil, none among you so remember his Transgression, as to cast it
at him, or upbraid him with it; for that is not according to the Mercy of God,
etc.

Subscribed by William Penn. George Whitchead. Steven Crisp. Alex. Parker. Tho.
Salthouse. John Burnyeat.



Observations.
Perhaps some may expect a great deal of sincerity under these fine Pretenses,
and that the meaning hereof is to Record the Condemnations of such Persons as
have lived a scandalous Life, and broke the Commands of God, disobeyed the
Precepts of Christ, laid down in the four Evangelists, or refused Obedience to
the Doctrine of the holy Apostles. But alas! if I may speak what I have known,
and what my Eye has been a Witness of, ever since these Cannonical Rules were
made, I must say the contrary; for let any man search the Records of our
Quarterly Meeting Book in Hadenham, in the Isle of Ely, and they shall there
find a Record of Condemnation; against John Ansloe, a Minister of the Gospel,
and every way (so far as ever I heard or knew) of a blameless Conversation,
wherein he is recorded out of the Unity; not for any Breach of Christ his
Commands, or any matter of Evil Fact, but for not taking his Wife according to
the Order of Friends (i. e.) not publishing his Intention before the
Womens-Meetings, as hereafter will be further manifest; but not one Recorded,
that ever I remember, for any Breach of Gods Commandments, or matter of evil
Fact in all the said Quarterly-Book: and if any man can convince me, that there
is a man called a Quaker, in the Isle of Ely, or else where, that has lived so
uprightly, as that in all his time of being under that Denomination, he has
not in any wise violated some of Gods Commandments, or Christ's Precepts whereby
he has sinned against God, and grieved his holy Spirit, and stood in need of
his Pardon, Mercy and Forgiveness, then I shall conclude, and not while then,
that there is some sincerity in the Contrivers of these Cannons, and the
Recorders of these Condemnations: for if there be any such Man, or Men, they
may leave out that part of the Lords Prayer, which he taught his Disclples; who
well knew what Form of Prayer suited best with the Condition and State of Man,
who by Nature, is prone to Sin, and liable to Temptations, and no longer
preserved from entering into the Temptation, than there is a diligent Watch
kept; the Clause I mean, is this;

Forgive us our Sins, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

And truly that man that says, He has no need to make this one of his
Petitions; or after that manner, when he put up his Prayers to God, I am
satisfied, he too much resembles the proud Pharisee; who said, he was not as
other Men, etc.

A General Observarion upon the four foregoing Branches of the said General
Councils Grant and Confirmation of G. F. his Erecting of Womens-Meetings, as
appears by his Order, about the beginning of this Second Chapter, and then I
shall proceed to the next Chapter.

First, It is decreed that Marriages, from the day of the date of those
Cannons, shall be propounded; that is, the Intention thereof published; yea, no
less than twice published before the Men's and Womens-Meetings, being distinct
and apart each from the other, according to the Platform of G. F. etc.

Secondly, That the Rife, Practice, Setting up, and Establishishing of the
Womens-Meetings, is according to the Mind and C^^nsel of God, and done in the
Leading and Ordering of his ETERNAL-SPIRIT; whereby G. F. his Erection of this
(as new as needless) Ceremony is ratified and confirmed, and absolutely
corroborated and strengthened by these Presents, according to their true Intent
and meaning.

No Pope ever had a more true and loyal Council, or one better skilled, or more
politic to save his Holiness from any Danger, or confirm his Infallible and
Unerring Institutions: nay, further, they have granted, I think, to him, his
Heirs and Successors, for ever; for I see no limit in the whole Ecclesiastical
Cannon: that whosoever, directly or indirectly discountenance these
Womens-Meetings, cannot be looked upon as in Unity with the Church of Christ;
and then to be sure, no Members: which if I believed, it would be sad News for
me.

Thirdly, And lest any should yet chance to call the Proceedings of these New
Spiritual Lords in Question, or call their Meeting Synodical, or the Members
thereof like Popes, Bishops, etc. their Epistle, Decrees, Cannons, or Edicts of
Men, etc. it is Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that such are not to be
permitted; (i. e.) to be at Unity with them: for alas! that is all they can yet
do, Viz. Reckon us as Heathens: and I look upon it better to be under that
censure, than (after all private means used, and they not reclaimed) to let
them go undiscovered.

Fourthly, But lest all this should not do, here is one stratagem more; and
that is, To Record those disobedient Sons, to all Eternity: for it is further
Enacted by this New arbitrary Authority, who did without the consent of the
People; perhaps forgetting that we are Englishmen, that the Testimony of the
Church shall be recorded, and the Condemnation of the Transgressors of these
Ordinances and infallible Laws, to which, indispensible Obedience is required;
which is partly, and plainly, and very truly so interpreted; if their Intents
may be measured by what has followed, as the event of these Things; which this
Treatise will yet further manifest.

So that upon the whole matter, I cannot see what could have hindered the
completing this Grant and Confirmation; had they but put these four Branches
to the remaining eight (for there are in all 12 Particulars) and obtained their
passing both Houses of Parliament, and the Royal Assent; the neglect whereof
has been greatly disadvantagious to their carrying on their then notable
Designs.

CHAP III.
Treats of the Proceedings of George Fox and his Party in the Executive Part of
the Order, Grant, and Confirmation mentioned in the Second Chapter; their
Proceedings against John Ansloe: an Opposition made thereto by several, Viz.

HAving in the two former Chapters, manifested the Way, Manner, and Method of
our Church Government, first as it was in our primitive Gathering, when as we
pleaded to the Magistrate for Liberty of Conscience; so we had the free
Exercise of it allowed amongst our selves in Matters Spiritual. And Secondly,
with reference to latter Years, when Liberty of Conscience is only pleaded for
to the Magistrate, but utterly denied to be put in practice amongst our selves;
which I hope may serve for a Proof to the Author of the Accuser, etc. and a
convincing one too, that W. R. when he published his Book, Entitled,

The Christian-Quaker, Distinguished from the Apostate and Innovator, In Five
Parts.

Was not without ground, when he cried out of Forms, Impositions, Orders,
Prescriptions, Rules, Cannons, etc. But that it may yet more plainly appear, I
shall now descend to the Proceedings in our own Country, which I am an
Eyewitness of, where these Laws, Rules, Cannons, and Directories have been put
in practice, on the greatest Penalties we are capable to inflict; and then
perhaps the Author of the Accuser may accept of my Endeavors, both for a Proof
and Catalogue of the unparrelled severity, according to the State and Capacity
we stand in, to the Members of our own Society; considering how liable we are
to the Persecution of so many penal Statutes every day: yea, I say, I know not
where to find a Parrellel for our Proceedings, our State and Capacity rightly
considered; we that differ from others, and desire their Forbearance; yet at
the same time, differing among our selves, cannot, nay, will not bear one with
another: we cry to the Magistrates for the Liberty and the free Exercise of our
Consciences in Matters Spiritual; and will not, nay, resolves not, come what
will come, to allow the free Exercise of Conscience in matters Spiritual, to
our discenting Brethren, as this Treatise will make manifest. Oh! depth of
Hypocrisy, and Forerunner of Tyranny; Should you have Power put into your
Hands before the Peoples Eyes are a little opened to see your Treachery, your
double dealing, your antichristian dealing? You are like the deaf Adder, you
will not hear; How often have I wrote unto you? How have I wooed and entreated
you to race out one Cannon? To condescend a little? Which I had great hopes of,
when I saw W. P's Addr. to Prot. But alas! he has told us by his Liberty
Spiritual, p. 13. his meaning, Viz.

Nor is it the least Evil this Spirit of strife is guilty of, even at this day;
that it uses the words, Liberty of Conscience, and Imposition, against the
Brethren, in the same manner as our Suffering Friends have been always
accustomed to intend them against the Persecuting Priests and Powers of the
Earth.

Whereby it is manifest, that it is accounted a great Evil (if not the least)
to call for Liberty of Conscience, since they are accustomed to intend it only
to the Magistrates for themselves, and not by that Expression to any that shall
call for it to them. Well, I am loath to trouble my Reader with my single Coment
upon these things, but shall come more close to the matter, even to what is
upon Record and Proceedings thereupon, and then leave it to the Conscience of
the Impartial Reader.

First then see a Copy of the Orders Recorded in our Quarterly Meeting Book, in
the Isle of Ely, which is as follows, Viz.

IT is ordered and agreed upon, at this Quarterly Meeting, that no Friends for
time to come, may Permit, or suffer Marriages, without the consent of Friends
at two Men's and Womens-Meetings; and the Man and Woman to come both to the said
Meeting, to receive the answer of Friends; that so no disorderly or indirect
Proceedings may be carried on any more, contrary to the Unity of Friends.

Dated the 1st. of the 10 Month, 1675.

This Cannon or Directory being ushered in amongst us, under the specious
Pretense of Good Orders, and to keep things clean: It was by our Meeting
generally received, and by me recorded, I being Writer at that time: but many
of us little thought that it was intended for a Rule and limited Form, to walk
by: as it seems as if it was designed by the Projector thereof, by the Event,
for we had so long disputed against the Holy Scripture being a Rule; that we
never thought, that instead thereof we had been introducing a Rule of our own
making; neither did we once conceive it to be the product of a London Consult,
as afterward we found it was, when it came to be imposed as a Rule to be
indispensably obeyed, under the Penalty of being Recorded out of the Unity. But
when J. A. came to be concerned in taking a Wife, and perceiving the ill
tendency such Records might produce in after times; and being willing to
maintain Christian-Liberty, and like the Apostle, would not be brought under
the Power of any thing that might prove a Yoke to his Brethren: he would
neither touch nor taste, nor in the least conform to it; whereupon many Contests
arose, and strong Debates about it; some crying out, That he must own his
Condemnation for not Marrying according to the Order of Friends: others said,
nay, but what Evil has he done? What Commandment of God, or Precept of Christ
has he broken? others said, If we let him alone, others will take Example by
him, and then the Orders will not be regarded. And amidst these Controversies,
it was put to the Vote, Whether he should be condemned by public Sensure, or
not? Whereupon Samuel Cater, and about nineteen Friends more, they being the
major part, Voted, That he should be recorded out of the Unity. Which
accordingly was done; a Copy whereof follows, etc.

At a Quarterly Meeting in Hadenham, the 4th. day of the 7th. Month, Anno, 1678.
We at this Quarterly Meeting, having the Business of John Ansloe, his taking
his Wife contrary to the Order of Friends brought before us: and Friends
having several times spoke to him about it, and he not giving Friends
satisfaction, we do testify, that we have no Union with him in this his so
doing.


This unrighteous and unchristian Precedure was testified against at the same
time by Edward Love, Thomas Wright, Francis Bugg, Phillip Tailor, and some few
others; which told them, That all Unrighteousness was Sin, and Sin was the
Transgression of the Law: and if they could make it appear, that he had
committed Sin in disobeying their Order, we were ready to hear them. Edward
Love told them, they had exceeded the Deeds of the Wicked. But notwithstanding,
they being the Major part, and the Poll over, they resolved to pass that
Sentence on him above recited; although they then did confess that they had
nothing against him, save his not taking his Wife according to the Order of
Friends.

Whereupon soon after Francis Bugg wrote a Letter to Samuel Cater, a Copy
whereof here follows, Viz.
Friend,
I Having since our last Quarterly Meeting, weighed and pondered the Recording
of J. A. and upon a deliberate Consideration thereof, do find it not
Apostolical, nor agreeable with our Profession (at least, in my Apprehension)
but that it rather seems to be the Product or Fruit of that Spirit which does
Apostatize, and draw back into the old compelling Path, where Dominion is
exercised over the Faith and Persuasion of others; which is not a Doing to
others, as we would that others should do unto us. It is true, I do think that
publishing our Intentions of Marriage is very meet and for my part, if it were
my concern, I know not, but that I should do it as desired. But that mine, or
any other Man, or Men's approbation herein, should be an absolute Rule for
others, under the Penalty of being Recorded to Perpetuity, I know no reason at
all: for it is my Judgment, That no Imposition ought to be upon Men's Consciences
by any but the Lord: for the Apostle in his Day, said, Let every Man be fully
persuaded in his own Conscience: and did not go about to force People to
conform to such Things that they were not persuaded of in their own
Consciences; and whatsoever People or Church: though they claim Infallibility
that teach a contrary Doctrine unto this; we have good reason to suspect it to
he that hasty driving, and over driving Spirit, that would force a Faith where
God has not given it,; Even like the Church of Rome, etc. This is my Judgment
and Opinion; the which I am very free to communicate to thee, or any one, as
not being ashamed thereof; and if upon thy serious consideration, thou see
Cause to race out the said Record, lest it prove an ill President to Posterity,
as well as great Injustice to the Party concerned; then I desire thee peaceably
and quietly to join in the racing of it out again; forasmuch as thou had a
chief Hand in the obtaining of it, through the Influence thou had upon the
Meeting; and doubtless caused them to err. But if thou shall stand to maintain
it, or justify it, then it will stand thee upon to appear at the next
Quarterly Meeting, there to vindicate it by sound Arguments; for many are
offended at it, and burdened with it: and by the same Spirit that opposed the
Papists Antichristian-Impositions, it will be opposed and withstood. And this I
thought good to let thee know, for diverse Reasons; partly, because thou may
consider of it, and not be surprised; and partly, because thou may not do as
several Bishops and Teachers have done: who, as soon as they have broached any
Heresy, as ever more they were the Original Cause thereof, and kindled a flame
amongst the People, then they slank away, and seldom, or never manfully
maintained the same, as Socrates Scholastious, Evsebius, and Evagrius
Scholasticus, and diverse other Historians make mention of in the
Church History. Thus in a few Words, I have cleared my Mind thus far: and rest
a Lover of all such as serve our Lord Jesus Christ, purely for for his
Namesake.

F. Bugg.
The 22d. of the 9th. Month, 1678.

But although Samuel had the recited Letter time enough, yet he did not appear
at the next Quarterly Meeting: but I being there, did endeavor what I could,
to have raced it out, as well as some other Friends, but we could not: then I
desired that some one of them, who was for its continuance, would prove it
Apostolical; but none would adventure to take that Task upon them: whereupon I
entered my Protestation in Writing, and several Friends put their Hands to it,
on the backside: the substance of it follows: the which I left among them,
etc.

F. B. his Protestation.
FOrasmuch as that on the 4th. of the 7th. Month last past, J. A. a Minicter of
the Gospel, was by S.C. and diverse others, they being the Major part, by Vote
adjudged (and that in his absense) Condemned and Recorded out of the Unity, for
not observing the prescribed Rule and Order of Friends in taking his Wife, and
none of you will adventure to prove the said Rule Apostolical, nor the
Proceedings against J. A. according to Gospel Order. And thereupon I Francis
Bugg do offer to prove the said Record, either openly by dispute, or publicly
by Writing, to be contrary to Christ's Doctrine and Example, and contrary to the
Apostles Doctrine and Example; and contrary to the Doctrine and Example of
Francis Howgil, Richard Hubthorn, and diverse other Friends Testimonies in
Print. -- and not only so, but Antichrictian and Romish; and thereupon, do
hereby enter my Protestation against the said Record, and every part thereof,

Witness my Hand, the 4th. of the 10th. Month, 1678. Francis Bugg.


All which desire of their proving their Proceedings Apostolical; and debating
the Matter, both by me and others, they denied and utterly refused. But I
marvail the less, since I now understand by the Preface to the Book of W. R. In
Five Parts, Entitled, The Christian-Quaker, Distinguished, etc. That it is the
Advice of such an Eminent Man of Party with G. F. that we should not be
reasoned, with; a notable way, but methinks very Singular; yea, so Singular,
that, there is no Profession of People, that I know of, now extant in England,
that will refuse to be reasoned with, except only the Papists; and they are so
infallibly sure, that upon that Foot, they do not doubt nor scruple their Faith
and Belief; for they Believe as the Church Believes: and G. W. says in his
Apost. Incendi. etc. p. 16. That the true Church is in the true Faith that is
in God: and we must either Believe thus, as the True Church Believes, or else
it were but folly and Hypocrisy to profess our selves to be of the True Church.
Indeed the first part of George his Assertion is true: for the Church of God,
which is made up of faithful Members amongst Episcopalians, Presbyterians,
Independents and Baptists, or under any other Denomination whatsoever, in any
County, City, Language, or People, that fear God, and work Righteousness, these
all have their Faith in God: but that those with respect to Degrees, Growths,
or Measures do differ, and are of different Persuasions in many Points; and
thereupon ought to bear, and forbear Judging one another, is manifest; as also
from the Practice of the Primitive Christians, as W. R. and T.C. have fully
manifested; which not only thwarts G.W's. Answer to the four Positions,
mentioned in the 15th. and 16th. pages of the said Book. But the whole Rubric,
Laws, and Cannons Ecclesiastical of G. F. and other Innovators, who are so
infallibly sure of the way, and that all that differ from them are in the
wrong; that as I said, they have no will to reason things, to debate things;
but too much like the Papists, would have things taken upon trust; Implicitly
Believe as the Church Believes, Practice as the Church Practices, and in all
Points yield obedience to her Decrees, without any Examination, Scruple or
Doubt: Or else why should that Abetter of the Cause of G. F. advise as
follows, Viz.

Let not this Spirit be reasoned with: Enter not into Proposals and Articles
with it, but feed it with Judgment, that is Gods Decree.

Mark the Nature and Tendency of this Advice; for should the Apostles have thus
Preached to the Boreans, What Liberty had been left for their Search, and their
further Examination; nay, Christ himself reasoned in the Synagogue of the Jews,
and the Apostles did the like: nay, when any Difference arose amongst
themselves, a free Debate was admitted, which amongst us has been both by
Advice and Practice stiffly denied, as I shall yet more manifest.

Six Queries propounded by F. B. the 12th. Month, 1678.
Some Qveries propounded to such amongst us as endeavor to impose a Uniformity
and Conformity to such Rights and Ceremonies as have ho Foundation in
Scripture, and to such a Church Discipline as neither the Prophets, Christ
Jesus, nor his Holy Apostles, Primitive Christians, Saints, or Martyrs in any
Age or Generation, either Commanded or Practiced; and do expect your Answer
according to Scripture; for the Scripture testifies of Christ and of his
Example; and the Apostles who wrote Scripture, had the Mind of Christ, and his
Mind is not variable; so let your Answer accord with Scripture.

And whereas you pretend you are for Holy Orders and good Government in the
Church, maintain the same by Scripture Proof, otherwise we shall look upon your
Pretentions altogether vain, and your plea no better than that which is
commonly used by the Persecuting Papists, and degenerated Protestants; who when
we bid them prove the Use of their Ceremonies and other Observations, by plain
Scripture, they say, They need not, for the Apostle said, Let things be done
decently, and in order. And the Church seeing a Decency in the Use of these
Things, She has a Power committed to Her, to impose them on Her Members, and
by Virtue of Her Authority, She commands the strict Observation of them, under
pain of Her Displeasure; and if any will not yield obedience to Her Decretal
Orders, when once approved on by a General-Council, or Synodical-Assembly, or
question her Authority, She has a Power to Excommunicate and cut off such as
Heriticks, or Gainsayers, or Men of Opposite Spirits, etc. Thus says ROME; and
thus say the Episcopalians; and thus say all Imposers, who have no Authority
from Christ Jesus for their un-scriptural Traditions: and that it begins to be
so with us, is plain and manifest, and for a particular Instance, view the Case
of J. A. who was both judged, and Condemned, and Recorded out of the Unity at a
Quarterly Meeting, or General Council, held at Hadenham in the Isle of Ely, the
4th: of the 7th. Month, 1678. -- And in as much as you seem to make G. F. the
Author of your Errors, it stands him upon, finally to reject, and to bear a
public Testimony against your New, Strange, and Dangerous Innovations, and
Babylonish Inventions, and to show that he has no Hand in the Introducing and
promoting the same. -- WHEREFORE answer these things following, that so your
Minds, Intents, and Purposes may be fully and clearly manifest, and upon what
Bottom you stand; and who gave you your Power, and whence you derive your
Authority, and in whose Name you compel a Conformity to your New Invenetd
Orders and Rules, under Pain of Condemnation.

QUERY I.

Whether Christ Jesus, the true God and Eternal Life, in whom the Fullness of
the Godhead dwelt Bodily, be the Head of the True Church? OR Whether George
Fox, who is but a Man, unto whom the Spirit is given but by Measure, be Head
thereof? Answer.

QUERY II.

If you say that Christ is the Head thereof, as I hope you will not dare to say
otherwise: then I further Query, Whether Christ be not Lawgiver to his Church?
Answer.

QUERY III.

If you say, That Christ is, and of right, ought to be both Head and Lawgiver
to his Church: as I presume you will not say otherwise. Then I further Query,
Whether we who profess our selves to be Disciples and Followers of Christ,
ought not to follow and obey the Example, Practice, Precepts, Commands,
Prescriptions, and Exhortations of Christ Jesus, our Lord and Master, who is
both Head and Lawgiver to his Church; which are frequently laid down in
Scripture by the four Evangelists, and other his Prophets and Apostles: Rather
than the Practice, Precepts, Commands, Prescriptions, and Exhortations, of G.
F. or any other Mortal Man?

QUERY IV.

If you say, That the Commands, Precepts, Prescriptions, and Exhortations of
Christ Jesus ought Rather, and in the first place to be obeyed: as I hope you
will not dare to say otherwise: Then I further Query, Whether Christ, or any of
his Apostles commanded that a Womens-Meeting should be set up Monthly
(distinct, and apart from the Men) and a Power committed to them to hear,
examine, and determine Matters relating to the Government of the Church, as now
practiced by many of us; and that if any did not subject themselves to the
Skill, Prudence, and Approbation of such Women-Governours and Government of the
Church, that they should be Judged and Condemned, and Recorded out of the
Unity? OR has Christ, or any of his Apostles left a Precise or particular
Command; that when any are intended to join in Marriage, that first, and before
the Accomplishment thereof, they, the said Couple should always twice go to a
Mans-Meeting, and Womens-Meeting (they being distinct, and apart from each
other, for so they must be, or else not according to G. F. his Orders: and then
all is in vain) to publish their Intention of Marriage: and when so done, to
stay a complete Month, and then go again to the said Meeting, Viz. first, to
the Womens-Meeting [for they have the Pre-eminence in our New Church Procedure]
and then to the Mens-Meeting [they being distinct, as I observed before; which
is a MAIN PRINCIPLE in this New Frame of Church-Government] to ask and receive
their Approbation and License to Marry; and this to be done under pain of the
Church's Censure* which peradventure may be, to Record them out of the Unity?
If there be such a particular, or general Command, pray show it us. Or, Whether
did not Christ leave his People to their Liberty and Freedom? How, and in what
manner they perform and complete the Outward Ceremony, provided they come
together Chaste, and Clean, as becomes the Gospel, and the Professors of it?

QUERY V.

If you say, That Christ, nor his Apostles left neither Command, Example, nor
President for Womens-Meetings, (a part from the Men) to be set up Monthly, any
way to intermeddle with the Government of the Church: as that you must confess
[how angry soever you may be at the Discovery of these hidden Mysteries] then I
do further query of you, the said Imposers; Where had you your Power? And from
whence had you your Authority to Institute and ordain such a Way of Government
in the Church, by Women, or otherwise, containing such Rites and Ceremonies as
have no President in Scripture? And in whose Name do you compel to a
Uniformity, and Conformity thereunto? And whether is not Christ's Doctrine and
Commands laid down in Scripture, of more Authority than the Commands,
Institutions, and Prescriptions of G. F? Which if you grant they be; as I know
in words you dare not deny, whatever you think: Then I still further Query, (of
you Directory-Makers) What is the Reason, and what does it mean? That neither
Matthew, Mark, Luke, nor John, nor any one Chapter of any of those Books, are
Recorded in our Great Book of Records; first, and before the Epistle of G. F.
as that which is more Powerful, more Binding, and of much more Authority?
Answer these Things.

QUERY VI.

Whether were not the Bereans commended, in that they searched the Scriptures,
to see whether Paul's Testimony accorded therewith; yea, and accounted more
Noble than they of Thessalonica, who were not so Inquisitive? And is it not
more commendable to search the Scriptures, to see whether the Institutions,
Orders, Cannons, Degrees, Traditions, and Ceremonies of G. F. (and other
Innovators of Party with him) Together, with the Compelling a Uniformity and
Conformity thereunto, which has occasioned so much Division, Discord, Strife,
and Contention since their Arrival, be according to Scripture, yea, or Nay?
Seeing it is written, Try all Things. And if upon a diligent Search, they be
found directly contrary to Scripture, and the Practice, Doctrine, and Example
of Christ Jesus and his Holy Apostles, Saints, and Martyrs in all Ages: Then I
further Query; Whether they ought not to be opposed, withstood, and testified
against by all those that have a certain Sight thereof; Alleging constantly
according to Scripture, That every one should be fully persuaded in his own
Mind: and if any be otherwise, or contrary Minded, they ought to be let alone,
until it pleases God to reveal and make manifest his Will unto them: For what
is not of Faith, is Sin: as says the Apostle. So answer these Things touching
the Point of Church Government; for your Practice brings you into Suspicion;
and you must come to Trial, as others have done before you.

F. B.
The Twelfth Month, 1678.

To these Queries there were some Testimonies of Friends added, which for
Brevity sake, I here omit, likewise the Letter (wherein I enclosed them) to S.
Cater, I also at present omit for some Reasons. And to this day I never had any
Answer to the said Queries: whereby I perceive what Effect the Advice given by
a Public Preacher of Party with G. F. has taken, Viz.

Let not this Spirit be reasoned with, enter not into Proposals and Articles
with it, but feed it with Judgment, that is Gods DECREE.

Which Advice, when compared with this kind of Doctrine frequently published;
as W. R. avers in his Preface to the Christian-Quaker, Distinguished, etc. Viz.

Let us exclude the Reasoning, the Wisdom, and the Jealousy; and let us have
an Eye to the Brethren.

I say, when I compare them, and many other like Exhortations, it is the less
marvel that they should refuse any Answer; especially considering, that if they
should answer, there is no way to evade being discovered; and Error loves
Obscurity, for its Habitation is Darkness, and Ignorance is the Mother of its
Devotion, and Conformity the Monstrous Womb that produced it; and when attended
with the Secular Power, supports all its deformed Parts with great Admiration,
crying, Who is able to make War with the Beast? etc.

I shall add one Query which J. A. put forth, to which, I never heard that he
had any Answer: and by that the Reader may understand his Sense about the
Proceedings of our Quarterly Meeting against him, and then I purpose to
conclude this Chapter, etc.

A Question propounded to S. Cater, and others of the Isle of Ely, and
elsewhere, who force a Conformity to Church Discipline, and say, Without
Conformity, no Unity.
The Question is, What is Conformity?

A very short Question, and easily answered: it may be S. C. and others may
say, It is to the Spirit; but not mean so, but intend the Wills and Edicts of
Men; as in Example; the late Proceedings against J. A. concerning taking his
Wife, who in every particular answered the Lord, and was conformable to the
Leadings of his holy Spirit therein, as his Conscience does bear him witness,
to his daily comfort; but could not fulfill in every Circumstance the Wills and
Edicts of Men; therefore the aforesaid S.C. and others passed their Sentence
against him, and Recorded him out of the Unity in their Quarterly Book, for no
other Cause nor Crime. Now it is before me to speak something in answer to this
Question for the Simples sake, who are easily led aside by the cunning
Craftiness of Men, and taking all for Truth that their Leaders say: and it has
been the Leaders of the People in Ages past that caused them to Err; drawing
them from the Anointing within, to Observations without, to expect the Kingdom
there: being an easy way, and more pleasing to the Flesh, is most taking,
drawing after them the greatest Number: I speak of them that profess the Truth.

I say, What is Conformity?

Answ. Conformity is a MONSTER conceived by the great Whore MYSTERY BABYLON,
the Mother of Harlots. A MONSTER, because of its Deformity and Degenerate
Birth; it can be no other, for the Devil is the Father of it; (I speak of a
forced Conformity upon Men's Consciences) Christ Jesus never gave any such
Command, nor left any such Example; saying, If the Son make you Free, then are
you Free indeed. Neither did he Conform to the Jewish Commands; which was often
laid to his Charge, as, Breaking of the Sabbath, and the like: and they upon
better grounds than any since that Day, because they were the Commands of the
Lord by his Servant MOSES; and they saw no further, neither did they believe in
Christ, but we say, We believe in his Name, and he only is our Lord, Lawgiver,
and the Sheepherd of his Sheep, and they hear his Voice, and the Voice of a
Stranger they will not follow. These Sayings are professed by us all: but I
find but a few in the practice of them.

I might mention the Doctrine and Practice of the Apostles, and a Cloud of
Witness, both before and since, that they neither did command nor compel
Conformity in Matters of Conscience, relating to Church Discipline, but I shall
(upon this occasion, and at this time) rather mention the Truth which we
received in the Beginning, etc.

The breaking forth of it was very glorious, after so long a Night of Darkness:
Oh how acceptable was it to my Soul! with many more: It can never be forgotten.
How contrary was Compulsion and Driving into Conformity, to it? Even as Light
is contrary to Darkness. Oh how did Love and Unity abound amongst us, that
received the Truth in the Love of it? Every one sitting under his own Vine, and
drinking of the Fountain of Life, which the Lord has opened in us, and walking
in that Liberty wherewith Christ had set us free: Not a word of Conformity, or
Church Discipline, for many Years, and then we loved one another, even as
Christ had loved us, freely for his Names sake, and went hand in hand together,
Serving the Lord, and one another; and the least Breathing that was after God
in any, etc.

How glad were we to see the Faces one of another? And how did our Harmony
sound in all our Meetings, before Conformity was brought in amongst us, and
cried up as the only Mark of Christianity? Without it, neither Hand, nor Eye,
unless with a Frown, nor lying, nor selling where its Power reaches. This
CONFORMITY has been the cause of Divisions and Persecution in Ages past:
first, Enforce, then Persecute, and much Innocent Blood has been shed by it:
It had its beginning in the Apostasy, and is most cried up in the thichest
Darkness, beginning at the Pope, to the meanest Profession: but I did once
think, it could never have crept in amongst us, at least, so soon; being so
many faithful Testimonies against it both in Word and Writing, still fresh in
our remembrance. But the Enemy of the soul of Mankind is buisie, NOW, as in
Ages past, with his subtle Devices, to beguile the Souls of the Simple,
transforming himself into an Angel of Light, and putting upon him the finest
Dress, in the purest Profession that the Sons of Men can make mention of, to
draw away the Heart from the Lord, from waiting upon him for the purest Stream
of Life and Love, into the dirty Puddle of Conformity, finding it the easiest
way of Entrance; having many specious Pretenses and fine Coverings. Oh! my
Heart is grieved for it, and I am often bowed down before my God, because of
these Things, and I am not alone; but there is a little Remnant with me, whose
Names are written in the Book of Life, and whose Garments are washed in the
Blood of the Lamb, and wears the Seamless Coat, that is woven from the top to
the bottom. And these things lay upon me to clear my Consoience; I could not
keep silence any longer, that I might be clear of the Blood of all Men; having
not long to be on the Stage of this World; I might lay down my Head in Peace,
as many of my Brethren have done before me, who finished their Course with the
same Testimony.

J. A.
The 3d. of the 2d. Month, 1679.
CHAP IIII.
Richard Hubberthorn his Reasons against Impositions. Francis Howgil his
Discovery of Innovations. George Fox's Old Doctrine and New Practice. A
Huntingtonshire Certificate. Observation, on G. F. his Ancient Doctrine.

Having in great measure, by these three foregoing Chapters, cleared three
Points under consideration. By the First, Showing, that as we desired Liberty
of Conscience from the Magistrates, so we allowed it amongst our selves, to
each other. By the Second, G. F. his Grant or Order, or the Women's Charter,
granted by G. F. for their Rule and Government in their distinct Meetings, and
the Grant and Confirmation thereof by the Yearly Meeting, Anno 75. Whereby
Liberty of Conscience is wholly excluded, and a Degeneracy, and an Apostasy
from our ancient Testimony, manifested. By the Third, a Proof of Persecution,
as far as our Power reaches, in the Case of J. A. whereby the Fruit of such
Synods is manifest.

I am now come to show how the ancient Testimony of Friends, and the Writings
of many moderate Professors and Bishops, and Blessed Martyrs, which stand as
Witnesses against the Proceedings of G. F. and those of Party with him,
mentioned in the two last Chapters.

Richard Hubborthorn renders seven Reasons why no Impositions ought to be upon
any Man's Conscience by any, but the Lord alone to have the Government thereof.
Two of which I shall only transcribe for brevities sake. See his Works, p. 188.

First, Because no Man can persuade the Conscience of another, either what God
is, or how to worship him: but only the Spirit which God has given to instruct
Man.

Secondly, Because, to Impose any thing upon another Man's Conscience, either to
Do or Practice, is not, To do unto another, as he would have another do unto
him. And therefore is contrary to Christ's Doctrine.

These two Reasons are so home to the matter, and such a Demonstration of
Equity and Reason, as one would think it were impossible for any Man; and
especially such who still seem to have R. Hubberthorn in Estimation, to deny
it; yet being gone from the Tenderness that was in the Beginning, are but like
the Pharisees, who in words, would highly commend the Prophets, garnish the
Sepulcres of the Righteous; who at the same time were devising how to Persecute
the Blessed Messiah, because he could not Conform to their Orders, and Outward
Observations, etc.

Next, I shall produce somewhat out of F. Howgil's Works; in p. 614. 616. 617.
620. 625. 626. etc. Whereby it will appear how his Testimony is contradicted by
our late Proceedings in our Church Government, etc.

See Francis Howgil, etc.

FAith is the Gift of God: there are diverse Degrees and Measures, according to
the Mind and good Pleasure of the Giver; so he that has received any Measure
or Degree, must not be excluded, as having no Faith, though he attains not to
that Degree that some do enjoy: and the Apostles Doctrine was, That every one
should be fully persuaded in his own Mind: and if any were otherewise minded,
they were to be let alone until God revealed it to them. And whatsoever PEOPLE
or CHURCH (though they claim Infallibility) that teach a contrary Doctrine to
this; we have good reason to suspect IT to be that HASTY-DRIVING and
OVER-DRIVING SPIRIT that would FORCE A FAITH, where God has not given it. --
For we are the Elders of the Church: and we ( say the Papists, and others, too
like them) have the INFALLIBLE SPIRIT: and though we make Decrees contrary to
what the Apostles made in their day, yet none to question that; the Church was
but in its Infancy then, as unwashed and unswadled, and in Persecution: but now
She is grown up to a greater Stature and Power, and endued with greater
Privileges. And that (say the Papists) may be necessary now, that was not
necessary then, etc. -- And whosoever brings in, [Now mark] Set up other
Precepts, Constitutions, Orders and Practices in Point of Worship: [And in
Marriage, and the Celebration thereof, there is a point of Worship] in
Opposition, and contrary to the Practices which were held forth in the
Primitive Times; and would set up other Traditions than the Apostles Delivered,
either by Word, or Writing, such are manifest to have the SPIRIT of ERROVR, and
are Innovators, and Bringers in of other things as necessary in point of
Worship amongst Christians, which the Apostles and Ministers of Christ did not
see necessary then: and yet they wanted no part of the Council of God. And
furthermore they said, We have the Mind of Christ, and Christ's Mind is not
variable. -- And speaking of the Spirit, said, It is that only sure Guide,
Judge, Way, Rule, in which there is certainly and Assurance of the Love of God
to Mankind; it is that by which the Deeds of the Flesh are mortified. -- What
shall I say but this; Let all Flesh be confounded before it, and all Deceit
stop its Mouth, and all the Sons of Men how before it, all COVNCILS and
CHVRCHES, all RULERS and ELDERS, all Reason and Comprehension, all Words and
Writings of Men, yea, of Holy Men.

Observations.
From whence it may be observed, that such as Set up other Orders,
Constitutions, Traditions, etc. than the Apostles delivered either by Word or
Writing, are INNOVATORS, and are manifest to have the Spirit of Error: and
that G. F. G. W. and those of Party with them have so done, is manifest, from
what is said in the 2d. and 3d. Chapters, or else I am under a great mistake;
so that W. R's Title of his Book, The Christian-Quaker, cannot be Blasphemy, as
C. Tailor falsely and wickedly says: but both the Tile and the Book, which
answer the same, will stand a Witness against them, unless they repent, and
make void their Cannons, Orders, and Prescribed Rules and Platforms, to be
observed by the People, and indispensibly obeyed under pain of being Recorded
out of the Unity, etc.

I shall at present only add something of G. F. his Testimony in former times,
before those Orders had a Being; which Testimony sufficiently thwars and
contradicts their new Model of Church Government, and Proceedings thereupon;
and then shall finish this Chapter, having elsewhere occasion to mention W. P's
Address to Protestants, etc. Viz.

Several Papers given forth for the spreading of Truth, and Detecting Deceit:
by G. Fox, Minister of the Eternal Word of God.

Page 5. The World is ruled by Outward Rules, and all goes from the Rule.

The Saints Rule is within them: Christ, who Rules over them, is Head of the
Body.

The Worlds Record is without them.

The Saints Record is within them: the Spirit which God has given unto them,
is their Record.

The Worlds Guide is without them, in the Traditions and Precepts of Men; which
Lead from God.

The Saints Guide is within them: to the Spirit, etc.

All you (Professors) that read these things, read your selves where you are:
whether you are within among the Saints, or without, among the World.

And Page 31. Query 44. What Scripture have you for sprinkling Infants, and for
the Word Sacrament: and if no Scripture, Whether it be not the Commands of Men;
taught for Doctrine.

Observations.
For my part, I am at a stand, to see how this Man's former Doctrine contradicts
his present Practice: and if W. R. calls him Apostate And Innovator; as that he
is manifest enough to be; then he is angry, and those of Party with him
stigmatize and abuse W. R. instead of endeavoring to convince G. F. of the
Error of his way. Nay, some of them have said to me, Admit all you say were
true, and that it were granted oo be as you seem to Suggest; YET for you to
Print and Publish these Things, is great Wickedness. To which I answer;

Nay, If all we say be true, touching your Innovations; as that we stand ready
to prove, then I say, That it is no evil to discover such manifest Hypocrisy as
you are guilty of; What, pretend one thing, and intend another, as your
Practice manifests. Indeed, were they not true, then to publish such things,
would be great Wickedness. But after all Endeavors privately used to bring you
to a sense of these things, and to entreat you, and beg of you to make void
your Antichristian Cannons, which limit People to a stinted Form, and for
Non-Submission, must be put out of Fellowship; as I have done for four Years
together, as my Letters from time to time, which I have now made public, do
abundantly manifest. I say, if after all these private Endeavors, by my self,
and others, by Letters to Quarterly Meetings, to particular Friends, to the
Second-days Metting, by way of Intercession for Peace-sake, and that you would
race out one Order, one Cannon, one Condemnation for Non-submission; upon which
I promised to cease all further Testimony against you, whether by Print, or
otherwise, in hopes that things might yet be amended, etc. But you will not
hear, you will not have any regard to the distracting Contentions, and dividing
Contests we have in the Country about your New Orders, so that a necessity is
upon me to undeceive the World, and such as have their Eye too much to you; for
notwithstanding things are as I have laid them down, and you will not
condescend a hairs breadth, yet the Author to the Accuser, has the face to
tell the World, in p. 127. And having these things in our Eye, we can the more
easily concur and accord, as to Circumstances and Outward Methods: and in the
Wisdom of God so condescend one to another, and accomodate Matters, as not to
divide about them; and therefore we do seriously profess, we see no real Cause,
or valid Reason, our Opposer (meaning W. R.) shows for the great noise and
rumble he makes about Outward Laws, Prescriptions, Edicts, Innovations,
Impositions, etc. For my part, I marvel that the Author of the Accuser, which
is said to be G. Whitehead, should have the confidence thus to appear in Print
when his own Conscience tells him the contrary: nay, it is not a year since,
himself was at our Quarterly Meeting, where the said Orders mentioned in the
Third Chapter, are Recorded as a Rule and prescribed Platform, under the Notion
of Orders: when one Robert Smith of Coline, in Huntingtonshire, came to publish
his Intention of Marriage with Ann Oliver, in the Isle of Ely: and because he
would not go into the Women's Meeting, and perform the Ceremony in Manner and
Form, he was not taken notice of, as others are that do conform, nor yet
admitted to have his Wife; and the grand Opposer, was G. VV. Albeit the Man
brought a Certificate with him from their own Meeting; which although it be a
Digression from my present Matter, yet I shall recite it; that so it may the
more evidently appear how far G. W. was from Accommodation or Condiscention;
which he, in the Accuser, fallaciously pretends to the World, in order to
deceive them, to cover their Deceit and Hypocrisy, and Arbitrary
Church Government, Dominion and Lordship, etc.

To the Quarterly Meeting in the Isle of Ely.
These are to certify all concerned, that Robert Smith of Colne, in this
County ( meaning the County of Huntington) Widdower, has at several Meetings
published his Intentions of taking to Wife Ann Oliver of Aldred, in the Isle of
of Ely, but grieved some Friends, (perhaps Richard Jobson and Tobias Hardmeat,
G. Fox's two principal Studs in that Country) by rejecting their Counsel, and
refusing to acquaint the Women Friends therewith, according to the good and
wholesome Practice of Friends in the Truth. But however we whose Names are
Subscribed, know nothing but that he is clear from all other Women.

Jasper Robins. Edward Neel. Will. Whitehead. James Parris. Thomas Bundy.
Richard Tailor. Thomas Bagly. Natha. Cawthorn. Nathanael Neele.

But to return, to make some Observation upon the ancient Doctrine of G. Fox to
the Professors: which the Professors may justly turn upon him, and say, Come,
G. Fox, and thy Adherents, hear what we can say: for we remember thou did not
only tell us, That our Rule was without us, our Touchstone without us, our
Guide without us, and that in the Traditions of Men, which lead from God; but
in the Year 1669, thou told us in thy Epistle to the Presbyterians and
Independants, and their rough Hearers, in a Book wrote by G. W. Entitled, The
Divinity of Christ, etc. That we must not Shuffle, for thou were resolved that
the Scripture should buffet us about. As if thou had been resolved to throw
the Bible at our Heads; adding, That we should be WHIPPED about with our Rule.
For thou were resolved to have plain Scripture; yea, nothing less than plain
Scripture would serve thy turn; as if thou had loved the Scripture very well,
and valued it far above thy own Prescriptions, which we now perceive was but
mere Mockery; since no Scripture is recorded in the Isle of Ely's great Book of
Records, as a Rule; but instead thereof, a large Epistle, or Church-Directory
of thy own writing; and now we must whip thee a little with thy Rule of
Ceremonies and Needless Traditions, with which many of your peaceable People,
the Christian-Quakers, have been long vexed and burdened, and do begin to
throw off thy Yoke, and to come out with true Testimonies against thee and thy
Adherents, and in order to buffet thee soundly; we now ask thee for plain
Scripture, and resolve to have it too, or else reckon thee a very Hypocrite,
and will prove thee so too, as amply as the Christian-Quakers have proved thee
an Innovator: we say, show us plain Scriptuer for your Womens-Meetings to be
set up Monthly, about the 10th. Hour of the Day, apart and distinct from the
Men: to get a little Stock by them. And when so Assembled, What Scripture have
you to compel all that intend Marriage amongst you, to go and present the
Publication of their Intention before them, at two several Meetings: come, do
not shuffle with us, for we are resolved to have plain Scripture for these your
Proceedings, or else we shall conclude thou have found Austins Knap-Sack, and
stolen out one of the Ceremonies that he used to bring the Rome; since we
never heard of any Proof for these your Women's Jurisdiction, save only by thy
Learned Friend, R. Richardson, who in his ill composed Ingredients, p. 11.
said, In like manner there remains in their Nunneries some Imperfect Footsteps
of Women's Services, etc. And again, What Scripture have you for Recording out
of the Unity such as will not Conform to these your Innovations, since thou
have told us about fourteen Years ago, in thy Book, Entitled, Gospel-Liberty,
and the Royal Law of Love, p. 23. saying; And therefore to bring People to that
which is not of Faith, is to bring them into Sin, and to make them make
Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, etc. Come, Is it not so still? Why
then do you allow in your felves the Thing you condemn in others; Why do you
Build again the Things you have destroyed, or think thou thy self
execusable, Oh Man!

Come, Give us Chapter and Verse for your Womens-Meeting distinct from the Men,
to be constantly set up (unless a little cold Weather intervene) Montly, about
the tenth Hour, to get a little Stock; we suppose thou meanest, a little Money
for certain Select and Holy Uses; it being a more private way than the Basin
and Platter, which our Nonconforming Ministers, it seems by thy Discourse, were
glad to receive their Money in publicly; but the Matter is the less, in regard
we never pretended to preach for nothing, etc. And as for us, we grant we are
for an Outward Rule; but it is the Scripture of Christ, his Apostles and
Prophets; which was wrote for our Example and Learning: but you deny the
Scriptures of Christ and his Apostles to be a Rule: and yet we see you are for
a Rule as much as any People: only you must have a Rule of your own Making, of
your own Framing, a Child of your own Brain must be your own Darling. As for
our Parts, we profess Christ to be our Lawgiver; and though we be for an
Outward Rule, yet it is such a Rule as Christ has left us: but you lay aside
the Scriptures of Christ and his Apostles, and use not so much as one Verse
thereof to corroborate and strengthen your late Laws and Cannons withal, and so
make to your selves a Graven Image, and an Exact Rule, neither to permit, nor
suffer any to Marry, except they will Conform and Square their Actions to your
Rule. Whereby we perceive you manifest Innovators; not only by W. R. his
Description of you, but by the undeniable Testimony of F. H. whose Judgment
was; That those that set up other Traditions than the Apostle Delivered in
point of Worship (and Marriage is a Point of Worship, it being Gods Ordinance)
by Word or Writing, that they are INNOVATORRS.

Wherefore hear what the Professors may further say, as a Word of Use and
Application.

G. Fox says, The Worlds Touchstone is without them.

Professors say, That G. F. and his Adherents, their Touchstone is without
them; no Conformity to the Women's Meeting, no Unity with them; do but Conform,
Unity, Unity, Unity.

G. F. says, The World is Ruled by Outward Rules, etc.

Professors say, That G. F. and his Party are Ruled by Outward Rules; at least,
they would Rule others by Outward Rules, see ad. and 3d. Chapter.

G. F. says, The Worlds Guide is without them, in the Traditions and Precepts
of Men, which lead from God.

Professors say, That G. F. and his Party have their Guide without them; in the
Traditions of Men, that lead from the Anointing within, to Observations
without, etc.

G. F. Asks the Professors what Scripture they have for sprinkling Children,
and for the word Sacrament: and if no Scripture: then, Whether it be not the
Commands of Men taught for Doctrine.

Professors. Ask G. F. what Scripture he had for Erecting Women's Meeitngs,
distinct from the Men, once a Month, about the 10th. hour of the Day; to get a
little Money, or Stock by them; and there to sit until some are intended to
Marry, and then they are ready to hear them publish their Intentions. And what
Scripture he and his Adherents have to Record out of the Unity such as will not
Conform to this Non-such way of Church Government: And if no Scripture, then
Whether it be not Men's Command, taught for Doctrine?

Behold the Parellel: Upon the whole Matter, it may appear that our Testimony
was against Imposition on Tender Consciences, as R. H. with great Reason does
affirm; and F. H. speak home to the purpose, and very pertinent; and G. F. too
in his Gospel Liberty, and Royal Law of Love, etc. But how he is gone from the
same in practice, is manifest, both in what I have said, and in what W. R. has
said in his Christian-Quaker, disting. etc. To which I refer the Reader.

CHAP. V.
Shows the Opinion of several of the Clergy, both Bishops and Ministers, to be
against Impositions; and the Imposers are the culpable Deviders, and Authors of
Schism.

HAving thoroughly proved, and clearly manifected a Change in our
Church Government, and showed how our Cannons and Outward Rules have been
Introduced, I am now come to show that the very moderate Bishops, and others of
the Clergy, who are considerate in their way, and not filled with Prejudice,
are against Impositions on Consciences, which cannot Conform nor Submit before
Conviction, etc.

I will begin with Bishop Doveman, who speaking on Col. 2.20. concerning Rites
and Ceremonies; this I took out of a Book, in Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet, Viz.

If you be free from the Rites that God did prescribe, then are you free from
the Traditions of Men: It is a most wicked thing, they should Impose this Yoke
upon you; and you are most foolish to submit your Necks to it: for God would
not have abolished the Ceremonial Law, Instituted by himself, that a New one
may be invented by Man.

Dr. Stillingfleet in his Iron. p. 122. says, Certainly the Primitive Church,
that did not charge Men's Faith with such a Load of Articles, as now in these
latter Ages Men be charged with, would much less burden men With Imposing
doubtful Practices upon them, as the ground of Church Communion.

Dr. Stillingfleets Iron. 120. says, Let men turn and wind themselves which
way they will, by the very same Arguments, that any will prove the Separation
from the Church of Rome Lawful, because She required unlawful Things, as
Conditions of her Communion; it will be proved Lawful, not to Conform to any
suspected or unlawful Practice required by any Church Governor, upon the same
Terms. If the thing so required be (after serious and sober Inquiry) Judged
unwarrantable by a Man's own Conscience, and withal, it would be further
considered, whether, when our best Writers do lay the Imputation of Schism, NOT
on those that withdraw Communion, but on them for requiring such Conditions of
Communion, etc. -- whereby they do rather eject Men from their Communion, than
the others separate from them.

Archbishop Land against Fisher, as quoted by Dr. Stillingfleet in his
Rational Account, p. 324. It Is too true (says he) indeed, that there is a
miserable Rent in the Church; and I make no question; but the best men do most
bemoan it; nor is he a Christian that would not have Unity, might he ahve it
with Truth: but I never said, or thought that the Protestants made this Rent:
the Cause of Schism is yours: for you thrust us from you, because we called
for Truth, and Redress of Abuses: for a Schism must need be theirs, whose the
Cause of it is, etc.

The Bishop of Hereford in his Edition, in Folio, p. 10. earnestly Addresses
himself to the Bishops thus;

My Reverend Fathers and Judges of the Church; I ( with St. Paul, Col. 3.)
BESEECH you, put on Fatherly Bowels of Mercy, Kindness, Humbleness of Mind,
Meekness, Long suffering toward your poor weak Children, and so long as they
hold fast the Body of Christ, be not so rigorous with them for Shaddows, if
they submit to you in Substance, have patience, though they do not submit in
Ceremonies; and give me leave to tell you my poor Opinion, This VIOLENT
PRESSING OF CEREMONIES has (I humbly conceive) been a great Hinderance from
embracing them, Men fearing your Intentions to be far worse than really they
are, and therefore abhor them. -- And p. 11. This Force urging Conformity in
Worship, has caused great Division in Faith, as well as in Charity: for had
you, by abolishing some Ceremonies, taken the weak Brethren, etc. -- Now I
beseech you in the Fear of God, set before your Eyes the dreadful Day of
Judgment, when Christ in his Tribunal of Justice, shall require an account of
every Word and Deed, and shall thus question you: Here are several Souls, who
taking offense at your Ceremonies, have forsaken my Church, forsaken the Faith,
have run into Hell the Souls for which I shed my precious Blood; why have you
suffered this? Nay, Why have you occasioned this? Will you answer, It was to
preserve our Ceremonies: Will not Christ return unto you, Are your Ceremonies
more dear unto you, than the Souls for which I dyed, who has required these
Things at your Hands? Will you for Ceremonies, which you your selves confess to
be indifferent, no way necessary unto Salvation, suffer your weak Brethren to
perish, for whom I dyed? Have I not showed you how David and his Soldiers were
guiltless in eating the Shewbread, which was not lawful but only for the
Priest to eat. David dispensed with a Ceremony, commanded by God, to satisfy
the hunger of his People; Will you not dispense with your own Ceremonies, to
satisfy the Souls of my People, who are called by my Name, and profess my
Name, though in weakness. Or will you tell Christ, They ought to suffer for
their own Willfulness and Perverseness, who will not submit to the Laws of the
Church, as they ought. Will not Christ return, Shall they perish for
transgressing your Humane Laws, which they ignorantly conclude Erroneous; and
shall not you perish for transgressing my Divine Laws, which you know to be
Good and Holy? Had I mercy on you, and should you not have Mercy on your Fellow
Servants? With the same measure you meet, it shall be measured to you again. I
tremble to go further, but most humbly beseech you for Christ's sake, endeavor
to regain these strayed Sheep for which he shed his precious Blood, and think
it as great an Advantage, as great an Honor to you, as it was unto St Paul, to
BECOME ALL THINGS TO ALL MEN: That you may gain some; doubtless you will many,
though not all; and the few standing off, will be the more convinced, and at
long running, wearied out, and gained also.

I shall only add something out of Allsop, in his Book, Entitled, The Mischief
of Impositions, and so conclude this Chapter.

Mischief of Impositions, p. 9. For Paul in his Admonition to the Church at
Rome, lays all the blame of the Separation, not upon them that Separate, but on
those that gave Cause to the Separation, Rom, 16.17. I beseech you Brethren,
mark, those that cause Divisions and Offenses among you, and avoid them. Where
he points to us these three Things:

First, That they which cause Divisions, are the culpable Dividers; the
Imposers must be responsable for the Evil Consequences of their Impositions.

Secondly, That it is Lawful, nay, a Duty, to divide from those that
unwarrantably give such Cause of Division.

Thirdly, That any Condition of Communion Imposed, BESIDES, as well as against
the Doctrine received from the Apostles, is a sufficient ground to condemn the
Imposer, to justify such as reject such Conditions, etc. --

And Page 2. There is nothing more common, than to press the Necessity of
UNION; and yet at the same time continue the necessary Causes of Division;
which sort of Rhetoricians might do well to consider, That whilst they
disclaim most passionately against the evil of Separation, they do but whip
their own Crimes upon their own Backs, and reproach themselves by railing at
other Men's Faults; in which popular Discourses, we hear of nothing but the
Prejudice, Passion, and Interest of those who will not Obey; but not a word, I
warrant you, of their own Pride, Rigor, and Imperiousness in what they
Command: always studying and pretending Reasons why Matters ought to be wrong,
but never offering rational Expedients to set what is wrong to rights.

Mischief of Impositions, p. 48. As it is the Duty of all Men to preserve the
Churches Peace, so it is theirs especially, who have got the Management of
things in their Hands, not to lay such dubious Terms in the way of Peace; which
they know many Conscientious Persons cannot get over, but have ever stumbled
at; for it may be returned with ease. It is impossible to preserve Peace, if
Men will make such ORDERS, as they know others must break; merely for the Fancy
they have taken up, of a Primitive Platform.

Secondly, If Peace be impossible to be had upon this account, Who are in the
Fault? Dissenters can Maintain a Fraternal Charity toward them, and their
Churches, who differ from them in Principle and Practice. If Imposers cannot,
or will not discharge their Duty reciprocally, we are not Responsable for their
Passions, we can love them whether they will or no, though we cannot force them
against their will, to return that Love and Charity.

And Page 61. Query. What must be done by Church Governors, if Men cannot come
up to their Established Rules? And thus much of the Answer is exceeding obvious.

First, That they had better sit still, and do nothing, than rise up and do
Mischief; let them do no more Harm than Good, and let them be doing.

Secondly, That if they must needs have more work to do, let them be sure they
have a Commission from God to do it; lest; while they do what they ought not to
have done, and leave undone those Things they ought to have done, they make
their Sins of Commission greater than their Sins of Omission.

Thirdly, They may do well, among all their Doings, to consider whether
Conscience be not Gods peculiar, and so not within their Precincts, out of
their Jurisdiction, and not liable to their Scitations, Prossesses, Summons,
and Visitations: If they will Judge, let them be sure they be Competent Judges;
if they will be buisie, let them beware it be not in Alieno Foro.

4thly, If they would know what they must do to others, let them first, put the
Case, what they would have done to themselves; let them do no more at home than
they would have done to them: Supposing they were Protestants in Italy or
Spain, it is very useful now and then for great Men to put themselves into poor
Men's Circumstances; I do not persuade them to change Places with them, but to
put Cases.

And Page 11. You may as soon whip these huge great Boys out of all Religion,
as out of one Ceremony; so fond, so doting, so peevish, froward, awkward, such
a whimpering, such a whining, such a puling and pouting for Ceremonies, as if
they had lost that famous Engine of the Nutcrack, etc.

Thus much may serve to show their Approbation of that Liberty of Conscience
which is every Christians just Privilege; and their Abhorrency of Impositions:
and that the ground of Discord, Emulation, and Division, is in the Imposers,
who are the real Schismatics, etc.

CHAP. VI.
Shows the Judgment of ancient Protestants, and Martyrs, against Forcing a
Conformity to Men's Traditions, not Grounded on Scripture Authority.

I now shall proceed to show some Testimonies of ancient Protestants and
Martyrs, against Imposition, which with what the two last Chapters mention,
together with what is held forth by the First Part, may be a sufficient
Demonstration, that Force and Imposition on Consciences is an Antichristian
Practice, and that an undisturbed Liberty of the Exercise of Conscience in
Matters Spiritual, is every Christians just Privilege and Right, where People
live peaceably under the Outward Government, which is one main thing intended
by this Discourse, as well as to discover that Hypocritical and two-fac'd
Practice, Viz. Of pleading to the Magistrate for Liberty of Conscience, and at
the same time are using and exercising all Force, Rule, Dominion, and Authority
they are capable to inflict upon their Discenting Brethren, who cannot fall
down, and cry Hosannah to every Likeness, lest the Accepting and Conforming to
one needless Ceremony, should be ground of Encouragement to the Ruling Party to
Introduce another, and so a numberless number; until at length Rome may (if
possible) be out done, etc.

Zanchy in his Epi. to Q. Eliz. L. 1. C. 241 Non propter Vestes totum Corpus
Ecclesiae Perdere.

Not to destroy the Body of the Church for Garments sake, not to disturb the
Peace of the Church, by urging Indifferent Things, Col. 245. etc.

William Tindall in his Answer to Sir Thomas Moor, p. 258. of his Works, thus
says; But they which maliciously maintain Opinions against the Scripture; or
such as make no Matter unto the Scripture, and Salvation, that is in Christ,
whether they be true or no; and for the Blind-Zeal of them, make Sects,
breaking the Unity of Christ's Church; for whose sake they ought to suffer all
things, and rise against their Neighbor, whom they ought to love as
themselves. -- Such Men, I say, are fallen from Christ* and make an Idol of
their Opinion -- Now this is a plain Conclusion, that both they that trust in
their own Works, and they also that put Confidence in their own Opinions, be
fallen from Christ, and Err from the way of Faith

And says he, p. 174. Some Men will say, The Pope hindeth them not, they bind
themselves: I answer, He that binds himself to the Pope, and had rather have
his Life and Soul Ruled by the Popes Will, than by the Will of God; and by the
Popes Word, than by the Word of God, is a Fool; and he that had rather be bound
than free, is not wise; and he that will not abide in the Freedom wherein
Christ has set us, is also mad.

And the reason that G. W's Learned Friend R. R. in his Postscript to the
Babylonish-Opposer* p. 15. He would seem to insinuate that this William Tindal
yields the Women such Authority, as may countenance the Proceedings of
Womens-Meetings amongst us, as Set up by G. F. and those of Party with him,
Viz. Once a Month, about the tenth Hour, distinct and apart from the Men; to
whose Assembly, when so convened, all that intend Marriage must go before them,
and present their intentions, and stay a complete Month, and then go both of
them before the said Womens-Meetings, met as aforesaid, to ask their License,
as in the Second and Third Chapters are at large set forth. And if any will not
so submit to their Authority, and conform to their Jurisdiction, then to Record
them out of the Unity, etc.

I say, lest his Insinuations should have such an Influence upon any of his
credulous Readers, and thereby be deluded,

I have traced him, and in the Reading of William Tindals Works, I have found
him out, and shall, for the right Information of the Reader, relate his
Judgment in his own Words, p. 252. Women be no meet Vessels to Rule, or to
Preach (for both are forbidden them) yet has God endued them with his Spirit
at sundry times -- Do not our Women Christen, and Administer the Sacrament of
Baptism in time of need: might they not by as good Reason Preach also, if
necessity required; if a Woman was driven into some Island where Christ was
never Preached, might she not there Preach Him, if she had the Gift thereto --
Notwithstanding though God be under no Law, and necessity Lawless; yet be we
under a Law, and ought to prefer the Men before the Women, and Age before
Youth, as nigh as we can; for it is against the Law of Nature, that Young Men
should Rule, and as uncomly, that Women should Rule the Men. --

And Page 313. Tells us what was the Service of Women, in these words; To be a
Servant unto the poor People, to dress their Meat, wash their Clothes, to make
their Beds, and so forth; and to wash Strangers Feet, that come out of one
Congregation unto another about Business; and to do all manner of Service of
Love unto their poor Brethren and Sisters, etc.

I think I need not comment upon the difference in all respects, betwixt what
this worthy Man intended, as by his words are manifest, betwixt the Women's
Services in those times, and the usurped Authority, and unlimited Power and
Rule that G. F. and others have placed in the Womens-Meetings; as that none
must be permitted or suffered to Marry, except they Conform, etc. So that the
Quotation of R. R. this Learned Champion, is as impertinent to his intended
Purpose, as the Quotations of G. F. in his little withdrawn (and for Reasons
enough) Entitled, A Book of Encouragement to all Womens-Meetings, etc. Which
by W. R. is very fully answered in his Christian-Quaker, Distinguished, etc. So
that I need not further paraphrase thereupon; but return to what was before me
(to wit) to show Testimonies against Imposing Conformity to the Traditions of
Men, etc.

Object. But perhaps some may say, There is, being but a few of you, in
comparison of the Multitude that will not Conform, for they can out Vote you
three to one, so that we are apt to think God will not suffer so many to Err,
or any more a Universal Apostasy.

Answ. I will answer this Objection in the words of William Tindal, because
this notable Champion R. R. [who for his Learning is admired by his Reverend
Friend G. W.] has him in some Estimation, etc. See his Work, p. 268. where he
says, The Turks being in number five times more than we, acknowledge One God,
and believe many things of God, moved Only by the Authority of their Elders.
And the presuming that God will not let such a multitude Err so long time, and
yet they have Erred, and been faithless these 800 years; and the Jews believe
this Day, as much as ever the Carnal sort of them ever believed; Moved also by
the Authority of their Elders ONLY; and think it is impossible for them to Err,
being Abraham's Seed, and being the Children of them to whom the Promises of all
that we believe, was made; and yet they have Erred, and been faithless, this
1500 years: and we of like Blindness believe ONLY by the Authority of our
Elders. And of like Pride think that we cannot Err, being such a multitude; and
yet we see how God in the Old Testament did let the great multitude Err;
reserving always a little Flock to call the other back again, and to testify
unto them the RIGHT-WAY.

Hear what Luther says about Opinions, Vol. 2. Lib. 7. Fox. Acts, and
Monuments, p. 63. Let Opinions remain Opinions, so they be not Yokes to the
Christians: let us not make Men's Opinions equal with the Articles of Faith, and
to the Decrees of Christ and Paul.

See the Epitome of Dr. Robert Barns, p. 363. Augustine says, Because that
those Men by such Observations, were led from the Verity by the which they were
made free; whereof it is spoken, The Verity shall deliver you. It is a Shame
(says he) and unconvenient, and far from the Nobleness of your Liberty (seeing
you be the Body of Christ) to be deceived with Shaddows, and to be Judged as
Sinners, If you despise to observe these Things.

Wherefore let no man overcome you (seeing you are the Body of Christ) that
will SEEM to be meek in Heart, in the HOLINESS of Angels, and bring in Things
which he has not seen.

Also in his Works, p. 298. Entitled, Men's Constitutions which are not
grounded on Scripture, bind not the Conscience: Hear him. Mark, That all
Traditions of men which are against (or not according) to Gods Law, must be
destroyed. Therefore let every man take heed; for it belongs to their Charge:
for both the Blind Guides, and also they which be led; shall fall in the Ditch.
It shall be no excuse for him that is led, to say, That his Guide was blind:
but let them hear the Word of God by his holy Prophets; Walk not in the
Precepts of your Fathers, nor keep their Judgment; but walk in MY Precepts, and
keep MY Judgments.

The other manner of Statutes be, when certain Things that be called
Indifferent, be commanded as Things to be done of necessity: -- As for Example,
To eat Flesh or Fish this or that day, is indifferent and free, etc. -- These,
with all other Outward Works, be Things indifferent, and may be used, and also
left. Now if the Bishops (or Ministers) will make Laws or Statutes, That these
Things shall be determinately used, so that it shall not be lawful for us to
leave it undone. But that we must precisely do them, and not the contrary,
under the pain of Deadly Sin: here they must be withstood, and in no wise
obeyed: for in this is hurt our Faith, and Liberty in Christ; whereby we are
Free, and not Bound to any exterior Work; but Free in all Things, and unto all
Men, at all times, and in all manners, except it be in such a Case, whereas
Brotherly Charity, or the Common Peace should be offended: therefore in all
these Cases we be free, and we must withstand them that will take THIS LIBERTY
from us, with this Text of Scripture.

We are Bought with the Price of Christ's Blood, we will not be the Servants of
Men.

This Text is open against them that will bind Men's Consciences unto Sin (for
what is not of Faith, is Sin) in those things that Christ has left them free
in.

Brentious, upon the 1st. of Cor. Chap. 3. No man has Power to make, or give
Laws to Christians, whereby to bind their Consciences: for willingly, freely,
and uncompelled with a ready Desire, and cheerful Mind, must they that come,
run unto Christ.

Dr. Tailor, in a Discourse of Liberty of Prophesying, p. 9. of the
Christian-Plea, Spir. Mar. I earnestly contend, that another Man's Opinion shall
be no Rule to mine, and that my Opinion shall be no Snare and Prejudice to my
self; that men use one another so charitably, that no Error or violence tempt
Men to Hypocrisy: this very thing being one of the Arguments I used to persuade
Permissions, lest Compulsion introduce Hypocrisy, and make Sincerity
troublesome. See his 16th. Section, Viz. For it may be safe in diversities of
Persuasion, and it is also a part of Christian Religion, that the LIBERTY of
Men's CONSCIENCES should be preserved in all Things where God has not set a
Limit.

That the same Meekness and Charity should be preserved in the Promotion of
Christianity, that gave it Foundation and Increasement, and Formness in its
first Publication. --

And that Persons should not more certainly be Condemned than their Opinions
confuted.

And also see a little of the Judgment of Bishop Tailors Cases of Conscience,
p. 301. Ecclesiastical Laws (says he) must be imposed; SO as to leave our
Liberty unharmed.

Page 310. Laws of Burden are always against Charity.

And Page 314. Ceremonies obliege no longer than they minister to the End of
Charity.

Hear also what Bishop Hooper says.

Scitis quod res Sancta, and vera quo magis examinatur, and per Verbum Dei
Explicatur, eo fit illustrior and purior; and quanto purior; and illustrior
tanto magis ab omnibus desideratur, and obviis Ulnis excipitur. Nam quod variis
modis tentatur; ac probatur, modo pium ac sanctum fuerit, jacturam ab Hostibus
nullam sentit, sed potius Hosts conculcat, ac interficit. -- Nec est quod
vobis ipsis metuatis, modo re ipsa id prestetis, quod ubique jactatis. Nam
quotquot vestras Parts non sequuntur, aliquo gravissimo ignominiae genere,
nimis Superbe afficitis -- aequa and justa petimus, ut palam ac public lites
inter nos componantur; nullis enim Legibus Sanctis and Justis unquam fuit
permissum, ut una pars litigans, de altera part Judex constitueretur -- nos
tantum Legem and Evangelium Dei in Causa Religionis Judicem Competentem
agnoscimus: illius Judicio stet vel cadat nostra Causa.

Which for the Sakes of some, is thus Translated;

Know ye, that by how much the more the Thing which is holy and true is
examined, and by the Word of God expounded, by so much it is become more clear
and pure; and by how much the more it is made pure and clear, by so much the
more it is by all desired and embraced. For that which is tried and proved after
various manners, if it has been pious and holy suffers no loss by the Enemy,
but rather suppresseth and destroys the Enemy: neither is there any Cause why
you may fear, so that you perform in very deed, that which you every where
boast of. For as many as do not take your Parts, you too proudly afflict with
some grievous kind of Infamy. What we desire is both equal and just, that these
Contentions may openly and publicly be composed. For it was never permitted by
any holy and just Laws, that one Party contending, should be constituted a
Judge concerning the other Party. We do acknowledge that the Word of God is the
only competent Judge in the Cause of Religion; let our Cause stand or fall to
the Judgment thereof.

CHAP. VII.
Shows that my self, and others in this Country have used private Means about
four Years, and that no Accommodation or Condiscention was attainable: neither
Answer to Letter, Answer to Query; nor when I went to London with a Letter from
Friends of our particular Meeting, to the Second days Meeting in London; and
delivered it with my own Hand; would neither Answer the Letter, nor so much as
Discourse me: but when I had given them the Letter, C. T. bad me be gone. All
which shows the Author to the Accuser; his Pretentions to an Accommodation and
Condiscention to be fallacious, Deceitful and Hypocritical.

Object.
BY this time, some may be ready to object, and say, It is true, these Things as
Stated, cannot be denied; but to have used a more private way, might have been
as convincing, and not have ministered that occasion to such as are Enemies to
all Religion, as this way of Proceeding perhaps may; especially since the
Author of the Accuser says, p. 127. We can the more easily concur, and accord
as to Circumstances and Outward Methods, and in the Wisdom of God, so
condescend one to another, and accommodate Matters, as not to divid about them.

Answ. That I with many other have used private means for about the space of
four years, without any Redress; nay, not so much as a Christian Answer: and
that the Pretense of the Author of the Accuser, to Condiscention and
Accommodation, is fallacious and false, and a mere piece of feigned Hypocrisy
to amuse his Reader, and delude the World, I shall make evidently appear before
I pass this Chapter, especially considering what means I used at our
Quarterly Meeting in the Case of J. A. made mention of in the third Chapter,
both by Letters and Queries.

First then see a Letter that eleven Friends belonging to our Meeting in
Milden-Hall, sent to our Quarterly Meeting; who were so far from Condiscention
and Accommodation, as that they refused to have it read amongst them: but said,
We were all deluded. A Copy whereof follows.

To Friends at the Quarterly Meeting in Hadenham; the 4th. Mo. 80.
Dear Friends,
THese Lines are to put you in Mind, that many Friends belonging to our
Meeting, as well as in diverse other Places, are offended and burdened by
reason of the continued Record against John Ansloe, which exclude him what in
you lie, out of the Unity of Friends, which is nothing less than
Excommunication to the utmost of your Power, whereby we are constrained to
visit you in this manner, entreating you to race out the said Record out of
your Quarterly Book. Indeed had J. A. denied Marriage, (the very forbidding of
which is a Doctrine of Devils) you might justly have thrown him out; for
Marriage is Gods Ordinance. But the Controversy is not here, but about
manifesting his Intention to Marry. Behold the Crime (as you account it) and
consider of it, we beseech you, for Peace sake, and lay not such a Stress,
where Christ, nor his Primitive Followers laid none. And that thereunto you may
be encouraged, ponder the saying of W. P. in his Address to Prot. p. 77. I
beseech you Protestants, by the Mercies of God, and Love of Jesus Christ,
ratified to you in his most precious Blood, FLY ROME AT ROME. Look to the
Enemies of your own House, have a care of this Presumption, carry it not too
high, lay not Stress where God has laid none. -- The Impositions of such
Opinions is the Privilege of Hypocrites, and the Snare of many honest Minds.
And p. 93. If we consider the Matter well, I fear (says W. P.) it will be
found that the occasion of Disturbance in the Church of Christ, has in most
Ages been found to lie on the Side of those who have had the greatest Sway in
it. And Page 94. If the Spiritual Guides and Fathers of the Church, would be a
little sparing of incumbring Churches with needless Supersluities. -- there
were far less danger of Schism and Superstition. And Page 144. Nay, Christ
himself, to whom all Power was given in Heaven and Earth, submitted himself to
the Test: He did not require them to believe him, because he would be believed,
he refers them to the Witness that God bore of him; (saying) If I bear witness
of my self, my witness is not true. He also sends them to the Scriptures; --
but an Imposing Church bears witness of her self, and will be both Party and
Judge, require Assent without Evidence, and Faith without Proof, therefore
false. But Christian Religion ought to be carried on only by that way, by which
it was Introduced, which was Persuasion; If any Man will be my Disciple; let
him take up his Cross, and follow me. Page 146. For if I believe what the
Church believes, only beause She believes, and not because I am convinced in my
Understanding of the Truth of what She believes, my Faith is false, though hers
be true. I say, it is not true to me, I have no Evidence of it. And Page 141.
The Apostle became all unto all, that he might win some; but this is becoming
all unto none, to force all; he therefore recomends the utmost Condiscention
that can be lawful; -- he stooped -- he became all unto all, that is, he
stooped to all Capacities, and humbled himself to those Degrees of Knowledge
that Men had, and valued that which was good in all; -- These Allurements were
all his Injunctions; nay, in this Case he makes it an Injunction to use no
other; Let us therefore (says he) as many as be perfect, be thus minded, and
if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you:
you shall not be Imposed upon, Stigmatized, or Excommunicated for want of full
satisfaction, or because you do not consent before Conviction. -- Thus far
William Penn.

Now let us a little animadvert upon this Noble Man's Words; Lay no Stress
(says he) where God has not laid Stress: as if he should have said, Friends,
God never laid any such Stress about publishing the Intent of Marriage, Why
then do you? Have a care of this Presumption, carry not things too high,
neither Smite, Record, nor Excommunicate one another about such Things, which
are at best but Men's Traditions and Impositions, which may prove a Snare to the
Honest and Conscientious, but a seeming Privilege to the conformable
Hypocrite: for you see that such as have the greatest Sway in the Church, are
evermore the cause of these Disturbances, who pretending themselves Fathers and
Spiritual Guides, are not sparing of cumbring the Churches with needless
Superfluities, and such Orders as Christ never commanded, nor his Apostles ever
practiced; which had they been so useful as you pretend they be, surely Christ
and his Apostles would not have been so forgetful of Prescribing such Outward
Observations: nay, but on the contrary, they have told us in Holy Writ, The
Kingdom of Heaven comes not that way, neither consists in such things. You also
may perceive that Christ was such an Example of Meekness and Self-denial, and
so far and free from Force and Imposition, that he only said, If any Man will
be my Discipie, let him take up his Cross and follow me; but an Imposing Church
bears witness of her self: and though She sets up such Orders as Christ never
commanded, yet She requires assent without Evidence, and Faith without Proof,
for She will be both Party and Judge, and Recorder out of the Unity at her
pleasure, which manifests her to be the false Church; for the true Christian
Religion was introduced by Persuasion, and ought to be so carried on; for if I
believe and practice only because the Church does so, ad not from a
convincement in my self, my Faith and Obedience would be false and Idolatrous:
The Apostles, who had the Mind of Christ, became all unto all, stooped to all
Capacities, to all Degrees of Knowledge, valued what was good in all; these
were his Injunctions, who said, As every Man is fully persuaded, so let him
walk, for what is not of Faith, is Sin: He did not Record out of the Unity such
as saw not so clear as himself, but became all unto all, that he might save
some; but you that would force all, become all to none; you will not stoop at
all, nor condescend at all, but exalt and magnify your Orders and written
Prescriptions, how many weak Brethren soever you offend. You value not the good
in any, but Conformity to your Humor, and to your Will; and though some are
otherwise minded about Discipline and Church Government, you will not let them
alone, but you will impose upon them, Stigmatize, and Record them out of the
Unity, which is no less than Excommunication. Wherefore take W. P's Advice, FLY
ROME AT HOME and lay not Stress where God lays not Stress.

Thus twice over, as it were, have you herein the genuine sense of Dear W. P.
And, Oh! that every one concerned would make a diligent search in his own
Heart, and like the beloved Disciple, smite upon his Breast, and say, Is it I,
Is it I that am guilty of this Severity, of this Presumption, if carrying
things too high, of setting up such Orders as prove a Snare, or at least, a
burden to the Conscientious; yea, of laying a Stress; and a great Stress where
God never laid any, One that am the Cause of this Disturbance in the Church;
One that bears witness of my self, and that will be both Party and Judge? Oh!
let me a little Examine my self; Am I One that cannot become all unto all; One
that cannot condescend at all to my Brother; One that will value not the good
in any, but Conformity to my Will and Humor; One that would have all believe
and practice as I do, whether I convince their Understanding of the Truth of
what I believe and practice, or not; and if not, condemn them for Heretics,
without any more a do?

I say, Oh that every one would thus reflect upon himself, that so you might
consider of these things, for many are offended and grieved with the
continuance of the aforementioned Record against J. A. And again beseech and
entreat you to reverse the same, that so Love and Good Will, Unity and Concord
may spring amongst us as in the Beginning, which is heartily desired by your
Friends, who subscribe their names hereunto.

Francis Bugg. Elizabeth Bugg. Joseph Masson Jane Masson. Joseph Ellington.
Rachel Ellington. John Thrift. Joseph Tetsall. William Bellsham. Phillip Wing.
Mary Huggins. Sarah Bird.
Dated the 15th. of the 3d. Month, 1680.

Note, That John Thrift, who carried the recited Letter to the
Quarterly Meeting, said, that they would not suffer it to be read, but cried
out, You are deluded. Which by the Second-days Meetings own Rule (if they
approved W. P's small Tract Entitled, A Brief Examination, and State of
Liberty Spiritual) is a mark of Imposition. For in the said Tract, p. 4. it is
thus written, I ask thee, May I not exhort thee to the Practice of that I am
moved to press thee to the Practice of? If not, thou are the Imposer, by
restraining me from my Christan-Liberty; and not only so, but away goes
Preaching, and with it the Scriptures, that are both appointed of God for
Exhortation, Reproof, and Instruction.

Their Proceedings herein need no Comment, being worse than the Magistrates
ever served me; (who do as really believe me to be deluded, as they could
pretend to any such Thing, and yet they will often hear, and do Justice too.)
And after I had waited more than a Year, and saw no Redress, I then wrote to W.
P. thinking he might be an Instrument to compose things; but what he did,
whether any thing, or nothing, I never had any Answer to this Day; A Copy of
which now follows, Viz.

This for W. P. with Care, etc.
Dear Friend,
When I consider the Nature of the Controversy betwixt W. R. and G. F. and the
multitude of Friends on each side, in almost all Counties, together with the
lamentable Consequences which will unavoidably follow the same, if not timely
put a stop to by a Brotherly Condiscention, I am even bowed down, and grieved
to behold the same, and under a sense thereof, I desire to lay before thee my
Apprehension, both of the Cause and Cure, that so thou together with G. W. (to
whom I have already wrote) may endeavor a Composure of, this Controversy: and
in remembrance of what thou did declare at the Meeting at Devonshire House,
the 27th. of the 3d. Month last, after the Debate, gives me Encouragement so to
do; as also; they Printed Addr. to Prot. for, said thou, If I knew of such a
Design as is surmised, to bring in an Implicit Faith, and Blind Obedience, by
forcing a Conformity before Conviction, I would oppose it with my at most
Endeavor (or to that effect) Now that thou may know (if yet thou do not)
as that thou should not (by thy positive Assertions in Alexander the Copper
Smith, page 10. 12. 15.) I will give thee a Copy of Orders, Recorded, as our
Cannon or Rule, to walk by, in the Quarterly Book for the Isle of Ely,
Verbatim, Parenthesis excepted, Viz.

It is ordered at this Quarterly Meeting, and agreed upon, that no Friends may
for time to come, permit or suffer Marriages, without the consent of Friends at
two Men's and Womens-Meetings, and the Man and Woman to come both to the said
two Meetings, to receive the Answer of Friends; that so no disorderly (a
notable Hedge without parrellel, I presume) or Indirect Proceedings may be
carried on any more (and yet never more disorderly than since) contrary to the
Unity of Friends. Written at a Quarterly Meeting in Hadenham, the 1st. of the
10th. Month, 1675.

Behold the Nature, Manner; and Form of these Orders, and compare them with the
Condemnation of J. A. for not coming up to a strict Conformity, who was
Recorded out of the Unity the 4th. of the 7th. Month, 1678. in the same Book,
as may be seen, for not proceeding in his Marriage according to the Orders.

Now see whether we do not first make a Rule or Cannon to walk by, and compel a
Conformity to the same before Conviction; nay, not only so, but pass
Diffinitive Sentence too, for Nonconformity, to the utmost of our little Power
we have: and when any Body questions the Authority of these Orders and
Practices, G. F. is presently quoted: and that being (as some say) moved to
give forth such Orders, who ever oppose them, they oppose the Power of God, and
thereupon call us Men of an Opposite Spirit.

I say, take a special view of what is said, and then impartially peruse this
following Advice of Friends, in the Case of Marriage, which was (amongst many
other things) in the Beginning, given forth by the ancient Laborers in Gods
Vineyard, whose Care and Skill was manifest, and then see if we govern our
selves upon our first Principles: That is to say.


The Elders and Brethren sends unto the Brethren in the North, these
necessary Things following; to which, if you in the Light wait to be kept in
Obedience, you shall do well. Fare you well, etc.
7thly, 'That if any one moved of the Lord, and in his Light called to take a
Brother or Sister in Marriage (Marriage being honorable in all, and the Bed
undefiled) let it be made known unto the Children of Light, especially to those
of the Meeting to which the Parties are Members, that all in the Light may
witness it to be of God, let them be joined together in the Lord, and in his
Fear, in the presence of many Witnesses, according to the Example of the Holy
Men of God in the Scriptures of Truth Recorded, which were written for our
Example [Here is true Humility] and Learning and that no Scandal may rest upon
the Truth, nor any thing done in secret, but all things brought to the Light,
that Truth may triumph over all Deceit; and that they that are joined together
in the Lord, may not by man be put asunder, whom God has joined together; that
there may a Record of the Time and Place in Writing, witnessing the Time and
Place of such Things, be kept within the Meeting, of which the one, or both are
Members; under which Writing, the Witnesses present may subscribe their Names,
or so many of them as may be convenient, for the stopping of the mouths of
Gainsayers, and for the manifesting the Truth to all who are without.


Now observe the Conclusion of the said true Christian-like Epistle.

Dearly Beloved Friends, these Things [for there were many besides Marriage] we
do not lay upon you as a RVLE or FORM to walk by, but that all with the measure
of the Light, which is pure and Holy, may be guided; so in the Light walking
and abiding, these Things may be fulfilled in the Spirit, not from the Letter;
for the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives Life, etc.


Now consider, I pray thee, First, our Primitive Principle and Institution,
Direction and Christian-Liberty, and see if the late Orders and Imposing them,
and Compelling a Uniformity to them, have not do violence to them; see thy own
words, and how our Practice contradicts them: Addr. to Prot. page 149. 150.
etc. That is to say;

For all Societies are to govern themselves according to their Institution, and
first Principle of Union; where there is violence upon this part, Tyranny, and
not Order is Introduced. Now since Persuasion and Conviction began, all true
Christians Societies, all Christian-Societies must uphold themselves upon the
same free Bottom, or they turn Antichristian.

Thus say thou, and I say the same; pray consider on it, and endeavor a
Reformation. I could further paraphrase hereupon, and many other Places of thy
Address, etc. Some Pages whereof (with some others) I may quote, and leave to
thy perusal, being loath to be too tedious, concluding with thy Address.

Page 221. That it is base Coin that needs Imposition to make it current: but
true Metal passes for its own intrinsic value. Oh miserable Imposition, and
the mischief of it! What Censuring, Sentencing, Recording, Judging? Yea, What
Superstition, Formality, Idolatry, and Hypocrisy has it begotten? And what
Animosities, Heart-burnings, Persecution and Bloodshed has it been the Cause
of? Which, had People been left to their Christian-Liberty, had never been: As
these following pages show; Address to Protestants, pages 122. 156. 143. 67.
68. 77. 93. 94. 95. 97. 98. 99. to the 104. 141. 148. 142. 144. 145. 146. 185.
190. 192. 193. Francis Howgils Works; page 534. 617. 620. 236. 625. Richard
Hubberthorns Works; page 188. Josiah Coal's Whore Unvailed; page 71. 72.
Coloss. 2. 16. 17. 18. Eccle. 12.13. Joh. 14.15. Mat. 5. Mat. 28. Christ's
Sermon. 5.6.7. Phil. 8.15. Romans 14.5.

Indeed thy Book alone is so full of matter against Imposition, against Force
and compelling a Conformity to Outward Rules, Cannons, and Prescriptions of
Human Invention, and for Christian-Liberty, that I know not well how to leave
it. I pray God, keep thee steady, and with a continual Dependency upon the
Divine Revelation of Gods holy Spirit, which is the Rock upon which the true
Church is built, and every Member of it; that so an Understanding of thy Duty
may every day be received, and a necessity therefrom come upon thee to perform
it; that so thou may not look one way, and row another, a thing some suspect,
by thy disputing on G. F. his Part, when he (some think) was ashamed to appear
himself. But for my part, when I consider thy Labor and Service in the Truth,
therein spending both thy self and Estate, together with thy Zeal in
vindicating Truth against all Opposers, I cannot have any Suspicion.

Object. But perhaps thou may say to me, How is it possible that a Composure
of this Controversy can now be, etc.

Answ. If I may not be too tedious, I will give thee my Answer, thus; Let there
be a present Cassation of all Controversy for three Months, proclaimed on both
Sides, and a Day set, and Place appointed Mutually by G. and W. to have a
Meeting equally constituted, with ten, or twenty Friends, more or less, on each
Side, by them respectively chosen; and when this is agreed upon, let them
exhibit their Charges in Writing by way of Declaration, and send it to each
other a Month, or more before the said Set Day; that they may both know what to
plead to, and how to make their Defense, and what Witnesses to bring, to prove
their several Charges so exhibited. And then where either of them are found
guilty, let them make that Satisfaction which is suitable to the nature of
their Crime, and wherein clear, let them be acquitted. This on W. R's Account,
I dare Engage, shall be performed; and that this is both a just and reasonable
Method, I dare appeal to all Judicious Persons in the World.

Why then shall this intolerable Controversy be continued? Why should there be
occasion ministered for those grievous Animosities, Rents, and Divisions, which
every day increase? And taking all Advantages against each other, by Printing,
Preaching, or otherwise; as if the one Side were infallibly all Christians, and
impossible for them to Err, and the other Side Heathens, Infidels, and Pagans;
and that by Predestination too, without any Recovery by that figure of using no
Endeavor. Oh dreadful Work! But if any shall say to me, no, George shall never
be thus brought upon the Stage, or be thus made public, for he cannot be in
such Fault as is surmised. I say, that Time will manifest such to be his
greatest Enemies: and I pray let such consider, that if they thus resolve to
keep him behind the Curtain, as if he were ascended above the reach, and out of
the the Sight of his Breathren: although it be the occasion of never so much
Contention, Debate, and Strife. I say, let such consider, if this be not more
indiscretion than the World (which we say, lies in Wickedness) in their open
Wars, do at any time produce. -- As for Example;

Suppose there was a very great Army laying Siege against a City, and resolved
to Raze it to the ground, and to leave neither Man nor Woman alive, except the
Citizens would deliver up such a Captain to them, who had betrayed his trust,
pretending an extraordinary Commission; Yet acted in his own Name only, and by
Virtue thereof, had been the chief Cause of that War and Bloodshed, and upon
Delivery up of that Imperious Arbitrary Captain, all Wars should cease; pray,
What City would be so sottish and so stupid, as to hinder such a Malefactor
from being brought to condign Punishment for his criminal Offenses, rather than
run the hazard of so many thousands of innocent well meaning People on both
Sides.

Oh William! Let these things be considered on, and let not the Wedge of Gold,
nor the goodly Babylonish Garment be thus hid any longer in the Camp; but let a
Search be made upon that very Consideration, that something is amiss; something
is the Cause of all these things; and let none say to me in disdain, or out of
Prejudice, as Eliah said to his Brother David, who came up to the Camp of the
Lords Host, though he was but a Stripling: for if they do, I will say unto them
as David did [i. e.] Is there not a Cause? 1. Sam. 28.29. and conclude with the
Apostle, Every Man ought to bear his own Burden, without respect to Persons.
That was once our Principle; I have much to say, and yet have said enough to
show my Desire, and to clear my Mind, whether thou will answer my Request, yea,
or nay. And Rest thy Friend.

Francis Bugg.


Address to Protestants, Page 152.

Principiis obsta, sero Medicina paratur
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
Resist betimes, that Medicine stays too long,
Which comes when Age has made the grief too strong.
And I wrote another Letter much to the same purpose, on the 22d. of the 6th.
Mo. and sent it to G. W. which for Brevities sake, I here omit, and the rather
because it is amongst other things incerted, as I understand, in the latter End
of the 7th. Part of the Christian Quaker, Distinguished, etc. put forth by W.
R. in Answer to the Accuser, etc.

And after I could have no Answer, but instead thereof, G. W. came to our
Quarterly Meeting, the 7th. of the 7th. Month, 1681. and instead of healing
Breaches, was an Instrument, and a great one too, against Robert Smith of Colne
his Proceedings in Marriage, except he would go and Publish his Intention
before the Women: they being in number about five or six in a cold back Room by
themselves: according to G. F. his Order, as heretofore I have treated on.
Insomuch that it came into my Mind to send him a few Queries; a Copy whereof
here follow, Viz. The Letter as Prologue to them, etc.

George Whitehead,
I Wrote to thee not long since, to desire thy Assistance in a Composure of the
late Differences: but in thy last Journey (I was loath to say, Circuit) this
way; thou have showed me and others thy Resolution. It is reported that
Nicholas Lucas told thee, Thou wentest up and down to cheat the Country: [I
reckon, he means not, of Money, but the People of their Liberty they have
right to] Truly thy Behavior has manifested the Truth of his Words in a great
measure, as I am able to make appear; not only by thy Advice in
Huntington-shire: but also by thy Erroneous Doctrine amongst us; if G. F. said
true in his Gospel-Liberty, page 23.

And therefore to bring People to that which is not of Faith, is to bring them
into Sin: and to make them make Shipwreck of their Faith, and of a good
Conscience.

But I believe the time is hastening, that such as thou shall be oftener called
in question than yet thou have been; for we begin to see the Truth of W. P's
Doctrine, who says in his Address to Protestants;

That the neglect of questioning our Ministers, is the Cause both of
Superstition and Schism.

However at present, I desire and expect an Answer from thee, touching these
Things queried, Viz. Either of thy Approbation of my Answer; or an Answer of
thine; lest I spread them before thee in fairer Characters than my hand can
write: for thine and others Practices have brought you into suspicion with the
People; for we see how you seek to usurp Authority over the Conscience; and
contray to your Pretentions, exercise Dominion Gentile-like, over your
Brethren: as if you were resolved to turn Monopolizers, and Ingrocers of all
Power, Rule, and Dominion over Consciences, into your own Hands. But your
Authority is coming into Question, and by the Holy Scripture (which is by you
so slighted) must you be examined, tried and proved; and the less you value the
Scripture, or Direction therefrom, the less will you be valued; and the more
you magnify your Directory, Orders, and Cannons, which have no relation to the
Scriptures, or the Primitive Christians Example, the more will your grow
despised, and turned from. Wherefore consider your ways, and wherein you can
see, and perceive your selves INNOVATORS and APOSTATES: let there be a Return
to your First Love; Viz. when you loved both to give and receive Liberty in
Matters Spiritual) And do your first Works, and do not think to heal your
selves by calling others what you really are your selves, for that will not now
do: By your Fruits you are manifest; and we know you by them. Oh! the Discord,
Contention, and Debate which entered, and does daily increase by reason of your
Ceremonies, and your forced Conformity to them; and the chief Cause hereof lies
at your Doors: for now, as in Ages past, the Leaders of the People cause them
to Err; who have greatly increased the Differences, instead of healing the
Breaches: and that you may see as you are seen, I have drawn before your view,
your Practices, and thereby showed you your Error: yet in as much as thou art
more especially concerned, I derect them to thee for a more immediate Answer:
Who am a Lover of Truth.

F. Bug..
The 7th. of the 8th. Month, 1678.

A few Queries propounded to such amongst us, who are crying up Holy ORDERS,
CHVRCH-GOVERNMENT; and are adding new Ceemornies, and Outward Observations;
whereby we thwart and contradict our avowed Principles, and so are building
again the thing; we once destroyed and cried out against; Condemning in others
the things we allow in our selves. THROUGH which Practices a man may discern,
without a pair of Spectacles, ERROR and SUPERSTITION coming in apace, LIMPING
upon their old crooked Crutches of IMPLICIT FAITH and BLIND OBEDIENCE. And
least you should not know how to answer these Queries, I will answer them in
the Words of our own Principles; that so you may the better behold your
Revoltings, and perceive your Innovations; and take notice of your Apostatizing
from your Primitive Principles: But if my Answer please you not, then let me
see by one Answer of your own, what you can say for your selves.

Query I. Whether to Impose any thing upon another Man's Conscience, either to
do, or practice, be not a doing otherwise to others, than we would they should
do unto us, and so Antichristian. See the Second and Third Chapter about
Marriages.

Answ. Yea, For so says R. Hubberthorn in his Works, p. 188. where he tenders
seven Reasons why no Impositions ought to be upon any Man's Conscience by any
but the Lord. (And says he) To Impose any thing upon another Man's Conscience,
either to do or Practice, is not, A doing to others as they would be dealt by:
and therefore is contrary to Christ's Doctrine; which say I, is ANTICHRISTIAN.

Query II. Whether such Societies as do not govern themselves according to
their Primitive Principles, but erect new Orders, and new Models of Government,
New Ceremonies, and new ways of Sentencing, Judging, and Condemning the
Innocent, Recording and Excommunicating such as cannot yield Conformity and
Uniformity thereunto, do not more resemble Tyranny than Order? Nay, Is it not
Antichristian?

Answ. Yea, For all Societies are to Govern themselves according to their
Institutions, and First Principle of Union: where there is violence upon this
Part, Tyranny, and not Order is Introduced. Now since Persuasion and Conviction
begun all true Christian Societies; ALL Christian-Societies MVST uphold
themselves upon the same Free Bottom, or they turn Antichristian.

Query III. Whether to restrain People from the free Exercise of their
Consciences, or to compel People to act against their Faith and Persuasion in
Matters Spiritual, be not Popish, and a Practice of the Church of ROME. Address
to Prot. page 149. 150.

Answ. Yea; For the Apostle in his Day said, Let every Man be fully persuaded
in his own Mind or Conscience. And did not go about to force People to Conform
to such Things as they were not persuaded of in their own Consciences. -- But
the Church of Rome does not admit that every one should Walk or Act as they are
Persuaded in their own Conscience. See Josiah Coal's Whore Unvailed: p. 71. 72.

Query IV. If so, Whether it be not Wisdom to beware of this Trojan Horse, of
this Practice which so much resembles Rome; who commonly lay more Stress upon
their own Ceremonies, and written Traditions, Orders and Institutions, than
upon the holy Scriptures, or the Primitive Christians Example.

Answ. Yea, I beseech you Protestants, by the Mercies of God, and Love of Jesus
Christ, Ratified to you in his most precious Blood, Fly Rome at Home -- have a
care of this Presumption, carry it not too high, lay not Stress where God has
laid none Neither use his Royal Stamp to Authorize your Apprehensions in the
Main of his Institutions. Address to Prot. p. 77.

Query V. Whether the holy Scriptures be not of more Authority than our written
Traditions and Orders? And whether it be not as commendable now to search the
Scriptures, to see whether our Orders, Traditions, and Ceremony be agreeable to
them, as it was formerly for the Bereans; who by the Scripture examined Paul's
Testimony? Seeing some of you call them the Professors Weapons: and will not
suffer them to be alleged in our Quarterly-Meetings.

Answ. Yea; For it cannot be denied, But that the great Foundation of our
Protestant Religion, is the Divine Authority of the Scriptures from without us,
and the Testimony and Illumination of the holy Spirit within us. Upon this
Foot, the First Reformers stood, and made and maintained their Separation from
Rome. -- with good Cause therefore, it is the general consent of all Sound
Protestant Writers.

That neither Traditions, Counsels, nor Cannons of any Visible Church: much
less the Edicts of any Civil Sessions or Jurisdiction; but the Scripture ONLY:
Interpreted by the Holy Spirit in us, give the final Determination in Matters
of Religion, and that Only in the Conscience of Every Christian to himself:
which Protestation made by the First Public Reformers, against the Imperial
Edicts of Charles the Fifth, Imposing Church Traditions without Scripture
Authority [Mark, you Order Makers; the same Cause moves to the same thing] gave
first beginning to the Name Protestant; and with that Name has ever been
received this Doctrine; which prefers the Divine Authority of the Scriptures
and Spirit, to that of the Church and her Traditions. Address to Prot. p. 148.

Query. VI. Whether it be not a Popish Tenet, to cry down Wisdom, and to say,
That Wisdom will destroy us: as it is usually with you to say: for the Papists
care not how foolish the Common People are, nor how much in Ignorance (it
being, as they say, the Mother of Devotion) they educate them; provided their
Ministers and Jesuits be very expert, and able to defend their way of Worship,
and heap of Ceremonies. And when do any that Write, or Dispute, to defend our
Way of Worship, write and speak like Fools, except they can neither write nor
speak otherwise: and why do you cry out against Wisdom upon every occasion, as
if Ignarance were become our only Darling.

Answ. For to admire what Men do not know, and to make it a Principle not to
enquire, is the last Mark of Folly in the Believers, and of Imposture in the
Imposers. To be short, a Christian Implies a Man, and a Man implies Conscience
and Understanding; but he that has no Conscience nor Understanding (as he has
not, who has delivered them up to the Will of another men) is no Man, and
therefore no Christian: Upon this Principle, Men must be made Fools, in Order
to believe: Shall Folly, which is the Shame, if not the Curse of a man, be the
Perfection of a Christian. Address to Prot. page 187.

Query VII. Is it not great Deceit and Illusion, first to make Rules, or
Cannons to walk by: and when any refuse Obedience to them, and cannot for
Conscience sake, Conform to them, then to Senctence, Judge and Record such out
of the Unity; and yet to the World pretend (and that in Print) that we do no
such Thing. I say, Is not this great Decoit and Delusion?

Answ. Yea; That our Friends (says W. P. meaning us, the People called Quakers)
Require any men to practice what they are not convinced of; I utterly renounce
in their Name, and that at an Infamous Slander. Alexander the Copper-Smith,
page 10.

Query VIII. Whether Antichristian Practices, Popish Principles, Contempt of
Scriptures, Folly, Ignorance, and Partiality, Practicing one thing, and
Pretending another, be Corruptions, or no? If yea, then whether or no a private
Man ought not to discover it, if he perceives such things entering the Church?

Answ. That both the Reading of the Scriptures, and the care of Religion
belongs not to the Pasture of the Church ONLY: But that every one that would be
Saved, ought to make deligent Search, whether any Corruption be already, or is
for the Future like to be Introduced; and this to be done no less carefully [I
hope I shall perform this Duty] than if he was persuaded that all besides
himself were asleep. -- Now, forasmuch as the Profit will be small, If some
private Man shall observe, that an Error is Introduced, unless he discovers
the said Error, and lays it open. Address to Prot. p. 163. Read pages, 93. 94.
95. 144. 146. 141. 142. etc.

Query IX. Whether the Barbados Order upon Record, which is,

To give up our whole Concern, if required, both Spiritual and Temporal, to the
Judgment of the Spirit of God in the Men's and Womens-Meetings. See
Babels-Builders, p. 5.

And the Isle of Elyes Orders upon Record in our Quarterly Book; which says,

Thath for time to come, no Friends may permit or suffer Marriages without the
consent of Friends at two Men's and two Womens-Meetings, being distinct and
apart each from other;

Be not Innovations, and the Setters of them up (and confirming them)
Innovators: and do they not do violence to our First Principles of Union?

Answ. Yea; Whosoever brings in, or Sets up other Precepts, Constitutions,
Orders, and Practices in Point of Worship, -- and would set up other Traditions
than the Apostle delivered, either by Word or Writing, such are manifest to
have the Spirit of Error, and are Innovators. See Francis Howgil's Works, p.
236. And that he begun to see the Evil Effects of Councils. See his Works, p.
534. where he quotes Dr. Paraeus, Gregorius, Theologus, and Gregorius
Nazianzenus, etc. Who complained of the Lordliness of the Ministers and
Bishops, and that seldom any Good came of Councils, as he there at large sets
forth, etc.

George Fox, See if thou have not as much Need of a Battledoore as the Scholars
and Professors had:

Who art as much Apostatized from they former Principles for Liberty of
Conscience, as the Scholars and Professors were from the single Language, viz.
Thee and Thou to a single Person.

And therefore to bring People to that which is not of Faith: is to bring them
into SIN, and to make Shipwreck of Faith and a Good Conscience. Gosp. Lib. p.
23. wrote 1668. by G. F. And in his several Papers given forth for detecting
Deciet, it is thus said, The Worlds Guide is without them, in the Traditions and
Precepts of men which lead from God, p. 5. etc. But now Conform to Hadenham
Orders; or Record him out of the Unity, etc. As at large in Cap. 3.

These Orders were made the 1st. of the 10th. Month, 1675.



This I set here, not to Adore. Because I do well understand, He that gave
forth the Battledore Now brings Grapes of another Land Which Sower be, because
not free From Force and Impositions; Although as yet he will not see Them like
Old Romes Traditions.

These Queries, or the Substance of them I sent to G. Whitehead; but never
received any Answer from him: only there came an obscure Letter to my hands
from R. R. but who it was, or where he dwelt, he did not acquaint me; and
whether the said Letter may be accounted any thing of an Answer, or whether he
does not rather manifest the obscure Author to be a Man full of Contempt,
Scorn, and Disdain, and Abuse, in that he calls and accounts me Conceited,
Befooled, my Ignorance, blinded Lies, perverse Liar; and yet does not
particular one Instance to prove me to be such an one, etc. I shall leave with
the Impartial Reader to weigh and consider, when he has read the said Letter,
and my Answer to it: a Copy of both hereafter follow.

Francis Bugg,
I Know thy Name and Nature (though not thy Person) A mean Sight may discern it
through thy own Spectacles plainly enough, to be Abusive, Unworthy, and Foolish
(though conceited) in this Matter at present: I could be glad to know 'twere
otherwise now; so would others. If not, I believe G. W. will send thy Papers to
the Quarterly Meeting: who I believe will see and disown thy Abuse, both of
this Meeting at London, particular Friends, and themselves, and especially the
Truth wherein they are concerned, and wherein they Labor and Travel: though
therein thou abusively comparest them to the Abuses of Bishops, Orders,
Constitutions, Decrees, Cannons, Cheating, and other Terms: I cannot now
remember, nor thou understand, else thou would write them in truer English,
and better sense. This I mention to meet with, and abate thy Concietedness; to
help thee with Spectacles to see how: unfit thou art to undertake to be a Judge
of Learning in that kind, as well as to be a Judge of such Friends in Truth,
and such Meetings of Friends, in an incomparably higher, in imperiously and
menacingly requiring them to advise and consent to the altering the Quarterly
Meeting Book in your Parts, as if thou had both this and that Meeting at thy
Devotion; either to bend to thy hand at thy pleasure, or else to undo by thy
Publication. The Bishopric thou speak of, and the Promotion aspired to, by
the Bryar and Thistle in Lebanon, which can but prick and rake the Skin, cannot
destroy (as it would) that within; and that Nature thou art in, can but blister
it for a time, and must in the end be crushed. So turn from it in time, and
signify it to those thou have wornged, is my Advice to thee: they Lies and
Revilings are not worth Answering, to be like thee, they are so gross and vain.
Thy Queries differ in the Principle from which they proceed, and the End to
which they tend, from the thou make thy Answer from Friends: and that which
is defective in two Principal Causes, is far from Good; which is from entire
Cause: Conceit has so blinded thee, thou can neither see Beginning nor End.
If I did not see thy perverse, willful gross Lies, I should answer to thy
Ignorance. But thus much at present is meet thou should know how it has
befooled thee. From him that has learned so much from the Truth (though by
thee despised and belyed)

R. R.
For Francis Bugg.




The Queries are before, and the Letters wrote by me and other Friends, which I
suppose he takes the Imperiousness and Menacing from, shall follow after the
Answer I sent him; for which he accounts me so foolish, befooled, blinded, my
Ignorance, not wrote in true English, etc. To which I refer the Reader. First,
then my Answer I sent him, Viz.

F. Bugg his Answer to R. R's Letter.
R. R.
I Have received a few Lines from thee, bearing no Date, nor yet acquainting me
who thou art, otherwise than by R. R. nor yet where thou dwell: by which I
perceive thou love Obscurity. If these Lines of mine chance to find thee out,
by them I am willing to inform thee, that I do not pretend constantly to write
true English: but thy Pride and Contempt is manifest, which becomes not a Man
of thy Pretenses: and whether mine, and other Friends Desire to have that
Cannon, Rule, or Order, Recorded in our Quarterly Meeting Book; which prohibits
all Marriage to the manner of the Parties publishing their Intentions, and the
Record of Condemnation against J. A. for his Non-submission to the said Orders,
Reversed and Raced out, be such a piece of Imperiousness and Menacing, as thou
seems to apprehend, I shall leave to the Consciences of others: Especially,
since it is the declared Judgment of Friends, and has past the Second-days
Meetings Approbation; That all Rulers are accountable to the People; See page
442. of Edw. Buroughs Works, where it is written; And we believe that all
Governors and Rulers OUGHT to be accountable to the People, and to the next
Proceeding Rulers, for all their Actions which may be enquired into upon
occasion, etc. What? Is it our Opinion, that -- Constables, and all other
Governors and Rulers are accountable to the People? and is it such a piece of
Imperiousness and Menacing, in me and others, to write a few Lines to the
Second-days Meeting, desiring [not requiring them, as thou fallaciously words
it] the annihilating, and repealing of such an Antichristian Yoke of Bondage
[meaning the Orders as anon will appear.]

If I have wrote Queries so foolishly as thou imaginest; let thy Grave and
Learned Answer to them instruct my Ignorance; If thou think I miss the
Matter, then should thou show me wherein, by a distinct, solid, and an
Intelligeable Answer.

As for G. W's sending to our Quarterly Meeting, that cannot fright me: for
except he lays his Indictment True and Legal, I shall Demur to their
Jurisdiction, as believing that they have not the Kings Broad Seal to
Commissionate them to call Delinquents to an account, if such an one I were;
nor yet one Verse in the Holy Scripture, the great Visible Charter of our
Christian-Liberty (that Authorizes them to give a Summons thither) But if he
will admit of a Meeting rightly constituted, and Men by him, and my self,
equally chosen, I do hereby offer to prove the Verity of whatever I have wrote
to him or others on the Foot of this Controversy; and this I desire thee to let
him know.

Thy Lines, I look upon impertinent, and in several places, false and unsound.
But in regard I am not certain that they past the Approbation of the Second
days Meeting in London; and also considering they are produced through such
Obscondency, I have wrote enough in answer to such a hidden conceited
Projector, although perhaps not in such true English, as that every word is
right spelled; which piece of Fallibility, I must confess, attends my Writing
often, and better Scholars than my self, or thou either. So let this
Acknowledgment suffice, and when thou writest again, write more to the purpose,
and let me know who thou art: for many Names begin R. R. and also where thou
dwell, that I may the better know how to give thee a suitable Reply. And
thus I conclude and rest; accounting it my Duty to discover Error publicly,
when all private Endeavors will not avail) and Hypocrisy, how hiddenly soever
it makes its Progress. Known by the Name of,

Mildenhall in Suffolk, the 2d. of the 1st. Month, 1681. F. Bugg.


Now follows a Copy of a Letter which I wrote to the Second-days Meeting,
out of which I presume he apprehends my Imperiousness, as by his Letter to me
appears: the which also I will leave to the Readers Conscience, that therein I
may have a Witness against such unrighteous Reflections: for I begin to see the
Truth of Robert Rich his Words, in a Letter from Barbados to his Friends,
Abstracts, etc. p. 20.

And I can assure you, that who meddle with the Quakers, had need be fenced
within and without, with the whole Armor of God, Truth and Love to
Righteousness ( David's Sling and Stone) and enabled to use both Hands, the Left
as well as the Right, etc.

So that to the Witness of God in the Readers Conscience, I commend the
following, to see whether I did Imperiously, and Menacingly require, or
Friendly desire their Annihillating of the said Order, especially considering
what private means by my frequent Letters Queries, Protestations, Debates, I
have had with them, near four Years together, as this Chapter, and the 2d. and
3d. Chapters sufficiently manifests, Viz.

To Friends of the Second-days-Meeting in London.
Friends,
FOrasmuch as it has so happened, that a Difference amongst us, the People
called Quakers, is risen about Church Discipline, Church Government, and
Outward Orders, Forms, and Prescriptions, and that by no means, a
Condiscention can be admitted of, whereby a Christian Composure may be
obtained, in order to the settling a Happy Union, and Blessed Fellowship
amongst us, as in the Beginning, but instead thereof begin to Excommunicate,
and Censure one another for that which is no Sin against God, but mere
Formality; no Breach of Gods Commandments but Man's Traditions: I say, inasmuch
as it has thus happened, and that there yet appears no probability of a
Reconciliation; and that as you look upon your selves the Heads of the People,
and chief Governors of the Church; and as such, assume the place of
Approbation of what passes the Press, and other Epistles, directory to the
Churches: for their Information, how to proceed in Matters Ecclesiastical, etc.

So that it is with me at this time to write a few Lines to you; not that I
admit you to have any Power or Lawful Authority over the Consciences and
Persuasions of your Brethren; or any particular Right of Dominion transmitted
to you beyond your Brethren: yet I say, Inasmuch as you assume the Place and
Authority aforesaid, although Usurped, I hereby signify to you, that whereas
there is a Decree or Cannon, called Orders, Recorded in our Quarterly-Book;
Dated the 1st. of the 10th. Month, 1675. which say, That NO Friends for time to
come, may PERMIT or SVFFER Marriages, without the Consent of Friends at two
Men's and Womens-Meetings; and the Man and Woman to come twice to the said
Meetings, etc. And that J. A. stands Excommunicate, or Recorded out of the
Unity for his Nonconformity to the said Orders, Decree, or Cannon: and I having
wrote to several Friends particularly, and to Monthly and Quarterly-Meetings,
touching these Things; and being for several Years dissatisfied with these
Proceedings, have desired to know by what Authority Womens-Meetings are Set up
Monthly, distinct and apart from Mens-Meetings, with a Power committed to them
to hear, examine, and determine Matters relating to the Government of the
Church; as in particular, in the Cases of Marriage; and in whose Name a
Conformity is required to their Jurisdiction. And to this Day, no man has
given me one Line in Answer. I not then knowing what I now understand by the
Preface to the Christian-Quaker, Distinguished, etc. put forth by W. R. that it
was the Advice of such an Eminent Friend as it was, of Party with G. F. Viz.

Let not this Spirit be reasoned with, enter not into Proposals and Articles
with it, but feed it with Judgment, that is Gods Decree.

Which gives me occasion to write to you at this time, to DESIRE [then not to
require, as R. R. says] a Letter from you; whether you will Advise and Consent
to the Racing out the said Orders, which prohibit Marriage to the manner of the
Publication of the Parties Intention; and whether you will advise and consent
to the Racing out the Record against J.A. for his Nonconformity to the said
ORDERS, or else maintain and prove them Apostolical, and agreeable to the Way
and Manner of the Apostles, and Primitive Christians Proceedings, by answering
my Queries sent to G. W. etc.

But if you refuse to do either, That is to say, To race out the said Orders
for Marriage, on Record, and the Record against J. A. or else maintain and
prove them Apostolical: Then I do hereby let you know, that I purpose, if the
Lord will, to bear a public Testimony against your Innovations, Usurpations,
Directories, Orders, Decrees, Cannons, and Constitutions.

But on the contrary [mark my Terms of Submission] If you shall race out the
said Orders and Record against J. A. or show [mark I pray you] your Advice and
Consent by Letter to me, to the Friends belonging to our Quarterly Meeting, to,
and for the racing out the said Orders for Marriage, and Record against J.A.
for his Nonconformity to them; so that it be done effectually: OR [mark the
reasonableness of my Proposals] prove them Apostolical by answering my Queries
sent to G. W. or otherwise, as aforesaid: Then I do hereby promise to forbear
such public Testimony; whether by Printing, or otherwise, and to wait in hopes
that Things which are amiss, may be mended.

And why you refuse this Request, which would tend to the gladning the Hearts
of many, I know not: Christ said to the lofty Professors in his Day, If you
Believe me not, yet Believe me for my Works Sake. And I say, though you may
slight me, yet for the Reason sake that I offer for Liberty of Conscience, as
an Expedient for Reconciliation, and for the Peace of the Church; and that
Liberty of Conscience in the Free Exercise of it, where neither Christ nor his
Apostles have set a Limit, may be enjoyed, and preserved from Violence and
Usurpation. Have some Regard to what I say.

It is not unknown to you how our Practice has been sometimes to the King and
his Council, sometimes to the King and Parliament, for Liberty of Conscience,
and the Free Exercise of it; and that we might be exempted from the Penalties
assigned for our Nonconformity to the Rites and Ceremonys of Prelatical
Institutions, Established by the Laws of the Land: This has been, still is,
and ought to be our Practice.

WELL THEN, How comes it then (...) pass, that we should be such humble Suitors
for Liberty of Conscience, and now such severe Imposers on each others
Consciences; and to such Orders as G. W's Learned Friend R. R. in his Perplexed,
Unlearned, and Ill-compos'd Ingredients, p. 11. 12. had no better way to
vindicate, than by two Proofs: The one from the Popes Nunnery, a Place I do not
like at all; and I pray God preserve me in that Faith and Practice which may be
defended by the Holy Scriptures, and Primitive Christians Example; that so I
need not be put to that Shift and Extremity, as to go to the Popes Nunnery to
defend the same; but as W. P. elsewhere says (though to his own Confutation,
in that he handed the Grant and Confirmation mentioned in the Second Chapter)
Error is only upheld by Error (and so he may see in time) The next Proof of
his is, That in the Jews Apostasy to Idolatry, the Women wove Hangings. And
that, as the First, Implies some Women's Service amongst the Primitive
Christians: So the last shows that Women did some Service in the Temple. Oh
profound Learning! And if this way of Reasoning was pursued, What Heathenish
Practices, and Popish Superstitions may not be Introduced. But says he, These
are Note, Imperfect Footsteps.
Imperfect Footsteps. And I think as Impertinently Quoted: and if R.R. has no
better Logic, he need not be admired by G. W. in Print, for his great
Learning, nor perhaps had not; only he has found out some History, or Popish
Author, which says, There were Deaconesses, as well as Deacons. Which was
helpful to G.W. in his Preaching and Disputing for Womens-Meetings lately in
Huntington-Shire, and elsewhere; where he took too much upon him, and behaved
himself more like a Lordly Bishop, or Popish Prelate, than an humble Minister
of Christ: and by me at this time is, and stands Impeached, as an Enemy to
Christian-Liberty, a Usurper over the Conscience, the which I stand ready,
publicly to assert, maintain, and vindicate.

And as you have in your Solicitations for Liberty of Conscience, showed our
King (at the latter End of the Treatise of Oaths) the Example of the Grave of
Nassau: and the Prince of Orange, and diverse others, who in their time gave
Liberty: so may I (and with great reason too) set the Example of our King
before your view; who, though he has not granted all you ask; yet has done
much more comparatively than you will do for your Brethren; and that in a
twofold manner, that is to say.

First, In that about eight or nine Years since, by his Letters Pattent, was
graciously pleased to Release many of us out of Prison, who lay under the
Sentence of Praemunire.

Secondly, By racing out the Exchequer Records; where many of us stood convict
of Recusancy; and thereby out of his Princely Clemency, set us free from the
Censures issuable thereupon.

These Things are manifest; Why then will you not bear with a little
Nonconformity to one Ceremony; and that such an one too, for which there is
neither Precept nor President in all the Holy Scriptures? Why will you not
learn of the King, who raced out, and made void the Judges Sentences, which
were severe enough, and blotted out the Exchequer Records? that so you may
thereby give us some ground to believe, that if you were in Power to Inflict
Corporal Punishment for our Nonconformity to your Church Government, YOU WOULD
NOT, etc. Oh that you would consider these Things in a Christian Spirit; which
would lead you To do to others, as you would that others should do unto you. So
desiring your speedy Answer, I rest your Friend, who cannot sow Pillows under
your Arm-holes,

Milden-hall, The 12th. of the 9th. Month, 1681. F. Bugg.


Thus it is left with the Reader to Judge what Imperiousnes is herein
manifested, considering my former Endeavors, and Patience therein for nigh
four Years.

The next is a Letter sent by a dozen Friends that belong to our particular
Meeting. And then after some Remarks upon their Procedure, I shall conclude
this Chapter.

To the Second-days Meeting of Friends Assembled in London.
Friends and Brethren,
FOrasmuch as some of us know, and others of us are credibly informed, that
there is an Order Established in our Quarterly Meeting, and that upon Record in
our Register-Book, belonging to the same Meeting; which shuts but and excludes
all Marriages amongst us: SO as neither to Permit or Suffer them, except the
Parties, both Man and Woman shall go twice to the Mens-Meeting, and twice to
the Womens-Meeting, distinct and separate one from the other, both at Monthly
and Quarterly Meetings, to publish their Intentions to each Meeting
respectively; and by reason that some Friends have refused for Conscience sake,
a Conformity to the said Orders, great and many have been the Debates,
Disputes, and Controversial Contentions about the same; insomuch as that in the
Case of J. A. Friends put it to the Vote, Whether he should be Condemned by
public Censure, for his Nonconformity to the said Orders, or not? Whereupon it
was determined by S. Cater, and about nineteen more, they being the Major Part,
that the said J. A. should be Recorded out of the Unity; although at the same
time they did confess they had nothing against him, only he did not take his
Wife according to the Order of Friends.

And as some of us know, and others of us are credibly informed, that there
has been Suite made [For several of their Hands are to the Letter sent to our
Quarterly Meeting, mentioned in the Third Chapter] by many Friends, for the
racing out the said Record, which was obtained by the Major Part of Votes, as
aforesaid, against J. A. But all Endeavors have proved ineffectual. Wherefore
we at this time desire a Letter of Request from you to the Friends that belong
to our said Quarterly Meeting, for the racing out the said Orders, which
prohibit all Marriages to the manner of the Parties publishing their
Intentions, and for the racing out the Record against J. A. that so those
Friends which reckon it a Duty incumbent upon them to go to the
Womens-Meetings, to publish their Intentions according to the said Orders, may;
and those that are otherwise Minded, may be let alone, and not imposed upon
beyond their Freedom: and yet nevertheless, Remain as Brethren In Unity, except
other Matter appear than that of Nonconformity; and thus we conclude, desiring
your Answer to the Premises by our Friend Francis Bugg, the Bearer hereof, and
rest your Friends, who subscribe our Names as follows, Viz.

Josepb Ellington. John Thrift. Elizabeth Bugg. Rachel Ellington. Joseph Mason.
William Bellsham. William Handslip. Joseph Tetsall. Jane Mason. Margaret
Belsham. Elizabeth Thrift. Kat. Handslip, etc.
The 20th. of the 11th. Month, 1681/2.

And persuant to the Trust reposed in me, I went to London, and carried the
said Letter my self, and delivered it to the Meeting with my own Hands, the
6th. of the 12th. Month, 1681/2; where were Assembled G. Fox, G. Whitehead, C.
Tailor, and about a dozen more: to whom I said, Friends, about a Month or two
since, I wrote to this Meeting, and since that time, I have received no Answer;
and now there are several Friends belonging to our Meeting have sent you a
Letter, and desire your Answer by me; and so laid the Copy of the abovesaid
Letter on their Table; and as soon as I had delivered it, C. Tailor told me,
That I had done my Business, and might be gone: and so after I had told them
that I should stay in Town two or three days, I went away, as Christopher bid
me, saying, I might be gone, etc.

So at night came Benjamin Antrobus and John Field, and examined me about many
Things: but at last I took their Particulars in Writing, a Copy whereof
follows, with my Answer which I sent the next day to Benjamin Antrobus, as I
promised; and how much they tend to an Answer, either to the Letter I sent
them, or the last recited Letter of Friends, I shall leave to the Conscience of
every Impartial Reader.

An Answer to these six Interrogatories put to F. B. by B. A. and I. F. the
6th. of the 12th. Month, 1681/2.
Query I. In whose hands are the Original Subscriptions?

Answ. In Francis Bugg his own Hands (or Keeping.)

Query II. Whether they are the Friends own Hands respectively that are
Subscribed?

Answ. Yea.

Query III. And whether those other Friends concerned in, and for the Record
complained of, do refer the Matter to the Second-days Meetings Advice, for the
Racing out their Order, or not?

Answ. That Question I never asked those Friends; so refer you to the Persons
concerned, and the sense you have of the Letter.

Query IV. And what others are the Subscribers that complain of the Order upon
credible Information, and not on their own Knowledge?

Answ. I cannot tell exactly their number.

Query V. And whether does F. Bugg esteem it fair and Judicial for all Friends
here to determine this Case, without hearing both Parties?

Answ. If you upon Sight of the Orders, find them not Apostolical, and
according to Scriptures, and Proceedings of the Apostles, you may determine
them Antichristian, Unscriptural, and Erroneous.

Query VI. And where is a Copy of these Orders?

Answ. They are Recorded in the Quarterly Meeting Book in Hadenham, in the Isle
of Ely: A Copy of them I here send you Verbatim, Viz.

It is Ordered and Agreed upon at this Quarterly Meeting, that NO Friends for
time to come, may PERMIT or SVFFER Marriages, without the Consent of Friends at
two Men's, and Womens-Meetings; and the Man and Woman to come both to the said
Meetings, to receive the Answer of Friends; that so no disorderly or Indirect
Proceedings may be carried on any more, con^y to the Unity of Friends.


These Answers were delivered, and I stayed in Town two or three Days, but
heard no more of them. And in regard I would leave Things plain, I am
constrained to be large, which has swelled my Book beyond what I at first
intended; so that I shall leave the Paraphrase hereof to the Reader, and so
proceed to the next Chapter, where I intend to conclude, etc.

CHAP. VIII.
Shows that the Severity used by G. F. and his Party, exceeds that of the
Judges, Justices, and Protestant Bishops; who have Excommunicated J.B. for
Selling W.R. his Book: And if Application be made to them for Redress of
Grievances, they cry, You are deluded; And will sometimes refuse to read a
Letter, but seldom Answer any. Also some Advice to the Pencilvanians.

HAving treated at large about the Cause of the Differences amongst us, the
People called Quakers, and of our Endeavors to have prevented the Increase
thereof, which might have been, if Brotherly Condiscension, according to our
Pretentions thereto, might, or could have taken place: and inasmuch as I have
at times, mentioned the Kings Indulgence, and in the Letter I sent G. W. about
a Composure, which is recited in the 7th. Part of the Christian-Quaker,
Distinguished, etc. By W. R. mentioned my Writing to Judges, Justices, and Men
in Authority, and of their hearing and doing Justice; and Intimated as if their
Moderation in some Cases had exceeded whatever yet has been manifested from G.
F. G.W. and those of Party with them: I now deem it reasonable to give a
Demonstration of it, lest it should seem incredible, etc.

I shall begin with a Copy of a Letter I wrote to Edward Turner, Judge of Ely
Assizes, and the rest of the Kings Justices, VIZ.

A few words presented in the Love and Fear of the Lord to the Judge of the
Assizes, and Justices serious Consideration, by us who have been Sufferers
about three Years, only and alone for keeping of a good Conscience, etc. As for
our refusing to Swear, we would have you all to understand, that it is not out
of Obstinacy, or Wilfulness, that we do refuse, or as though we had any Reserve
to our selves, etc. (with pretty much on that Subject of not Swearing; we being
that Assizes to be Premunir'd which for Brevity, I here omit. But see the
Closure, and the Effect that followed) Thus in short have we endeavored to
satisfy you, by showing you the Cause of our not Swearing: which if you weigh
our Sufferings in an equal Balance, you will find that you have dealt very
hardly by us, in keeping of us in Prison one Year after another (In which time
of Confinement, one of the Servants of the Lord, Thomas Richardson, has
finished his Course) and dyed a Witness of Jesus, and a Prisoner for his
Namesake) And the last Summer, the Prison being close, was so thronged with
Prisoners, that it was Gods great Mercy to preserve us from the Contagious
Disease of the Plague. Thus much in short, may serve as a Motive to stir you up
to let the Oppressed go free. From us who subscribe our Names,

George Thorrowgood. John Ives. Francis Bugg. William Custance. Clement Crabb.
And others.

The 10th. of the 11th. Month, 1666.

This Letter we sent to Judge Turner, by a Woman Friend, and the Judge bid his
Clark read it, which he did deliberately, and he leaning upon the Table, heard
it all, and instead of telling us we were deluded, the next day, or the day
after, released us all.

And when our Meetings in Ely were disquieted by the Pesecution of the Act
against Conventicles, when it came first in Force, where I then lived. I then
again wrote to Edward Turner, when he came the Summer Assizes, 1670. And he
hearkened, and heard our Complaint, in our Sufferings; and after we sent that
Letter, I do not remember that ever a Warrant was granted during the time of
that Storm: and because the Letter is short, and that his Example may be of
Service, I may transcribe the most of it, which is as follows, Viz.

To Edward Turner, Judge of Ely Assizes, These.
FRiend, as our manner has been, so it is once more in our Hearts, to lay
before thee in short, our Oppressive Wrong and Injury which we have met withal
from some Magistrates in Ely. Knowing thou art not a Stranger to the Letter,
nor nature of the Law, lately made against Seditious Sectaries; who under a
Color of Tender Consciences, may contrive Mischief, etc. That so thou may
hear, consider, and do us Justice: as in other Cases we perceive thou art very
willing to do; yea, though to Thieves and Murderers, by searching out the
Truth in every Testimony, or Evidence, before thou passest Judgment, etc. Now
as for us, who are in Scorn called Quakers, who meet together to worship God in
Spirit and Truth, Not under Color, but in the Reality of our Hearts, the Lord
is our Witness. Whether we be the People against whom the late Act was made, or
no, remains a Question? Seeing in the Preamble of the said Act it is said to
be, For the suppressing of such who under Pretense of Tender Consciences, may
contrive Insurrections, etc. Or words to that purpose: which we are clear of,
Blessed be the Lord, having not the least Evil Intention in our Heart against
the King, nor the Present Government Established.

But notwithstanding we are clear from the Facts therein provided against, and
so consequently free from the Punishment therein prescribed; for the Fact is
the Cause of the Penalty: Yet notwithstanding there are many are willing so
largely to construe it, as to stretch it to us, having nothing whereof justly
to accuse us, save concerning the Law and Worship of our God: and whether the
Justices be informed against us, we certainly cannot tell: Yet this we know,
that whereas the Law says, We should be first Convicted: We never were so much
as brought before them, to hear our Accusers, and answer for our selves a
Privilege not denied Thieves and Murderers, nor us, in some Places, where
they have any respect to Justice. -- And thus are we disinabled to go on with
our several Employments, through the false Construction of those who are not
willing, To do, as they would that others should do to them: By whose means
our Cloth, both Wooling and Linning, our Stuffs, our Peuter and Brass, Boots
and Shoes, are taken out of our Shops, we being of several Trades; yea, our
Featherbeds from under us, with other Bedding and Household Goods. And all this
severity extended toward us, altogether without any just Cause ministered on
our Parts.

Oh that ever Judgment should thus be turned backward, as we have just Cause to
say it is, and Justice find no Place in the Hearts of those who profess
Christianity: surely if Turks, Heathens, and Pagans should be suffered to deal
thus with us, it would be no other Cruelty than what we should expect at their
hands. But for our own Countrymen, our own Neighbors, professing all one God,
Christ, and Scripture, only differing in some things, to deal thus with us,
contrary to Justice, contrary to Law, contrary to Reason and Neighbourly
Affection.

Oh surely! Will not these Proceedings, these Rendings, and Tearings, Selling
Goods not half to their value, laying Families Wast and Desolate, be a Cause
for other Nations, to have Christianity in Derision. Much more might be said of
this Nature, but being loath to be tedious at present, conclude: greatly
desiring that both thou and others, would lay these Things to Heart, which are
writ in Love, and in the same, sent from the People in Ely, called Quakers.


This Letter was given him; he likewise ordered his Clark to read it; and that
in the presence of several of the Magistrates who had Persecuted us; so that
one would think it might have been the worse for us; but from that time, no
more Warrants, as above observed. Likewise about three years after, many of us
were Sufferers in this Town of Milden-hall, at which time I wrote a Letter to
Judge Hales, who was a very courteous man, who received my Letter at my Wifes
Hand, and read it; and said, Truly, Sweetheart, the Execution of this Law is
left with the Justices, and is out of our Power, but if I could do you any
good, I would. My Wife replied, That she did not question, but that if he did
but speak to the Justices, they would hear him: and he said, He would, and much
Favor he showed her, etc.

One Instance more I will mention of this Nature; and that is in April 78. (as
I remember) my self, and four or five Friends of our Town, were convict of
Recusancy, and Persecuted, in order to seize our Freehold. And upon a time I
being at Norwich, on the account of my Trade; when I came home, my Wife told me
that here had been the Sheriff and his Bailiffs, and had Impanelled a Jury of
Inquiry, of the value of our Estates, who stood Convicted as aforesaid in this
Town; and the Jury had found us, some more, some less; yet moderately, as not
knowing indeed what we had clear, and further they were not obliged to find:
so I forthwith wrote a Letter to Sir Henry North, Knight [so called] who lived
in our Town, being at London, and acquainted him with the nature of their
Proceedings; and instead of saying to me, You are deluded, Why do you not
Conform to our Church-Disciplin, etc? I say, instead of this, he took such
care, as that not only my self, and those Friends of our own Town, but he took
off all our Friends that we knew of (who stood in the same Jeopardy) in these
Parts of Suffolk, so that at present, I Bless God, we live a quiet Life, and
free from Disturbance. And Blessed be the Lord for putting it into the Hearts
of the Rulers, and Men in Authority, to show Mercy, when otherwise they have
Power enough to Oppress and Spoil many Families. And I further desire, that a
Blessing may rest upon all such who Act in Moderation, and are willing to do as
they would be done by: for all men would have their Liberty, there are none
would be Imposed upon, contrary to their Faith and Persuasion, etc.

And now I shall turn to the Bishops of the Protestant-Churches, and do not
question, but shall make it appear, that they (their Power considered, and that
the Laws are on their Sides) are more moderate, and use not that Severity to
the Members of their Church (although they are severe enough too) that George
Fox, and those of Party with him, use to the poor Quakers, if they chance to
transgress their Traditions, etc.

As for Example.

J. B. in the City of London, who is a Man of a good Conversation, and one whom
they say themselves, they have no evil thing to lay to his Charge, other than
for selling the Book of W. Rogers his putting forth, Entitled, The
Christian-Quaker, Distinguished from the Apostate and Innovator, etc. I do
believe the Book did anger them sorely, for it Detected G. Fox of Error; and
what if I should say, It Detected him of that which is worse (to wit) Lying,
and False Accusing of the Innocent, Namely, John Story, behind his Back; yea,
and there are many Witnesses stand ready to prove it; I say, this Book did so
anger them, that Christopher Tailor called the very Title, Blasphemy; and the
reproachful Words that he and others called W. R. for putting it forth, are
intolerable: no Bishop ever did the like, that I read of, that are of the
Protestant-Churches. For Dr. Stillingfleet may write his Opinion of Schism,
and Separation; and Alsop may answer that, and write his Opinion of Imposition,
and by both their discoussing of these Points, and diverse others, the Standers
by may reap Advantage, and the Magistrate Information. Here is no
Excommunication pronounced to either of these Sons of the Church; neither are
the Booksellers that sell these Controversial Books; no such matter; for if the
Bishop of London should Excommunicate all Booksellers in London that sell any
Book that speaks any thing against the Common Prayer, against Marrying with a
Ring; that speaks any thing against the Bishop of Canterbury, etc. he should
have work enough, and thankless work too; and perhaps no Bookseller, nay, in
all probability, not one Bookseller in London Un-Excommunicated, etc. But
however J. B. is Excommunicated Ipso Facto; for nothing else but selling the
said Book of W. Rogers, etc.

A Copy of I.B. his Excommunication here follows.
From the Monthly Meeting, at Devonshire-House, the 4th. of the 11th. Month,
1681.
Whereas there have been some unruly Spirits gone out from Truth, and the
Unity of the Blessed Power of God, which has gathered us to be a People;
Writing, Printing, and Publishing things hurtful and prejudicial to Truth, by
Corrupting of Peoples Minds; tending also to draw them into disesteem of many
of the Lords Servants, whose Faithfulness has manifestly appeared amongst us,
with whom our Unity stands to our mutual Satisfaction and Refreshment.

Upon consideration of these things, we find our selves Conscientiously
concerned to take notice of something of this kind, befallen J. B. who was
formerly a Member of this Meeting, who having dispersed into several Parts of
this Nation, diverse of those pernicious Books in Print, wrote by W. R. called,
The Christian-Quaker, Distinguished from the Apostate and Innovator, etc.
(Which have manifestly been proved in many material Passages, Erroneous and
False, both in the Historical and Doctrinal Part of it) was privately and
publicly reproved for that unrighteous Action, by several Friends (at diverse
times according to Gospel Order) as they found it on their Spirits from the
Lord, as also admonished against it; yet after all the Labor and Travel
Friends have had (on his Behalf) being desirous, if possible, to reclaim him
out of the Enemies Snare (into which he is fallen) he has from time to time
resisted their Advice and Counsel: So that now we being wholly clear; having
used our utmost Endeavor in the good Will of God, to reclaim him as aforesaid;
do not only testify against that SPIRIT, which has as aforesaid led him into
that disorderly Practice; but also against him, while joined thereunto; nor can
we have Spiritual Communion, or Fellowship with him, until unfeignedly he shall
return unto the Truth, by Condemnation of that Work and Spirit which in the
Love of God we exhort him to; and desire that for him a Place of Repentance may
be found.

Now if I thought the Bishop of London would take Example against the poor
Booksellers in London for dispersing any Book that speaks against the Cannons
and Constitutions of the Church of England the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church of England, I should then repent that I have transcribed this
Antichristian Piece of Work: But as the Jews were more zealous for their own
Traditions, than for the Scripture: and the Papists more zealous for their heap
of Ceremonies, than for Holy Scriptures; as Dr. Lloyd in his Sermon, Preached,
November the 5th. 1678, at St. Martins in the Fields, p. 4. 9. 16. sufficiently
makes appear, and which I was purposed to transcribe, as pertinent to my
present occasion; but Brevity constrains me to leave it out, it being somewhat
large. Even so it is manifest, that the Contrivers of this Exommunication are
more zealous for G. Fox his Laws and written Prescriptions, which that Book of
W. R. ath manifestly Detected, than they are for the Scriptures; for a Man may
transgress the Scripture days without number, but yet never be Excommunicated
by G.F. nor his Party: but J. B. never sold but one Book, namely, that of W. R.
his Publishing, that ever I heard of; and lo you see he is Dismembered, no
Spiritual Fellowship, no Spiritual Communion they can have with him, until he
returns to the Mother Church; no, by no means; Stand off, for I am more Holy
than thou: cries the Proud Pharisee; for I am not as other men; nay, they do not
only testify against that BAD SPIRIT, as they account it, but HIM ALSO, Viz,
the MAN ALSO: Oh that we could but say, Take him Jailer, and that Effectually.
So that I do not find a Parallel betwixt the Proceedings of the Protestant
Bishops, with the Sons of their Church, (to wit, the Booksellers) to equalize
the Proceedings of G. F. and his Party, with W. R. for Writing, and J. B. for
Selling the Book, called, The Christian-Quaker, etc. For Edmund Hickeringal
wrote the Naked-Truth of Matters and Things transacted amongst the Clergy, and
the Booksellers Disperse and Sell them; but for the same, we hear of no
Excommunication, or such bitter Invectives, as attend W. R. J. B. and as many
as adhere, receive, or favor the said Book, or Liberty, the Authors thereof
stand for and vindicates. A Copy of the said Bitter Invectives, Censorious,
Antichristiand Dreadful Judgments uttered against W. R. for Writing; J. B. for
Selling, my self and others for Buying, Owning, and Reading the said Book of W.
R. Entitled, The Christian-Quaker, Distinguished, etc. and for refusing
subjection to the Jurisdiction of the Women: as I took them out of several
Books approved on by the Second-days Meeting in London; for which very piece of
Service, Stamp, and Probatum est: I think that very Meeting deserves to have a
TRIPPLE-CROWN. Pray hear the Invectives, and then Judge, VIZ.

The Accusers of the Brethren -- driven out from the Presence of the Lord,
Unsavory Salt -- Heady, Wilful -- Highminded, Unruly, Passionate, and Furious
-- this miserable Man W. R. -- who through Vnwatchfulness, Disobedience, and
Rebellion against God, (which is as the Sin of Witchcraft) -- The unclean
Spirit and Adversary of Man's Soul; the old Accuser of the Brethren having now
the Rule in him (meaning W. R.) and over him, makes War through him against the
Lamb and his Followers -- Rude, Insolent -- His profane speaking concerning
the Power of God; -- but from the Spirit of Antichrist; the cruel, outrageous,
deadly, hellish Spirit, or Image of Jealousy; a murmuring, complaining,
dividing Spirit; a rending, tearing Spirit; a dark, jealous Spirit; a loose,
gainsaying opposite Spirit; a proud exalted Spirit; a contemning scornful
Spirit; a self-conceited Spirit; a turbulent, willful, froward Spirit -- This
cursed Spirit of Satan is now entered into the Heart and Soul of William
Rogers, and such of his Abetters as own the Printing and Publishing his wicked
Book aforesaid -- And are become twice dead, plucked up by the Roots: and
through Perverseness, Peevishness, and Cross-spiritedness, entered into the way
of Cain, and Spirit of Korah, and his Company, -- of which Number and sort is
William Rogers and his Adherents -- who have attempted such manifest Rebellion
against Gods pure Power -- A cross Cankered Spirit -- Fallen Antichristian
Instruments -- and which I say, be Co-workers with the Prince of Darkness --
where the Firstborn of Death Rules and Reigns without any good Order -- of
that Seed and Spirit ye are joined to, and led by, against the very Heart of
God, and his Light and Life, which his People live with him in, etc.


These with many such other Terms, are to be found in several Books approved on
by the Second-days-Meeting, as at large appears in the Preface to the Reader,
where the Books and Pages out of which I took them, are Quoted. I say, A
Parallel whereof I know not where to find: nay, had I all their Books of
Controversy by me, I presume it were a thing too hard for me to undertake, so
that I must take a step into the Papists Road of Cruelty and Severity, and then
perhaps I may; first then see the Prohibition sent by Cuthbert Tonstal, Bishop
of London, to his Archdeacons, etc. in King Henry the Eighths Time, as left
upon Record by Fox in his Eighth Book, continuing the History of the Martyrs,
etc. Page 248.

Cuthbert, By the Permission, etc. -- By Duty of our Pastoral Care, we are
bound diligently with all our Power, to Foresee, Provide for, Root out, and put
away all those things which seem to tend to the Peril and Danger of our
Subjects, and especially the Destructions of their Souls: wherefore we having
Understanding by the Report of diverse credible Persons, and also by the Evident
Appearance of the Matter, that many Children of Iniquity, Maintainers of
Luthers Sect, Blinded through extreme Wickedness (the Old and New Pretense)
wandering from the way of Truth, and the Catholic Faith, craftily have
Translated the New Testament into our English Tongue -- and Erroneous Opinions,
pernicious and Offensive, seducing the Simple People. -- Pestiferous, and most
pernicious Poison, dispersed throughout all our Dyocess of London, in great
number; which truly without it be speedily foreseen, without doubt will infect
the Flock. -- And with much of this Nature; giving the People 30 Days to bring
in all the Books which have been dispersed, etc.


But Richard Bayfield, who refused so to do, but still Owned and Dispersed
those Books which opened the private Cabonet of the obscure Consults of the
close Designing Papists, was Sentenced, and Condemned, and Burnt; as you may
read in p. 291. 292. of the aforesaid Book; for bringing into London, and
publishing several Books which were wrote by Luther, Zuinglius, Lambert, Bucer,
Hus, Frith, and others, as bad Spirits, to the Interst and Design of the then
Papists: as W. R. can be to G. F. and his Party; and yet doubtless they think
he and his Friends are bad enough, or else they would not have given them the
Characters before described, except they be Arrant Hypocrites indeed, etc.

But one thing by the way, that Fox noted, is worthy our Consideration, which
is set down, p. 289. Intimating that the Papists might have of these Books to
read and peruse them, and to answer them upon occasion, as G.W. and others have
had of the Books of W. R. but not a word against them, as if they were Heirs
apparent to that right honorable (in the Papists account) Sir Thomas Moor.
Hear what Fox says,

Although all these Books -- were Inhibited, Viz. Prohibited, etc. -- Yet
License was granted before to Sir Thomas Moor, by Tonstal, Bishop of London,
Anno, 1527. That he notwithstanding might have, and peruse them, with a Letter
also sent to him from the said Bishop, or rather by the advice of other
Bishops, desiring him that he would show his Cunning, and play the pretty Man (
as the Author to the Accuser did) in Expunging the Doctrines and Opinions of
those Books, etc.

I could also tell you the Story of the cruel Sufferings of Thomas Green, for
spreading Books in Queen Marys Reign, but you may read it at large in p. 218.
of the Sp. Mar. Revived, etc.

Object. But some may perhaps say, That though the Papists were against the
spreading of these kind of Schismatical Books, yet they allowed, or at least,
permitted wicked Books; and that does not G. Fox, or his Party, etc.

Answer. This I confess was an Objection which had some place in my Mind. But
being in London in the Month of February last, after I had seen the
Excommunication against J. B. I was resolved to try the Truth of the matter,
and so I went to Benjamin Clark, who is a great Man for G. F and his Party, and
sells the Answers to W. R. his Book, but I suppose it is against his Conscience
to sell one of W. R. his Books, although it has more Divinity, Truth, and
Reason in it, than all the Books extant against it: yet inasmuch as G. F. is
therein Detected; and their Church Government reprehended, and R. B. his Book
of Government Anatomised; the said B.C. will not sell one of them.

However I went to his Shop, as a Countryman, and Stranger, and asked if they
sold no pretty Books for Children, no pretty Play-Books, or Papists Books, in
short, I had all sorts brought to my view, and as wicked -- Books; yea, such as
I never saw that I remember; which if they desire a Proof of their Badness, I
may, for ought I know, afterward have occasion to produce one out of them. Oh
gross Deceit, and manifest Hyppocrisy! Were ever more vain Pretenses amongst
the Papists, than are now entered this sort of New Church Governors? Oh! How
did G. Fox Buffet Thomas Vincent, who had rather that his Hearers should go to
a Bawdy House, than to a Quakers Meeting, in his Epistle to the Book,
Entitled, The Divinity of Christ, etc. Put forth by G.W. yea, the whole
People, saying, How now Presbyterians, High Priests, What, Is this your
Doctrine that you Preach up, for your Hearers to go to a Bawdy House, etc. Over
and over they are pelted, as if that kind of Wickedness, the Presbyterians had
been Principled in; because T. V. in his over hot Zeal; might use such an
unjustifiable Expression; and now may they say to G. F. How now G. F. What,
Had thou rather that B. Clark and J. Bringhurst should sell Papists Books,
Play-Books, Jesting-Books, nay, (...) Books, rather than that Book of W.R.
because it discovers the Naked Truth of your New-Model of Church Government,
etc.

Object. Perhaps some may object and say, as B. A. or J. F. or one of them said
to me, Viz. Well, but suppose all that you say or suggest, be true; admit that
were granted, yet to publish it, that is abominable and wicked. Or words to
that purpose, etc.

Answ. Indeed if things were not true, and that what we suggest had no bottom,
but barely our own Apprehension and Suspicion, then to publish things of this
nature, thereby to Expose, and falsely Represent a People, this would be very
wicked, and such a Practice is, and ever was hated of God and good Men: but
admitting they be real Truths, and no Fictions, which I hereby expose; as that
I stand ready to make appear, then upon that Foot, and upon that Bottom, I do
account it both Just, Reasonable, and a Christian Duty, in three Respects;

First, To reprove the Erroneous, by showing them their Errors; if not, then
were the Apostles, Martyrs, and the whole Line of Protestants, in the wrong,
and under Blame greatly.

Secondly, To undeceive the World, and the credulous People therein, who are
very apt to be led aside by the Flourishes and fair Pretenses of Men, and not
like the Noble Bereans, search the Scriptures, in Order to examine things
relating to Life and Salvation, and the Doctrine and Discipline their Teachers
lay down to be indispensibly obeyed.

Thirdly, To manifest the right Way, both to the Erring Persons, and the
Ignorant World of Implicit Professors; and this to be done for the Good of
Souls, for the Increase of Knowledge, and Gods Glory; and that this is my main
End, and peculiar Intent, I appeal to God the Searcher of all Hearts, and knows
the Intents thereof, etc.

A Word of Advice to the Pensilvanians.
FRiends, you have the Advantage of those that went into New England,
Barbados, and other Plantations formerly; you may perceive the Rock upon which
they have miscarryed, and what has been an Impediment to the Increase of Love
and Charity amongst them, to wit, Impositions on the Consciences of those that
differ from them in some Religious Point of Church Discipline, or other. How
has New England that fled from hence under a Complaint of the Bishops Tyranny,
made their Little-Finger as heavy as their Loins; Witness the Sufferings of
our Friends to Death under their Tyranny. And Secondly, Enquire and see how
sweetly our Friends lived in Barbados, in Love and Charity one toward
another, until G. F. his Law came to take place there; Insomuch as that at
length, at a Quarterly Meeting at Ralph Fretwells House, in Barbados, the 23d.
of the 10th. Month, 1680. Where the Sum of their Testimony amounted to a Choice
to be made, Viz. Whether Friends would cleave and abide to the Universal
Spirit, Viz. in the Men's and Womens-Meeting, etc? Or, Whether to their
particular Measures, etc. [A strange kind of Proposition] And after many
Testimonies given to the further Opening the Question, the Judgment underneath
was written, and voluntarily Subscribed by both the Men and Women, etc.

That is to say,

I Desire to give up my whole Concern, if required, both Spiritual and Temporal
unto the Judgment of the Spirit of God in the Men's and Womens-Meetings; as
believing it to be more according to the Universal Wisdom of God, than any
particular Measure in my self, or any particulars, with which the Men's and
Womens-Meetings have not Unity.

Subscribed by 39 Men, 43 Women: Total, 82.

Thus Implicit Faith and Blind Obedience for the magnifying of G. F. his Laws
and Orders, began to spread far and near; but this Papistical Judgment, and
Erroneous Opinion stands Answered by T. C. in a Small Tract, Called,
Babells-Builders Unmasking themselves, etc.

Also you have the Advantage of seeing the Effects of G. F. his Laws here in
England. Wherefore in short, this is my Advice to you; Keep the Holy Scriptures
in Esteem amongst you; and if any would lay a Foundation for Church Government,
that is not warranted by the plain Text thereof, and would compel you to a
Conformity to the same, slight it, and never submit to such an Yoke, neither be
entangled thereby, though there may be a Show of Wisdom in them, as the Apostle
said, Gal. 5. Heb. 9, 10. Isaiah 29.13. Mat. 15.9. I say, keep the Scpipture in
great Esteem; and if your Teachers bid you observe any particular Thing or Duty
that Christ Commanded, do it with a Reverend Regard: but if they begin once to
extol their Written Traditions above the Holy-Scriptures, you will have good
and warrantable ground to testify against their Innovations: and if for this
they call you Heretics or Schismatics, answer them in the words of St.
Augustine, Errare possum, Hereticus esse non possum. In an Error I may be, but
an Heretic I cannot be; for there are three things necessary for just Proof of
Heresy; First, That it be an Error that I hold. Secondly, That it be an
Error against the Truth of Gods Word: for otherwise every Error makes not a
Man a Heretic. And Thirdly, That it be stoutly and wilfully maintained;
otherwise an Error against Gods Truth, without wilful Maintenance, is not
Heresy.

There is the Sixth Branch of the Grant and Confirmation, mentioned in the
Second Chapter about Sufferings, which as Stated, is not warrantable, which for
brevity sake, I pass by, until an Opportunity offer it self, and then I may
unriddle the meaning, and perhaps discover the Effects thereof Effectually. And
thus I rest your Friend,

Milden-hall, the 9th. of the 1st. Month, 1682. F. B


THE Postscript.
AS it was the manner of the Pharisees to propound Insnaring Questions to
Christ Jesus in the Day of his Flesh; tempting him, endeavoring to entangle
him in his Talk, when otherwise they were not able to Confute him. Even so has
it been the manner of some amongst us, to come to me, since I sent the forgoing
in Manuscript to the Press: Questioning me, in order to ensnare or entangle me
in my Talk, instead of proving their Proceedings Apostolical, and their Force
and Compulsion in their Church Procedure, warrantable: WHEREFORE my further
Advice to the Reader, is, To frequent the Holy Scriptures, and read them
diligently; as also the Works of R. Hubberthorn, F. Howgil, and other Ancient
Friends, and the foregoing Tract; and then see and consider whether there be
not Violence done to our first Principles of Union, whereby Tyranny instead of
Order is introduced.

For it is a Protestant Principle, to read all Authors, to search out the Truth
of Things in Controversy, to endeavor, after a right Understanding, to prove
all things, and hold fast that which is good; and hereby will Implicit Faith
and Blind Obedience be excluded, Knowledge increased, and true Conviction
become the ground of our Conformity, and the Bereans Example become our daily
Practice. But it is a Popish Principle, To believe as the Church believes,
barely because She so believes: to take all for granted our Leaders say,
without any further Examination, to read no Books, but what are Licenced and
approved on by this General Council, or that Second-Days Meeting, to Pin my
Faith on their Sleeves, to see with their Eyes instead of my own. Oh this
Implicit Faith this Blind Obedience, this Idolizing the Wisdom and Conduct of
the Multitude, and refusing the use of our own Reason, Sense and Understanding,
is no less than the Product of a Popish Principle, and ought to be avoided.

Object. But some may object, and say, That although things be thus (which
being upon Record, cannot without great Impudence, be denied) yet to publish
them, we think very hard measure, etc.

Answ. If no private means had been used, then indeed this Objection had been
of some weight; but in regard so many private Endeavors have been used for
four Years together, and all avail nothing, it is but just and equal, as for
Example;

Let any of the Hearers be found guilty of Misdemeanors (although no other
Crimes than the Leaders and Teachers themselves are guilty of) it is usual to
go to such and admonish them if they persist in the Evil, then admonish them
again: and if after all private Means they will not be reclaimed, then it has
been usual to give out Papers of Condemnation against them, that the World may
see we do not own them in their evil Practices, etc.

Even so it is but just and reasonable, that if our Leaders and
Church Governors, as (they count themselves) who pretend to see for the Body,
shall Erect such a way of Church Government and Discipline as neither Christ
nor his blessed Apostles never commanded nor Practiced, and bring in and set up
other Traditions than the Apostles delivered; and then compel (according to
that little Power they have) a Uniformity and Conformity to them; then it is
but just to call these Leaders to account, and admonish them again and again,
and show them their Error, and the Mischief of their Impositions, and if after
all private Endeavors, for three or four Year together, these
Church Governors will not be reclaimed, nor in any wise persuaded to make void
such Edicts, such vain Traditions and useless Ceremonies; nor yet be content
that as many as have freedom to use them, may, and that others that are
otherwise minded, may be let alone, and left to their Christian-Liberty,
whether to Conform, or not Conform; then it is but just to bear a Public
Testimony against them, their Impositions, their Prescribed Rules and Cannons,
their Written Orders, their Antichristian way of Church-Procedure; that the
World may know we do not own them; and that G.F. G. W. and those of Party with
them have been called to account have been admonished again and again; Is fully
manifest by what is set forth in this Treatise, together with what is written
by W.R. in his Book Entitled, The Christian-Quaker, Distinguished, In Five
Parts, etc.

Milden-Hall, the 22. of the 3d. Mon. 1682. F. Bugg.

The Labouring-Mans Caveat Concerning Womens-Meetings.
TAKE heed, beware of Novelty,
And of Female Authority,
That they into the Church ben't brought,
And thereby such Divisions wrought,
Through Craft of the Old Enemy,
Who is profound in Subtilty;
As may cause Bitterness to Spring,
Which is a very hurtful Thing,
And more thereby's defiled within
Than Women can wash clean again.
But rather take the Good Old Way
As God Commanded: Paul does say,
That Women in subjection be,
And not usurp Authority,
Nor in the Church permitted speak,
Whereby they should good Order break,
Except to Pray or Prophesy,
By Power given from on High.
Otherwise they will Confusion make,
And cause the Hearts of Friends to ache:
But rather all with one Accord,
Let Male and Female Serve the Lord,
That as Partakers of one Grace,
They meet together in one Place,
And not distinct, as George does say,
At the Tenth Hour of the Day,
Nor yet divided, one from the other,
Lest that Division breeds another:
But as the Children of one Father,
Brethren and Sisters both may gather
Together in one Place to see
What may to others needful be,
And helping their necessity,
May serve each other in Unity;
And Men's Invented Novelties
With Womanish Formalities:
What 'ere defiles may out be swept,
And all Things sweet and clean be kept;
Who first convinced us by his Light,
To lead us on may have his Right.
And following Him as Children Dear,
May walk in Love whilst we are here,
And all unto him be Subjected,
That all may in him be Perfected;
That God over all may Ruler be,
And Glorified Eternally.
But what art thou that art so bold,
That Womens-Meetings thus Controlled,
And thus do seem to lay a Block,
Against the raising of a Stock:
Whereas George has Infallibly
Erected them to sit on High;
And that against their Government
None should show Discouragement,
Neither Direct nor Indirect,
Lest out of Unity they be kept.
I tell thee I am a Labouring-Man,
And have been taught to Thresh and Fan,
And what is the Chaff unto the Wheat?
Though it may serve some Beast to eat;
And to the Wheat may grow so near,
That both came forth of the self same Ear,
And sent forth wrapped in Paper White,
Wise Men will look ON IT in the Light;
And such whose Eyes are in their Head,
Can see it is not fit for Bread;
Therefore on it refuse to feed,
Lest it should ill Humors breed,
And such Distempers as Blind-Zeal,
Which noysom are to Commonweal:
For when Men's Minds with it are heat,
Their Fellows they are apt to beat,
According to their Power and Might,
They with their Tongues begin to smite,
And he that is not of their Mind,
From Truth (say they) he is Declined,
And Womens-Meetings he does slight,
How then can his Spirit be right;
And then says one, Let Us Mouth be stopped,
And others cry, He must be knocked,
Another, He does blasting threaten,
And thus are Fellow Servants beaten,
From Cross-Bow of their crooked thoughts
Which Blind-Zeal bent, they shoot their bolts.
It Is like I shall be paid with blows
For smiting the Image on the Toes,
That Image of Authority,
Which Womens-Meetings signify;
Although but two or three be there,
As more seldom do appear,
When Weather's cold, and Winds do blow,
I seldom see a bigger Show:
But I don't mean with them to fight,
Therefore to keep me from their Sight:
I Will to my Refuge quickly fly,
Even God that Judges Righteously,
And with him also will abide,
Till he does Remedy provide,
That Truth over all may so prevail,
As Love to conquer may not fail;
That as God's one, also his Name,
We all may be one in the same,
And he may Reign whose Right it is,
That nothing may be done amiss,
And then his Saints with Joy shall sing,
And sound forth Praises to their King,
Which was his due all times before,
To him be it given for evermore.
But now before I go my way.
Another word I have to say:
To such as would know my Intent
Why this I writ, it is to prevent
The further growth of Discontent,
Raised with the Female-Government.
Although a Charter firm they have,
And Grant and Confirmation brave,
Which Strengthen and Corroborate
Their Jurisdiction obtained of late;
Yet if the Tree known now may be
By the Fruit, mine Eye does see
Charter and Confirmation both,
Are Innovations nothing worth.
Wherefore I say, my Council take,
And to your selves no Image make,
Nor to a Likeness now Submit
That no Foundation has in it.
Now to Gods Grace I all Commend,
For teaching thereon to depend,
Which from all Strife can us defend,
And thus I here shall make an End;
Who am a Lover of Truth and Peace,
To all therein wishing Increase.
A Table of the Contents, or principal Matters contained in the Second Part of
this Book.
CHAP. I.
Treats of Principles of Truth, Received and Believed in the Beginning, with an
Epistle about Marriage, and other Things, not as a Form to walk by, but as
Advice suitable to the Nature and Tendency of the Testimony of Truth Received
and Belieed, etc. Truths Entrance amongst us, Page 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. The 7th.
Particular in an Epistle of Advice, Page 29. 30.
CHAP. II.
Manifests an Alteration and Change: Shows the Women's Charter for their
Jurisdiction: Sets forth the Grant and Confirmation made at a London
Yearly Meeting, 1675, Viz. G. F. his Platform for Womens-Meetings, Page 33, 34,
35, 36. 37. The 1st. Branch of the Grant, Page 41, 42. 2d. Branch of the Grant,
P. 42, 43, 44, 45. 3d. Branch of the Grant, Page 48, 49. 4th. Branch of the
Grant, Page 50, 51. Observations upon them, Page 54. 55, 56.
CHAP. III.
Treats of the Proceedings of G. Fox his Party in the Executive Part of the
Charter, Grant, and Confirmation, mentioned in the Second Chapter: Their
Proceedings against J. Ansloe: An Opposition thereunto, made by several, Viz.
Hadenham Orders, Page 60, 61. The Record against J. A. Page 63. A Letter to S.
Cater, by F. Bugg, Page 64, 65, 66, 67, 68. F. Bugg his Protectation, Page 68,
69. Six Queries about G. F. being Head of the Church, Page 75, 76, 77, 78, 79,
80. One Query by J. A. Viz. What is Conformity? Page 82, 83.
CHAP. IIII.
R. Hubberthorns Reasons against Impositions, Page 88, 89. F. Howgils Discovery
of Innovators, Page 89, 90, 91. G. Fox his Old Doctrine, and New Practice, Page
93, 94, 95, 96, 97. A Huntingtonshire Certificate, Page 97, 98. Observations on
G. Fox his ancient Doctrine, Page 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104.
CHAP. V.
Shows the Opinion of several of the Clergy. both Bishops and Ministers, to be
against Impositions, and the Imposers are the Culpable Dividers and Authors of
Schism, etc. Bishop Dovenants Testimony, Page 105, 106. Dr. Stillingfleets
Iron. Page 106, 107. Archbishop Laud against Fisher, Page 107. Bishop of
Heriford, Page, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111. Alsops Mischief of Impositions, Page
111, 112, 113, 114.
CHAP. VI.
Shows the Judgment of Ancient Protestants, and Martyrs, against Forcing a
Conformity to Men's Traditions not grounded on Scripture Authority. Zanchy's
Testimony, Page 116. W. Tindal about Forms, Page 116, 117. R. Richardson
Traced, and found fallacious, Page 118, 119. W. Tindal about Services of Women,
Page 119. An Objection answered, Page 120. Tindal about the Elders erring, Page
121. Luther about Opinions, Page 121. Barns against Imposition, Page 121, 122,
123, 124. Brentious upon Cor. 3. Page 124. Dr. Tailor about Liberty, Page 124,
125. Dr. Tailor about Ceremonies, Page 125. Bishop Hoopers Speech, Page 125,
126.
CHAP. VII.
Shows that my self and others in this Country, have used private means about
four Years, and no Accommodation, or Condiscention was attainable: Neither
Answer to Letter, Answer to Query; no when I went to London with a Letter from
Friends of our particular Meeting, to the Second-days Meeting in London, and
delivered it with my own Hand, would neither answer the Letter, nor so much as
discourse me; but when I had given them the Letter, C. Tailor bad me be gone.
All which shows the Author to the Accuser his Pretentions to an Accommodation
and Condiscention to be Fallacious, Deceitful, and Hypocritical. A Letter from
11 Friends to the Quarterly-Meetings, Page 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136,
137. F. B's Letter to W. P. about a Composure, Page 138, 139, 140, 141, 142,
143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148. F. B's Letter by way of Prologue to 9 Queries to
G. W. Page 150, 151, 152, 153. Nine Queries sent to G. W. Page 154, 155, 156,
157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162. A Battledore and Spectacles for G.F. P. 163. R.
R's Letter to F. B. Page 164, 165, 166. F. B. his Answer to R.R's Letter, Page
167, 168, 169, 170. F. B. his Letter to the Second-days Meeting, Page 172, 173,
174, 175, 176, 177. 178, 179, 180. 11 Friends Letter to the Second-days
Meeting, Page 180, 181, 182; 183. An Answer to Six Interrogatories, Page 184,
185, 186.
CHAP. VIII.
Shows that the Severity used by G. Fox and his Party, exceeds that of the
Judges, Justices, and Protestant Bishops, who have Excommunicated J. B. for
selling W. R's Book: And if Application be made to them for Redress of
Grievances; they cry, We are deluded: and will sometimes refuse to read a
Letter, but seldom, or never answer any. And Advice to the Pensilvanians. A
Letter to Judge Turner, Page 188, 189. Another Letter to Judge Turner, Page
190, 191, 192, 193. J. B's Excommunication for dispersing W. R's Book, Page
197, 198, 199. R. Bayfield burnt for dispersing the Books of Luther, Tindal,
Hus, and others, Page 204. Sir Thomas Moor allowed to read and to answer those
Schismatical Books, Page 205, 206. G. Whitehead allowed to buy, have, possess,
and read, yea, and answer W. R. his Book, Page 205. B. Antribus, or J. Fields
Objection Answered, Page 208, 209. Advice to the Pensilvanians, Page 210, 211,
212, 213.
A few of the most remarkable Errors corrected, the rest are left to the
Friendly Reader to correct. ERRATA.
Page 4. line 9. for 8th. Article, r. Articles of Faith. p. 5. l. 23. for
their, r. those. p. 17. l. 15. for Woolwick, r. Woolruch. p. 24. l. 10. for
Heavenly Spiritual, r. Heavenly and Spiritual. p. 26. l. 3. r. declared. p 28.
l. 22. r. from the Brethren to the Brethren. p. 38. l. 16. for Grant or Order,
r. Charter for Womens-Meetings. p. 40. l. 30. for Order, r. Charter. p. 47. l.
9. for how to, r. and how to. p. 56. l. 14. for partly, r. purely. p. 57. l. 3.
for Order, r. Charter. p. 71. l. 16. for the, r. their. p. 84. l. 17. r.
W^tnesses. p. 85. l. 20. for lying, r. buying. p. 93. l. 20, 21. r. to wit the
Spirit. p. 105. l. 16. for Doveman, r. Dovenant. p. 119. l. 30. f. Little
withdrawn, r. his Book Entitled. p. 125. l. 6. for Increasment and Formnes^,
r. Increment and Firmness. p. 153. l. 22. for 1678, r. 1681. p. 206. l. 24. for
Clark, r. Clarks Shop. p 196. l. 17. for discousing, r. discoursing.

FINIS.

