Quakerism Withering, AND Christianity Reviving OR, A BRIEF REPLY TO THE
Quakers Pretended Vindication. In Answer to a Printed Sheet delivered to the
PARLIAMENT. WHEREIN Their Errors, both in Fundamentals and Circumstantials, are
further detected, and G. Whitehead further unmasked. By an Earnest Contender
for the Christian Faith, Francis Bugg.

Licensed,

March 3. 1693/4.


Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched forth my hand, and no
man regarded: I also will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear
comes. Prove. 1.24, 26. LONDON: Printed for the Author, and sold by J. Dunton
at the Raven in the Poultry, and J. Guillam Bookseller in Bishopsgate-street,
1694.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND EDWARD, Lord Bishop of Gloucester.
My Lord,
SINCE by Divine Providence, after my many Years Conversation with the Quakers,
I heard the first Sermon by a Public Minister in your Church, whereby my
Understanding was in great part cleared from those cloudy Mists which fell from
the confused Notions and uncertain Doctrines of the Quakers; I think my self
bound in Duty to return Public Thanks to God for that his Providence and Token
of his Especial Favor; as also to his Servants, who labor in the Word and
Doctrine, and for the same (however despised by the Ignorant) are worthy of
Double Honor. And having been concerned in Conscience to unveil the Teachers
of the Quakers, who bring in Damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that
bought them; I presumed to present your Lordship with the ensuing Discourse,
who, as you know how to rebuke with all Authority such as wilfully maintain
Errors, so you also know how to bear with, and forbear, such as through
Infirmity may unwillingly err. I therefore do most humbly offer what I have
wrote to your Lordships Perusal, and shall most willingly submit to your
Censure the Matters therein contained: And if, for want of Judgment in the
Matters controverted, I have wronged the Quakers, I shall most willingly
Retract, and make them public Reparation; believing on the other hand, that if
they be found guilty of the Errors charged, that your Lordship will think it
requisite, that they, under their Hands, make an ingenuous Retractation,
according to their Pretenses in their printed Works. I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble, and most obedient Servant, Fra. Bugg.

THE PREFACE.
READER,
PRovidence has so attended me, as that a Judicious Person (beholding the
Injustice of G. W. to me, and especially his Pervertions of the Truths asserted
by me) have answered his Book falsely styled Innocence triumphant, etc. by his
Book styled Some Animadversions, etc. so that I need say nothing in answer to
it. As for his large Quotation out of my Book De Christianae Liberate, it was
some years before I left the Quakers, and which G. W. need not boast of, for it
was levelled at the Usurpation of their Women's Meetings; and it gave Them a
sore Wound as well as G. W. who wrote in favor of them: And indeed the Matter
suited the Subject, and the Book so Methodised, the Time considered, as I am
glad it was no worse; though I am grieved to behold so much wrote by me without
any mention of the Death and Sufferings of Christ, his Resurrection, Ascension,
and the Benefits accrewing thereby to Mankind; and the more to consider how
many there are led Captive, as I once was, to the Antichristian Doctrine of the
Quakers, for whose sake I have been concerned, and had not G. W. withstood our
words, I do think there might have been a better Understanding than there has.
For my part, I declare solemnly, no Man can pursue an Accommodation with more
Sincerity than I have done: How have I wrote! how have I wooed and entreated,
that we might have a meeting to sentence what was wrong, and to press after
Truth! And when I came to London, November last, before I printed the Sheet to
the Parliament, I wrote to G. W. that we might have a meeting, that so he and I
might engage a Retractation if need were. And as this was pursuant to their own
Proposal mentioned p. 2. so it might have had a good effect, viz.

I being now in Town, if you will come to my Lodging you shall be welcome; if
you will have an hours private Discourse, I will promise, if you will do the
like, never to take notice of what passes, or be both at liberty, which you
please: If we can agree on terms to have a meeting, with 6 or 8 of a side, it
may be a means to prevent farther Controversy: If you do not think good to
come to me, if you invite me to come to your House, or any other place, I will,
etc. This I wrote before I printed the Sheet delivered to the Parliament, but
he was so far from consenting to what I proposed, that he gave me no answer to
my Letter; and when I saw that, I knowing what they had done against me, I
thought it prudence, for my own preservation as well as for a general Good, to
keep up the Test against Quakerism, I mean the Oath; for though they say, W.
Smith's Catechism, p. 79. Quest. And are you so disposed toward your Enemies,
as that you cannot seek Revenge, etc? Ans. Yes, that is the disposition of our
Nature, not to seek Revenge, though we do suffer Wrong, for the Revenging
Nature is in the Fall; but it is not so with us, whom God has redeemed, etc. I
say, notwithstanding this pretended Innocence, I found the Quakers so fallen,
and so much unredeemed, that I should rather fall into the Hands of Papists, if
they had power, for had they power, they would be as often in the Fall as out
of the Fall, as often in old Adam as in their new, as often in the Unredeemed
as the Redeemed State; so the best way is to keep them out of Places of Trust
and Government, and then they can only bark, and show their Teeth; -- Canes
timidi vehementius latrant.

But since such as revenge themselves are in the Fall, then they are not in
their Star, their Branch, G. Fox; for he said, He was (when living) in a state
beyond the First Adam that fell, and in the state of the Second Adam that never
fell; That his very Marriage was above the state of the First Adam in his
Innocence, in the state of the Second Adam that never fell; and that he never
fell nor changed; that he had power to bind and loose whom he pleased, etc. See
The Quakers unmasked, p. 27. Surely then W. C. and G. W's other Creatures was
all in the Fall, and unredeemed; out of G. Fox, that never fell nor changed;
out of their Star; out of their Branch notwithstanding their idolizing his
Motions, his Travels, his Sufferings, and meritorious Labors, and Books
printed and reprinted, sent abroad and dispersed: but lest G. W. leave out the
History of his Glorified State in the Reprint, I may Recite it; see The
Examination and Trial of G. Fox, at Lancaster Assize, etc. p. 21. And before I
came to the Bar, I was moved to pray, that the Lord would confound their Envy;
and the thundering Voice answered, I have glorified thee, and will glorify
thee again. And I was so filled full of Glory, that my Head and Ears was filled
full of it: And that when the Trumpet sounded, and the Judges came up again,
they all appeared as dead Men under me, etc. G. Fox. Alluding to John 12.28.
and 16.14. and 17.1.

Now you that are Disciples to G. W. pray measure the Truth of the printed
History of G. Fox his Travels; if you find his Glorified State fairly related,
as it is in his Book above recited, you may be assured there is some Truth in
it; if not, you may without breach of Charity conclude the said History a
Romance, a partial Story, some true, some false, some put in, some left out,
pieced and patched, mended and painted.

BOOKS written by Fra. Bugg.
1. DE Christianae Liberate. 2. The painted Harlot both stripped and whipped, etc.
3. Reason against Railing, etc. 4. Innocence Vindicated, etc. 5. The Quakers
detected, etc. 6. Battering Rams against New Rome, etc. 7. One Blow more at New
Rome, etc. 8. New Rome unmasked, etc. 9. New Rome arraigned, etc. 10. Quakerism
Withering, etc. Besides a Letter to the Quakers; and a Sheet to the Parliament,
etc.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. lin. 12. dele thing; p. 40. l. 9. for never read seldom; p. 43. l. 27.
for recommended r. mentioned; p. 52. l. 23. for 2 s. r. 20. p. 58. l. 27. for
Hen. r. John; p. 71. l. 20. for less r. weaker; p. 60. l. 14. for they out r.
they cut. p. 68. for Rose, r. Rofe.

Quakerism Withering, BUT Christianity Reviving.
The Introduction.
Courteous Reader,
THE main thing I intend is a Defense of my Sheet to the Parliament, from the
False Glosses of George Whitehead in the Quakers pretended Vindication; and to
show wherein I have offered to meet George Whitehead, to debate matters,
wherein he says I have wronged the Quakers, which I am not conscious of: And
this I did, first, in answer to his Challenge p. 4. viz. To make it appear
before any six, ten, or twelve competent Witnesses, which cannot be rationally
thought to be Quakers, in regard they are Parties concerned. So likewise did I
offer to debate the matter, when I allowed him to have Quakers, upon condition
that what they could not Justify he should Retract; which is according to
their Offer in like Cases; as in the Epistle in the front of Edw. Burroughs's
Works, etc. viz. And so gladly would we be made manifest to all the World, --
That we may freely and cheerfully, four, ten, twenty, more or fewer of us, give
as many of the wisest and ablest of the Priests and Professors a meeting for
Dispute at any place, and for what time; and let such, whether them or us, that
cannot prove our selves to be of the True Church, -- but found in Error, etc.
renounce all their Religion, and confess to all the World under their Hands,
that they have been deceived. -- And upon these, or any equal Terms, would we
willingly engage all, or any one, of these Sects, etc. As in New-Rome,
unmasked, p. 2. the said Challenge is by me then accepted, and by G. W. in his
Essay, etc. p. 7. rejected; which also is W. Penn's method. Again in my printed
Sheet to the Parliament, p. 2. I offered before ten or twelve impartial Men, to
produce every Book and Page which I therein quoted: This I did then offer with
the Sheet in my Hand, and many Quakers present, but none of them put me upon
proof; but G. W. in his pretended Vindication, p. 4. said, I G. W. freely offer
to make it appear, before any six, ten, or twelve competent Witnesses, who are
moderate Men of Sense and Reason, that F. B. has grossly abused and perverted
Truth, and wronged the People called Quakers, both in Charge, Citation and
Observation in his said Sheet, etc. Thus far then we agreed as to Matter of
Debate: I in my Sheet offered to produce every Book and Page quoted, before ten
or twelve impartial Men: And G. W. offered to make it appear, before any six,
ten, or twelve moderate Men, that I had wronged them: So that nothing remained
now but my coming to London to join Issue with G. W. and pursuant the 27th of
January 1693. I did, and sent him the Charge following; which had he kept to
his word [any thing] we had debated the matter; but nothing would do with him
but Quakers on his side, which though I was loath, yet upon condition of a
retractation of what I proved against them, and which they could not justify,
I at last consented, and to that I held them, seeing it is, as above observed,
their own method, proposed by Edw. Buroughs and W. Penn, to the Papists. And
whether I have not herein acquitted myself, I leave the World to judge.

Francis Bugg's Charge against the Quakers.
1. THEY deny Jesus of Nazareth, who was born of the Blessed Virgin Mary to be
Christ, and the efficient cause of Man's Salvation, etc.

2. Their Books are Blasphemous, and their Practices Idolatrous.

3. They deny the Scriptures, by speaking contemptuously of them, calling them
Death, Dust, and Serpents-meat; and that Preaching out of them is Conjuration.

4. They despise the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, as Baptism and the Lord's
Supper, saying, They arose from the Pope, and are no part of God's Worship; to
which their practice of laying them aside as useless say Amen.

5. They undervalue the Death and Sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ.

6. They exalt their own Writings above the Scriptures, and their own
Sufferings above the Sufferings of Christ.

Observe, that I do not charge these Errors upon all that go under the Name of
Quakers, as George Keith, and diverse others that are separate from the Foxonian
Party, who also charge them with Damnable Heresies and Doctrins of Devils, and
such Errors as no Protestant Society would tolerate, etc. as at large in their
Book extant, etc. and as in New-Rome unmasked, etc. I have more largely
explained my self, p. 68. to 71.

Francis Bugg's particular Charge against George Whitehead.
1. HE is a public Defamer. 2. A wicked Forger. 3. A wilful Liar. 4. A gross
Perverter. 5. A false Glosser. 6. A deceiver of the People. This I offer to
prove, and when done, before the same Men to answer any Charge which G. W.
shall exhibit against me,

Francis Bugg.

Here follows the substance of the Letter I sent him as Cover to the Charge.

In answer to your faint Challenge in your pretended Vindic. p. 4. to meet me
in any place in London, I am come to prove both the general and particular
recited Charge before eight moderate Ministers, each of us to choose four,
excepting against Quakers, Ranters, and Muggletonians, but give you your
choice, whether to choose the whole number out of the Episcopalians,
Presbyterians, Independants, or Baptists; or whether each of us one out of
each: This I leave to you. And since you are of late for distinguishing the
Moderate from the more Rigid, if your Case be good, I hope you cannot but think
there is four Moderate Men amongst them all, who have both Reason and Sense to
judge of Matter of Fact.

Fr. Bugg.

This he refused, which showed he either doubted his Case, or that he had such
Incharity, as not to think there were four moderate, wise, and just Men in all
the four Societies; if the last, what signify his pretended distinguishing? If
the first, why does he so bitterly complain, that I wrong them in Charge,
Citation, and Observation? But his word [any] gave me my choice; so when he
refused the Terms abovesaid, I made him a second Proposal, viz.

to prove my Charge exhibited, also my Sheet to the Parliament, and if I have
asserted any thing falsely, to retract it under my Hand, before six Members of
Parliament, each of us to choose three, upon condition that you will do the same.

Sent and subscribed in the presence of Samuel Grove, Samuel Place, Henry
Symons, John Fenn, Daniel Hassel, by me Fra. Bugg.

This he also refused, either judging we could not find each of us three
moderate Men in the House of Commons, or else he went from his words, to leave
it to any six, ten, or twelve moderate Men of Common Sense and Honesty: Nay,
that is not all, but he still refuses to abide by Burrough's Proposition above
recited: But that he might not have a starting-hole, I sent him a third Offer,
viz.

G. W. I was minded to except against Quakers, as in my first and second
Proposal I did, because I know they cannot be impartial between us; but because
I perceive you cannot otherwise be prevailed withal, I will renew my Offer,
viz. do you choose three Men where you please in the King's Dominion, and I will
choose three; and I offer to prove my Charge on condition, that you will engage
under your Hand, that what the Quakers hold you will either justify by
Scripture, or retract under your Hand, as also what your self have wrote: And I
do hereby engage the like, etc.

Fra. Bugg.

This he also refused to abide by, upon the account of a retractation; though Ed.
B. in the name of the Quakers, offered not only to retract, but also to
renounce all their Religion, and to confess to all the World under his Hands,
that they have been deceived, etc. as at large in his Epistle abovementioned:
But still I pursued him, and sent him a fourth Offer, viz.

Feb. 9th. 1693.
G. W. yours received, and return you the Terms upon which I offered to debate
the Controversy, according to Agreement in other Circumstances; I ask no more
than I give, which is equal: I am not conscious to my self of being guilty of
what you either have or now do charge me with, and that encourages me to engage
a retractation, if need be: If you think yourself clear of my Charge, and that
the Quakers hold no such Errors as I lay to their charge, what make you so
timorous of engaging under your Hands to retract, if proved upon you? If you
think a retractation will mar the beauty of your pretense to write and speak
by and from an Infallible Spirit, remember that Hungate the Jesuit, who
professed Infallibility almost equal with the Quakers, did not refuse to
subscribe when he disputed with Bishop Bramhal. Read the Life of the said
Bishop. Beside, you see E. B. allowed the point: Nay, moreover it was W. Penn's
way with the Papists; see his Seasonable Caveat, etc. p. 35. To conclude, (says
W. P.) if we would not receive a Thief until he has repented, let the Papists
first recant of their voluminous Errors, not known in Scripture, nor ever heard
of for Three hundred years together after Christ, etc. Yet if you will leave
the Matter to disinterested persons, according to the latitude of your Offer in
your printed Sheet, viz. to any Moderate Men of Sense and Common Honesty, etc.
I will require no retractation, but leave it to them, whether I have wronged
you in Charge, Citation, or Observation. And as to the twelve Witnesses, for
whom you make such a complaint, if upon examination I do not prove them guilty
of Perjury on your own Propositions to Authority, I will retract my Proceedings
against them; but if I do prove it, then you shall engage, that they shall
retract under their Hands, always excepting against the said twelve
False-witnesses, being present at the Debate unless it be when the four
particulars in their Certificate be under examination; or when any Matter
depending thereon no under consideration.

Fra. Bugg.

But all would not do; I could not get Sheba, the Son of Bichri, that Man of
Belial, 2 Samuel 20. to come out on equal Terms: Neither will their People, like
the wise Women in Abel, bring him out; and thereupon I shall leave it to the
World, whether I have not performed what I promised in my Sheet; and whether G.
W. have not shuffled and evaded a fair Debate, 1st, in refusing to leave the
Matter to any moderate Men, as he promised in print; 2. And when debated before
his Friends, who are Parties in the Errors, and cannot give it against him,
refuse to subscribe a Retractation, according to the Offer of their great
Prophet Edw. Buroughs, and W. P. But before I proceed to prove my Charge, I
would premise some few things, viz.

First, The Quakers Vind. etc. p. 1. It Is not unknown unto you (the Parliament)
that we are Dissenters from the Church of England, and as such we enjoy our
Liberty under you; and consequently we ought not to be reputed Criminal for
being such, etc.

I grant, that barely for being such, you ought not to be reputed criminal: But
if under that notion you take Liberty not only to maintain and defend such
Errors, as tend to overthrow the Christian Faith but also print, expose and
spread your erroneous Books all over England and Wales, and beyond the Seas,
unlicens'd to the Scandal of Religion; and not content therewith neither, but
to indict me for printing and exposing unlicens'd: This seems criminal, at
least very bold: For if you would not be reputed Criminal, because your Opinion
is for the present indulged, forgetting perhaps that you stand but upon your
good Behavior, why should you repute such as see your Errors, and forsake you,
(and conform themselves to the Established Religion, as that which is more true
and orthodox) Criminal, calling me a Self-condemned Apostate? Is not this
throwing Dirt in the Face of the Government, rendering their Religion so false
and erroneous, as that whoever forsake, and conform to the Established
Religion, must therefore be Self-condemned Apostates? Do you think this may not
affect your Superiors, so as to consider of your bold Adventures, etc.

Again, That Fra. Bugg himself did not account us Criminal for our Principles
two years after he left us, and joined himself to the Church of England, etc.
For which he quotes my Book, The Quakers detected, and their Errors confuted.

To which I answer, The very Title shows the contrary: And in the Book I charge
them with False Doctrine, Erroneous Principles; their Teachers Cruel
Taskmasters, Persecutors, and Tyrants; and that part of their Doctrine, which
was true, (as I still believe some little of what they teach is true) served
only as a Decoy to catch simple Souls by; charging their Ministers with Lies,
gross Forgery, and scandalous Defamations, Babel's Builders, Pharasaical
Hypocrites: See p. 4, 5, 18, 21. And now let the Wise in Heart judge, whether I
did not account the Quakers criminal in 1686. With what face then can this
gross Perverter G. W. say I did not account them criminal in 1686. unless to be
guilty of the forementioned be not criminal? As by the Quakers persisting
therein, they should not account it: However I did then, and do now, account
them great Criminals, both in Doctrine and Practice, and for leaving them am not
condemned; but bless the Day that ever I forsook such an Heresy as I deem them
to hold, defend, and I fear wilfully maintain.

The Matters in that Book treated on I methodiz'd under these three general
Heads, viz. The first point under Consideration was, How I came to be a Member
of their Society: The second, How I came to see their Errors and leave them:
The third, How I came persuaded and satisfied in going to the Public. In the
first I did set forth what I thought of them in 58, and 60. and what they
preached, and how innocent they appeared: G. W. in Norwich-Castle seemed as
demure as the best; yet in that Book I set forth, as I then believed that all
was but a Decoy or Cheat, to draw Disciples after them; and if I was cheated
and mistaken in them, so was Hugh Latimore, that learned Prelate, in the smooth
Carriage of the Papists, and their Infallible Delusions, who said, I am
ignorant of things which I trust hereafter to know, etc. Read Fox's Acts and
Monuments, etc. p. 410, 467, 468, 1325, 1488. where Bishop Latimer, Bishop
Cranmer, M. Luther, Dr. Barns, and other pious sincere Christians, have not
been too good nor too holy to acknowledge themselves mistaken, upon conviction,
though by your Doctrine render d Apostates, in that they once thought the Popish
Doctrine true, etc. Nay, your Incharity renders many of your own People
Apostates, who before they were deluded by your black Art of calling the
Scripture Death, Dust, and Serpents-meat, the Ordinances an Institution of the
Whore of Rome, the public Ministers Witches, Devils, Gormandizing Priests,
etc. thought the Doctrine of the Church of England sound and orthodox: But
since they are turned to the Heresy of Quakerism, G. W. accounts them Saints,
Lambs, Prophets, and what not? But as these Weights are counterfeit, so I
purpose to try them by the Touchstone of the Scripture, which cannot lie. And I
refer to my Book, New-Rome unmasked, etc. containing more than 100 Pages in
Quarto, divided into twelve Chapters, which show at large, that forsaking the
Quakers is no Apostasy from the Articles of the Christian Faith, etc. sold by
Mr. Dunton at the Raven in the Poultry, and Mr. Guillam Bookseller in
Bishopsgate-street. Concluding my Introduction with St. Augustine, Errare
possum haereticus esse non possum.

The FIRST CHARGE Against the Quakers. That they Deny Jesus of Nazareth, who
was born of the Blessed Virgin Mary, to be Christ, and the Efficient Cause of
Man's Salvation.
The ARGUMENT.
THE Method proposed to prove the recited Charge, is, 1st. A brief Citation of
Scriptures proving, that Jesus is the Christ of God, and Efficient Cause of
Man's Salvation, from the Testimony of GOD, Angels, and Men. 2dly. A Recital
out of the Quakers Books, wrote by their most approved Authors, alleging the
contrary, showing them thereby to be of a different Faith from the Prophets,
Apostles, Saints, and Blessed Martyrs, and all true Christians to this day.
3dly. That Geo. Fox, the first Founder of Quakerism, Anno 1650. have since
assumed to himself those divine Attributes due only to Christ, and thereby has
overthrown the Faith of some. 4thly. That his Disciples and Followers, and such
of greatest note amongst them, has said Amen to his Blasphemies, by their
frequent Adorations of him, as the Star, the Branch, the Son of Righteousness,
etc.

1st. Scripture Texts proving Jesus to be Christ.
John 1.14. And the word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us: (and we beheld
his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father) full of grace and
truth. Luke 1.26. And in the sixth month the Angel Gabriel was sent from God
unto a city of Gallilee, named Nazareth: and the Angel said unto her, Fear not
Mary, for thou have found favor with God: and behold, thou shall conceive in
thy womb and bring forth a son, and shall call his name Jesus. 2.10, 11. And
the Angel said unto them, Fear not; for behold, I bring unto you good tidings
of great joy, which shall be unto all people; for unto you is born this day, in
the city of David, a Savior, Christ the Lord. Mark 9.7. Matt. 17.5. While he
yet spoke, behold a bright cloud overshadowed them: and behold a voice out of
the cloud, which said, This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, hear
him. Matt. 26.67. Then did they spit in his face, and buffeted him, and others
smote him with the palms of their hands. 27.38. Then there, were two thieves
crucified with him, one on the right hand, another on the left. Ver. 50. Jesus,
when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost. 28.6. He is
not here, for he is risen, as he said, Come see the place where the Lord lay.
Acts 1.9, 10, 11. While they beheld, he was taken up, and a cloud received him
out of their sight. And while they looked steadfastly toward Heaven, as he went
up, behold two men standing by them in white apparel, which also said, Ye men
of Gallilee, why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus which is taken
up from you into Heaven [ then not in them, in the Quakers sense; for as he
said with reference to his Person, Matt. 26.11. Me ye have not always] shall so
come in like manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven. Acts 5.30, 31. The God
of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew, and hanged on a Tree, him has
God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give
repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. Acts 2.36. Therefore let all the
house of Israel know assuredly, that God has made the same Jesus, whom ye have
crucified, both Lord and Christ. Heb. 5.9. And being made perfect, he became
the Author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him. 12.2. Looking unto
Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before
him endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand
of the throne of God. Romans 8.34. It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is
risen again, who is at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for
us. Acts 7.35. But he being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into
Heaven, and saw the glory of God and Jesus standing on the right hand of God.
Ver. 56. And said, Behold, I see the Heavens opened, and the son of man
standing on the right hand of God. Acts 10.38. to 44. How God anointed Jesus of
Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with power, who went about doing good -- And
we are witnesses of all things which he did both in the land of the Jews and in
Jerusalem. Whom ye slew and hanged on a tree, him God raised up the third day,
and showed him openly, Not to all the people, but to witnesses chosen before of
God, even to us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead.
And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify, that it is he
which was ordained of God to be judge of the quiok and dead. To him give all
the Prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believes in him, shall
receive remission of sins. Read 1 Cor. 15.15.

2dly. The Quakers teach the contrary.
A Question to Professors, p. 33. Now the Scriptures do expressly distinguish
between Christ and the Garment which he wore; between him that came, and the
body in which he came; between the Substance which was veiled, and the Veil
which veiled it. Lo, I come, a body have thou prepared me. There was plainly
he, and the Body in which he came; there was the outward Vessel, and the inward
Life: This we certainly know, and can never call the Bodily Garment Christ, but
that which appeared and dwelt in the Body. Observe how flatly they contradict
the holy Scripture Testimony, and how they would divide the Humanity from the
Godhead; which is, in plain terms, a plain denial of Christ; for if they can
never call him that was born of the Virgin Mary Christ, whom the Jews spit
upon, smote with the palms of their Hands, nailed to the Cross, hanged on a
Tree, and at last crucified him; I say, if they can never call him Christ, but
a Veil, a Garment, a Figure, etc. they can never own him to be Christ, and
consequently deny him to be Christ; and not only so, but acquit the Jews, and
their drudge Judas of the Sin of murdering the Lord of Life and Glory; for
when they laid hold of him, smote him, buffeted him, crowned him with Thorns,
scourged him, nailed his tender Hands and Feet to the Cross, pierced his Side,
out of which came Water and Blood; they all this while, by the Quaker's
Doctrine, did not lay hold upon nor touch Christ, and consequently ought not to
be charged with crucifying the Lord of Life and Glory; only, it is true, they
took hold of a Garment, a Veil, etc. which they can never call Christ. Thus
have they made the Apostles False Witnesses, acquitted Judas, and cleared the
hard hearted unbelieving Jews of all their Barbarities inhumanly inflicted on
the Blessed Jesus.

A Quest. etc. p. 27. Is not the Substance, the Life, called Christ, wherever
it is found? Does not the Name [Christ] belong to the whole Body, and to every
Member in the Body, as well as to the Head etc? Observe how Matt. 24.24. is
fulfilled by their Doctrine; every believing Quaker may be called Christ as
well as he that suffered Death upon the Cross: Oh, dreadful Blasphemy! And to
confirm it, he tells you about ten lines after, viz. That the Name is not given
to the Vessel, etc. O Impudence itself! did not the Angel say, That unto you is
born this day, in the city of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord? Luke
2.11. and v. 28. Simon took him in his arms, and blessed God, and said, Lord,
now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word; for mine
eyes have seen thy salvation, etc. So that to say the Name Christ belongs to
every Believer, as well as to him, is Blasphemy; for the Apostle to the
Colossians gives the Name not only to the Godhead in him, but to him in whom it
dwelt, which they contemptuously term the Garment, Col. 2.9.

The Christian Quaker, and his Divine Test, etc. part 1. p. 107. To conclude,
We, though this general Victory was obtained, and holy Privileges therewith,
and that the Holy Body was not instrumentally without a share thereof; yet that
the efficient and chiefest cause was the Light and Life. -- P. 111. So that
thus far we can approach the honester sort of Professors of Religion, etc.
Observe how far the Quaker's Approach to the Christians amount to: The
Christians believe, that he who was born of the Virgin Mary, who was spit upon,
buffeted, smote with the palms of their Hands, dyed, rose again, and ascended
into Heaven, in the sight of the Gallileans, and now sits at the right hand of
God, according to the recited Scriptures; I say, they believe the same Jesus to
be the Christ of God; and that he is both the efficient and chief cause of
Man's Salvation: Acts 4.10, 12. By the name of Jesus of Nazareth, whom ye have
crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him does this man stand here
before you whole. Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is none
other name given under Heaven among men, whereby we must be saved, etc. So that
the Professor's Faith and Hopes of Salvation are in the crucified Jesus, which
you call the Holy Body. Indeed, you do approach to them a little, in calling
his Body Holy, and allowing him to have some share in the Salvation of Mankind
instrumentally; but the chief and efficient cause is in the light which you
have in your selves, and which was in the Jews and Gentiles before the
Incarnation of our Blessed Lord and Savior; which if that had been sufficient,
what need was there for Christ's coming, since he is but instrumentally a
Savior? For so you allow good Men to be, as I shall show anon: So that your
Approach to the Christians is very small, even but a few steps; for the
unbelieving Jews thought him to be a good Man, viz. Elias, Jeremias, or one of
the old Prophets; but instead of pressing on, the Author turns himself round to
his old Friends the Quakers, and tell them his Meaning by this sudden and
unusual Approach.

P. 102. So that the Invisible Life was the Root and Fountain of all, which is
sometimes ascribed in Scripture to the Body, by that common figure or way of
speaking amongst Men, the thing containing which, is the Body for the thing
contained, which was the Life, etc. Observe, I always understood, that when we
call a House that is made of Lime and Stone a Church, that it was a figurative
way of speaking the thing containing for the thing contained; but I never knew
this distinction touching our Blessed Savior made by any others than the
Quakers; and their chief Reason is, That they having the same Light, Life and
Spirit in their Bodies, as was in his Body, they would have every Man a
Savior, every Man a Christ: For, as above, they say, The Name of Christ
belongs to every Member of the Body, as well as the Head: And where ever they
make an Approach to the true Professors of Christianity, it is only for a Decoy:
For as above observed, they can never call the Bodily Garment Christ, meaning
him that was born of the Virgin, but a Garment, a Veil, a Figure, an
instrumental Cause of Salvation, but not the efficient; the thing containing
for another, viz. for the thing contained: For to call him that was born of the
Virgin, who suffered Death on the Cross, Died, Rose again, and ascended; this
is but a metaphorical Speech, the thing containing for the thing contained.
Thus have they robbed the Blessed Jesus of one of his emanent Attributes, viz.
of being the efficient Cause of Man's Salvation. Thus do they dance the Rounds,
sometimes approaching to the Christian Professors; as if they were in good
earnest: but by and by, with a sudden turn they glide to their Brethren, and
insinuate by consequence, That him that was born of the Virgin, he is no
otherwise a Savior [let the Episcopalians, Presbiterians, Independents and
Baptists say what they will to the contrary] than other good Men are, etc.

P. 102, 103. I dare not attribute to an External prepared Being, (That) which
is the natural and proper Work of the Divine Light: But certainly, if some Men
in Scripture are entitled Saviors, because of their Contribution, of their
Trials, Travels and Labors toward the Salvation of Mankind; of much more
right is that Honor ascribed to him, who had the Spirit without measure, etc.
Observe, the best Approach I take notice of, is, That they do seemingly allow
him to have the Spirit without measure; but I cannot call it otherwise than
seeming, since it is but about eight Lines after, where speaking of Salvation,
he says, And to the Holy Manhood not any otherwise than Instrumentally; which
in the Paragraph above recited, he there allows to good and holy Men, and that
as a meritorious Reward too, viz. Because of the Contribution of their Trials,
Travels, and Labors toward the Salvation of Mankind. So that by the Quakers
Doctrine, good Men are Instrumentally Saviors: And Christ himself is no more
but Instrumentally a Savior. The First I grant, as they are Servants to
Christ, and by his hand of Providence made use of toward the Conversion of
others. The Last I deny, as an Heretical Doctrine, which tends to rob Christ of
one of his chiefest Jewels; as the next Passage will demonstrate.

P 129. That nevertheless not to the Body, but Holy Light of Life therein is
chiefly to be ascribed the Salvation; and to the Body, however excellent, but
Instrumentally. Observe, how with one Shoulder they bear down the Blessed
Jesus, as only a Body, instrumentally serviceable, contrary to the Testimony of
St. Luke, and the inspired Apostles and Holy Prophets, who foretold of the
coming of the Just one. And since it is a great and precious Privilege, that we
have the Holy Scriptures in a known Tongue, that thereby we may have recourse
thereunto, to rectify our Mistakes, and help our Judgments, and prove the
Articles of our Christian Faith: So am I willing to prove my Charge against the
Quakers from plain matter of Fact, out of their own Books, writ by the most
Learned amongst them; and by the Coherence of their Doctrine, confuted by
Scripture, Reason, and Authority, shall this Controversy be decided. For if
the good Deed of the Woman, Matthew. 26.13. done to Christ against his Burials
shall be told of her so long as the Gospel is preached, surely so long as the
Gospel is preached shall there be War made against such false Teachers, as
shall thus bring in damnable Heresies, denying the Lord Jesus Christ to be a
Complete Savior, etc. But once more pray hear him.

P. 97, 98. The Serpent is a Spirit: Now no thing can bruise the Head of the
Serpent, but something that is Spiritual, as the Serpent is. But if that Body
of Christ were the Seed, then could he not bruise the Serpents Head in all,
because the Body of Christ is not so much as in any one; and consequently, the
Seed of the Promise is an Holy Principle of Light and Life, that being received
into the Heart, bruiseth the Serpents Head. And because the Seed which cannot
be that Body is Christ, as testify the Scriptures, the Seed is one, and that
Seed is Christ, etc. And thus have I traced him in his diverse Turnings and
manifold Approaches; sometimes to the Professors, and back again to the
Quakers, until at last you see he denies the Body which was born of the Virgin,
to be Christ: And the reason he gives, is, Because he is not personally in
every Man, and so no way capable to conquer the Serpent in them; and therefore
not the Christ: But if they were humble, and would forsake their Errors, and
by Faith lay hold of Christ, who is the Seed of the Promise, Genesis 3.14.
confessing their Sins, and begging Pardon for Christ's sake, let them not doubt
but the Head of the Serpent in them shall be bruised. But if they thus contemn
the Blessed Jesus, who was born of the Virgin, etc. one calling him a Garment,
which they can never call Christ; another, because he is not personally in
every Man, he cannot be Christ; and by and by the Name Christ belongs to every
Member, as well as to the Head; for that they have Light, Life and Spirit in
them, as Christ had: another, that Christ is not a Complete Savior, otherwise
than instrumentally; nor no otherwise to be called Christ, than metaphorically,
or by that common Figure or way of speaking, viz. the thing containing for the
thing contained: I say, so long as they continue in their Unbelief, its no
marvel they complain so much of the Serpent's having Dominion in them.

The Sandy Foundation shaken, etc. P. 21. The Justice offended being Infinite,
his Satisfaction ought to bear a Proportion therewith, which Jesus Christ as
Man could never pay, he being Finite; and from a Finite Cause could never
proceed an Infinite Effect: For so Man may be said to bring forth God, since no
thing below the Divinity it self can righly be styled Infinite. I have much
more to say against the dangerous Errors in that Book, which came lately to my
hand; but I spare the Author. However, by what is said, it is plain that they
account him that was born of the Virgin but a Man, a Finite Creature, a Vail, a
Garment, a Savior instrumentally like other good Men, and which they cannot
call Christ. Nay further, they say he is not Christ, not being personally in
every Man: And the Consequence is both natural and plain, that they deny Jesus
of Nazareth.

Smith's Primer, P. 8. How may I know when Christ is truly Preached?

Answ. They that are false (Ministers) preach Christ without, and bid People
believe in him as he is in Heaven above; but they that are Christ's Ministers,
preach Christ within.

Smith's Catechism, P. 57. And is that which is within you the only Foundation
upon which you stand, and the Principle of your Religion?

Answ. That of God within us is so, for we know it is Christ; and being Christ,
it must needs be only and principal; for that which is only, admits not of
another; and that which is principal, is greatest in being: And thus we know
Christ in us to be unto us the only and principal, etc.

The Sword of the Lord drawn, etc. P. 5. Your imagined God beyond the Stars,
and your carnal Christ is utterly denied. -- That this Christ is God and Man in
one Person is a Lie. By which, without enlarging, it is very plain, That as they
do not own Jesus of Nazareth, who was born of the Virgin, Suffered, Died, Rose,
and Ascended, and now sits at the Right Hand of God in Heaven above; so all
that preach the same Christ, and bid People believe in him as he is in Heaven
above, are, by the Quakers Doctrine, False Ministers: But they that preach the
Light within, as the only Foundation which admits of no other, and as the
principal Cornerstone of their Building. These, and these only are (say they)
true Ministers. And this, if nothing had been said before, had been sufficient
to prove my first Charge; namely, That the Quakers deny Jesus of Nazareth, who
was born of the Blessed Virgin, to be Christ, and the Efficient Cause of Man's
Salvation: And I pray God to give them a Heart to repent them of their Unbelief.

1. By Geo. Fox's assuming Divine Attributes to himself.
News caming up out of the North, etc. P. 1. Written from the Mouth of the
Lord: From one who is naked, and stands naked before the Lord: Clothed with
Righteousness, whose Name is not known in the World, risen up out of the North,
which was prophesied of, but now it is fulfilled, etc. G. F. The Teachers of
the World unvailed, etc. P. 26. I am the Light; him by whom the World was made;
and does enlighten every Man that comes into the World: If you love the Light
which you are enlightened withal, you will love Christ, who says, Learn of me:
But if you hate that Light, there is your Condemnation from him, who is Here is
a Fourth Person added to the Trinity, according to their Doctrine.
one with the Truth in every Man, who of the Lord was moved this to write, that
People might see what has gotten up since the Apostles time out of the Light,
with the Light, and reigned out of the Light, but now is manifest with the
Light, which the Apostles were in, it is seen, and to the Children of Light now
is manifest, whose Name of the World is called G. F. Several Petitions
Answered, etc. P. 60. My Name is covered from the World; and the World knows
not me, nor my Name. -- He that overcomes, has the new Name, and knows it.
-- He that overcomes, sits in his Throne: He that overcomes is Crowned: --
He that overcomes, eats of the Hidden Manna: He that overcomes shall
inherit all things. -- He that has an Ear to hear let him hear; and blessed is
he that reads, and does understand what he reads. G. F. Saul 's Errand to
Damascus, p. 7. The Old Man cannot endure to hear the New Man speak, which is
Christ, and Christ is the Way; and if Christ be in you, must not he say, I am
the Way, the Truth, and the Life? P. 8. And he that has the same Spirit that
raised up Jesus Christ from the Dead is equal with God. G. F. The Second Charge
against the Quakers. Their Books are blasphemous, and their Practice
Idolatrous, etc. which is proved in the foregoing and following, to the
confutation of G. W. and his false Witnesses, who deny these Appellations, etc.
This is only to go amongst Friends.

THou, O North of England! who art counted as desolate and barren, and reckoned
the least of the Nations, yet out of thee did the Branch spring and Star arise,
which gives light to all the Regions round about; in thee the Son of
Righteousness appeared with Wounding and with Healing, etc.

The next is John Blackling's Certificate, see Part V. Christ. Quak.
distinguished, etc. p. 77. That G. Fox is blessed with Honor above many
Brethren; and, That Thousands will stand by him in a Heavenly Record: -- That
his Life reigns, and is spotless, innocent, and still retains his Integrity,
whose Eternal Honor and Blessed Renown shall remain; yea, his presence, and
the dropping of his tender words in the Lord's Love, was my Soul's Nourishment.
The Quaker's Challenge, p. 6. of G. Fox thus in brief: A Prophet indeed. -- It
was said of Christ, he was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the
World knew him not: So it may be said of this true Prophet, whom John said he
was not; but thou shall feel this Prophet one day as heavy as a Millstone upon
thee; and though the World knew him not, yet he is known. Sol. Eccles. Jos.
Coale's Letter to G. Fox, out of the Barbados, thus in brief:
DEar G. Fox, who art the Father of many Nations, whose Life has reached through
us thy Children, even to the Isles afar off, to the begetting many again to a
lively hope, for which Generations to come shall call thee blessed, whose Being
and Habitation is in the power of the Highest, in which thou rules and governs
in Righteousness, and thy Kingdom is established in Peace, and the Increase
thereof is without end.

Jos. Coal.




Another from John Audland to G. F. out of the West of England.
DEar and precious one, in whom my Life is bound up, and my Strength in thee
stands; by thy Breathings I am nourished; by thee my Strength is renewed;
Blessed art thou for evermore, and blessed are all that enjoy thee: Life and
Strength comes from thee holy one; -- daily do I find thy presence with me,
which does exceedingly preserve me, for I cannot reign, but in thy presence and
power; pray for me, that I may stand in thy Dread for evermore. -- I am thine
begotten, and nourished by thee; and in thy Power am I preserved: Glory unto
thee, Holy One, for ever.

John Audland.




Brief Observations upon the Two last Particulars.
1. G. Fox's assuming Divine Attributes to himself, viz. First, He tells you,
he wrote from the Mouth of God himself, stands naked, clothed only with
Righteousness; which was prophesied and fulfilled. Secondly, That he is the
light of the World, by whom it was made One, with the Truth in every Man.
Thirdly, That he was so covered, as that neither himself nor his Name was known
in the World, had a new Name, placed in his Throne, was Crowned, inherited all
things, Christ in him might say, I am the way, the truth, and the life,
alluding to John 14.6. And Fourthly, He that had the same Spirit which raised
Jesus, was equal with God: Which Spirit he pretended to have.

2. How Fox's Disciples ecchoed back Adorations, which answered as Face answers
Face in a Glass; for he could not magnify himself, but his Proselytes were
ready to cry Hosanna: First, Oh thou North of England, desolate the least of
the Nations barren, etc. yet out of thee did the Branch spring, the Star arise,
the Son of Righteousness appear, etc. Alluding to Micah 5.2. Numb. 24.17. Mal.
4.2. Zech 3.8. And Secondly, That his Life reigned and was spotless, his
eternal Honor, and blessed Renown, etc. Thirdly, A Prophet indeed compared to
Christ, as not known in the World, though made by him. Fourthly, Precious
George, the Father of Nations, whose Kingdom is established in Peace, the
Increase thereof without end: Alluding to Isa. 9.6, 7. And Fifthly, That they
received Life and Strength from him, preserved by him, could not reign but in
his power, begotten and nourished by him, etc. Upon the whole matter, as there
were never greater Blasphemies spoke by Man than by Fox, so never greater
Adorations given to such a Sect-master. And yet G. W. and W. P. in their Book
Judas and the Jews, p. 44. Serious Search, etc. p. 58. Judgment Fixed, etc. p.
19, 26. Innocence against Envy, etc. p. 18. have Justified or Excused every
Passage, except John Audland's Letter, which when charged therewith by the
Athenian Mercury, June 11.1692. G.W. did deny it to be of J. A's writing. But
we have the Original Letter, and able to make it appear. by comparing Hands, to
be his: Nor did G. F. deny it in his Lifetime, albeit an Abstract thereof was
Printed and Reprinted, etc.

The Third Charge against the Quakers. That they deny the Scriptures, by
speaking contemptuously of them: calling them, Death, Dust, Serpent's Meat,
etc. and that to Preach out of them is Conjuration.
The ARGUMENT.
THis is one of their Errors I charged on the Quakers in my Book, New Rome
unmask d, etc. Epist. Cr. 6. and p. 78. This G.W. procured Twelve Witnesses, to
testify in the Holy Fear of God, and on the behalf of the Quakers, That they
never so believed, so said, nor so affirmed: Which was such a notorious Lie;
and calling God to Record, I took it to amount to an Oath on their own
Proposals to Authority: And not knowing a better way to manifest them, I
erected a Mock-Pillory, and Tried them, and found them guilty on their own
Premises. But the main matter now before me is, To prove the Truth in that
particular, both in the cited Book New Rome, etc. and the Sheet delivered to
the Parliament: And in order to it I shall first recite their contemptuous
Expressions of the Holy Scripture; and then confute their Arguments, which they
bring to salve their Error. And lastly show, That they extol their own
Writings above the Scriptures, viz.

Their Contempt of the Holy Scriptures.
News coming up out of the North, etc. p. 14. And your Original is Carnal,
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin; and your Word is Carnal, the Letter; and the Light is
Carnal, the Letter; and your Baptism is Carnal. -- And their Communion is
Carnal, a little Bread and Wine. -- So dust is the Serpents Meat; their
Original is but Dust, which is but the Letter, which is Death. -- So the
Serpent feeds upon Dust. -- And their Gospel is Dust, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and
John, which is the Letter, etc. Saul 's Errand to Damascus, etc. p. 7. All that
do study to raise a Living thing out of a Dead, to raise the Spirit out of the
Letter, are Conjurers, and draw Points and Reasons. -- They are Conjurers and
Diviners, and their Teaching is from Conjuration, which is not spoken from the
Mouth of the Lord. -- The Letter of the Scripture is carnal, and kills, etc.
G. F. David 's Enemies discovered, etc. p. 7. And these (i. e. Quakers) do not
call the Letter the Rule; and the Four Books, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, the
New Testament or Gospel, as thou, ( i. e. the Public Minister) and thy
Generation do, thy Ministry is in the Letter, which kills. G. Whitehead and
Chapter A. Truth's Defense, etc. p. 2. 104. You might as well have condemned the
Scriptures to the Fire, as our Books and Papers: For our giving forth Papers
and Printed Books, it is from the immediate, eternal Spirit of God. Burrough's
Works, etc. p. 51. And herein you have been bewitched from the Obedience of the
Truth within, to obey the Letter without. P. 47. That is no Command from God to
me, what he commands to another: Neither did any of the Saints which we read of
in Scripture, act by the Command which was to another, not having the Command
to themselves. The Quakers Refuge fixed upon, etc. p. 17. Whether the first
Penman of the Scriptures was Moses or Hermes; or whether both these, or not
one; or whether there are not many Words contained in the Scriptures, which
were not spoken by the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit: Whether some Words were
not spoken by the Grand Impostor; some by wicked Men; some by wise Men ill
applied; some by good Men ill expressed; some by False Prophets, and yet true;
some by True Prophets, and yet false, etc. Several Petitions answered, etc. p.
30. And whereas we are moved to write abroad, showing forth your Errors, that
if ever you own the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles (Writings,) ye will own
them which are given forth by the same Power and Spirit, etc. A Brief Discovery
of a three fold Estate, etc. p. 7. The Priests of the World are Conjurers,
raising dead Doctrines, dead Reasons, dead Uses, dead Motives, dead Trials out
of the Letter, which is Death; raising Death out of Death. Notable Conjurers!
P. 9. Babylon's Merchants, selling Beastly Wares. -- The Letter, which is Dust
and Death. Observations thereupon.
1st, Observe, that they call the Holy Scripture Death, Dust, and
Serpents-meat: If they object, they mean the Letter abstractly from the Spirit,
that is but one of G. W's Juggles; see their Paper against J. P. Aug. 10. 1670.
viz. Whereas J. P. did bring to the Exchange several Books and Writings, and
amongst others the Holy Scriptures, etc. Surely he could not burn the Holy
Spirit that gave them forth, as they most wickedly suggested he would have
burnt the Bible. It seems they can call the Bible the Holy Scriptures when for
a wicked design, and Dust, and Death, and Serpents Meat, when they speak their
Judgment clearly. 2dly, That they are Conjurers that preach out of them: Surely
when they preach out of them, they do not preach the Letter abstractly from the
Holy Doctrine and Blessed Precepts therein contained, but some part of those
holy Truths therein contained; and yet this preaching is by their Doctrine
Conjuration and Witchcraft, etc. 3dly, You may perceive that G. W. and the
Quakers do not call the four Books of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, either the
New Testament of Jesus Christ, or the Gospel; and why? His Brother Fox says
it is Dust, Death, and Serpents-Meat: Yet to serve another turn, Ellwood writing
against W. R. in his Antidote, p. 81, 82. calls the Writings of the
Evangelists, The New Testament, Scriptures of Truth, etc. Oh the Deceit and
Self-contradiction of these Babel-Builders. 4thly, You may see they bring their
own Nonsense in competition with the holy Scripture and New Testament: Nay, I
shall prove by their Practice, that they prefer their own Pamphlets before the
Scripture, and that beyond all their Glosses to the contrary. 5thly, That such
as obey the Scriptures are bewitched from the Truth: And therefore, say they,
That is no Command from God to me, what he commanded the Saints of old,
recorded in Scripture; for, alas! what is the Scripture but a little Dust,
Death, carnal Letter, Husk, Beastly Ware; and they that preach out of it
Conjurers, notable Conjurers, Babylon's Merchants, yea, Witches, Devils,
Gormandizing Priests, etc? 6thly, They insinuate by way of Query, That it is
doubtful whether Moses or Hermes was the first Penman of Holy Writ; or whether
either or neither; and so confound the Scriptures, as to overthrow its Divine
Authority, suggesting that what is true the False-Prophets wrote, and what is
false the True-Prophets wrote, and what is ill expressed and ill applied Wise
and Good Men wrote, and by a Natural Invertion all the rest by Wicked Men, and
the Grand Impostor. And I think they, by this time, have made room for the
Atheists and Papists. This, I must confess, is such a cunning Stratagem of
Satan and his Instruments, as the boldest Jesuit that ever I read of never
attempted the like. And for more of it, I refer to New Rome unmasked, etc. p.
23. And by this time I hope G. W's Witnesses are convicted sufficiently, and
for time to come will not say, the Quakers never said, affirmed, or believed,
that the holy Scriptures are Death, Dust, and Serpents-Meat, etc.

But notwithstanding all this, and much more that might be quoted of this
nature, yet G. W. boldly imposes upon the World, that though they call the
Scripture Dust, Death, and Serpents-meat, yet they do not call the holy
Scripture so; see their pretended Vindication, etc. p. 2. Essay, etc. p. 5, 8.
but say, The holy Precepts and Doctrines they own: And from thence they are
called, says G.W. holy Scriptures I grant it is for that very reason that the
Christians call them Holy Scriptures. But on the other hand I do positively
affirm, That it is for that very Reason that the Quakers call them Dust, Death,
Serpents-meat, Beastly Ware, etc. And this I will prove by the Practice of each
sort, viz. by both the Practice of the Christians, and the Practice of the
Quakers. And first, the Christians they read them in their Churches, practice
them in their Families, particularly the Lord's Prayer, the Ten Commandments,
the Apostles Creed, think themselves, as Disciples of Christ, obliged to follow
the Examples of the Primitive Christians and Holy Martyrs, in frequenting the
Ordinances of Jesus Christ, as Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, and diverse other
Commands, etc. They believe the Scripture is given by divine Inspiration, and
infallibly true, being by Wise and Good Men well expressed and rightly applied,
and that the true Prophets speak truly; so that there is a sweet harmony in the
Scriptures. They believe also that Moses was the first Penman, and divinely
inspired, and his Writings quoted by Christ and his Apostles; see Mark 12.16.
Luke 24.27. Luke 16.19. and 24.27. 26, 27, 44. Acts. 2. And for these and the
like Reasons they call it Holy Scripture.

But then, Secondly, if we must judge the Tree by the Fruit, as Christ
directed, then the Quakers do not believe the Doctrine and Precepts recorded in
Scripture, to be either blessed or holy, and therefore call them Dust, Death,
Husk, Serpents-meat, Beastly Ware, etc. which I thus prove:

First, By the very reproachful Language and contemptuous Expression you cast
upon them, as Dust, Death, Serpents-meat, etc.

Secondly, In that you do not read them in your Meetings for Worship, nor
recommend them to be read in your Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, as you
frequently do your own Epistles.

Thirdly, Because you say, That to preach out of them is Conjuration, which you
would not, if you believed the Doctrines therein to be holy and blessed.

Fourthly, By reason you lay aside as useless the Use of the Lord's Prayer, Ten
Commandments, and the Apostle's Creed, which are some of those holy Precepts
contained in the Scriptures.

Fifthly, In that you deny the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, and do not practice
them according to the Command of Christ, Go teach all Nations, baptising, etc.
This do in remembrance of me, etc. For if they were sincere, and did believe
the Doctrine and Precepts were holy and blessed, as they pretend, you would at
some time or other see a Bible in their Hands, in a Meeting, and make
Confession of Sin, and beg Pardon of God for Christ's sake, which they never
did.

Sixthly, That from your Practice, Words, and Writings you do prefer your own
Books, Papers, and Epistles before the Scriptures, as in New Rome unmask d,
etc. New Rome arraigned, etc. For proof see your Yearly Epistle follows.

The 27th of the 3d Month, 1675.
IT is our Sense, Advice, Admonition, and Judgment, in the Fear of God, and the
Authority of his Power and Spirit, that no such slight and contemptible Names
and Expressions, as that faithful Friend's Papers, which we testify, has been
given out by the Spirit and Power of God, are Men's Edicts or Canons, etc. with
such scornful Sayings, be permitted by W. Penn, Alex. Pack, Stephen Crisp.
George Whitehead, and others.


Now I am apt to think, as superstitious as you are, that you did not ascribe
Holiness to the Paper and Ink of your own Papers and Pamphlets: But yet what
Care, what Caution, what Advice and Admonition was sent out from the general
Council, not of Trent, but London, that no such scornful Expressions should be
put upon your Friend's Papers, as Edicts and Canons, which indeed are not such
contemptible Names? And yet how do you charge them, by the Authority of the
Power and Spirit of God, that no such contemptible, scornful, and unsavory
Expressions be permitted to be cast upon your Papers, which you say are given
forth by the Power and Spirit of God? So tender and careful you are of your own
nonsensical Papers, Epistles, etc. Here is no calling them Death, Dust,
Serpents-meat, Beastly Ware, Carnal Letter, Husk, and the like; no, no, yours
were given forth, you say, by the Power and Spirit of God; and consequently the
Doctrines contained in them (in your esteem) are blessed and holy; and that is
the reason why you are so tender and cautious of suffering any slight and
contemptible Names and unsavory Expressions to be put upon them as Men's Edicts.
But as for the Scripture, who knows, says you, whether Moses or Hermes was the
first Penman; or which part of Scripture was wrote so true, that we may depend
on it, since what the Prophets wrote is false, at least great part of it, and
thereupon you who are thus doubtful do not believe the Doctrine and Precepts to
be holy: And that doubtless is the Reason why you not only permit, but your
selves, even the best of note amongst you, call the Scripture by such unsavory
Names and contemptible Expressions, as Death, Dust, Serpents-meat, Beastly
ware, etc. Again, by the care you take to spread your Books and Papers, and not
the Scriptures, is self-evident that you do prefer your own Papers above the
Scriptures. See your Epist.

Renewed Advice to the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings in England and Wales, for
spreading Friends Books for Truths Service, Anno 1693.
Dear Friends,
HAving at several Yearly Meetings considered how all those Books printed for
the Service of Truth might most effectually be spread for a general Service to
Truth; -- That the Printer send to his Country Correspondents, etc.

1. For Friends to have general notice what Books are printed, etc.

2. That they may send for what quantities they want.

3. That the Printer may be encouraged in printing for Friends.

4. That one Book of a sort may be kept in each Monthly and Quarterly Meeting.

Dear Friends, It Is advised that ye be careful in spreading all such Books writ
in defense and for the service of Truth, whether by way of Epistle, Caution,
Warning, Exhortation, or Prophecy, that we may not be negligent in promoting
Truth. Record this Epistle in your Quarterly Book, and sometimes read it for
remembrance and notice.

Signed on the behalf of the Meeting, by B. B.

OBSERVATION.
Pray note, what Care, Caution, and Industry they use to spread their Books;
working by Policy like Moles under ground, little taken notice of, until they
turn up the Foundation. Here is not a Word of Death, Dust, or Serpents-meat,
Beastly Ware, etc. No, no; nor not a word of Scripture Proof in either of these
Epistles. I was minded to put a Sample of their Books and Epistles they write
each to the other, to be read in their Meetings, in one Column; and what they
write to the World, to decoy, in another Column; showing their Books to be of
two sorts, of two Stamps, and to carry two Faces, as G. W. has confessed of W.
Smith's Primer: One reads as F. B. has quoted; another reads the contrary; and
so is their general way. But I shall exceed what I at first intended.

See what Labor and Pains here is to spread, disperse, and send up and down
their Books to all the Counties in England and Wales. In the Yearly Epistle, p.
2. they tell them, That in Germany their Books are dispersed, and Epistles
recommended to Barbados, Maryland, Pensylvania, Virginia, Scotland, Holland,
Ireland; but not a word of recommending the Scripture: No, their Language and
Practice sufficiently discover their Disesteem they have for it; and their way,
manner, and care to disperse their Erroneous Books, should re-mind all good
Christians, and especially Pastors and Teachers, to assist in spreading such
Books as are, and have been wrote, to detect their Errors; particularly Mr.
Norris's Book, and diverse others. I shall conclude this, with showing the
Quakers way of charging their Disciples to read their Epistles, etc. Several
Papers given forth for the spreading of Truth, etc. Viz. I charge you in the
Presence of the Lord God, to send this [Epistle] amongst all Friends and
Brethren every where, to be read in all Meetings to you all; this is the Word
of God. Geo. Fox.

Thus, like the Pharisees of old, they are making void the Holy Scripture by
their Traditional Pamphlets, which they esteem and prefer before Scripture; as
appears by undeniable Demonstration, both from their Words and Practices, and
which G. W's 12 Witnesses may now perceive fairly proved.

The Fourth Charge against the Quakers. They deny the Ordinance of Jesus
Christ, as Baptism and the Lord's Supper.
THat they deny these two Ordinances, their Practices as well as their Doctrine
sufficiently declare. Yet in regard G. W. p. 2. says, As for Baptism and the
Lord's Supper, Scripturally considered in their several Dispensations, in their
Figure and Substance, we confess and own. This is false, as their Books
declare, viz.

E. Borough 's Works, etc. p. 51. The Bread and Wine is visible and carnal: --
We see them: -- But a Carnal Figure of a Spiritual thing: -- The Figure is
declared against: -- For Christ never since he was Sacrificed brake of the
Bread, or drank of the Cup with his Disciples, p. 581. we do deny, and do say
it is no Ordinance of God; neither was it ever commanded of him, or practiced
by the Saints, but is an Institution of the Whore of Rome, and England received
it by a Popish Institution; and your Practice of it is Idolatry, and not any
part of the true Worship of God. And as for your breaking Bread and drinking
Wine, we do utterly deny to be of God. News coming up, etc. A Voice and a Word
to all you Deceivers and Blasphemers, who utter both your Blasphemy and
Hypocrisy; that tell People of a Sacrament, and tell them it is the Ordinance
of God. Blush, blush; and tremble you who live in the Witchery, and bewitch the
People, etc. To the like purpose see Smith's Primer, p. 36. and the Music
Lecture, etc. p. 35. Where they are I was, viz. In Performances, in Ordinances,
in Family Duties, in Hearing in Reading, in Prayers and Fasting: -- but when I
came to bend my Mind to that of God in me, I durst not give God Thanks for the
Victuals set before me, etc. Observe, Here is E. B. G. Fox, Sol. Eccles, all
great Prophets, and W. Smith one of their Ministers, who testify both by Word
and Doctrine, as well as the whole People by Practice, that it is no Ordinance
of God, but an Institution of the Whore of Rome, no part of God's Worship, but
absolute Idolatry; and that such as tell People of a Sacrament, are not only
Witches, but Deceivers and Blasphemers, and ought not only to Blush, but
Tremble, etc. And that though they had been in the Observation; yet Quakerism
has so altered their Judgment, as they confess they have laid them aside. But
still for the Quakers thus to charge the Church of England with a Popish
Institution, Idolatry, etc. and yet seek to them for Favor, and a kind
Acceptance, it is preposterous: So that I might well say, How could you have
the Face to seek for Relief, till you retract these Errors. As to your
Exception against Sprinkling, and seeming thereby to allow of Dipping: This is
fallacious, in that you practice neither.

F. B 's Fifth and Sixth Charge against the Quakers. That they undervalue the
Death and Sufferings of Christ, and exalt their own Sufferings above the
Sufferings of Christ, above the Sufferings of the Apostles, above the
Sufferings of the Martyrs, or any Christians since the days of Christ, etc.
E. Burrow's Works, etc.ANd this is to go abroad into the Nation, and into the
World: -- That the Sufferings of the People of God (called Quakers) in this
Age, is greater Suffering, and more unjust, than in the days of Christ, or of
the Apostles, or in any time since Queen Mary's days, brought not forth a
Suffering more cruel. -- What was done to Christ, or the Apostles, was chiefly
done by a Law, and in great part by the due Execution of a Law, etc. In my
Sheet to the Parliament I put a Query grounded upon this Doctrine, viz. Whether
was greatest, the Sufferings of the Quakers, or the Sufferings of Christ, to
which G. W. gave no direct Answer, but glossed it over, as his usual way is:
For if he had answered, that the Sufferings of the Quakers had been greatest,
as their Doctors Teach, the People, would have been ready to stone him for
Blasphemy. Again, if he had said, the Sufferings of Christ had been greatest,
he had then given the Lie to E. B. their great Prophet: So that he was in a
great Strait, like the Pharisees of old their Predecessors: For all the Saints
Sufferings are not to be compared with the Sufferings of the ever-blessed
Jesus. But in the next place, that they should thus exalt their own Sufferings
above the Sufferings of the Apostles, Martyrs, etc. is such a boast, as has no
parallel amongst Protestants. But that is not all; they come in as Advocates
for all the Tyrants and bloody Persecutors, who without any Law, and contrary
to Law, martyred and murdered many Thousands for Christ's sake, saying about
six lines off, And herein it appears the Sufferings to be more unjust, because
what the Persecutors of old did to the People of God, they did by a Law, and by
the due execution of a Law, etc. So that to confute this grand Error, wicked
Lie, and false Plea of the Quakers, first on behalf of the Persecutors, who
they say executed their Cruelties upon the Apostles and Martyrs not only by a
Law, but by the due execution of a Law: Next on the behalf of themselves; both
which I shall consider distinctly, viz. The Sufferings of the Quakers of the
one part, and the Sufferings of the Holy Apostles, Blessed Martyrs, and Pious
Protestants, since the days of Christ, of the other part. I say, in order to
confute this vainglorious Error, I shall first produce a few Instances of the
Sufferings of the Apostles and Martyrs, etc. and next, a Sample or two of the
Quaker's Sufferings; and let G. W. in his next show his Art, and deny my
Argument if he can.

First then, to begin with the Primitive Sufferers, Apostles, and Blessed
Martyrs, viz. John Baptist, Stephen, James, Bartholomew, Mark, Peter, Andrew,
Matthew, Philip, Paul, and diverse others, some flead alive, some their Brains
knocked out, some crucified, some burned alive; what Law did these Worthies
suffer by? Was the Law duly or justly executed upon them? Answer in your next.

Secondly, What say you to the Ten Persecutions under those bloody Tyrants,
who, as History says, suffered as many as amounted to 5000 to a day, for 12
months together, some racked, some burned, some drawn to pieces by wild Horses,
some fried, some roasted, some broiled upon Gridirons, some melted Lead poured
down their Throats, some put into boiling Coppers of Oil, some rouled in
Barrels of Nails, and a hundred other exquisite Tortures and barbarous
Cruelties; was this done by a Law, and the due Executions of that Law? And are
your Sufferings greater? Answer these three Queries in your next, or else as E.
B. said, acknowledge under your Hands, That you have been deceived, and becomes
false Witnesses, and publish your retractation, for thus deceiving the World.

3. What think you of the horrid Massacres in France, Piedmont, Ireland, and
the Martyrdom of Salter Badly, Thorp Hus, Jerome of Prague, Zuinglius, Calvin,
Beza, Bilny, Bradford, Frith, Barns, Tindal, Ridley, Hooper, Father Latimer,
Dr. Tailor, Bishop Farrar, and Archbishop Cranmer Which W. P. says, taught the
Papists how to deal with the Protestants, by his Practice of Burning Joan of
Kent.
, which in the whole, as from History I can make appear, was more than
50000000, who suffered the like Tortures which the Heathen Tyrants executed;
nay, used more or different Stratagems. Come G. W. in your next, answer the
last three Queries directly, without your glossing or painting, for your
Enchanting Art will not now do: For, 1st, Either these suffered by a Law, or
they did not. 2dly, And by the due execution of that Law, or they did not.
3dly, That the Quakers Sufferings have been greater, or they have not. If the
first, bring forth your Arguments to prove it, for I deny them jointly and
severally: If the last, are you not gross Liars and grand Impostors, who have
the Impudence thus to impose upon the World? Nay, 4thly, Are your Sufferings
more cruel than the recited? If not, you are found False-witnesses; and your
Verdict for and on the behalf of the due Proceedings and legal Executions of
the bloody Tyrants, persecuting Papists, and cruel Irish, will not pass: You
must go out again; for we say and deny that they suffered either by Law or the
due execution of a Law; or that your Sufferings were either greater or more
cruel; all which your Doctrine holds forth, and nothing will salve it, but an
ingenuous Retractation, published in condemnation of Burrough's Doctrine, which
is both taught, received, and believed by the poor misled Quakers. And now I
shall proceed to show a Sample of the Quakers Suffering, which being compared
with the recited, the disproportion will the better appear, viz. For Meeting,
for Not Swearing, for wearing the Hat, for Tithes and Church-Dues, etc. from
1650. the day of the Quakers date, to 1658. which was after E. Borough had
wrote the Book above recited, which was in 1657. though I grant it was
reprinted in 1672. viz.

A Declaration of the present Sufferings, etc. J. Evans imprisoned for speaking
to a Priest. J. Norris of Swasy, for the same. El. Fowler speaking in
Steeple-house imprisoned. J. Green of Bulbrook, for the like. John Rogers
imprisoned for the like. Ann Blackling at Bury, for the like. George Harrison,
for meeting, was abused till he did spit Blood. Bar. Logg fined 3 s. 4. d. for
his Hat. Tho. Bagg, for not putting off his Hat, and for not swearing, was
fined 13 s. 4. d.
Reader, here is one Sample of the Quakers Sufferings, which they bring in
competition; nay, say they exceed all before them since the days of Christ: But
what was it for? namely, for disturbing the exercise of the established
Religion. But if any now disturb them, let them look for worse Sufferings, not
putting off their Hats, etc. For mark: As they cannot for Conscience sake put
off their Hats to their Superiors, no more can they suffer their Inferiors to
stand with their Hats on; witness their forcing their Apprentices to stand
bare-headed before them: And likewise for meeting together. And for that the
Poor Man was so abused, that he did spit blood: Ay, that he did, and it is
recorded a Suffering too, to help to make up the balance between the Sufferings
of the Quakers of the one part, and the Sufferings of Christ, his Apostles and
Martyrs on the other part. Pray see the other Sample.

The Record of Sufferings for Tithes. W. Ground's Tithes 2 s. took a Mare, 5 0
0 W. Ground's Wardens, Rate 2 s. 1 d. a Kettle, 0 10 0 R. Letchworth, Tithes 20
s. 2 Cows, 5 0 0 Dan. Pechy, for Tithes 2 doz. Yarn, 0 2 0 Rob. Crabb, Tithes 1
s. 1 d. took a Kettle, 0 7 0 Cl. Crabb, for Dues 7 s. Pot of Butter, 1 0 0 Hen.
Place, dues 1 s. 6 d. took Goods 0 3 0 W. Johnson, Tithes 9 s. 10 d. Pot Butt.
1 3 0 R. Crabb 2 Wardens, Rates 1 s. 10 d. took Goods, 0 4 10 El. Carecrost,
Clerk's Wages 2 d. took Goods, 0 0 8 Another time, for the Popish Steeple
house, 0 1 0 Sam. Cater, dues 10 d. took a Kettle, 0 5 0

Reader, I have given you a large Sample both of what they suffered and what
they took beyond what was due, as they say, at their own price, and yet forced
to bring in 8 d. and 12 d. Sufferers; and yet it will not balance for the whole
sum of their Sufferings in eight years time through England and Wales, in Pots
and Kettles, Dripping-pans, Candlesticks, Pans, Barrels, Dishes, Cart-wheels,
and other Lumber, comes to but 1568 l. 14 s. 8 d.

Behold the disproportion; and yet they are not ashamed; no, they are not at
all ashamed: But if they have any shame in them, I intend to make them ashamed;
and in order to it, let me give you Cater, one of their Praters, I should have
said Preachers, since he is so upon Record, who formerly was a poor Journeyman
Carpenter, with his Budget of Tools at his Back; but since he got the knack of
Preaching worth many hundreds, etc. and I presume much of it got this way, viz.

Sam. Cater, for being at a Meeting at Phackenham in Norfolk, the 4th. of the
5th. Month, 1670. preaching and publishing the Gospel of Peace, one Ann Wats, a
Woman-Informer, told the Officers, who came with a Warrant, and had him before
Christopher Colthorp a Justice, who fined him 20 l. which Warrant and
Conviction he sent to the Justices of the Isle of Ely, namely, John Laney,
Henry Hitch, and Thomas March, who in pursuance of the Norfolk Justice's
Conviction, sent their Warrant to the Officers of Littleport (in the Isle of
Ely) who distrained as much Household Stuff and Timber from the said S. Cater as
was worth more than 20 l. Reader, this is a Copy of the Record of their
Quarterly Book, unless they have torn it out for madness since I have
discovered the Cheat, who stands Recorded a Sufferer above 20 l. for preaching,
when in truth he did not suffer 20 d. Nay, he was so far from that, that he got
10 l. clear by it. And yet 100 year hence, when all are dead that know the
matter, and none able to contradict it, it will look like a noble and valiant
Act in S. C. thus to preach, and thus to suffer for preaching. And perceiving
by their last yearly Epistle, that they keep to their old way of sending up to
London their Sufferings from those Quarterly and Monthly Meetings, I am the
willinger to show the nature of their Sufferings, and the manner of their
Proceedings, and particularly about Tithes taken from them, whether the Real
Value due by Law, or two or three times the Value: So that when their faithful
Chronicles come forth, which they have told us of this 20 years, such as have
been moderate, and for ease to the Quakers and themselves, have taken no more
than the Real Value, nay, perhaps less, shall be rendered Persecutors in the
next Age.

Epist. p. 1. That Friends, at all Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, call for the
Sufferings of Friends, to see that they be sent up (to London) both of what
Tithes are pretended to be due, and for how long time, and the time when taken,
and by and for whom, and what Goods are taken, and the value thereof; as well
of those not exceeding as those exceeding the sums demanded, both being a
Suffering for Truths sake; they being in these Particulars found defective, is
an Obstruction to the general Record of Friends Sufferings: And therefore the
Monthly and Quarterly Meetings are advised to take more Care for the future,
that all Friends Sufferings for Truths sake may be brought up as full and
complete in all respects as may be, etc. By which it is evident that they design
to represent to the next Age all Persons who take Tithes, let them be never so
moderate in their Demands and taking of Tithes, Persecuters: Which as it is an
ill Representation for such a Nation as this, who profess the Name of Jesus, so
is it both uncharitable and ungrateful in them, their Indulgence considered.
And that they do so intend, see their Book, Judas and the Jews, etc. p. 41. Our
Faithful Chronicles of the bloody Tragedies of that Professing Generation, will
tell future Ages other things, etc. From which passage three things are
observable: 1st, That Professing Generation, meaning the Presbyterians,
Independants, and Baptists, for they do account them Professors of Christ, but
not Possessors or Enjoyers of what they profess, only empty Professors, mere
Notionists, airy. Talkers, etc. 2. But the Episcopalians they account the
Profane, the Publicans, the Vulgar or Common People, but both of the World;
and their Teachers false, their Scriptures Death, their Gospel Dust and
Serpents-meat, their Ordinances an Institution of the Whore, and rejected by
themselves. 3. But themselves the only Possessors and Enjoyers of the Light,
Spirit, and Substance, together with a few pious Gentiles, as G. W. calls them
in his Book, The Christian Doctrine, etc. p. 9. And W. Penn. bestows about 40
Pages in folio upon Gentile Divinity in his Christ. Quak. etc. Yea, Ellwood,
Richardson, and the most Learned amongst them, as they have showed all the
Contempt they can to Jesus of Nazareth, (calling him a Veil, a Garment, which
they can never call Christ) to the Scriptures, to the Ordinances and Ministers
of Jesus of Naz. with great Incharity: So on the other hand they have taken all
the care they can to raise the Fame of the Gentiles, Heathens, Jewish
Idolaters, as possibly afterward may be made appear. Well, but this is a
Digression, let us come to Sam. Cater's Sufferings.

First, it is true he did preach, was fined, was distrained, as recorded, but
all his Goods was returned, and for this Noble Act he had 10 l. sent him out of
the Treasury from London, by John Peacock, late of St. Ives, as a Recompense;
but his poor Neighbors R. Crabb, T. Pain, and others, was fined and distrained
for meeting June 9.1670. and neither had their Goods again, nor a Reward out of
London Chest, that I ever heard. A notable way to encourage such Praters to
banter all other Dissenters (who are not so vainglorious as themselves, nor so
cunning and close as the Quakers, who may compare with Jesuit and Jew) as G. W.
in his Christ. Quak. and Dev. did, who charged them to hold Erroneous and
Blasphemous Principles, carnal Policy, timorous, creeping, occult, cowardly,
base, etc. And as I said, that I may make them ashamed of their deceitful
Practices, who thus banter and domineer over all other People, I may recite
part of an Edict, (only I must remember not to give their Laws such
contemptible Names as Edicts) which enjoined the Hearers to meet constantly,
and suffer greatly, insomuch as that in the loss of 13550 l. their Preachers
never lost 50 l. And the Reasons thereof are more particularly handled in my
Book, The painted Harlot both stripped and whipped, etc.

An Abstract of their Antimagistratical Edict is as follows, viz.

London, 27. of the 3d Month, 1675.
IT is our Advice and Judgment, That all Friends keep up those public
Testimonies, and neither decline, forsake, nor remove their public Assemblies,
because of Times of Sufferings, as worldly, fearful, and politic Professors
have done, etc.

Signed by G. W. W. P. and diverse others.

Yet notwithstanding how did G. Whitehead creep up and down, here and there,
with all the caution and timerousness possible? to evince which, see a Letter
he ordered to be writ to me, to appoint a Meeting for him, etc.

DEar Friend F. B. G. W. is now here, and does purpose to be at your Meeting
the 27th Instant, and therefore desires that Friends may be together by the
11th hour at furthest. Thou need not mention his Name to any particularly, but
may acquaint them of a Friend's Intention to be with them the time aforesaid.
So with G. W's dear Love to thee and thy Wife, I rest thy dear Friend,

Hen. Hubbard, jun.
Stoake, 25th of the 11th Mon. 1675.

Thus wary was G. W. and cautious in his Travels, which had been well enough,
had he left the People free: But for him to make a Law against the National
Law, that they must constantly meet, and neither forsake, remove, nor decline,
etc. like worldly, politic and fearful Professors, yea, antiscriptural too;
For, said Christ, if they persecute you in one city, flee or remove to the
next. And his inspired Disciples oftentimes met privately for fear of the Jews,
etc. yet how did G. W. like Ahab go disguised? he must not be known, his Name
must not be mentioned.

Well, I knew him and his Name too, and had his Company and dear Love too, and
called Dear Friend, yea, all dear to me at that time, though now I have so
disturbed this subtle Fox, and so manifested his deceitful Practices in many
things, that he cannot afford me my proper Name, only Bugg; Bugg say so? Bugg
quote, etc. Bugg's Testimony; yea 34 times he calls me only Bugg in one Sheet;
and since I came to London, in a private Letter, in one side of half a sheet,
he calls me eleven times only Bugg, such is his proud, disdainful, and insolent
Behavior, besides scurrilous Names and reproachful Terms, far contrary to
their pretense in the beginning. See,

An Account of the Children of Light, etc. p. 16. Also it has been laid upon
us by the Lord, to call Men and Women by their Names, which their Fathers have
given them to be known amongst Men by, etc. But G. W. is grown so great since
he came first amongst the Quakers, Anno 1652. (a poor Boy about 15 or 16 years
old, traveling on foot) and has so gathered up his Crumbs, though chiefly at
other Men's Tables, that he scorns to call him that has fed him and his Friends
at his Table by his proper Name: Oh, Insolent and Imperious George!

I have been the longer on this Head, because it is the most glorious Jewel in
their Crown, how counterfeit soever it be within: For, when there was no
Persecution, they cut themselves out Work, by disturbing of Churches, for which
they sometimes suffered the Justice due to such Offenders, and then they cried
out of Persecution, and resolved to go on against all Law, Government, and
Rule, and all that opposed them: herein was Nebuchadnezzar, Darias, etc. and
themselves Daniel, Shadrack, etc. and in a little time came to collect their
Sufferings, whether it was 6 d. 8 d. or 1 s. in it went; and having by 1657. in
England and Wales, mustered up 1568 l. 14 s. 8 d. they printed, and taught,
That their Sufferings was greater and more unjust than the Sufferings of
Christ, his Apostles, and Martyrs, and more unjust in that they suffered by a
Law, and that Law duly executed. I do not doubt, but if G. F's Works be
printed, there will be such a discovery of Quakerism as the World never saw;
but I do declare my Belief is, they will never print them, lest they be laid by
Sol. Eccles Fiddles: Possibly they may print some Passages of his Travels, to
make Fools admire, and Wise Men laugh.

VI Charges against G. W.
I. A Public Defamer. See his Book Judgment fixed, etc. p. 263. Francis Bugg
is turned Informer: To let pass all his other Names, as Cankered Apostate, Vile
Apostate, Self-condemned Apostate, Judas Runagate, Beast, Dog, Wolf, Child of
the Devil, Enemy of all Righteousness, etc. That very Name Informer, the time
1682. considered, is sufficient to term and prove him a public Defamer, and a
malicious Incendiary; for he knew me to be no such manner of Person, but one of
the greatest Sufferers by Informers in the whole County. But however T. Bird,
J. Mason, J. Ellington, W. Belslam, and above Twenty more Quakers, gave me a
Certificate, to certify the contrary; and did very nobly testify against such
Antichristian Treatment. But it is by such Arts they have raised their
Structure, witness their Book entitled, A Battledoor, etc. saying p. 3. Come
ye Doctors, Scholars, Teachers, and Magistrates, etc. in which, beside the
English, and some other foreign Languages, there was the Latin, Italian, Greek,
Hebrew, Chaldee, and Syriack; and before each of these Six Languages, in each
Page, at the beginning of each Language, they erected the form and figure of a
Child's Penny horning Battledoor, subscribed on the Handle thereof Geo. Fox;
and all was about Thee and Thou, singular and plural, as if they had been such
Ignoramusses as did not understand tu and vos, without the help of Geo. Fox,
who was, before a Quaker, a poor Journeyman Shoemaker. But it was a notable
Project to bring both Learning and the Learned into Contempt, to the scandal of
the English Nation: Thus defamatory have their Libels been. The next Book this
Imperious Fox provided for the Clergy, was entitled, A Primmer for all the
Doctors and Scholars in Europe, but especially Oxford and Cambridge, containing
2434 Queries of this import, viz. What is a Verb, a Participle, an Adverb, a
Getive Case, etc. what is the word called declined; who was the first Author of
it, and by whom it came, etc. And with the greatest Contempt and Reproach,
conceivable, as by his lofty Strains, bold Challenges, and daring
Interrogations, with which the said Primmer is plentifully stuffed, does appear,
saying,

These Queries are to call you out into the Field; the little David's are risen,
who have the Baggs, the Slings, and the Stones: Ye that profess your selves
wise and learned Men, and are Novices and Fools, answer me; draw out your
Weapons if you have any, and answer me these things: Come out of your Holes,
and do not skip nor hip from them; answer every Word in particular, for you
have Tongue enough sometimes, let us see now if it can wagg, etc. -- G. Fox.
For more of this impertinent Nonsense see my Book, Battering Rams against New
Rome. Thus scandalous and defamatory have they been in their contemptuous
Libels against both the Gentry and Clergy of the English Nation, on purpose to
raise themselves out of their Ruins; [for they had no better way to prove their
own Religion true, than by rendering all others false.] But when these Libels
and pernicious Books would not do their business fully, then they termed them
False Prophets, Deceivers, etc. See their Book A brief Discovery of a threefold
Estate, etc. p. 7, 8, 9, 10. viz. The Priests of the World are, 1. Conjurers,
raising dead Doctrines out of the Letter which is Death, raising Death out of
Death; notable Conjurers. 2. Thieves and Robbers. 3. Antichristians. 4.
Witches. 5. Devils. 6. Liars, -- The Commission and Call of Baal's Priests,
came from Oxford and Cambridge. 7. A Viperous and Serpentine Generation. 8.
Blasphemers. 9. Scarlet-colored Beasts. 10. Babylon's Merchants, selling
Beastly Wares, -- the Letter, which is Dust and Death. 11. Whited Walls. 12.
Ravening Wolves. 13. Greedy Dogs, -- Really they are Bloudhounds still hunting
and gasping after their Prey, like the Mouth of Hell: Woe, woe, woe was the
Portions of those Pharisees then, and woe, woe, woe is their Portion now; and Woe
and Misery is the Portion of the Upholders ( i. e. Parliament) of that
Treacherous Crew and deceitful Generation, etc.

Come G. W. answer in your next, whether your dispersing these Defamatory
Libels unlicens'd be not seditious, scandalous, and tend to the scandal of the
Clergy, Parliament, and People; and yet they forgive you all your Trespasses,
pass by your many Affronts: But you, like the wicked Servant, whom his Lord
forgave all for a Trifle, fall upon others. But you will say, this was in
Oliver's time; Why? Was Oxford and Cambridge a Nursery for Baal's Priest in
Oliver's time? And is it otherwise now? No, you are the same you were: See your
Book, The Guide mistaken, p. 18. printed 1668. by W. Penn. And whilst the idle
Gormondizing Priests of England, run away with above 150000 pounds a year,
under pretense of being God's Ministers, -- And that no sort of People have
been so universally, through Ages, the very bane of Soul and Body of the
Universe, as that Abominable Tribe, for whom the Theater of God's most dreadful
Vengeance is reserved, to act their Eternal Tragedy upon.

Reader, I hope by this time I have not only proved G. W. a Public Defamer,
but also his Brethren the like.

II. A Wicked Forger. The Vind. etc. p. 3. Fra. Bugg affirms in his Book de
Chr. Lib. par. 2. p. 83. printed 1682. that Conformity is a Monster, etc. --
and about two years after he himself conformed, etc. In answer, I am not the
Author of one word of that Page, but the whole Passage is a Query of John
Ainsloes, propounded to S. Cater and others, beginning p. 81. ending p. 87.
with his Name to it, and by me quoted as his sense touching that Conformity
they required of him, about taking his Wife in subjection to their Law of
Women's Meetings, and to whom neither J. Ainsloe nor my self ever conformed: And
as it was J. A's, and by me quoted, to show his sense, and to manifest Quakers
against Quakers, so it is an absolute piece of Forgery to say, he affirms he
himself conformed, -- his own Testimony: When all this while it was none of F.
B. but J. H's writing, and both his Name and Date, with a black line drawn to
distinguish it from mine. Who then can give credit to this Insincere, pretended
serious G. W. this grand Forger.

III. A Wilful Liar. The Content. Apostate, etc. p. 3. F. Bugg and his Company
being got to the Meeting before G. W. and into the Gallery where our Ministering
Friends used to be, etc. In short it is false, and that to G. Whitehead's
Knowledge too; for there was not a Man of my Company in the Gallery with me,
but S. Cater; and this he wilfully and maliciously sent abroad, to render me a
turbulent Disturber; which is fully proved in New Rome unm. etc. p. 50, 51.

IV. A Gross Perverter. The Quakers Vind. etc. p. 3. Note, that the Instances
Bugg has to prove the Quaker's Contempt of Governors, being between the years
1654. and 1659. -- when it is clear (thereby) that the Magistrates and Ministers
instanced were those very Persecuters and Usurpers in O. Cromwell's days,
whereby F. B. has at once justified those Magistrates or Governors in those
days, as Christ's Magistrates, and consequently the Usurpation of that
Government testified against by E. B. and others. Reader, the main thing
intended by this Perverter G. W. is to make the World believe that they were
such Enemies to Oliver and his Usurpation, as that E. Burr. and the Quakers
only reprehended those Governors and Magistrates as such, when it is no such
matter; for though I grant they were wrote in O.C's time, yet they were reprinted
in 1672. and by the Quakers common consent and approbation, and for which they
are responsible until they condemn them. Well, but did G. Fox, E. Borough so
severely reprehend that Usurpation? I do think, who ever read The Quakers
unmasked, etc. will be of another mind. P. 21. To all you who are called
Delinquents and Cavaliers: Thus says the Lord, My Controversy is against you,
even my Hand of Judgment is upon you already, and you are become cursed in all
your hatchings. -- And though your Kings, and Princes, and Nobles have been cut
off in Wrath, -- yet you repent not; nor will you see how you are given up to
be a Curse, and a Desolation, and a Prey in Houses, and Lands, and Persons to
them whom I raised up (i. e. O. Cromwell) against you, and gave Power over you.
-- And you and your Kings and Lordly Power shall be enslaved by the Devil in
the pit of Darkness, in everlasting Bondage, where he shall reign your Lord and
King for evermore, etc. Given under my Hand and sealed by the Spirit of the
Eternal God, through Edw. Borough. Taken at first out of the Trumpet of the
Lord sounded, p. 9. but left out of E. B's Works in the reprint, which argues,
that G. W. etc. did not believe E. Burr. was so moved, nor that his Message was
so sealed by the Eternal God, as E. B. pretended, for if they did, they dealt
very unfaithfully to leave out such a notable Prophecy.

Thus you see E. Borough was so far from reprehending Oliver or his
Usurpation, that he tells what the Delinquents was, and how God's Hand was upon
the Royal Party, their Kings, Princes, Nobles, Lands, Houses, etc. in Judgment;
and that Oliver was raised of God, etc. Well, let us hear what G. R. another of
their Prophets says, viz.

TO thee, O. Cromwell, thus says the Lord, I have chosen thee amongst the
thousand of the Nations, to execute my Wrath upon my Enemies, and gave them to
thy Sword, with which I fought for the Zeal of my own Name, and gave thee the
Enemies of my own Seed to be a Curse and a Reproach for ever; and many have I
cut down by my Sword in thy Hand, that my Wrath might be executed upon them to
the utmost. The Righteousness of God, etc. p. 11. Geo. Rose. Come G. W. was
this reprehending O. C. or his Government? Are you not ashamed to give occasion
thus to discover your corrupt Principles by your base Pervertions? Well, hear
G. Fox, To the Parliament of the Commonwealth, etc. p. 8. Let all these Abbey
Lands, Gleab Lands, that is given to the Priests, be given to the Poor of the
Nation; and let all the great Houses, Abbeys, Steeple Houses, and White Hall,
be for Almshouses.

Come G. W. what Paint have you in store to salve these your grand Pervertions,
horrible Principles, and new Forgeries, and false Glosses? What! did you think
your Sheet would never be answered? Well George, I have not done, but having
retrieved my Head from the Wall, by acquitting my self from justifying O. C's
Usurpation, and also pointed to the very Creatures, Flatterers, and Prophets
who both justified, abetted, encouraged, and assented to the said Usurpation.
See The Quakers unmasked, etc. I am now coming to tell you what Usurpation I am
against, viz.

The Usurpation of the Quakers. And that in diverse respects; first, In that you
summons the King's Subjects to meet annually in London, by way of general
Council or Convocation, without any legal Warrant, Writ, or other legal
Authority: And when sat in Council in Devonshire-house you make Laws, Edicts,
and Canons for the King's Subjects throughout England to observe, contrary and
in direct opposition to those very Laws, Rules, etc. which the King and
Parliament make at Westminster. This is the Usurpation I am against, if you
would needs know of me what I account Usurpation: And that you have done so,
see your yearly Epistle, May 1675. where, in opposition to the Law the King and
Parliament made, that you should not meet above Four, etc. you in opposition
made a Law, That your People should neither forsake, decline, nor remove their
Meeting. This was one remarkable Instance of your justling with Authority, and
of your setting your usurping Post by the legal Post; and a Hundred Instances
more of your arbitrary illegal Proceedings and Usurpations might be brought.
But to mention a few fresh Instances, see your last yearly Epistle, entitled,
The Epistle to the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings in England and Wales, and
elsewhere, from our Yearly Meeting held in London the 5, 6, 7, 8. days of the
4th Month, 1693. in which, amongst other things, you p. 3. order.

1. That your Books be spread up and down the Nation as well as in parts beyond
the Seas, which being unlicens'd, and tending to defame both the Clergy and
Gentry, is a Usurpation I am against.

2. That none should pay Tithes, but refuse payment thereof, as an
Antichristian Yoke of Bondage; which show that you at Devonshire-house
interfere with those at Westminster.

3. That none should pay to the Steeple-house Rates or Leys, which put the
Country to great trouble, and your Proselytes, who submit their Necks to your
Usurpation to great Sufferings, tending to Sedition and very evil Effects.

4. That none should carry Guns in their Ships. This shows that you are not
content with your own Ease, but as far as your Usurpation prevail, you weaken
the Government, and are not willing to leave your People [your People, did I
say? yes, your People; for if you say once what they shall or shall not do,
it is a Law like that of the Meads, etc.] to their Freedom in this and many
other Instances, 1. Whether to publish their Intentions to marry before Women's
Meetings or not. 2. To meet precisely at the time, day, and place, whether the
Law command the contrary or not. 3. To pay Tithes, or not. 4. To pay to the
Church Rates or not. 5. To carry Guns, and serve their King and Country, or
not. 6. To buy of your Books, as they are persuaded, concerning the Truth of
them or not. I say, Did you leave your People free, and at liberty in these and
other things, you would do well: Then if any particular person could not for
Conscience sake acquiesce in any of these things, wherein the Law requires
their active Obedience; then let such pray the Magistrates and Government to
hold them excused, and when so done, let them acknowledge the Favor from the
Government, who only ought to be Judges in that Case. But your taking upon you
this Usurped Dominion, the more you prevail upon the People, the less the
Kingdom is, and consequently the more you increase, the more dangerous. And
this Usurpation I testified against in my Book de Chr. liberate, Anno 1682.
and in Painted Harlot, etc. 1683. and in several other Books; and now you see I
am of the fame Judgment still touching Usurpation, etc.

V. A False Glosser. The Qua. Vind. etc. p 2. F. B. accuses somebody with
objecting against paying Tithes under the new Covenant, because abrogated by
Christ, observing from thence, that the Quakers condemn the Martyrs, etc.
Observe this False Glosser: I did not say they condemn either Martyr or others,
who did refuse payment of Tithes; I neither said so, nor will my words carry
any such intendment, but by that Doctrine laid down by Tho. Ellwood, in his
Antidote, etc. p. 78. Truth allows no payment of Tithes at all under the new
Covenant; they who pay Tithes uphold a legal Ceremony abrogated by Christ, and
thereby deny Christ come in the Flesh, which is a Mark of Antichrist, etc. I
say, by this Doctrine they do conclude, That all that pay Tithes, whether
voluntary or by force, and all such as receive Tithes, and make Laws that
Tithes shall be paid, are Antichristians; nay, not only the present Generation
of Men, but all former and future Generations that have been, or shall be,
since the days of Christ being personally on Earth to the Worlds end: And it is
this your Incharity that I oppose, and think it great presumption in you to
seek Favor at the hands of such as you condemn as Antichristians, etc.

VI. A Deceiver of the People. See Judgment fixed, Introd. etc. If the Lord did
not lay a Necessity upon me, I should choose to be mute; -- but the Lord has
laid the Necessity upon me. -- I neither consult Events nor fear Effects, etc.
If what I have herein said be true, and which I offer to prove before 10 or 12
impartial Men, then he is a great Deceiver of the People; nay, were it needful,
where I have mentioned one President, (which in order to prove my Charge I was
obliged to do) I could have mentioned ten, both Lies, Pervertions, Forgeries,
False Glosses, and scandalous Desamations, both of my self and others. But this
may serve for both Caution and Warning to such as, like the noble Bereans of
old, are willing to try all things: Which that they may, is the hearty Desire
of him that was once led away by their Dissimulation.

Fra. Bugg.

FINIS.

