Jezebel Withstood, And Her Daughter Anne Docwra, Publicly Reproved, For Her
Lies and Lightness in Her Book, styled, An Apostate Conscience, etc.
By Francis Bugg.
Friendly Reader,
THE great Business which this Woman has undertaken, together with her
Approvers, i. e. their Second-Day Meeting, is to render Francis Bugg a poor
Indigent Person; one that goes about a begging, p. 4, 6. a grand Lie; and G.
Whitehead a Gentleman Quaker: But the way they have jointly taken is very
Wicked and Scandalous; to discover which is my present Task, which I shall do,
by extracting some few of her manifest Lies and Falsehoods, upon which their
whole Structure is built, and then leave the old Woman with her Incoherent
Fables; and briefly thus, viz.

Lie I. p. 5, 27. in her Pamphlet, Francis Bugg was (says she) but a poor Man
when he came first among us: -- He cannot prove that he had 30 l. a Year before
his Father's Death.

Reply. This is a Formidable Lie: For my Grandfather, Francis Bugg, died in
Anno 1655. and gave me 30 l. a Year in good House and Land in Milden-Hall, as
may appear by his last Will and Testament, which was then proved in the
Prerogative-Court at London; and this was above Ten Years before my Father
(Robert Bugg) died.

Lie II. p. 55. He (Francis Bugg) also gave a Bond to make his Wife a Jointure
of some part of his Estate.

Reply. This also is a notorious Lie: For I never gave Bond to make my Wife a
Jointure, nor did her Father ever desire it, nor in Reason could not, since he
never paid me her Portion, which upon Marriage he promised; which was, to make
her as good as any Child he had, yet I never got but 20 l. in Money, and that
in 5 or 6 Years time: And I can still make it appear, that his Executor, my
Brother John, owes me 100 l. if he will come to account, and pay his Father's
Debts: I have often complained of this Injustice done me, but could never get
Remedy, yet I should not have made this public, had not this old Woman
provoked me to it. His Name I shall forbear, yet add, that he was a noted
Quaker.

Lie III. p. ibid. He (F. Bugg) has since sold his Estate to his Son, these
things he has confessed to me and others.

Reply. No Knight of the Post ever uttered more manifest Lies: For I never sold
my Son either House or Land, little or much, in all my Life; how then could I
confess to her and others that which never was?

Lie IV. p. 26. Robert Bugg, his Father, dwelt with him some Years after he
married; he rose from Dinner one Day, and went out, and was found drowned in
Water, where he had no occasion to go to that Place, as F. Bugg and his Wife
related.

Reply. Here is Lie upon Lie, four Story high. 1. My Father never dwelt with me
a Week since I married, much less some Years. 2. He never SO rose from Dinner.
3. Nor was SO found drowned. 4. Nor did I or my Wife ever SO relate it, nor
could we, since it was never so, as by her suggested; and therefore I would
have her and her Abbetters and Approvers look into the 56 p. of her Book, where
she says the Devil is the Father of all Liars, that so they may see whose
Children they are. She was accounted by them that knew her to be a Proud
Haughty Woman, and a great Liar; but now Experientia Docet.

Lie V. p. 31. she reciting that part of a Letter she sent me, wherein G.
Whitehead was by the honest Quakers suspected to be a Jesuit, as cited by me in
my Pilgrim's Progress, etc. p. 25. she deny it to be hers. Again,

Lie VI. p. 35. She recites part of one of her Letters, which treat of the
Quakers Common Bank or Fund, which she then was as much against as my self, as
cited by me in Pil. Prog. p. 58, 59, 62. and in my Book, The History of the
Rive, Growth and Progress of Quakerism, etc. p. 148, 149. Both which she denies
to be hers in these Words, p. 32. This Letter (says she) is a mere forged
thing, I never writ any such Letter to him. P. 35. This Letter I have disowned,
with a Certificate to prove it false, etc.

Reply. I do affirm I have both the Letters still by me, and that they both are
of her own Writing; and this I offer to prove, or publicly burn my Book, on
Condition that G. Whitehead, her late Gentleman Quaker, and she will engage
under their Hands to burn her Book, in case I do prove it, as aforesaid. Surely
Quakerism is come to a low Ebb, since they are thus forced to make Lies its
Refuge. This puts me in mind of a Passage of Father Penn in one of his Books,
i. e. Error is only upheld by Error.

Lie VII. p. 36. F. Bugg was not the Author of some part of his 20th Book,
meaning my Pilgrim's Progress.

Lie VIII. p. ibid. He (F. Bugg) was seen at Oxford at the same time, when this
Book was about Writing.

Lie IX. p. ibid. He was 16 Weeks from home when his Book was writing, only he
came home some times for a Night or two.

Lie X. p. 37. F. Bugg says in his last Book, that Oxford exceeded Cambridge in
their Bounty to him.

Reply. 1. I wrote every Line of that Book my self. 2. I never was in Oxford,
during any time of the writing of it. 3. I was in London Three Months when I
wrote that Book, but never came home a Night all the time. 4. I never printed,
That Oxford did exceed Cambridge in their Bounty, nor has she shown in what
Page it is, nor can I remember or find any such Passage: I observe her Mark
therein, and I guess at the Design of it, but I shall not gratify her in what
she would willingly have, since in all Respects she is a notorious Liar, which to
show, is the Subject of this Discourse, that the World may see the Nature of
the Quakers Repeated Answers, boasted of in the Quakers Modest Observation to
the Parliament, as in p. 45. herein, and also from thence gather the Reasons
why the Quakers at West-Dereham refuse to own their Books, and defend
themselves, notwithstanding they first gave the Clergy a Challenge to bring in
their Charge: And indeed this very Discovery of their way of writing, may be a
sufficient Refutation of their late Book, entitled, The Defense of the People
called Quakers, being a Reply, etc. Printed 1699. For as never was a People
more confuted, so there never was any Heresy had the Impudence to Lie,
Dissemble, and Prevaricate from their own Words, their own Writings and
Pretenses, and to wrong all People they controvers'd with: For Jesuit-like they
stick at nothing, their Second Day Meeting have a Dispensation ready; they have
Power to Bind, and to Loose; they have Authority to Lie and Dissemble, and all
Infallibly. But to the Matter, else I shall exceed my Half Sheet, which I am
willing to wind up this old Woman in.

Lie XI. p. 37. There are Verses, which E. Bugg says I writ of G. Fox; this is
false.

Reply. I do now offer to prove it true upon her: I have the Manuscript still
by me, and I never added one material Word, otherwise than it is and has been
usual with Mr. Crisp, Mr. Keith, and others, who have sometimes altered a Word,
in Correcting the Press for me: But the Matter was nevertheless mine; and
possibly to make her Verses run smooth, I might, when I Printed them for her,
put in a Word; but of this she never showed any Dislike till now, though I
Printed them in W. Rogers's Book, styled, A Second Scourge for G. Whitehead,
etc. as I remember about 12 Years, or more, since; and Mr. Crisp and I have
Letters of hers still by us, which, it may be, may fill another Half Sheet, but
I would not bestow much upon this crazed old piece, which is now creeping into
the Unity of the Quakers, and no way was to be found, but to make G. Whitehead
a Gentleman Quaker, and to tell a few innocent Lies, to uphold their tottering
Cause.

Lie XII. p. 40. Sam. Cater does affirm he never had his Timber again.

Reply. This is a Lie in Anne or Sam. or in both: If I find it under his Hand
who had it, who sold it, and the like, then will I produce my Proof; for I love
to discover Hypocrites and Liars.

Lie XIII. p. 13. Fr. Bugg Conformed to the Church of England 1684. for fear of
the Statute of 20 l. a Month.

Reply. I deny it, and charge it as a Lie: I believe I did go into a Church in
1684. as some Churchmen may go into a Quakers Meeting, to Try and Examine, etc.
but I did not go to Church, at home, in Conformity to her, until 1685. for I
well remember I went to Church more than a Year at a distance from home, to
give my self Satisfaction in my Conformity to her Doctrine and Discipline, and
in all that time I do not remember that ever the fear of 20 l. a Month came in
my Thoughts; nor was there Occasion for such a fear; let her produce one
Instance of 20 l. a Month after 1685. suffered for not going to Church; so that
her whole Story thereabouts is like the rest of her Lies.

Lie XIV. p. 27. He (F. Bugg) was a Presbyterian when he came among the Quakers.

Reply. This is another Lie: I never was a Presbyterian, nor so called, nor my
Father before me: But if I had, so I had not turned Quaker, what Crime had it
been?

Lie XV. F. Bugg 's Grandfather was a poor Boy, bound out to the Wool Trade by
the Docwra 's.

Reply. This is another Lie: Nor was he of my Trade originally, nor did I ever
hear or understand that he was a poor Boy, but have often heard that his Father
gave 24 l. with him to a Blue Clothier in or near Colchester, which was then a
good Sum, as well as a good Trade, and he lived well on it: And first he was
born Heir to 14 l. a Year; what Money he had I know not: But this I Will tell
this Venomous Woman, that he was a Man of as good Name, Fame and Estate, as any
Docwra I yet ever knew. He had Four Daughters, which he gave 300 l. Portions
to. He had Three Sons, to whom he gave little less than 400 l. a Year in House
and Land from first to last: And when he died, he gave Additional Portions to
all his Grandchildren, which were very many. I had Six Sisters; and he gave me
30 l. a Year, and each Sister 5 or 6 l. a Year, in House and Land, which was
worth more than 1000 l. He gave all his Great Grandchildren a Legacy; as also
the Poor in Four Towns, and to every Servant he kept. He was a wise Man, and
endued with a good Understanding in the Law; and chosen often Arbitrator
between Men in difficult Cases: And why this Venomous Woman should thus detract
from HIM, that was every way HER Superior, I cannot tell; only this, she is
overgrown with Pride, and possessed with a Lying Spirit, even the Spirit of
Quakerism.

Lie XVI. p. 42. My Aunt said G. Whitehead was a Gentleman born, or brought up
so; and called him the Gentleman Quaker.

Reply. This must needs be another Lie. 1. Do Gentlemen live in a poor Cottage,
standing on Mud Walls, not worth 50 s. as G. W. did, as I am credibly informed
by a Person of Note that saw it. 2. Do Gentlemen's Sons walk about the Country
on foot, and live upon Alms, as he did. And 3dly. A Scholar he was not, as may
be seen by his early writing, which I have seen in Manuscript; as also by his
Book, Jacob found in the Desert Lands, etc. I do not say but he might have
learnt his Accidence, as many poor Boys do. But now, to merit the Quakers
Favor, and to get her Lying Pamphlet licensed, she has styled him the
Gentleman Quaker: A sine Jingling Name, by Yea and Nay.

Lie XVII. p. 17. And now Liberty is granted, we stand upon equal Terms with
our Opposers in Religious Matters.

Reply. I deny it; and the Law tells you that this is another Lie; though indeed
your Impudence, and known Antimagistratical Frinciples, leads you into some
Practices beyond what the Established Church can legally do: But remember you
stand but upon your good Behavior; do not boast too fast of your Equality with
the Church of England, who oppose your Errors.

Lie XVIII. p. 40. If Friends were so charitable, as to send S. Cater 10 l. to
help to pay his Debts, or to carry on his Trade, they did well in so doing;
better than F. B. in upbraiding him.

Reply. I deny that the 10 l. was sent him on that Account: No, it was sent him
as a Reward for his Pretense of suffering 20 l. when in Reality he suffered
nothing. But suppose it was sent him, to help to pay his Debts, as you say; do
you therein keep to an even Balance, whilst you condemn that in the Clergy you
commend in your selves? And when did they or I ever account Sam. a Beggar, an
Indigent Fellow, a Judas, a Man of a desperate Fortune, etc. because you
supplied his Need, and helped to pay his Debts? But how came you to be so bold,
as to meddle with the Bishops Certificate? Though therein you did me a Kindness;
I do not say on purpose; no, it is manifest what your Design therein was; but
accidentally it is so, and quite overthrows the Drift and Design of your Book,
since I hope it is of more Credit with all good Christians, than your False and
Pernicious Libels: But you nibble at it like Rats, or like a little Cur that
lays hold of a Bone, in which his Teeth makes no Impression And now I Will leave
off counting your Lies; as for your Story in p. 51. about the 15 l. Fine, and 5
l. which I received for my Charges for prosecuting three Appeals, I send you to
my Books for an Answer, i. e. The Painted Harlot both Stripped and Whipped, etc.
and Reason against Railing, etc. where all your Allegations are fully answered,
and the Point fully cleared. And whereas, p. 53. she seems to believe that I
never lost 32 l. by the Quakers, but I can tell her I have lost by them near
300 l. but when Men pay what they can, and therein show an Honest Moral
Principle, I am not apt to upbraid them by Name in print, though I could not well
omit Tho. Plumstead, who run away, and paid me never a Penny; and as I was
told, conveyed away too by his Brother Clement Plumstead, at the Cross Saws in
the Minories, (a noted Quaker) on purpose to wrong me and others; but if I were
minded to draw a black Line over Quakerism on that Head, and to enlarge on
other Heads, I have but just hinted, (and that too upon just Provocation) I do
tell you that I could make that Discovery, which the Cobbler of Gloucester is an
Ass to; nay, and go no further neither than your Writers and Preachers,
notwithstanding your Pretense to a Sinless Perfection, and thereupon make no
Confession of your Sins to God; as elsewhere I have largely (yet truly) set
forth. But to conclude.

Come on, Cousin Docwra, (for so I Will call you, since we had the Misfortune to
have such a Liar drop into our Family) let us reason a little, and I Will tell
you, I was not so poor when I came amongst you, as you render me; and that no
Man in our Country laid himself more out, both as to Imprisonment, and Fines,
for Meetings; nor a Man, that I know of, that entertained your Teachers more,
nor at greater Expense, Clothing some, and putting Money into the pockets of
others: Your Brother, Giles Barnadiston, would have scorned to have dipped his
Pen in such muddy Ink as you have done; for he and his Wife (your Sister) have
been often at my House; sometimes near a Week together; and sometimes your
Brother, Francis Waldgrave, I think, as their Serving-man; and all freely, and
not grudging, as P. 34. you basely Insinuate, and with a bold-fac'd Lie into
the Bargain, i. e. That I told you so. This piece of Impudence is too frequent
with you, if you consider your Age. But had you not wrote this Lying Pamphlet,
G Whit^head, etc. would never have forgiven you, for writing so much against
their Bank, their public Fund, which you call their Dagon, etc. But
notwithstanding all these Lies, to serve a Turn, and to get into Favor again
with G. W. etc. yet I almost think, for the sake of their Truth, which is
sensibly touched, when the World's People get Knowledge of their Immoralities,
I still think that G.W. etc. must turn this She goat out of their Heard, unless
she will bear a Faggot, etc. But let her then blame her self. I must leave her to
the Fate she brought upon her self, by her Lies and Lightness.

Come Geo. Whitehead, and the rest of your Cabal, i. e. your Second Day
Meeting, one branch of whose Business is to Approve and License your Books
which you disperse through England and Wales, the fruit of which tends to
Poison the Nation, and to Supplant Christianity; and that with no small Pains
and Charge, not to your selves, but to your deluded People, that supply your
Fund. Let me show you some of the fruits of this your Infallible Club;
especially since until you meet me as proposed, I know not that I shall take
any more notice of your Railing Invectives; believing, That AS God raised up
Zealous John Wickcliff, who wrote more than Two Hundred Volumes against Rome 's
Superstition, SO he will, in his own time, raise up abler Men to Complete that
Work which is begun; and what I now offer to your Consideration, is from
certain Letters, and a printed Paper of your Friend A. Docwra, which she wrote
to Mr. Crisp, not having my own by me in London: And,

First, Out of a Printed Broadside, entitled, The New Projecting Formalist
Characterized, etc. I know it is common (says she) with some of them, in their
Books of Controversy, to put the Names of such Persons, as they account their
Vassals, both to Certificates and Books, sometimes without the Consent of the
Parties, whose Names are inserted, and sometimes with Consent, through slavish
Fear, of having their Trades obstructed, and they ruined of their Livelihoods,
or Reputations, by Public Defamation -- Two Years ago I saw a small Book, in
Octavo, i. e. The Liberty of an Apostate Conscience, it was notably worded by
an able Penman, [G. W.] wherein was my Name, as a Witness, without my Consent,
to Testify more than was true, which I must disown: -- Yea, a barefaced Lie,
and an undeniable Truth; so closely interwoven together, that it was not easily
discovered: -- Their separate Men's Meetings have been the Nurseries of
Contention, and I believe the chief Cause of this long-grinding Persecution;
the Magistrates has upbraided me as one that adhered to them, looking upon such
Meetings as more dangerous to the Peace of the Nation, than our Public
Meetings (with Doors open) where Men and Women meet altogether -- Separate
Meetings have served to little Purpose, but to shelter great Bellies; and to
obstruct or defame Lawful Marriages, and to Ingross honest Friends Properties
to themselves. -- The most Innocent Self-denying People, have been the Subject
of their Clamorous Tongue, when the Loose and Vicious, the Covetous, Proud,
Lying Hypocrites, have been Covered and Protected.

Again, in a Letter to Tho. Crisp, Sept. 20. 1683. she thus says, S. Cater 's
Narrative is come out in Print: I do greatly pity him; for of a certain his
Weakness is betrayed by his false Friends: I found my Name in it, I suspect G.
Whitehead to be the Author of it; Sam. Cater is not Sophister great enough, to
twist his Matter together so cunningly; either to make Truth go for a Lie, or a
Lie go for Truth: It is part of a Letter I wrote to S. Cater, concerning my
Cousin Francis Bugg, wherein they have added a few Words, that quite alters the
Sense of my Letter; neither have they put in the greatest part of it, which
would have overthrown their whole Cause -- I have writ a Letter to my Cousin
Francis Bugg, to invite him to me about this Matter.

Again, in another Letter to Tho. Crisp, Feb. 13. 1683. Sam. Cater is very
angry with me, because I call him to an Account for bringing me in for a
Witness in his Narrative, to Justify him, which I cannot do; most of that he
has written concerning me is false, but not all of it; he has mixed a Lie and
Truth together.

Again, in another Letter to T. Crisp, March 25. 1684. viz. Sam. Cater has been
lately with me, clamouring against F. Bugg, and J. Ainsloe, I have had a sharp
Conference with him about his Narrative, wherein he has used my Name in Print,
to justify him in his Contentious Pamphlet with F. B. about Money; he have
written more than is true concerning me; I laid it before him smartly before
several Friends; he is very bold, and the most confident Liar that ever I met
with: I laid the Record against John Ainsloe before him, and his indirect
Proceedings; also Geo. Whitehead 's false Certificate about the (said) Record
in his Judgment Fixed, that is an abuseful Forgery; for some of those whose
Names are to the Certificate, absolutely disowns it, and say, they set their
Hands to none: It is very sad that Men should be so confident in their
wickedness.

Again, in another Letter, Aug. 6. 1684. Francis Bugg 's Book concerning John
Ainsloe 's Marriage, is much liked of by Friends here: -- And are much
concerned for him, that he should be so used by them that profess the Truth.

I have not room for the rest of the Letters, but these may show the horrible
Deceit, and deep Hypocrisy, that Sam. Cater, one of their noted Teachers, and
the greatest Liar that ever she met with: G. Whitehead a wicked Forger, to set
Men's Names to Certificates without their knowledge: That their private Meetings
are Nurseries for Contention, and dangerous to the State; and of little use but
to shelter great Bellies, and to Ingross the Property of others, thereby to be
enabled to Ruin their Opposers, in Estate and Reputation: All which I know to
be true, and she too; else why did she write to me, and others, against these
Works of Darkness.

Geo. Whitehead, I cannot enlarge on her other Letters; nor is there any need,
since these few are so to the purpose, as well as true in fact, that all your
Pretenses to write from the Mouth of the Lord, and the Holy Ghost, and Eternal
Spirit; and that your pretense, George, That a Necessity from God lay upon you
to write your Book, Judgment Fixed; all these pretenses are a Lie, a Cheat, and
a horrible Snare, whereby you catch Thousands of otherwise well-meaning People:
And to make this more obvious, I shall draw some few Natural Inferences from
your Practices, both reproved and discovered in the recited Printed Paper and
Letters.

First, Then is it so, that you put the Names of Persons, which you account
your Vassals, to Books, and Certificates, and without their Consent too? What
horrible W^ckedness is this? And that which adds to the malignity of it, is, it
must still go with the same Title, and in the same Person's Name; witness Sam.
Cater 's Narrative, which was as Lying a piece of Forgery as ever I knew;
witness R. S 's Righteous Judgment, where those Heathenish Verses were put in
by your Second Day Meeting, which R. S. never wrote, nor knew of, viz. Team,
Rogers, Pennyman, Bullock, and Bugg, etc. And does this Woman say, that such as
will not submit to their Yoke, they will endeavor to Ruin both in Name and
Estate. How then ought this to raise Courage in all their Proselytes, who have
but a spark of Zeal left, to throw off her Tyranny.

Secondly, But, George, your Dear Sister, Anne Docwra, suspects you to have a
Chief Hand in Sam 's Narrative, and consequently, in putting her Name to what
she never wrote; who have therein so intermixed Lies and Truth, as it is not
easy for the Reader to discern seriously; George, this is wickedly done with a
witness.

Thirdly, Again, George, and the rest of your Second Day Meeters, you see she
has Charged your Private Meetings, to be Nurseries of Contention, and
dangerous to the State, and have given you a good Reason for it; agreeing with
what I have said in Pilg. Prog. etc. p. 65, to 105. Is it so, George, that
these your Private Meetings tend to little use, but to shelter great Bellies,
to defend the Vicious, Lying Hypocrites amongst you, and to ingross the
Properties of your poor deluded Followers. Oh horrible! And are the most
Innocent Self-denying People amongst you, the subject of your Teachers
Clamorous Tongues? Then seriously, George, I think there are not grander
Deceivers upon the whole Earth.

4. Is it so, that she thus brands G. Whitehead for a Forger, for setting Men's
Names to his Certificate without their Knowledge, Privity, or Consent? Is it
possible, that what Sam. Cater wants of being a Sophister, great enough to make
a Lie seem true, that sincere George (which is the Token of his Writing in all
his Epistles) should have the Insincerity to do it privately? Oh gross
Hypocrisy! And which is still worse, to take from, and add to, what A. D.
wrote in a Letter privately to Sam. and to be Printed without her Consent, as
moved thereto by the Holy Spirit; this is such a depth of Iniquity, as will
hardly meet with a Parallel.

5. Is it so, that Sam. Cater is the most Confident Liar that ever A. D. met
with? That G. W. the Gentleman Quaker, is such a Forger and Grand Sophister, to
make Certificates, and Print them in Men's Names that never knew of it? See
Judgment Fixed, etc. p. 361. And we have now just Cause to question that in p.
250. for he that can forge one Certificate, may forge two, and as many
Hundreds, if their Consciences are enough hardened: And I know of no way that
G. W. has to clear himself from this manifest Forgery, but to produce an
Original Certificate before 1682. But alas, Charge them with what you will,
it is not now worth their Notice, it is below them to clear themselves, since
they have repeatedly answered all Objections: Repeatedly, do they say? Then
it is by a Repetition of Lies and Forgeries; as in the Case in hand.

6. Is it so, that my Book, Innocence Vindicated, etc. was so liked amongst
them, which was the fourth Book I wrote against Geo. Fox 's Party, even whilst
I remained a Quaker? Why then does A. D. in this late Book say, p. 7. That I
was the Author of part of their Order for Marriage; and that J. A. told her so;
that I was Quarrelsom, etc? All this she knows to be false: See her Letter,
Aug. 6. 1684. to Mr. Crisp, as herein recited: I did indeed write the Order
from Sam. Cater 's Mouth, as Clerk to the Meeting, but was not the Author of
one word of it; nor was I quarrelsom; but had a Place amongst the Moderate
Sort, and they liked well what I wrote, until I saw into their Errors in
Fundamentals, and then left them.

But, George, I have not yet done, though I think almost; for until, George, thou
do meet me, as proposed, p. 11. in Quakerism Exposed to Public Censure, etc.
I do not know that ever I shall after this concern my self further with you:
But to the Matter.

One of your Papers which you gave privately away came to my Hands, and I made
no ill use of it: But, George, whereas you therein complain of Suffering 20 l.
Damage for 13 s. and the like, this, George, is your Six-Week Meetings fault,
and as great a Sign of your deep-rooted Design against the Public Ministry, as
any you have yet manifested; who will rather spend Twenty or Thirty Pounds upon
Lawyers, Bailiffs, Sheriffs, etc. than to pay Twenty Shillings due Debt; such
is your Mortal Hatred to the Clergy, and which I have showed in my Pilgrim's
Progress, p. 65, to 72. But since I came last to London, I have seen an Account
taken out of a Manuscript of W. M 's, viz. They have Condemned many Quakers as
of Antichrist, that do pay Tithes, as others do. Joseph Clark, a Preacher,
professed to me, That God moved him to refuse to deliver the Tithe to the Priest;
the Priest Sued him, he Answered the Priest by Advice of John Field, who had
promised to Secure Joseph's Goods from the Priest, which he (J. Field) failing,
Joseph the Day before the Assizes at Bedford, got a Person to Agree with the
Priest for him, and since said to me, He could now pay Tithes as well as other
Taxes.

Thus, George, do your London Six-Week Meeting defend your Country Subjects,
and enable them to stand it out with the Priests, as you call them, in order to
tire and weary them out; not mattering what you spend, provided you can but
gain the Point, viz. the Overthrow of the Christian Ministry, thereby making
way for Quakerism.

But, George, when all this is done by your London Fund, and the Assistance of
your Common Bank, for you then to solicit for help herein, is such gross
Hypocrisy, as I want words to set you forth; for if ever there was a People
that deserved the Characters following, you are the very Men; your Fruits make
you manifest; and with that I shall conclude this half Sheet, which (in
conjunction with what I have elsewhere wrote) shall stand as a Monument of the
Quakers grand Errors, and deep Hypocrisies, great Dissimulations, and horrible
Treachery, manifest Cowardice, dreadful Blasphemies, self-condemned Apostasy,
gross Superstition, great Idolatry; what shall I say, George? It is plain to
me, that thy self, and many of your Brethren; the Teachers of your Schism, are
proud Boasters, fierce Despisers of them that are Good, Heady, High-minded,
false Accusers, Time-servers, Sowers of Discord in Families, Implacable,
Unmerciful, yea, filled with Hatred, Malice, Strife, Envy, Debate, and
Malignity, given to Licentious Uncleanness, and Epicurism, Incontinent,
Impatient, who are going in the way of Cain, and running greedily after the
Error of Baalim the Son of Bozer, who loved the Wages of Unrighteousness; who
mind earthly things; and whose End shall be according to your Works, except you
repent and amend your Ways; which that you may do, is the great desire of your
very much Abused Friend,

April 11. 1699. Francis Bugg.

FINIS.

