DISCOURSES AND ESSAYS ON Several Subjects, Relating chiefly to the
Controversies of these Times: Especially with the SOCINIANS, DEISTS,
ENTHUSIASTS, and SCEPTICKS.

By JA. BVERDSELL, M. A. Fellow of Brase-nose College. Oxon.

OXFORD, Printed by Leon: Lichfield, 1700.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM, Lord Bishop of Worcester, Lord
Almoner to the KING.
My Lord,
NEver any Pieces more wanted so great a Name, as your Lordships, to cover
their faults, if the Composition of them is surveyed, nor more deserved it, if
the Nobility of their Subjects is considered, than these Essays, which now beg
your Lordships Protection. If the Management of them resembled the Matter they
are employed about* they might appeal to your Lordships Judgment, as a Critic,
not fly to your Goodness, as a Patron* But as I am conscious of the numberless
defects of these Discourses, so am I equally sensible that your Lordships
Writings and Worth have gained you such a settled Esteem amongst all Persons,
*whose Esteem is valuable, that if it is possible to guard an ill Writer from
his just Doom, your Lordships Character may ensure him. And certainly if any
faulty Performances carry their excuses along with them, these may lay claim to
Pardon, since they are wholly designed to promote Truth, Virtue, and Piety, how
defective soever they are on other regards. Even the Imperfections of them may
perhaps be useful, as Nature serves her self of the most contemptible Means to
bring about wonderful Ends; for by not appearing such, as so good Themes would
suggest to Persons of excellent Parts, they may provoke them to draw their more
artful Rens in so just a Cause, and to substitute better Discourses in their
places, and to rescue these illustrious Subjects from so rude Hands as mine, by
employing their successful Wits in defending them. It will be Felicity enough
for me, if I can so far contribute toward producing a good Writer, as to be
his Foyl, and to show that in others, which I cannot make my self.

I hope these Exercitations will not be looked on as quite useless, though
something of the same kind with most of them, has advantageously appeared in
several Languages. For some of the Arguments, I think, are not absolutely old,
and though their Matter is sometimes so, yet the Form or Dress is always new. It
may often be as hard to trace from whence the Materials were taken, as in a
Wine-Vessel, to show from what Grape each drop of Wine was pressed.

In one or two of these Discourses I have had Authors of note in foreign
Languages in my view, which are so well known, that it is superfluous to name
them. This, I fancy, needs no Apology, since a Critic, as excellent, as
severe, has made it allowable above a thousand Years ago, where he affirms,
That the using the Works of other Learned Men for our Patterns, and to govern
our Inventions by, (...). Longin. (...) Sect. 11. p. 57. Edit. Langbaine.
is no more stealth, than one's taking the Manners, the Pictures, or any other
Pieces of Work done by another, for our Models to copy after.

If the Opinions which I oppose, are rather those of ancient, than modern
Writers, it is because I look upon those to have greater strength than these,
and in diverse places the latter to have only transcribed the former; though
neither are our modern Writers past by without consideration.

If I differ from great Men in some Punctilio's, I believe it is generally
where I can produce others of equal remark, of my Sentiments; and I desire to
express my Dissent with all imaginable deference and regard, and to pay the
utmost Honor to those admirable Personages, whom I am so bold as to
contradict. Notwithstanding which I am very willing to submit all to riper
Judgments, declaring that I make these Attempts public, more with a desire to
invite others to inform me, than with the presumption of informing others. If
your Lordship had seen these small Tracts before they went to the Press, as you
have done since they came from it, when you were pleased to encourage me to
address them to your Lordship, they might have come abroad much more correct,
more worthy your Lordship's Patronage.

As to the time of giving these Essays light, it cannot be ill chosen, when our
Established Religion is attacked by Scepticks, Deists, and others of that Rank:
and therefore, as in a public Invasion, every person is commissioned to put
himself into a posture of Defense; and if the dumb Lydian Prince had his Tongue
loosed by the violent Passion and Effort to save his Royal Father, insomuch
that he could utter an apt and significant Reprimand against the Assassin, if
we believe an (...). Herod* in Clio, p. 36. Sect. 85. Edit. Gale.
Historian who sometimes relates things incredible; so it is no time to be
silent when our common Mother, the Orthodox and Catholic Church, is in every
part assaulted by profane and irreligious Pens? The Lydian's speaking indeed
preluded to the ruin of his Father's Grandeur, and one of the most flourishing
Monarchies in Asian But our Church, by the Divine. Blessing, needs not to fear
any thing, from any Omen, while such as your Lordship preside over her.

As to what Censures may pass upon me, for venturing these Papers into a World
which is so extremely fond of Detraction, I shall endeavor to bear them with
patience, if these may prove serviceable to any good design. I care not how
many speak ill of them, if they have the happiness to do good to one single
Person, to reform one Vice, or to rectify one Error. I shall gain more by this,
than I shall suffer by that; and if they can be Patronized from Contempt, your
Lordships Name can Patronize them.

If the Esteem, Deference and Honor which the Offerer has for your Lordship,
can give a Value and Price to the Offering, this Present which I make your
Lordship, would by them be much raised above its true proportion. To give your
Lordship all the Instance which at present I can of my Veneration, I shall
(against the common Mode of Dedications) abstain from pretending to draw your
Lordships Character, not only because your Lordships Piety and Modesty disallow
it, nor likewise because a Panegyric would be an unsuitable Introduction to
the Nature of my Subjects, but because I cannot reach the height of my Theme,
nor draw such daring, majestical Lines, as may distinguish your Lordships
resemblance from others. No: let your Lordships Praises lie where they are,
written deep in the Hearts of all those, who wish well either to Religion or
Learning. It is enough for me to admire at an awful distance what I dare not
offer to describe.

I shall close my over-tedious Address, with expressing my satisfaction that I
have the Happiness to be the first who have in this public way congratulated
your Lordships Accession to your new Diocese, (to which you were nominated by
the wisest of Princes, to comfort it, for the loss of that famous Man, Your
Learned Predecessor,) which that You may long adorn with those Virtues and
Excellencies which shine in Your Lordship, shall always be zealously wished
for, by

My LORD, Your Lordships Most Humble, Most Obliged, and Most Obedient Servant,
JA. BUERDSELL.

THE CONTENTS.
DISCOURSE I. Concerning our Savior's Divinity. On 1 John ver. 1. The Word was
God. page 1 DISC. II. Concerning our Savior's Satisfaction. On 1 Epist. Joh.
Chap. 2. V. 2. And he is the Propitiation for our sins. p. 25 DISC. III.
Concerning Miracles. On Heb. 2. 4. God also bearing them witness, both with
Signs and Wonders, and with diverse Miracles. p. 57 DISC. IV. Showing that the
Moral Law of Moses is the same with that of Christ; against the Racovian
Catechism, and others. On Luke 10. 25. A certain Lawyer stood up and tempted
him, saying, Master, What shall I do to inherit eternal life? He said unto him,
What is written in the Law? How read thou? p. 83 DISC. V. Proving that the
Celestial Law is the same with the Moral, or that the Moral Law is a Rule for
the Angels and Saints to act by in Heaven; being a Sequel of the former
Discourse. On Mat. 6. 10. In Earth, as it is in Heaven. p. 110 DISC. VI.
Concerning the Qualisications of Prayer: or, A Method to Pray in the Spirit,
against the Enthusiasts. On Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always with all Prayer and
Supplication in the Spirit. p. 137 ESSAY I. Upon Melchizedec: or, A Parallel
between the Priesthood of Christ and Melchizedec. p. 169 ESSAY II. Upon the
General Resurrection. p. 185 ESSAY III. Against Skepticism in Matters of
Religion. p. 205
ERRATA.
Page 11. in the Margin, join Tom. 1. p. 656 with Praesat. ad Respons. F.
David. p. 17. in the Margin, join Edit. Sylburg. with Apolog. 2. p. 76. p. 51.
l. 3. for eexcute read execute. p. 86. l. 14, 15. instead of, the purport of
the Lawyer's Question, a preparation to which Answer is made, etc. read the
purpo^^ of the Lawyer's Question, and our Savior's Answer, a preparation to
which Answer is made, etc. p. 92. in the margin, for Mor. Nov. read Mor. Nev.
p. 156 l. 21. for on read in. p. 167. l. 22. dele Yet.

A DISCOURSE Concerning Our Savior's DIVINITY.
1 JOHN ver. 1. The Word was God.
WHERE Christ is not styled the Word, purely in a Figurative Sense, as the
Door, the Way, Valentia. Smalcius Paraphr: in 1. cap. Job. p. 107.
because he discovered to us the Will of God, as Men by Words reveal their
Sentiments one to another. For at this rate the Prophets, or Apostles, or any
Person who was ever furnished with God's Authority to make known his Will,
might be termed the Word of God. But since this glorious Character is not given
to any but to our Savior, it seems to follow, That it must be given to him in
such an extraordinary manner, as could not suit with any one besides, must
imply Christ Incarnate, God made Man; suitable to Plato in Philebo, p. 30. etc.
the manner of speaking used by Plato and others, who make the Divine Word to
be the Former and Contriver of the World. Tho's as to their making it a Person,
distinct by peculiar acts from the Nature and Mind of God, seems only a new
Fancy, started by Modern Divines; particularly by two excellent Persons of A.
Bp. Tillotson, p. 590.
our own Nation: the one the strongest, as well as justest Reasoner; the other
the Dr. Scott, Vol. 2. p. 51. Christ. Life, and in his Notes at the end.
most delicate Thinker, which perhaps it ever produced. For Plato makes the
Wisdom, Power, and other Attributes of God, to be as much personally
distinguished, as the Nature or Fountain of the Deity, the divine Word, and the
divine Mind: and from his Writings we may as well conclude, That all the divine
Attributes, of which he had any Idea, were personally distinguished, as the
three before mentioned. This Divine Word, or Christ Incarnate, is by St. John
called God; not as Smalcius imagins, because Eomil. 1. in Joh. 1. 1. p. 12 and
13.
all things which appeared in his Prophetic Function were full of Divinity,
and far surpassing what was discoverable in the former Prophets. For every
Prophet, who at any time produced the divine Credentials, came into the World
after an extraordinary, singular and miraculous manner; a divine Luster spread
it self through all their Actions; and whether we regard the Will of God, which
they revealed, or the Power of the Almighty, by which they supported their
Doctrine, there was something Heavenly in both. And according to this Standard
of Divinity, they too might put in their pretensions to it, in some measure, as
well as our Savior. Nor is the Divine Word styled God, because he was born
after a Divine Val. Smalcius ibid.
manner, above the Laws of Nature, of a spotless Virgin. For then S. John
Baptist, who was born after as wonderful a manner, in some sense, as our
Savior, might be said to be God. For the Nativities of both being miraculous,
and Miracles as springing from an equal Power being equal, it cannot be looked
on as a greater* Miracle, that Mary should Conceive, than Elizabeth. Nor is he
God, because he was Smalc. Ibid.
taught by God, after a divine way. For since God cannot be taught, since
infinite Knowledge can admit of no enlargement, there can never from any
communication of this kind between God and something else, result a likeness
to, much less an equality with God. Nor, lastly, is he God, because* He was
endued with Divine Smalc. Ibid.
Innocence. For from whence does this Innocence arise, but from an uniform
Obedience to the Will of God? But now if to obey God, makes the Person obeying
capable of being called God, the holy Angels, who always preserved the most
exact conformity to the divine Will, may as justly challenge the divine
Attributes, as our Savior. So that by God is meant, God by Nature and
Substance: God, who had a Subsistence, and that Subsistence from his Father, of
whom he was together from all Eternity, and was Himself Eternal God. So that
the sense of the words will be, that the Word, the divine Word which assumed
Flesh, is God; not by Office, or any other foreign denomination, but by Nature,
Essence and Substance. In order to prove which, I shall

First, Show that the Nature and Essence of Christ is truly Divine.

Secondly, I shall reflect on the ill Consequences of any Assertion different
from this.

The Nature and Essence of Christ is truly Divine, 1st Because he is justly
honored with Divine Worship; and 2ly Because of his Co-partnership with God
the Father in those actions, which could only be performed by his substantial
union with the Divine Nature.

First, The Nature of Christ is truly Divine, because he is justly honored
with Divine Worship. For if nothing can be honored with Divine Worship, but
God himself, and if Christ is honored with such a Worship, it follows, that
Christ must be truly God. But nothing can be worshipped with Divine Worship, but
God himself. For every act which signifies an Honor peculiar to God, signifies
also an Excellence, which belongs to none but him; and to ascribe Divine Honor
to any Object, is at the same time to attribute Divine Perfections to it. The
Command of worshipping the Lord our God, and of serving him only, was not a
Temporary Command, which, as some pretend, Volkel. de ver. Rel. l. 5. 6. 29.
obliged purely under the Old Testament; but is a standing Rule for Divine
Worship, under the Gospel, as well as under the Law. For our Savior did not
abrogate any Branch of the Law, but what was merely Typical. But how could a
Precept for Divine Worship be a Type? What could it represent, or figure out in
the Evangelical Occonomy? But it is farther replied, That in worshipping Christ,
we worship the Father by whom he was endued with such a Power, and that this is
the difference between the Worship of God, and of Christ, That the Worship of
the former is circumscribed and bounded within Himself, whereas that of the
batter is only relative; or as others term it, God is worshipped as Jo. Lud.
Wolzogen on Matthew 4. 10. p. 189.
the supreme cause of All things, as the first Author of our Salvation; but
Christ only as the Means which God had appoinied to bring about that miraculous
Work. But this way of reasoning does not only conclude for the worshipping of
Christ, but of any other extraordinary Instrument of Man's Salvation. The
Apostles themselves, on this account, might have been adored as well as their
Divine Lord and Master. And St. Peter was not justly acquainted with the
Privileges annexed to his Apostleship, when he reprimanded the devout
Centurion, for falling down at his feet, and worshipping him. The chief
Objection which can be formed against this Argument, is, That Angels have had
Divine Smalc Hom. 1. in 1 Job.
Worship paid them by the Patriarchs, and therefore Divine Worship may be given
to others besides God. To this the Orthodox Junius, Piscator, and others.
reply, and even the Socinians themselves grant, that these Angels were God, or
the Messiah himself. That he on some great design assumed an Angelick Form, as
he did afterward for Man's Salvation an Human Nature; and therefore the paying
of Divine Worship to Him, was no alienation of it from God. But upon a due
enquiry, it will appear, that this is more than the Orthodox ought to have
said, or than the Socinians had reason to have allowed. For these Celestial
Beings mentioned in Scripture, if ever, yet certainly were not always the
Messiah, but sometimes at least, as they are expresl, Angels. For as the
Messiah never took on him the Nature of Angels; so neither did he, in all these
places of Seripture, their Appearance. For the Apostle St. Paul with a great
deal of Elegance and equal Passion, recommending the Virtue of Hospitality, in
allusion to these Texts of Scripture, says, That some of the Patriarchs in
practicing it, had entertained Angels unawares. But would not his Reason have
had much more force, as well as beauty, if they had entertained God, or the
Messiah himself unawares? What cause had he to dissemble the dignity-of the
Person, who vouchsafed to visit these hospitable Roofs, and do an injury, if
not to the Truth, at least to his Subject? But to return: Why should this
Veneration, which was paid to the Angels, be any thing more, than a Civil
Honor and Deference, expressed indeed after an extraordinary manner, on account
of the greatness of the Persons, and the glorious import of their Message? So
that from hence cannot be deduced any Worship due to Angels; nor have we hence
any reason to conclude, that any thing is to be worshipped, besides God alone.
As it is thus plain, that God only is to be worshipped, so is it equally so,
that Christ may be honored with Divine Worship. For it is made part of the
terms of Salvation, to worship him ^^ for Whosoever shall call upon the Name of
the Lord shall be saved. Where Lord can only be applied to our Savior Jesus;
and not to God the Father, since it agrees only to Him, who, in the former part
of the Discourse was, by the Apostle, styled a stumbling stone, and a rook of
offense, which cannot fute with God the Father, who was owned by all Nations,
without the least scruple. And it is farther to be observed, that these words
are cited from the Prophet Joel, where the word Lord is Jehovab, God by Nature,
Being and Essence; not a Creature invested with Divinity, according to the new
fancy of our Adversaries.

Secondly, St. Paul ushers in most of his Epistles with this Prayer, full of
Charity, Grace to you, and Peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ's; combineing Jesus with God the Father, which had been the highest
injury to the former, had the latter only been a Creature, how exalted soever
his Rank might have been, to have jointly petitioned him, to have given Grace
and Peace to the Saints. And though to this it is returned, That St. John in the
Revelation might, by the same reason, be said to pray to the seven Spirits
which were before the Throne of God, and so have equaled them with God: Yet
this objection will rather support our Reasons, when we consider, that by the
seven Spirits are to be understood the Holy Ghost, and its sevenfold Gifts, as
they are brancht out by the Prophet Isaiah, into The Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and Might, the Spirit of Knowledge, of
Piety, and of Fear of the Lord. For otherwise why should St. John place any
other Spirits between God and Christ? Why should he omit the Holy Ghost, the
Giver of Grace, and address himself to Angels, who are but Ministering Spirits?
So that this, instead of overthrowing what was before laid down, will be a new
Instance of joining nothing with God, but what is God. Farther, St. Stephen, a
Man full of Faith and the Holy Ghost, recommends his departing Soul to our
Savior, as equal to the Father of Spirits, with this solemn Invocation, Lord
Jesus receive my Spirit. And though to this it is replied, That this act of St.
Stephen' s can be no Precedent to us, because he saw the Heavens opened, and
the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God; yet why should the sight or
concealment of the object of our Adoration, make it more or less adorable? God,
though He is a God who hides himself; who, though He inhabits Regions of Eternal
Light, is invisible to our Eyes of Flesh; yet is He still to be worshipped with
the most humble Devotion. And as long as we are convinced by Faith, that Christ
is ready to succor us in our Necessities, and give us what we ask, we have
reason enough to Pray to Him, though there is no miraculous opening of the
Heavens, nor the glorious Scene withdrawn, to discover the Son of Man standing
at the right hand of God. Farther, At the Name of Jesus is not every knee to
bow, of things in Heaven, and things under the Earth? Are not all the Angels to
worship him? So that since nothing is to be worshipped but God, and Christ is to
be worshipped, it follows, that Christ is God.

But to make a short Reflection on what has been said on this Argument. There
is no occasion to prove, to the strict Followers of Socinus, that Christ ought
to be worshipped; for they are as zealous Patrons of his Worship, as they are
artificial Underminers of his Divinity. For Socin. ad Praefat. Vujek. p. 8.
Edit. 1624.
Socinus expressly Excommunicates all those, who denied our Savior's Worship.
He declares, that If Christ is not to be invoked, then is he Christ only in
Name. That such Praefat. ad Respons. F. David.
a Notion is a manifest tendency to Judaism, and to exalt Moses above Christ.
That Tom. 1. page 656.
they who are against the Worship of Christ, cannot be Christians; because,
though they dare not openly, yet do they really deny Jesus to be Christ. But that
which made it necessary in this Argument, to insist on the Worship due to
Christ, is the Position of the modern Socinians, who finding how hard it was to
reconcile the Worship of a God Made, with the Divine Prohibitions against
Idolatry, have thrown off our Savior's Worship, with his Divinity. I shall
only quote the words of one of their own Party. There are, says he, no acts of
Worship Answer to Milbourne, p. 50.
required to be paid to the Lord Jesus Christ, but such as may be paid to a
Civil Power, to a Person in high Dignity and Office, to Prophets and Holy Men,
and to such as are actually possessed of the Heavenly Beatitudes. But to proceed,

Secondly, Christ, or the Word is God, because of his Co-partnership with God
the Father in those Actions, which could only be performed by his Substantial
union with the Divine Nature. These Actions are, the Creation of the World, the
Inspiration of the Prophets, the Exercising all power in Heaven and in Earth;
Raising the Dead out of their Graves, Judging them according to their Works;
the Destruction of the World. First, Christ is God because of His
Co-partnership with God the Father in the Creation of the World. For to Create
is an act proper to the Deity; For he spoke and it was done, he commanded and
it stood fast; He has made the Earth by his Power, he has established the
World by his Wisdom, and has stretched out the Heavens by his Discretion. Nor
had he any Creature to assist him in his miraculous Production; for He is God,
even he alone, he made Heaven and Earth. But it is very plain that all things
were Created by Christ. For all things were made by him, and without him was
not any thing made, that was made. He was in the World, and the World was made
by him, and the World knew him not. It Is true, the Socinians understand this
Creation, not of the Mosaic forming every thing out of Nothing, but of the New
Gospel-Creation, by which the Reasonable World (if we may so style it) was put
into a capacity of recovering its original Rectitude and Uprightness. But this
is a forced sense, and quite different from what the ancient Fathers understood
the words in. Nay, the very Arians themselves applied them to a proper
Creation; and to obviate the stress of them, made Christ God's Instrument, or
subservient Power only in the Creation. But as to the Socinian sense, if
Creation in these places is wholly Figurative and Metaphorical, why may it not
be so in the first Chapter of Genesis too? Why may not the Creation of the
visible Heavens and the Earth, in the Old Testament, be no more than the
Foundation of the Jewish Commonwealth; since it is owned, that by New Heavens
and new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, in the New, no more is
understood than a renewed state of things under the Gospel? Why should the
darkness which was upon the face of the Earth, signify more than that State of
spiritual Darkness, which blinded the whole World before the Mosaic Law? Why
might not the Sun be the Law, the great Guide of the Jews; the Moon and the
Stars the Laws and Directors of other obscurer Nations? Why may not the
Firmament amidst the Waters, be the Jewish Polity struggling with oppositions,
as the Earth appearing out of the Waters, the settlement of that State; since
Waters in Scripture Language often denote Troubles? And thus a new Face might
be put upon the whole Scripture. But farther, to overthrow this novel, and
over-refin'd sense of Creation, St. Paul remarks to the Colossians, that By
Christ were all things created, that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth,
visible and invisible, whether they are Thrones and Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers. Where it is to be observed, first, That All in
Heaven and Earth, things void of Reason, and so not liable to Error or Sin, and
so incapable of this New Creation, were made by Christ. Secondly, That
Dominions and Powers, Angels, whether Good or Bad, were formed by him: But the
Good had no need of this New Gospel-Creation. They never stained those Robes of
Glory with which they were made, and so had no need to be washed by the blood
of the Lamb. The Bad, as falling from the very Throne of God, and descending
cheaply and foolishly into Darkness, contracted such a Guilt, as the greatest
Mercy of the Gospel could not reach: And so were unfit Subjects for this New
Creation. Thirdly, That it was the aim of this Epistle, to oppose the Heresy
of Simon Magus, Menander, and Basilides, v. Epiphan. p. 56. Edit. Pet. ^.
whose Error it was, That the World was made by the Angels. To confront which,
S. Paul not only shows, that Angels themselves were created, and so could not
be Creators; but that they, and the whole World were made by God, and Christ,
and the Holy Spirit, Three Persons and One God. So that this place can never be
understood of this New Creation, or Gospel Renovation. As Christ is God because
he Created the World, so is he God,

Secondly, Because he Inspired the Holy Prophets. For he by whom the Prophets
spoke, was God. For the Word which came by them was the Word of the Lord; and
the Scriptures which they wrote, is said to be given by Inspiration of God. For
Holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. But he who speaks
by the Holy Ghost, speaks by the Spirit of God the Son, as well as by the
Spirit of God the Father. It Is true Schlictingius answers, That the Holy Ghost
is termed the Spirit of Christ, not because he proceeded from Christ, but
because he spoke of Christ. But in this sense the Holy Ghost might be called
the Spirit of Abraham, or of Lot, as well as of Christ, because he spoke of
them too. Nay, there is no Being so evil, which is ever mentioned in Holy Writ,
but the ever-blessed Spirit might be said to be their Spirit, according to this
wild and uncouth Hypothesis. St. Barnabas styles the Spirit of the Prophets,
the Spirit of God who should appear in the Flesh. Justin Martyr says, that the
Prophets were not Self-inspir'd, (...) Apolog. 2. p. 76.
Irenaeus against Marcion as expressly, that it was Jesus Edit. Sylburg. lib. 4.
c. 21. Advers. Haeres. p. 337. Edit. F. Ardent.
Christ, who spoke to Abraham and Moses. If it was God therefore, who spoke by
the Prophets, and Christ was Co-partner with God the Father in this speaking,
Christ must be God, of the same Nature with the Father.

Thirdly, Christ is God, because of his Exercising all power in Heaven and in
Earth. For the Government of the World is a Branch of the Divine Prerogative.
He rules over all Kingdoms of the Earth. He whose Name is Jehovah, is the
highest over all the Earth. But Volkelius himself, as refined an Author De Ver.
Rel. Book 3. c. 21.
as any that Party can boast, freely owns, that Christ exercises Jurisdiction
over all things (to use his own words) which are contained not only in the vast
compass of the Earth, but also of the Heavens. Christ therefore must be God.

Fourthly, Christ is God, because He is to raise the Dead from their Graves to
Life and a new State. For none but He who breathed a living Soul into us, can
restore it. None but One, whose Understanding is infinite, who knows every
Atome of our Bodies, every Dust and Particle which belongs to us. He who is
conscious what Dust appertains to each Body, what Body to each Soul. None but
One, whose Power is as unbounded as his Knowledge; in regard of whom all
Creatures must suffer and do what he will have them. Who can summon and
re-assemble our scattered Atoms from the Earth, and from the Waves, and
reconcile our long estranged Parts to their ancient familiarity. Whose Voice
can awake the sleepers of Thousands of Years, some to Peace and Joy, but some
to Misery and everlasting Contempt. But Christ is the Person who must raise the
Dead. For the Dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear
shall live. All that are in the Graves shall hear his voice, and shall come
forth, they that have done Good unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that
have done Evil unto the Resurrection of Damnation.

Fifthly, Christ is God, because He shall Judge the World. For it is necessary
for him who shall Judge the World, that he should be intimately acquainted with
the Consciences of all Mankind; that all their Thoughts should be laid naked
and open to his view, and that all the devices of their Hearts should be
manifest to him. But none besides God can have such a Knowledge as this: for
Lo! he that declares unto man what is his thought, that makes the morning
darkness; the Lord, the God of Hosts is his Name. But Christ is ordained by God
to be Judge of the Quick and Dead; and to this end Christ both died, rose, and
revived, that he might be Judge both of the Dead, and the Living; and so for
that reason must be God.

Lastly, He who shall destroy and change the World, who, in the Prophet's
Language, shall roll the Heavens together as a Scrowl, the Heavens, which like
a wide stretched Scrowl, are written over with beauteous Characters by God's
own hand; he is God. For this is one of the peculiar Actions of God, that he
shall destroy the Heavens. For as a Vesture shall he change them, and they
shall be changed. But Volkelius owns, that our Savior has such a power, and
that he shall roll them up together like a Scrowl, and burn them. And therefore
on that account must be God; which may be farther made out:

Secondly, From the ill Consequences of the contrary Assertion. For how open
does the Socinian Christ lie to the Exceptions of the Jews, or the more
rational sort of Deists, who own a God, a Providence, and a future State; and
to any who maintain the Unity of the Godhead, yet deny the Divinity of Christ?
And is it not very suitable for the Jews to reason against Christianity, from
the Socinian Principles, after this method?

We are convinced from Scripture, that there is but one God; we know that there
is no other besides him, or with him: for Who is God save the Lord, and who is
a Rock save our God? But now you introduce one Jesus as God, who was neither
God from Eternity, nor by Nature and Essence. This new, this created God, we
look upon as a Fiction; we can pay him no Homage, no Adoration, till we have
renounced Moses and the Prophets, and offered violence to the Principles of
Reason, and Natural Religion. Farther, our God has taught us by his Prophet
Isaiah, that He even he is the Lord, and besides him there is no Savior; and
this is spoken Prophetically with regard to the times of the Messiah. How then
can we own this Jesus for our Savior, who is by Nature different from God? We
are commanded to worship the Lord our God, and to serve him only* How then may
we worship and serve Jesus, who is a God different from the God of Israel? How
can we give him equal Honor with the Lord Jehovah, without provoking his
Wrath, and forcing him to repeat all those Inflictions on us, which our Fathers
justly suffered? God has expressly declared; that He withnot give his glory to
another but by worshipping your Jesus, is not God's Glory given (...) Object
distinct from God? The Scriptures solemnly inform us, that God alone ^^^^'s the
Heart and the Reins* and is conscious to all the* Thoughts of Men If we as you
do, should apply these Actions to the Man Jesus, we should be guilty of
advancing a false God into the Throne of the Almighty, and making a Creature
rival the Deity. Farther, Has not God taught us to address to him alone in the
time of our Distress, and promised his succors to encourage our Prayers? Can
we then pray to your Jesus, whom you your selves deny to be the true God of
Israel? The Scripture threatens, that Gods which have not made the Heavens and
the Earth, even they shall perish from the Earth, and from under the Heavens.
Can we then honor him for God, who was so far from making the Heavens and the
Earth, that he himself had no Being when they were formed? Or can God at the
last Day be angry at us, for not receiving and worshipping him as God, who
according to Scripture, was to perish from the Earth, and under the Heavens?
Lastly, The Idea, which we have and always had of God, represents him to our
Minds, as present every where, Omniscient and Almighty. If therefore he, who is
offered to us to be worshipped under these Ideas; is not God by Nature he is to
be looked on as a strange God. How can we then ascribe these Attributes to your
Jesus, whom you deny to be God by Nature, without laying out selves under the
guilt of worshipping strange Gods? If you reply, That the Miracles performed by
your Christ are Motives strong enough to justify his Worship, and that the
mighty Works which he did, prove that he was clothed with such a Divinity as
might deserve Honors more than human. To this, not we, but our God himself
shall answer, that If there arise among you a Prophet, and give you a sign or a
wonder, and the sign or the wonder come to pass whereof he spoke unto you,
saying, Let us go after other Gods, and let us serve them; Thou shall not
hearken unto the words of that Prophet. Such a Prophet as this we look on your
Jesus to be; his Miracles of this false nature; because they tend to bring us
off from the Worship of the true God, to give part of it to him.

If a Jew should make such an Apology as this for the not worshipping and owning
of our Savior, I cannot see what a Denier of his Essential Divinity could
reply to it. It seems to be exactly reasoned in every part, and each Conclusion
drawn from their own Principles. Either they must wholly deny his Worship, and
so make him a Pure Man; or if he is to be worshipped, they must grant, that he
is God by Nature and Essence. If I am God where is my Worship, does not hold
with greater force against the irreligious despisers of God's Service, than the
Reverse of it would do against our Adversaries, If I am to be worshipped I am
God.

The sum of all is, That Christ, or the Word Incarnate, is God; not because
whatsoever appeared in his Prophetic Function was full of Divinity, not
because he was born after a divine manner, not because he was taught by God,
not because he was endued with Divine Innocence, but on account of his Divine
Nature and Subsistence; which was proved, because whatsoever is worshipped is
God, and that Christ is to be worshipped; and secondly, by reason of his
Co-partnership with God the Father in Divine Actions; such as are, The Creation
of the World, the Inspiration of the Prophets, the Exercising of Divine Power,
the Raising the Dead, the last Judgment, the Destruction of the World. And in
the Second General were shown the ill Consequences which may be drawn from the
contrary Position. So that even the Being and Unity of a God are not clearer
Articles of Natural Religion, than the Divinity of Jesus Christ of the Revealed.

A DISCOURSE Concerning Our Savior's SATISFACTION.
1 Epist. JOH. Chap. II. ver. 2. And He is the Propitiation for our Sins.
THE Apostle had in the former Chapter discovered the inconsistency of a state
of Sin with that of Perfection, and that the pretenses of reconciling
fellowship with God with walking in darkness, was the greatest aggravation that
could heighten any Impiety. That it was a making God a Liar, and was a positive
denial of Actions to be sinful, which he had by the most express Laws and
Sanctions declared and enacted such. He then shows that the truest Test of, and
the securest Method to attain to a perfect State, was to walk in the Light as
God is in the Light, to partake with Christ of his Graces, and to resemble him
in his Purity. That this was the only sign of the real and unfeigned Gnostick;
and that we might hence measure our Knowledge of God, by our keeping his
Commandments. But that if we should fall into any Sin, the way to remove it,
was not by saying, that we have not sinned; that either our Natures are so
pure, that they change every thing we do into acts of Piety, or at least that
God is willing, out of his favor to us, to overlook our Transgressions: but
that it was our Duty to confess our Offenses, to acknowledge our Danger, and to
fly to God for Pardon upon Repentance. And then he comes to state the nature
of Remission, that it was nothing else but the applying of our Savior's
Satisfaction, or Propitiation for Sin, to the Penitent: which Propiriation was
sufficient in its nature and force to artone for Sin, and in its extent and
compass to reach to all the Crimes of Mankind. For -- He is the Propitiation
for our sins.

Propitiation is the reconciling of an offended Party to him who has injured
him, by performing some Act by which his displeasure may be removed. And as it
is spoken of our Savior, it intimates, That he has done something so grateful
to God, that on consideration of this, God is willing to take Man again into
his favor; to forgive him his Sins, and to bestow those Blessings on him,
which were do only to his Innocence. By Sins are understood, first, Our
inclinations and tendencies to Sin, and then Our voluntary breaches of God's
Laws in their utmost extent, with all those Circumstances, which may either
heighten or lessen their guilt. For Offenses in this latitude, and for Crimes
in this compass, is our Savior a Propitiation.

From the words I shall show, That Christ is a true and complete Propitiation
for Sin: Where I shall enquire,

First, How Christ is a Propitiation; and then

Secondly, Into the Equity and Reasonableness of his being so.

First, As to the manner of our Savior's Propiriation. That it was wrought by
procuring our Sins to be forgiven, is granted on all sides; but after what
manner our Sins were removed, is variously disputed. Which Contest being
managed by the Followers of Socinus on one hand, and by those who justly style
themselves Orthodox on the other; I shall in order to a due determining of this
Matter prove, first, That Christ did not propitiate for, nor remove Sin, after
any of those methods or ways which Socinus contends for, nor that any of them
can amount to a Propitiation; and next, I shall state the true Means by which
he did really take our Sins away, and propitiate for them. First then, Christ
did not propitiate for Sin after any of those ways which Socinus contends for,
nor can any of them amount to a Propitiation. He did not propitiate for Sin, by
barely laying down his Life to Socin p 165. and passim.
confirm, or bear witness to that Doctrine, or Rule of Life, by the observance
of which Crellius against Grotius* p. 4. etc.
Remission might be purchased; nor by gaining or acquiring a Right and Power to
forgive Sin, with which he was not invested before; nor by merely leading a
Life of Patience, Obedience and Submission to the Will of God, which should be
a Pattern to all his Followers, and by the imitation of which they should
certainly procure Remission; nor lastly, was it the Death of Christ considered
only as a strong and active persuasive to perform those Terms, which are
necessary to the taking away of Sin, which wrought this Propitiation. Not any
of these separately, nor all of them united, how far soever conducing to apply
this Propitiation, were the thing it self.

Christ did not propitiate for Sin, by barely laying down his Life to confirm,
or bear witness to that Doctrine, in which Remission of Sin was contained. For
this makes the Death of Christ rather a Consequent, or an Effect of this
Remission, than the efficient Cause on Producer of it. For the Existence, or
the Being of any thing, is the Cause, as well as the Measure of the Testimony,
and not the Testimony the Cause of the Existence. Therefore if Christ's Death
was only a Testimony to that in which Remission of Sins is included, it has no
share in it. A Testimony in proportion to the Character and Worth of the
Testator may give Light to those who are ignorant, or Conviction to those who
doubt of any Matter; but can contribute nothing of reality to the thing it
self. But it is plain from Scripture, that Christ's Death did really,
effectively and antecedently work to the Remission of Sins. And that we have
Redemption in his Blood, the forgiveness of Sins. That the Blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses us from all Sin; and that without shedding of Blood there is
no Remission. Therefore this shedding of Blood must be something more than a
bare Testimony to the Doctrine, in which Redemption, Forgiveness, Cleansing from
Sin, and Remission are implied; must be the very Conveyer of these Blessings to
us, without which we had been still in our Sins, and under an indispensible
obligation to Punishment for them. For at this rate the Blood of the Martyrs
might purify us from Guilt, as well as that of our Savior, seeing that that
too was spilt as a Testimony to the same Doctrine. Nay, their Blood was on this
account a more full and extensive Testimony to Christianity, even than his;
because, when our Savior died, though the Morals of the Christian religion were
brought to their perfection, yet there was something farther to be added as
Objects of Faith and Belief, which were not yet accomplished; as our Savior's
Resurrection from the Dead, and Ascension into Heaven. Now to these our
Savior's Death could bear no Testimony, as being results from it, and
transacted after it; but the Death of the Martyrs still ratified and settled
this fundamental Truth of Christ's being risen again, which by being
established it self, confirmed all the rest. Now Socinus himself freely owns,
that the Resurrection of our Savior is a necessary Article of our Belief, and
an essential Principle of our Religion. Nay, this is almost the only one of the
Socianian Creed which regards our Savior. And Socinus applies Remission of
Sins to this, rather than to our Savior's Death; because that the Hopes of
that glorious State of which our Savior took possession, upon his
Resurrection, have the strongest Influences to reform our Lives; which
Reformation is immediately attended with the Remission of Sins. So that the
force of the Argument will be this, That if all that our Savior did toward
Remission of Sin, was only giving Testimony by his Death to that Doctrine in
which Remission was preached; then the Primitive Martyrs, who bore witness to
this Doctrine by laying down their Lives for it, when it was advanced to a
fuller extent, did more abundantly, at least equally cooperate to this
Forgiveness. But since this Remission is never attributed to any Testimony of
theirs, it follows, That our Savior made his Propitiation by some other act
than this of Testifying. Moreover, as the reason why our Savior was put to
Death, was not his preaching Repentance and Forgiveness of Sins, but his
declaring himself the Son of God; so that which he attested by his Death, was
rather his own Divinity, than the Truth of what he had before taught. But
granting that it might be one of the less principal Designs of our Savior's
Death, to give Sanction to his Doctrine by his Blood, yet this could not perform
it so sutably and so completely, as his Miracles did; which were fully adapted
to this purpose, and to which he addresses, as to the exact standard by which
his Doctrine might be examined. It Is true, that to die for a Man's own
Sentiments, is a bold and a gallant appeal, and a sufficient warrant, that he
himself believes what he says; but this is not security enough for me to assent
to his Tenants; because he may be mistaken in the Truth of that, which he
himself is very conscientiously persuaded of. For as Falsehood may be maintained
with equal warmth and zeal as Truth, so may it be suffered for, with resembling
Patience. But when Miracles are once brought to second a Doctrine, these silence
any farther doubts; I yield, I am convinced: for these are either contrary to
the Laws of Nature, or above them, and so are immediately acted by God himself,
who will neither exercise his own Power, nor delegate it to any other, to
ratify a Lie, or grace an Impostor. So that since our Savior's Miracles were
more proper, more clear and visible Tests of his Doctrine than his Death, if his
Propitiation, or what he did toward the abolishing of Sin, consisted only in
bearing witness to his Doctrine, it might rather be derived from these, than
from his Blood; which is a Paradox which hitherto has never been advanced.

To proceed: This Propitiation cannot consist in Christ's merely gaining or
purchasing, by his Death, a Right or Title to forgive Sin. For our Savior did
not purchase any such Right by his Death, because he was invested with it long
before he suffered; and when a Person is once legally possessed of any Right, he
needs no subsequent act to appropriate it more closely to him. But that our
Savior had such a Right before his Crucifixion, is plain, as from several
other places of Scripture, so from that instance of his Healing the sick of the
Palsy; where he Prefaces his miraculous Cure with that comfortable Declaration
of, Son thy sins are forgiven thee. And lest it might be urged, That this was
only a removing of his temporal Punishment, it is very apparent that our
Savior distinguishes between these two Acts, by subjoyning the other Command
of, Son take up thy bed and walk, which had been utterly needless, if the
former words had implied a Cure of his Disease. Nor can it be shown, That
Propitiation for Sin can coincide with a Right of forgiving Sin; for the former
pre-supposes an offended Party, which must be satisfied; an offending one,
which is of it self unable to atone its Anger; and lastly, a Mediator or
Sequester, to finish the Reconcilement. So that three Terms are necessary to
make up an entire Propitiation; but a Donation (and a gratuitous Remission is
nothing else) is only between two, where there are no insuperable Hindrances or
Lets, why the Donor should not suffer his Bounty to stream freely out toward
the Indigent, without any third Person to interpose for him, or to bear his
Punishment.

Farther: Neither did Christ propitiate by merely giving us an Example of
Obedience, which if we transcribe, we shall assuredly have our Sins pardoned.
For how much soever our Savior's Example may be serviceable to our
Sanctification, it can have no regard to our Pardon. For if we can work out our
own Pardons, by an exact and unerring Imitation of our Savior's Obedience, the
exactness of which must consist in gaining the same Ends, by the same Means;
then did our Savior at this rate, by his own Obedience, work out a Pardon for
himself, or else he could be no Precedent for us. But he did not purchase any
Pardon for himself, because he never stood in need of any; never transgressed
the Law at any time, nor had any occasion of having it dispensed with on his
account. Though He was numbered with Transgressors, yet it was only in their
Punishment, not in their Crimes. Though His Soul was made an Offering for Sin,
yet was it for our Transgressions that he was wounded, and bruised for our
Iniquities. So that though by keeping close to our Savior's Example, we may be
Holy as he is Holy; yet cannot we by this procure our own Pardons for former
Sins.

To close all: The Death of Christ considered only as a Motive to an Holy Life,
and as inspiring into us the Hopes of a future State of Glory, and so
persuading us to perform what is necessary to Remission, cannot be the
Propitiation expressed in the Words. For what force could the disgraceful and
bloody Death of an innocent Person, and of one who had made it his Business to
go about doing good, have, to convince Men, That God was a Rewarder of Virtue
and Integrity? Would it not rather discourage Men from the practice of
Perfections, which were crowned indeed but with Thorns, and whose only
Exaltation was on the Cross, to make them more conspicuous Instances of Woe and
Infamy? Socinus himself foresaw the power of this Objection, and to evade it,
he has recourse to the little Sophistry of saying, that Indeed there was no
great Efficacy in the Death of Christ, to be an Incentive to a good Life, and
so to make way for Remission; but that there was in his Resurrection and
Ascension into Heaven, which were Consequents of his Death; and that the
Glories of that Kingdom he then took possession of, carry the strongest
Rhetoric in them, to move us to abandon our Sins, and lead Lives of
Righteousness. This is a miserable way of reasoning. For would the Scripture
apply the Propitiation so often, and so expressly, to the Death, the Blood, the
Sufferings of Christ, if it was all this while his Resurrection which effected
the Remission of Sins? Nay, Does it not oppose the Benefits flowing from the
Resurrection, to those resulting from the Death of our Lord, informing us, that
Christ died for our Sins, but that he rose again for our Justification? How
then can these Acts in all regards be coincident, be the same? His Resurrection
indeed was a Confirmation, a Justifying to the World, That he had by his Death
purchased Remission of Sins to the Penitent; but it neither was the Remission
it self, nor any way concurred to it, more than by begetting in us a Faith in
his Death and Merits.

The sum of what has been said, is, That Christ did not propitiate for Sin By
dying to bear witness to his Doctrine; because then his Death would only have
been a Testimony of his Propitiation, and not the Thing it self: Nor By gaining
a power to forgive Sin; because he had This before he died: Nor By setting his
Life out to be an Example to his Followers; because this Example has no force
to purify and absolve from Sins, at least from past Sins: Nor, lastly, did his
Death considered as a Motive to an holy Life free from Sin; because Christ's
Death simply and abstractedly considered, as the Death of a Just Man, without
its effect of actually removing Sin, is not such a Motive. As to the
Enthusiast's method of Satisfaction, which W. Penn's Christian Quaker, p. 102.
they resolve only into a spiritual shedding of the blood in their Hearts; it is
a changing this comfortable Doctrine wholly into an Allegory, and a substituting
an imaginary fantastic Savior instead of a true one. And as none of these
ways singly takes away Sin, so neither do they all of them combined: For the
result of them all is this, That God sent Christ into the World to live a Life
of Righteousness, and to die an ignomimous Death; only to be a more successful.
Instrument to reform the Sinner, and to prevent Sin for the future. But if
Christ did nothing but this, How could his Merits reach to Sins committed
before this Repentance or Reformation? These would still lie open to the Divine
Vengeance, to the Wrath of that God, who has too high a respect for his own
Laws, to suffer any breach of them to go unpunished; but will certainly revenge
them either on the Sinner himself, or at least on his Proxy. And though the
Sinner should at length correct his ways, yet what compensation would this be
for his former Violations of the Commands of God? Would this be any thing else,
but beginning to do that at last, which he was always obliged to do? So I shall
proceed to state the true Means by which Christ did really take away our Sins,
and propitiate for them.

And to clear this Case from its original, it is to be observed, That God as
the Governor of Mankind, gave them a Law, which was to be the general Rule of
all their Actions: This Law he secures on each hand, as all other wise
Magistrates, with Penalties suitable to the power of the Lawgiver, which being
Omnipotent, they too must of consequence be Infinite and Eternal. The keeping
of the Commands of God blessed with ever lasting Life, the breach of them
punished with equal Misery. This was the original Covenant, or Contract,
between God and Man, which was very just to be imposed on Man in his Integrity,
for then he was endued with strength to perform the Condition; and was as
equitable to be exacted from him after his Fall, because he had contracted his
weakness and insufficiency by his own fault, and had willingly disabled
himself. But God was more merciful than to deal with him according to the
rigor of Justice; he had a compassionate sense of that helpless State into
which he was sunk, and was willing to accept of a Propitiation. He knew that
the Sins he should commit in his fallen Condition, would be of a different
Character from those of the Angels, and therefore were more mercifully to be
proceeded against. That the Angels were irreclaimably lost, because God had
done for them all that could be done; had created them so perfect, that they
had a whole prospect of their Duty at one view; knew when they fell as much as
they could know, and* therefore admitted of no room for Repentance, or
alteration of their choice* But that Man receives the Knowledge of his Duty by
degrees, and advances into a Mind prepossest with the prejudices of Sense, and
therefore may see farther and farther into things, so as to correct his Errors,
and repent of them. That his Passions grow strong before his Reason has force
to govern them. That his Duties are so many, that in some cases they are almost
inconsistent. That even when he sins and provokes his Maker, there are secret
declarations in his Conscience against what he acts; or, in the Language of the
Apostle, The Evil that he would not, that he does. Such Considerations as these
moved the merciful God to be willing to receive Man to favor; made him
inclinable to be reconciled, and to mitigate that Anger he had justly conceived
against him for the breach of his Laws. But it is impossible that God should be
pacified, while the Law which Man has broken, and which the weakness of his
Nature tempts him still to violate, remains in its severity. There can be no
Peace between God and Man, while this is to be executed upon every failure;
while Man is born under almost a necessity of Sinning, and yet obliged to a
necessity of Innocence. Something must be done to this Law, before God's
displeasure can be removed; and if so, This Law must either be wholly taken
away, or Explained in a more easy Sense, or some other satisfaction made it.

But the Law, which ought to have been the Rule of Man's Life, could not be
repealed and quite taken away. For then Man either must be left Lawless, or
some other Law made in the room of it. The former throws down all the
boundaries of Virtue and Vice, gives encouragement to every Irregularity,
excludes God out of the Government of the World, and places Man in the wildest
State of Nature, accountable to none but himself for his Actions. If a new Law
is to be substituted, either this Law must partake something of the former, or
be opposed to it. If it has somewhat of the Injunctions of the old Law, it must
have as much of the Difficulties of it too; opposed it cannot be, for the
former Law rises so regularly from the Nature of Things, that whatsoever should
command any thing contrary to it, would enjoin what is unjust, and therefore
would be null as soon as promulg'd.

Neither could this Law have a milder and more equitable Sense or Construction
put upon it, to soften its hardness, that Man might in some measure evade the
Obligation, and therefore the Penalty of it. For a mild interpreting of a Law
is only a showing, That some Persons or Actions are not comprehended under it.
As the ancient Heathens were not obliged by the Jewish Judicial or Ceremonial
Law, or the present Chinese by the Evangelical. As Works of Religion and Mercy
are not included under the Prohibition of working on the Sabbath. But neither
of these can take any place here. For Man could not pretend to be exempted from
a Law, which was made and designed for him, and could not be suitable to any
other Order of Beings. Nor could any Actions be excepted out of it, for then
must all Actions be so; for though particular Persons might only break the Law in
some special parts, and therefore only have need of having those Actions
Privileged, which were contrary to it; yet Mankind in general would violate
every Branch of it: so that all Actions in gross must be put out of its reach;
which is the same with an Abrogation, or Repeal.

But there was a different Method from all these. A Method by which the Law
might be retained in its Majesty, as well as Integrity; not one jot or tittle
of it pass away, and yet Man be freed from its Rigor. This was, if a third
Person would interpose, and undergo the Punishment due to the Offenders: would
satisfy the Divine Wrath, and propitiate for Mankind. For the Dignity or
Honor, as well as the Force of a Law, is sufficiently preserved, if either its
Injunctions are kept, or satisfactory Punishment inflicted. But, Who can stand
before God when he is angry? Or, Who atone for the Sin of Mankind? Which of
all the Angels or Archangels can sustain the Person of a Mediator, and satisfy
the Law which we have broke? Which in the Language of the Holy Job, might like
a Daysman betwixt God and us, lay his hand on us both. For God is not a Man, as
we are, that we should answer him, and should come together in Judgment. The
most perfect of Created Beings would shrink under so vast a Burden. So that
the Son of God himself must be deputed for so glorious a purpose. He that comes
from Edom, with dyed Garments from Bozrah. Wherefore is he red in his Apparel,
and his Garments like him that treads in the Wine-fat? The reason is, because
He has trodden the Wine Press alone, and of the people there was none with him.
And in this God commended his Love toward us, that while we were yet Sinners
Christ died for us. That the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and that
with his stripes we were healed. For as by his Life he fulfilled every part of
the Law, did whatsoever it had enjoined, and so performed our Righteousness; so
by substituting himself to bear the Punishment of our Transgressions, by
enduring what the Law had threatened, he dissolved our Obligation to those
Sufferings, which were due to us according to the Order of the Divine Justice,
and pacified the Diety's Fury; the Law being still retained in its original
Majesty. And both these as well the Innocence of his Life, as the
Meritoriousness of his Death, were necessary for the Person who should atone
for the Sins of Mankind. For had not his Life been wholly made up of Obedience,
had there been one flaw, one Transgression in it, he could not have been that
holy and unspotted Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole World. All that he could
have done, would have been to have died for his own Offenses, if perhaps he
could have washed out his Personal stains by his Blood. But as to our Faults,
it must cost more to redeem them; the Sacrifice which can expiate for them must
have nobler Qualifications: so that He must let that alone for ever. The
Innocence of his Life was therefore not only an accomplishing of the Law in our
stead, and a Rule for us to act by; but was in a more peculiar manner a
Qualification also to prepare him to suffer duly for our Sins.

Which Passion was the formal Act which took away our Transgressions. On him
they were laid, and he paid the Price of them. By this Act, and under this
Qualification did he propitiate for our sins.

Secondly, The equitableness of which Propitiation, by removing the Penalty
from the Sinner to a Stipulator, who engages himself to suffer for the Guilty,
is the next thing to be considered.

If there was any Injustice in this, as Socinus pretends there is, it must
either consist in this, That an innocent Person underwent a most barbarous,
poinant, as well as shameful Death; that One in whose Mouth was found no Guile,
was oppressed, was afflicted, as well as despised and rejected of Men; or else
because he endured all this for our Sins. But there is no Injustice in the
former, because it is plain from Scripture, and Socinus himself owns, That our
Savior, after a Life of the most spotless Innocence, had it taken away by the
most cruel and ignominious Death; a Death of Slaves and Malefactors. And this
not only by the Permission, but even by the Ordinance and immediate Act of God;
for He was stricken, smitten of God and afflicted, and Shall not the Judge of
all the Earth do right? Far be it from God, that he should do Wickedness, and
that the Almighty should pervert Judgment. So that the Enquiry will be this,
Whether it is consistent with Equity, that the Holy JESUS, the true and uniform
Pattern of all Virtue, should be thus severely punished, as the Propitiator for
us Sinners. And that he should be so, is neither irreconcilable with that
positive Justice or Equity, which God has revealed in his Word, nor with that
Natural Justice which may be drawn from the Reason of Mankind, and the Practice
and Usage of Nations, and which Socinus so much insists on. The derivation of
Punishment from the Transgressor to the Innocent, is not irreconcilable with
the Divine Word. For it is not irreconcilable with the Divine Word, either that
an Innocent should be punished for the Sins of the Guilty; or that he should be
in such manner punished, that the Guilty may be freed from the Penalty due to
Guilt. First, It Is not irreconcilable with Scripture, that the Innocent should
be punished for the Sins of the Guilty. For is not Canaan sentenced to be a
Servant of Servants, for the Unnaturalness of his Father Ham? Are not seven Men
of Readiness Sons hanged up to the Lord, for his Treachery? Are not seventy
Thousand cut off for the Sin of David? Which forced from him that Pathetical
Exclamation, worthy such a Prince: Lo! I have sinned, and I have done wickedly;
but these Sheep what have they done? Let thy hand; I pray thee, be against me,
and against my Father's house. And in general, though it is the Character of the
Lord, that He i^ Merciful and Gracious, Long-suffering, and abundant in
Goodness and Truth; yet do not the very next words inform us, that He visits
the Iniquities of the Father's upon the Children, and upon the Childrens
Children, unto the third and fourth Generation? And does not the Prophet in the
Lamentation, personating Sion, complain, Our Fathers have sinned, and are not,
and we have born their Iniquities? Farther, It is not irreconcilable with
Scripture. Justice, that the Guilty may be freed from the Penalty, which the
Innocent have undergone, or (which is the same) are to undergo. To prove this,
I shall only produce one Instance; that of Ahab, who for his short and
transient Repentance, and which past away like the morning dew, had the
Judgment denounced against him, executed on his Posterity: See thou how Ahab
humbles himself? because he humbles himself before me, I will not bring the
evil in his days; in his Sons days will I bring the evil on his house. As
Punishment by deputation is thus reconcilable with the sentiments God's Word
gives us of Justice, so is it equally so with the Practice or Usage of Nations.
First, it is agreeable to th^se, That one Man should lay down his Life for
another's Crimes; and next, That the Guilty should gain Impunity by something
which has been suffered for him. First, it is consistent with the Usage of
Nations, that one Man should lay down his Life for another's Crimes. In the
Affair of Pledges in War, received by all Countries, are not these sacrificed
to the Fury of their Enemies, for the Perfidiousness of their Fellow-Citizens?
Do they not die for Violations of Faith* which sometimes they could not so much
as contrive or design* as being Children; never eexcute, as being Prisoners?
Did the most human and compassionate of Princes ever think it any reflection on
his Justice, to take the Forfeiture? Or could Justice be preserved in the World
without such Examples? When one Prince is notoriously injured by another, did
the injured ever esteem it unjust or barbarous, to revenge himself on his
Enemy's innocent Subjects; to bu^n, ravage and destroy Cottages, for the
Affronts and Villainies of the Palace; to kill or enslave the Peasant, for the
wicked Counsel of the Statesman? When the Law of War i^ broke between two
Generals, is not ho without regard to any antecedent Demerit always the most
guilty, who is first caught? In the Decimation of mutinous Soldiers, may not
the fatal ^^o^ fall on the peaceable and harmless, as well as on the stubborn
and rebellious^ Or is there some secret Oracle in the Chances, which infallibly
guides them to the Offenders? Or is it Injustice to punish the unfortunate
Condemned, how guiltless soever? As it is thus consistent with the Use of
Nations, That one should suffer for another's Crimes; so is it not less so,
That the Guilty should gain Impunity, by something which has been suffered for
him. Thus in the instance of Sacrifices, received into the Religion of all
Nations; whatsoever the matter of them was, whether it was Thousand of Rams, or
whether they brought their firstborn, and offered the fruit of their Bodies
for the sin of their Souls; yet the intention of them both, was to procure
Impunity to the Sinner, by laying the Punishment somewhere else. And how
useless soever, the former might be, or how cruel the latter; yet both prove,
That it was the Sentiments of Mankind, that freedom from Penalty might be
purchased by a vicarious Infliction. There was nothing therefore in our
Savior's Suffering, which is inconsistent with the constant sense of Mankind,
in regard to the Expiation of Guilt. Nor is there any thing in it unjust,
whether we examine it by the Rules of Justice displayed in the Word of God, or
by the Usage of Nations. Nor, farther, is there any thing in it unreasonable,
which is now to be made out. For it was reasonable that Christ should die for
our Sins: because, first* It is reasonable that God should release the
Punishment due to our Sins; and next, That he should remit* it by the method of
punishing Christ in our stead.

That God should release our Punishment, is reasonable, whether we consider the
Nature of God, whose Goodness must strongly plead before the Throne of Grace
for fallen Man's Remission, even before there was any other Advocate; or whether
we consider the Nature of that Service, which God exacts from Man. For God
never obliges to Duty, where he has put himself out of a possibility of
requiting it* But while Man's Sins were unforgiven, while his obligation to
Punishment remained, it was not in the power of God to reward his Piety. Since
undistinguishing Misery was to be his Doom at last, and was to be the common
Event of all; both of those who sacrificed, and those who sacrificed not.

It being therefore thus reasonable, That God should release Man's Punishment;
it is as reasonable. That he should lay this Punishment on Christ. For either
the Punishment must be laid on Christ, or on some other, or be remitted without
any Satisfaction.

But without Satisfaction (whatsoever the Deist may fancy) the Penalty could
not be sutably removed: for, that God should pardon Sin, without receiving any
Satisfaction, is, first, against his Nature and Being; for He is of purer Eyes
than to behold Evil, and cannot look on Iniquity. Against his Justice, because
as a just and righteous Governor of the World, he may not suffer his Laws to
be affronted, without vindicating their Honor. Against his Truth, since in his
first Covenant with Man, he has inseparably combined Sin and Punishment: In the
day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die.

Nor could the Punishment be laid on any other, but Christ; because none,
except one of the Persons of the everblessed Trinity, could suffer Punishment
sufficient to clear the Guilty. For it was infinite Majesty which was injured,
and it must be satisfied by Majesty as infinite. But it was not reasonable,
that the Father, who i(...) the Economy and Order of the Trinity is superior
to the Son and Holy Ghost, should by this Humiliation be debased below them
both. It was not meet that the Holy Ghost should propitiate; because he was to
be sent by the Mediator, in order to the applying of the Salvation, which he
should purchase. So that whatsoever imaginary Models the Schoolmen may raise
of other Methods, by which God might save the World; yet there is none which
agrees with Reason in all Points, but the Propitiation which Christ wrought
through his Sufferings.

The sum of all is, That Christ is become our Propitiation; not by Dying to
bear witness to any saving, or sanctifying Doctrine; not by gaining a Right by
his Death to forgive Sin; not by giving us an Example, by which we may have our
Sins pardoned; not by any Encouragement his Death might yield us to an holy
Life; not by any of these single, nor by all united; but by Dying for our Sins,
and paying a Price tantamount to our Transgressions. By clearing the Mulct,
which the breach of the Divine Law had contracted; by an Act, which at once
secures Honor to the Law, and Impunity to the Offenders. Which Substitution of
our Savior, to suffer for our Sins, was shown to be Just and Reasonable. Just,
as having nothing in it which disagrees either with other methods of Divine
Justice, or with Human Proceedings; Reasonable, as being the only means by
which God might show his high value of his own Commands, and yet his compassion
for his Creatures; and by one well-mixt Action, display at the same time both
his Justice, and his Mercy.

A DISCOURSE Concerning MIRACLES.
HEB. Chap. II. ver. 4. God also bearing them witness, both with Signs, and
Wonders, and with diverse Miracles.
THE Apostle, in the entrance of this Chapter, informs us, That Christ being a
Prophet so much surpassing all before him, and now advanced above the Angels to
his Royal Office in Heaven, whereby he is certainly able to perform what he
foretold; we ought in all reason to heed his Predictions, and to make use of
them as means to fortify us, when we are tempted to Sin or Apostasy. For if
the Law were given only by the Ministry of Angels, and yet the Threats on the
breaking of that did come to pass, and all the Sins committed by the Israelites
against it, were severely chastis'd, and the Transgressors not suffered to
enter into the promised Land; How shall we avoid equal Punishment, if we do
not, by Constancy and Obedience, make our selves capable of that Deliverance,
which Christ first at his being upon Earth, and the Apostles which heard it
from him, assured us of; and which God himself has testified, by so many
Prodigies, and ominous Presages? And by giving them, who foretold 'em, Power to
work Miracles, and other Abilities of the Spirit: God also bearing them
witness, both with Signs, and Wonders, and with diverse Miracles.

By Wonders, in a strict sense, are meant any extraordinary, surprising, and
new Operations, whether springing from a divine Power, or a natural. By
Miracles are understood Effects of a divine and infinite Power, whether wrought
privately or publicly, on purpose to confirm any Doctrine, or without any such
design. Thus our Savior's Fast for forty Days, was a Miracle, though it was not
wrought for the confirmation of any Doctrine, nor before any public Assembly of
Spectators. A Sign is something more than a Wonder, or a Miracle; for it is
wrought publicly by an infinite Power, in confirmation of a Doctrine. Thus our
Savior's changing Water into Wine, is said to be the first of his Miracles of
this kind; that is, the first of his Signs: (...). For as to pure Miracles, he
had acted several before; as his Fast for forty Days, tho Descent of the Holy
Ghost in a Bodily shape. This is the distinction of the Schools, though in common
vld. Aquln. 2. 2dae q. 178. art. 1. ad 3.
acceptance, Signs and Miracles are taken in the same sense: Under which
Notion I shall consider them, and show

First, What a Miracle is.

Secondly, I shall examine what Power is capable of working a Miracle.

Thirdly, I shall enquire into some of those Marks, by which we may distinguish
a true Miracle from a false one.

Fourthly, I shall prove, That the Miracles wrought by Jesus Christ, and his
Apostles, have all these Marks of a true Miracle.

Lastly, I shall close all, by briefly showing, That though Christianity was at
first established by Miracles; yet that there is no reason, that we should
expect a continued succession of them to the present times.

First, I shall show what a Miracle is.

A Miracle is something that surpasses the Power of Men, or of Nature; wrought
in savor of a Person, who knows that this Miracle shall be thus transacted.
It Is a Work that surpasses the Power of Men, or of Nature: for let an Effect be
never so surprising or extraordinary, yet while it is within the force of
second Causes, it is no Miracle. It must (in strict speaking) bear the lively
Impression, and sovereign Stamp of Divinity upon it; so that we may, without
hazard of being deceived, boldly vouch, that This is the Lord's doing, and it
is mavelous in our eyes. Which we may safely say, when Diseases are cured by
a Touch; the tumultuous Seas calmed by a Rebuke; and the Dead raised by the
Command of One, who assumed no more than the Form of a Man. When the Unlearned
speak Languages, which they never learned. When the Flames shall lose their
destructive Nature, and instead of consuming, guard. When a Hand raised up
shall determine the Fate of Armies. When the Lord shall hearken to the voice of
Man, insomuch that the Sun shall stand still upon Gibeon, and the Moon in the
Valley of Ajalon. As a Miracle thus surpasses the Power of Nature, so the
Person in favor of whom it is wrought, ought to know that this Miracle shall
be thus wrought. He ought either to know in particular, that this Miracle will
be wrought, and no other; or that a Miracle of some kind will be wrought, when
natural Helps shall fail. Thus Moses, when Pharaoh pressed behind, and the
Red Sea raged before, though he seems to have had no special Revelation, that the
Sea should be made dry Land, and the Waters be divided; yet he knew in gross,
that The salvation of the Lord should be seen that day, and that the Egyptians
whom they had seen that day, should no more be seen again for ever. Therefore
the dividing the Red Sea was a Miracle performed by Moses, though he did not
particularly foresee it. But when the Person, in behalf of whom a miraculous
Work is brought about, is wholly ignorant of it; this can be no Miracle, nor
ought any Consequence to be drawn from it, as if that Person was immediately
Commissioned from God. The sudden Advancement of Men from the lowest Fortunes,
to the highest Stations, by unaccountable and unforeseen means, is sometimes
assuredly the immediate Hand of God: but since this Exaltation may be for the
Ruin, as well as for the Happiness of Mankind; and since the Party exalted
could not foresee his Success, it is no Miracle, though it is wrought by a Divine
Power; nor ought we to conclude, that this Person is a nearer Favorite of
Heaven, than the rest of Human kind. The Creation of a Reasonable Soul is
miraculous; but because it is usual, is not of that kind of Miracles expressed in
the Words. Thus the Inspiration of Grace is miraculous; but because it works
now adays according to the method of Reason and Discourse (whatsoever the
Enthusiasts may pretend to the contrary) assisting us while we use such moral
Means, as Religion commands, and Reason prescribes, it is not to be ranged with
the Miracles mentioned here.

Since Miracles therefore are the Effect of a Power more than Natural, it is
just to enquire,

Secondly, What Power is capable of working a Miracle.

Where notwithstanding what the acute Le Cler^, and others of this Age have
Jean ^e Clear de l' Incredulite. Lettre 2. p. 355.
advanced, That Miracles may be wrought by good or bad Angels, or by a Power
less than Infinite; yet it may be laid down as a Conclusion, That infinite
Power alone is capable of working a Miracle. For a Miracle proclaims an
omnipotent Agent, and carries the Hand of God written upon it in bright
Characters, legible to the most Vulgar Reason. For every true Miracle is a
forming of something out of nothing; and that either in the thing it self, or
in the manner of forming it. In the thing it self, when it is of that sort,
that it cannot be formed by any second and ordinary Causes: As the Resurrection
of the Dead, the Reunion of the Soul and Body, the restoring of the Springs
and Mechanism of Motion, after a total separation. For Death is a Prison, which
surrenders back its Captives upon no other Summons below those of the Almighty.
To restore Life being only the Prerogative of him who gave it. Or a Miracle may
consist in forming something out of nothing, as to the manner of doing it; when
the thing lies within the power of second Causes, yet is brought about without
the assistance of any of them: As to cure Diseases by a Word speaking, or by
touching the Hem of the Garment. Where there is something which answers calling
Light out of Darkness, and commanding every thing to be from nothing. Creation
therefore being one of the peculiar Acts of God, and which we do not know that
He ever communicated to a Creature; the Power of working Miracles, as to the
original of it, must be so too: For only He who first formed the Laws of
Nature, can suspend or alter them. It Is true, the Angels far surpass us in the
excellency of their Faculties, and therefore may perform such things, as are
apt to raise Admiration in us, because of our unacquaintedness with the causes
of them, or manner of their Production. Even the fal^ Angels themselves have
not their Forces so much broken by Sin, but that by Lying Wonders they may
easily impose on the Spectator's Eye; though it is wholly impossible for them, by
any Power of their own, to alter the Course of Nature, or produce a real
Miracle. So that if a Miracle has been wrought for the confirmation of any
Doctrine, it is a sufficient warrant, that this Doctrine is of God. But since the
evil Angels, who have assumed the Person of God, may also counterfeit his
wondrous Works, it will be necessary,

Thirdly, To enquire into some of those Marks, whereby a true Miracle may be
distinguished from a false one. So that a difference may be put betwixt the
Works of God, and those of his greatest Enemies.

The first Mark of a true Miracle is, That there should be sufficient Evidence
that this Miracle has been wrought, and the Effect of it ought to be addressed to
our Senses. For a Miracle it self, is not an object of our Belief, though it is
formed in confirmation of something, which we are obliged to believe: For then
a Miracle would be as obscure as the thing which it is produced to prove. And
every Miracle would want another, to make it serviceable to its grand design.

The second Mark of a true Miracle is, That it ought not to tend to the
overthrowing of any Doctrine, before established by God, by sufficient Miracles.
For God cannot be divided against himself: But should he overthrow that by
Miracle, which he had before settled by Miracle, Eternal Truth would disagree
with himself. For Miracles, and a Doctrine, give mutual support one to another;
as Miracles declare the Doctrine to be true, so the purity and excellence of the
Doctrine, confirm the Miracles to be Divine. But if there is an Inconsistency
between the Miracles, and the Doctrine; the decision must be in favor of the
Doctrine, in opposition to the Miracles. For if a Person acts the most wonderful
Works, to give Sanction to a Religion, which contains low Idea's of God, or
interferes with the great Duties, we owe to one another; his Miracles are
nothing but artful Frauds, and he himself only a more pompous Deceiver: So on
the other hand, when Miracles are produced in favor of a Doctrine, which is
pure and holy; whose prospects of Rewards are only laid in a future State;
which enjoins Modesty, Temperance, Sobriety, and Patience, and whatsoever is
fitted to advance Human Nature; such a Doctrine is highly fitted to persuade
Men, that the Miracles wrought in behalf of it, are true.

The third Mark of a true Miracle is, That the Effects of it ought to be
lasting and durable. If Diseases are removed by a Miracle, they ought so to be
removed, as not to return. If Sight is restored to the Blind, it ought not to
be a temporary Restitution, but a permanent and continued state of Seeing.

Fourthly, Miracles ought to be of that Nature, as to be capable of being
extended over the whole Creation. For since they flow from an infinite Power,
which has equal Jurisdiction over every Creature, they cannot be confined
within any particular Circle of Beings. For whatsoever Creature the Voice of
God is addressed to, it immediately loses, its Liberty, and can only perform what
is his Pleasure.

There is a fifth Mark which commonly attends on a real Miracle, which though it
does not fully convince, that the Miracle is true; yet it is a great
recommendation of it to the Love and Admiration of Mankind; and is fitted to
persuade us, That the Doctrine settled by it, is from above: That is, when a
Miracle is wrought for the good of Mankind; to cure their Diseases, raise their
Dead.

The sixth Mark of a true Miracle is, That it should not be wrought merely for
the Advantage, or Honor of the Performer; nor ought he to propose any Interest
from it, but the good and happiness of Mankind. Where these Marks combine in
any Miracle, we may securely vouch, That it is the Work of God; and that the
Person who performs it, is Commissioned from Heaven, after an extraordinary
manner. So that I shall proceed to show,

Fourthly, That the Miracles performed by Jesus Christ, and therefore those
wrought by his Apostles, have all these Marks of a true Miracle.

And First, There was sufficient Evidence, That the Miracles of Jesus Christ
were wrought. And first, There was Evidence sufficient to convince those, who
flourished in the times in which the Miracles were wrought; and secondly, To
satisfy us, who live in distant Ages. Those who were co-temporary with the
Miracles, had not the least Umbrage from Reason, to doubt the truth of them.
For they were wrought in public, often in great Assemblies of People;
generally upon notorious and invetera^^^* Diseases and Maladies, in presence of
the Enemies of Christianity: And in matters addressed to Sense, where every one
has due Power, as well as Right to judge. Even the most implacable Adversaries,
who saw and envied this growing Religion in its Infancy, could not deny, but
that notable Miracles had been done by the Professors of it.

But, Secondly, There is sufficient Evidence to satisfy us, that these Miracles
have been wrought. And this Evidence rises from the Sincerity of the primitive
Believers, who were Eyewitnesses of these Miracles, and Recorders of them to
Posterity: And who laid down their Lives, not only to give Sanction to the
Doctrine of Jesus; but to attest the truth of his Miracles, by which it was
confirmed. The Relations of these Persons must be assuredly true, since they
could propose no other Interest to themselves, but the Propagation of Truth.
All other sinister aims were disappointed by their Deaths, and their Reward was
only to be hoped for, in that glorious future State, of which they discoursed
so much. Add to this, That the first Professors of Christianity always appealed
to Miracles, and challenged the Heathens to bring their fancied Deities;
assuring them, that they should all be miraculously struck dumb by the God of
the Christians; otherwise they offered themselves to Death, as Enemies of the
established Religion of their Country. The greatest Enemies of Christianity
could not deny so manifest a matter, as the Miracles wrought by Jesus Christ,
and his Apostles. Lucian, the great Ridiculer of all Religion, freely owns it:
For He, whom he blasphemously styles in his (...), p. 363. Edit. Ribitti.
Ariston, (...), is undoubtedly our Savior. This Jewish Sophister, he tells
us, cast out Devils, healed the Sick, raised the Dead.

Secondly, The Miracles of our Savior did not tend to overthrow any Doctrine,
before established by God, by sufficient Miracles. For though the Civil and
Judicial Laws of Moses fell shortly after our Savior's Death, because they
were only calculated for the Commonwealth of the Jews, and were dissolved with
that Polity; yet we find that our Savior, during his abode on Earth, did not
in the least invalidate their Obligation; and was so far from teaching any
thing contrary to the Obedience of them, that he was always prepared to
practice them himself. As to the Ritual and Ceremonial Law, which was employed
about Circumcision, and Purifications, and Sacrifices, in distinction of Meats,
and Times, and various other Rites and Observances; this was not properly
dissolved and made void by the coming of Christ, but fulfilled and made good by
him. The Rites and Ceremonies of this Law, were the Types and Resemblances of
those future good things, which were promised under the Gospel* a kind of rude
Draught and Sciography of a more spiritual, refined and perfect Economy, which
was designed, and at last finished and completed by Christianity. But while
these Laws continued in force, our Savior submitted himself to them. He was
Circumcised, and presented in the Temple; and performed all other Rites,
commanded by the Law of Moses. He did not therefore work any Miracle, in
opposition to these Laws, but they having remained as long as they were
designed to do, and there was any use of them, expired and abated of their own
accord.

Thirdly, The Effects of our Savior's Miracles were permanent. He did not
suspend only, but expel Diseases: the Dead which he raised, had their Soul
joined to their Body by as firm an union, as when it was at first inspired.

Fourthly, Our Savior's Miracles were extended over the whole Creation: the
Power of them was as large as the Circle of the World; nor were Hell and the
Grave exempted from their Jurisdiction. The fallen Angels, who rebelled against
God, were yet forced to submit to him. And Death and Diseases were softened
into Life and Health. The Winds and Seas were silent at his Voice; and He
stilled the raging of the Waters. So that the general Obedience of all Nature,
was a sufficient Motive to persuade, that it was the God of Nature who acted.

Fifthly, Our Savior's Miracles bear that endearing Character, That they were
wrought for the good of Mankind. For most of the Works of our Savior were
equally beneficial and miraculous. Even in the Prologue to his own Crucifixion,
(his violent Attachment,) when one of his Enemies was wounded, he bestowed a
Miracle to effect his cure. The Spirit of the Gospel displayed it self in all
that he did, as that of the Law in the Miracles of Moses: As the latter were
generally performed, to destroy and consume; so those of Jesus wholly aimed, to
preserve and save.

Lastly, Our Savior's Miracles were not designed to gain himself Applause,
Interest, or Honor: For he refused to be made a King. And though he was crowned
indeed, yet it was with Thorns alone: though he was Exalted, yet it was only upon
the Cross, to be made a more conspicuous Instance of Woe and Infamy. He was
despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, and
we hid as it were our faces from him: He was despised, and we esteemed him not.
As these Marks of a true Miracle agree to the Works of our Savior, so do they
to those of the Apostles, and Primitive Believers. For these were only
resemblances, of what their Lord had done before; repetitions of his miraculous
Acts, and therefore bear the same Marks and Signatures. Phlegon, freed by the
Emperor Adrian, mentions the Miracles of St. Peter, according Contra Celsum.
to Origin, who lived near Phlegon's time, and had read his Books then commonly
extant; and therefore his Testimony must be as valid, as if we had the
Originals. Porphyry, as ingenious, vid. Cyrill. lib. 10. against Julian.
and as severe an Enemy as ever appeared against our Religion, owns several
Miracles to be performed by the first Christians, in defense of their Worship.
God therefore bore witness to their Doctrine, by thus wonderfully displaying of
himself: their Doctrine therefore is true. For when Miracles are once brought to
second a Doctrine, these silence all my scruples; I yield, I am convinced: for
God cannot exercise his own Power, or delegate it to any other, to give
sanction to a Lie, or honor an Impostor. But these Marks cannot agree with any
Miracles; which were wrought in competition with our Savior's. As for the
Cures pretended to be performed by the Emperors, Vespasian and Adrian, as they
are related by Cap. 7. in Vespasian.
Suetonius, Histor. l. 4. c. 81.
Tacitus, and 12. p. Edit. Salmasil.
Spartianus; those who reflect what different Artisiees were about that time
especially, used to gain an esteem of Divinity to the Emperors, will not much
wonder, that such reports should be spread of them, or that Persons should
counterfeit and imitate those Diseases described, to give themselves out to be
relieved by them: So that they fail against the first and principal Mark of a
true Miracle, because it is not evident that they were at all performed. For
there seems to be no necessity for the Hypothesis of Grotius, That Vespasian
was endued from above with a Power of working Miracles, because he was to be
God's Minister of Vengeance against the Jews. The next who appeared after
these, but who made a much greater Figure than they, was that famous Impostor
Apollonius Tyaneus; but his Transactions want the greatest part of the Notes of
a true Miracle. For, first, They are feigned to be done in private, and
therefore what reason have we to believe that they were done at all? Secondly,
The Person who gives an account of him (Philostratus) lived above an hundred
Years after him. 3ly, All his Miracles are only false Transcripts of our
Savior's, with all submission to a late famous Author, ^p. Parker of the Law
of Nature, p. 296.
who has asserted the contrary. Thus because Jesus Christ was the Son of God,
Apollonius is fancied to be so too: Because Angels proclaimed our Savior's
Birth, a parallel Miracle is advanced in favor of Apollonius: Because our
Savior was forsaken by his Disciples, Apollonius is deserted by his Scholars:
Because our Savior was accused before Pilate, Apollonius is impeached before
Domitian: Because our Savior converst with his Disciples after his
Resurrection, Apollonius also appears after his Death, to a certain Young man,
and gives him an account of a future State, about which he was extremely
curious: Because our Savior ascended into Heaven, there was also a Voice
heard, inviting Apollonius into Bliss: (...). Philost. lib. 8. cap. 12.
Thus all other workers of Miracles, who ever have made any opposition to our
Savior, cannot produce these Marks of a true and just Miracle; and therefore
their Doctrins are not of God, nor are they to be looked upon as Prophets. So
that I shall proceed to show*

Lastly, That though Christianity was at first established by Miracles, yet that
there is no reason why we should expect a continued succession of them to the
present Times.

For it is unreasonable to expect that God should work a Miracle, where the End
may be accomplished without one. This would be to make Miracles too vulgar and
despicable. For a thing often seen, how excellent soever it is, yet ceasing
thereby to be new, it ceases also to be admired. For it is not the worth or
excellence of an Object, which draws the eyes and wonder of Men after it. For
can any thing be imagined more august and beautiful, than the Sun in its full
light and glory; and yet how many more Spectators and Wonderers does the same
Sun find, under the veil of an Eclipse? Miracles continued in the Christian
Church, till the Christian Religion, had received its settlement from them, in
a great measure; and should God call Persons to convert Infidels, he might
perhaps employ this extraordinary Method again. Though since Christianity is
fully established, it is more likely that he might accomplish this grand Design,
by the invisible workings of his Grace, upon the Hearts of the Unconverted; by
inclining and moving them within, and by some extraordinary Providence
without. And this may give us reason to suspect some of St. Xavier's, and the
Indian Missionary's vid. Xaverii Epist. lib. 3. Epist. 4. etc.
Miracles.

As to the present Objections of the Obj.
Deists, which they propose in this form, That if God had reason to work
Miracles in former times, there is also reason why he should form them at
present; since the same Spirit of Unbelief prevails and flourishes now, as much
as it did when Miracles were wrought: And therefore God is obliged to work
Miracles in favor of those who question Religion now, as he did in behalf of
them, who lived in the times of Jesus Christ and his Apostles.

To this it may be replied, That the Resp.
Proofs which we have of the ancient Miracles, are convincing to us, as well as
to them before whom they were visibly wrought; nay, there is this to be said in
favor of the ancient Miracles, That they have undergone the Test of Time, and
have been discussed in most Ages, through which they have past, and yet no flaw
is found in them; which cannot be said of modern Miracles, if they could be
had: And therefore, on this account, they carry a greater ground of
Credibility. But we may remark farther, That those who may justly demand new
Miracles, ought to have made good use of those means, which God had before
displayed, to manifest his Truth. They ought, without Biass or Passion, to have
examined the Revelation of the New Testament. They ought to be adorned with all
those Virtues, which they themselves own to be perfective of their Natures, and
just Qualifications of a pure and generous Deist. They ought to be truly humble
and submissive, to whatsoever bears the resemblance of Divine Revelation; and
if they have not these Excellencies, which the Light of Nature, and their own
magnified Deism it self, prove so extremely necessary; how can they expect that
God should make fresh discoveries to them, by new Miracles? But granting that
God should condescend so far, as to work Miracles in their favor, there is the
greatest reason to believe, that they would find collusions and pretenses, to
continue still in their Unbelief; since they have invented ways to evade those
of our Savior, granting that the Matters of Fact were true. And it is very
remarkable, That though nothing could be more bright and convincing than the
Miracles of our Savior, yet the Jews still found out reasons to break the
Force, and avoid the Evidence of them. And are the Scepticks and Deists of our
Age less furnished with Sophistry, or better prepared to entertain Religion?
Does not the same disposition of Heart, so contrary to the Christian Religion;
Do not the same Pride, Prejudices, and Negligence prevail amongst them, which
did amongst the Jews? Is God therefore obliged to humor their unreasonable
Desires, or run the hazard of having his wondrous Works exposed to their
Censures, Criticisms, and captious Enquiries? At this rate, God would be
engaged to work a Miracle, as often as any Man should arrive at Impiety high
enough to doubt of his Religion, and to receive profane Sentiments into his
Breast. At this rate, why ought not Sin* and Unbelief to abound, that Grace
might much more abound? But farther, Is not the System of Deism so contrived,
as quite to preclude the working of a Miracle? For if God is Material, as Mr.
Hobbs pretends, and so not distinct v. Leviath. de Regno Tenebrarum.
from the World; or if God and Nature are the same, as Spinosa (the great
Apostle of Deism) asserts; there can be vid. Tractatum Theologico-Politicum, p.
100; and Passim. as also in his Opera Posthuma: and Blunt's Anima Mundi.
no such thing as a Miracle. Though an Event may be strange and uncommon, yet it
must be natural still; since God and Nature being the same, what is wrought by
the former, is also wrought by the latter. Why therefore do they demand such
Proofs, which they themselves vouch, cannot be given?

But to close all: We have not only Moses and the Prophets, but a greater than
Moses, the Holy JESUS, and his Apostles; if we hear not them, neither will we
be persuaded if the greatest Miracle should be wrought, and even one should
rise from the Dead. The Miracles therefore of Religion are wisely adapted to
convince us of the truth of it; and we our selves may be highly serviceable, to
persuade Unbelievers of the force of Religion, if we will suffer it to work one
great and comprehensive Miracle on us; that is, to reform our Lives, by
composing the unruly motions of our Souls, by cooling the irregular warmth of
our Affections; and by charming all our Passions into so sedate a Peace, as to
be submissive to the Rules of the Christian Religion: which is greater than to
speak with the Tongues of Men and Angels. Then shall we bring Honor to our
holy Religion, and be duly prepared to expect the last and finishing Miracle of
it; that is, that our Corruptible may put on Incorruption, and our Mortal
Immortality.

A DISCOURSE Showing That the Moral Law of Moses, is the same with that of
CHRIST; against the Racovian Catechism, and others.
LUKE Chap. X. ver. 25, 26. A certain Lawyer stood up and tempted him, saying,
Master, what shall I do to inherit Eternal Life? He said unto him, What is
written in the Law? How read thou?
THE peculiar method by which our Savior delivered his Doctrine; the tendency
of it to a greater measure of Piety, than was commonly taught by the most
extraordinary Doctors of those times; the ratifying of his Divine Commission,
by a train of unquestionable Miracles, which were not only suited for the
conviction, but also at the same time adapted to the use and service of
Mankind; and all these graced with the most unblameable Conversation that ever
was, had raised the Love of the greatest part of his Auditors; the Envy of
some, the Wonder and Curiosity of all. Of this number (whether moved by Envy or
Curiosity alone, but most likely principally by the former) a Lawyer, one who
was thoroughly versed in the most refined Niceties of the Jewish Law, came to
try what his Judgment was about the Law, or Rule of Life; designing probably to
discover, whether he would advance any thing contrary, either to the Law, or
the received Traditions, that so he might make him obnoxious to the Penalty of
that Law, whose Sanctions he should dishonor by his Innovations. The Enquiry
which he proposes to him, is one of the greatest importance, and in whose
Resolution the most momentous Interest is concerned: namely, What was necessary
to be observed for the attaining that External Life, which Christ promised in a
clearer manner, than had been displayed by the Law and the Prophets. The
Enquirer, no doubt, was expecting a system of new Precepts, the addition of a
Table unknown to Moses; at least that the old ones should be extended to fresh
Duties, and new Obligations. And no question but that he was highly surpised,
when our Savior informs him, That the Law of Moses and the Prophets, was a
true and adequate standard of Duty, and the living up to it, the sole way to
Salvation. That though the Law of Ordinances and Ceremonies obliged none but the
Jews; yet that the Moral Law, as it was the Reason, so it should be the
standing Religion of all Mankind. That what was indispensably required to
Salvation before the coming of the Messiah, should* as to the Substance of it,
be so after* nor any other Duty superinduced. For the Law, as arising from the
nature and relations of Things and Persons, and as marking out the boundaries
of Good and Evil, Right and Wrong, which are always in the main the same, was
incapable of Change, Addition, or new Interpretation; was still to be read and
practiced, agreeably to its genuine and original Sense. And that the Savior of
the World, during the term of his abode in it, had no other Authority but to
walk suitable to its Commands, and to reconcile for the Affronts which had been
put upon its Divine Author, by Mankind's disobedience of it.

A certain Lawyer stood up and tempted him saying, Master, What shall I do to
inherit Eternal Life? He said unto him, What is written in the Law? How read
thou?

From the Words, taken in relation to the purport of the Lawyer's Question; a
preparation to which Answer is made in those our Savior's other Questions,
What is written in the Law? and* How read thou? but fully completed in that
Injunction of our Savior's upon the reading of the Law, in the words after the
Text, Do this and live: From the Words thus taken, I conclude, That as our
Savior did not invalidate any Commands of the Law; so on the other hand, That
nothing was made a Duty, or absolutely needful to the gaining of Eternal Life,
but what was so under the Old Testament, before his coming; otherwise he had
been obliged to have informed the Lawyer of th^se new Terms of Salvation, and
not to have referred him to the Law, and what was to be read in it. He did not
therefore new extend the old Commands, or impose new ones: he introduced no new
Religion into the World, nor even material Circumstances of it; the Will of God
as it was revealed to Man, being of that kind, that it is as unchangeable as
his own glorious Nature; and the way to Heaven as much one, as that
ever-blessed and holy GOD, whose enjoyment makes up the Bliss of that happy
State. This Conclusion, drawn from the design of the Words, I shall endeavor
to prove, by showing,

First, That it was inconsistent with the Character which our Savior should
bear, to exercise such Legislative Power, as to give New Commands, or new
extension to the Old ones.

Secondly, That the Moral Law in its own nature was incapable of receiving an
addition of New Commands, or of having the Old ones extended to New Duties.

Thirdly, That as it was inconsistent with our Savior under that Character
which he bore, and as there was this incapacity in the Law; so That he never
attempted to do what was both thus against the Nature of the Thing, and besides
his own Character, to extend the Old Commands, or impose New ones.

Fourthly, That as our Savior has not added any thing to the Law, so neither
has he taken any thing from it; nor is there any Privilege in the Gospel,
which makes void any of the Commands of God before given.

Lastly, I shall briefly reflect on the Encouragement that there is to observe
the divine Commands, because their observance shall be rewarded with Eternal
Life, as it is styled by our Savior.

The three first of these Positions are quite contrary to the Doctrine taught by
Smaloius, or whosoever else was the Author of the Racovian Catechism, and
Racov. Cat. ^. ^^^. etc.
to the generality of the Unitarian Divines; nay and even to some of great Name
amongst our selves, who, in some B^. Taylor's Ductor Dubitant. page ^42, etc.
Rule 4. Edit. 1696. Forbes, and others.
things, seem too favorable to their Opinions; who affirm, That it was
agreeable to our Savior's Character, to make additions to the Law, and that
the Law was qualified to receive 'em; and that he did not only extend the
Mosaic Commands to new Duties, but also made the Appendage of several Commands
of his own. Such are the Commands of Self-denial, taking up the Cross, or
Patience under Misery and Death, the following of Christ; to which Duties, they
say, there was no obligation before Christianity. In opposition to whom, I
shall endeavor to prove,

First, That it was inconsistent with that Character which our Savior should
bear, to exercise any such Legislative Power, as to give new Commands, or
newextension to the old ones*

By the Virtue of his Character, our Savior does not so much as assume
Authority, to displace the Scribes and Pharisees from Moses's Chair, or to
weaken that power which they had gained over the People; though he well knew how
unjust their Pretensions were both to the one, and the other: so far is he from
publishing any thing, but what might reasonably be spoken from the Chair of
Moses, and suitably to his Sense. The Scribes and Pharisees, says he, sit in
Moses's seat; all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe and do, that
observe and do. It Is true, he divests the Law, as was fit, of those artificial*
Traditions, which, instead of strengthening, did (in his unerring Judgment) make
it void. He drew off that Veil from its Face, which their Doctor's
Interpretations had put on it; and showed the beauty of its Holiness, in its
full luster. But he does not, that we find, add any thing to it; and as He came
not to destroy the Law and the Prophets, so neither came he to make any New Law
of his own. For the Character which he sustained, was indeed unqualify'd for
such an Office; because he did not appear in the Person of a Lawgiver, to give
New Laws, but in that of a Mediator, being at once the Priest and the
Sacrifice, to atone for our breaches of the old; to free us from the Curse
which we had contracted by them, and to be made a Curse for us, that he might
redeem us from the Curse of the Law. For this is one of the great differences
between Moses and Christ, That the former was to make Laws, and by the force of
them, to accuse and condemn the Disobedient; whereas Jesus Christ came only to
pardon, absolve and reconcile. Do not think that I will accuse you to the
Father, (says he to the opposing Jews,) there is one that ^co^soth you, even
Moses in whom you trust: The reason is, because God sent not his Son into the
World to condemn the World, or indeed to execute any other branch of Judicial
or Legislative Jurisdiction; but that through him the World might be saved. For
the Law, the Rule of Practice and Obedience, was given by Moses; but Grace, the
Dispensation of Pardon and Reconcilement to the Benitent; and Truth, the
Fulfilling of the Types of the Law, came by Jesus Christ. The appearance of a
man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, was too inglorious for a divine
Lawgiver to assume; and Laws would but receive small force from him, who was
despised and rejected of men. So that he was only to live, suffer, and die
suitably to the Law, a Pattern of unmateh'd Innocence and Virtue: to fulfill it,
not to add to it. And indeed it was absolutely unnecessary, that our Savior
should be invested with the Power of adding any thing to the Law: For,

Secondly, The Moral Law in its own nature was incapable of receiving an
addition of New Commands, or of having the Old ones extended to New Duties.

The Psalmist tells us, The Law of God is perfect; and there is reason that it
should be so, if we consider, that the fources of Good and Evil are not chiefly
laid in any positive Injunction of God, with a design to try Man's Obedience,
(as Sunt qui nullam praeceptorum causamquaerunt, sed dicunt omnia solam Dei
Voluntatem sequi. Maimonides, Mor. Nov. ^. 3. c. 26.
some have fancied) but in the order and dependence of things themselves, which
are always in the principal the same. We must therefore conclude, that this
Law, which is the Rule of this Good or Evil, must be always the same too; and
therefore when it began to be a Law, or a measure of this Good or Evil, it must
be as perfect as it is at present; because what is now Good or Evil, was always
Good or Evil. Farther, If we survey the compass and latitude of that Holiness,
Sanctity, and Perfection which were commanded by the Law; we may find, that it
was not an imperfect Holiness which might be dispensed with in some points; but
was to be a complete, universal Holiness, inconsistent either with the least
Sin, or the want of the least Virtue; was to be like their Sacrifices, not only
without spot and blemish, but also perfect in every part: for, Be ye holy as I
am holy, says God. The Holiness of the Divine Nature was to be the measure of
their Holiness; and since no Law could enjoin any thing which tended to a
greater Holiness than this, it follows, That no Law could be superadded to
this, nor the Law which exacts such Holiness be extended to any other Duties:
the Law was then incapable of receiving an addition of New Commands, or of
having the Old ones extended to New Duties.

Thirdly, Our Savior did not attempt to do what was both thus against the
Nature of the Thing, and besides his own Character, to extend the Old Commands,
or impose New ones.

He did not new extend the Old Commands; he did not reach them out to New
Duties, which they did not enforce before. And this may be made out from a
short view of the divine Commands, and the measure of their Obligation, as they
were given by Moses, and explained by him and the succeeding Prophets. And in
the first place, the Duties of the first Table, which regard God, were advanced
to the highest pitch before our Savior's coming; neither did the first Command
of having no other Gods before the true one, receive any addition by divine
Worship being paid to our Savior; because he is God of the same Nature with
the Father, God over all, God blessed for ever. The object of divine Worship
was not multiplied by Worship given to him; because He and the Father are One.
The second, third and fourth Commands were observed by the Jews, even to the
greatest Superstition; to the thinking that their exactness in their Duties
toward God, might atone for the omission of their Duties toward their
Neighbor; and that the abundance of their Sacrifices, joined with their Zeal
for the Worship, the Name of God, and his Day, might excuse for their want of
Mercy, Charity, and Compassion: So that our Savior rather seems to regulate
their mistaken Zeal on this Head; to try to make their Social Virtues
consistent with their Religious, than to have added any thing New. The
Pharisees indeed had perverted the design of the fifth Commandment, by teaching
the lawfulness of defrauding Parents of what was due to them, by a consecrating
it to God; yet this is not the intent of Moses, who seems to be more
particularly careful for the keeping of this Command, in its utmost e^tent,
than for any of the rest, by annexing the promise of long life in the land
which the Lord their God should give them. But the great difference lies in the
five last Commands of the second Table: and here our Adversary, the Racovian
Catechist, says, That the Command against Murder Racov. C^l. p. 127.
was enlarged by our Savior, to the forbiding of all kind of Anger and
Revenge. That against Adultery, to the restraining p. 129.
all impure Desires. That the Command against p. 130.
Theft was extended to the restraining all Avarice. That against false Witness,
p. 133.
to Detraction. That against Coveting, to the Ibid.
curbing every Inclination after what was unlawful, how unlikely soever to
break out Edit Racov. An. 1609. and dedicated to King Yames I.
into act; which Anger, Revenge, impure Desires, Avarice, Detraction, and evil
Inclinations, were under no Prohibition from the Laws which Moses and the
Prophets received from God. But the contrary to this will appear, if we
consider in the first place, that our Savior has laid no new restraint on
Anger and Revenge: for moderate Anger is no more opposed to the mild and gentle
Spirit of the Gospel, than it is to the more rough Dispensation of the Law. Be
ye angry and sin not, is the Apostle's direction to manage this Passion; which
shows that it ought to be governed, not destroyed; and that it is criminal, not
in its Nature, but its Excess. But immoderate Anger, springing from a desire of
Revenge, is as much against the Morality of the Law, as of the Gospel. Or else
why should the Psalmist advise to cease from Anger, and forsake Wrath? or why
should Solomon describe Anger as outrageous, and Wrath as cruel? why as only
resting in the bosom of Fools, if there was no inconformity in it with the
divine Law?

As to Revenge: Private was as unlawful before the Gospel, as under it. Thou
shall not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people, was
God's Law by Moses; and no more is his Law by Christ But as for Public
Revenge, by the Sword of the Magistrate, it is as much allowed by the latter,
as by the former; for the Magistrate under the Gospel too is a Ministar of God,
a Revenger to execute Wrath on him that does evil.

Secondly, All Impure Desires are directly against the last Command, Thou shall
not Covet; where all evil Desires, or Covetings in general are condemned. But
what other measure can there be of the Evilnese of any Desire, but the Illness
of the Action, to which it tends? And what other Rule can there be given of the
Sinfulness of any Imagination, than that when it has conceiv^d* 'twill most
certainly bring farth Sin(...)

Thirdly, Avarice was criminal before the Gospel, as well as under it and
therefore cannot derive its Sinfulness from any subsequent Institution of our
Savior's. For the Prophet Amos pronounces a Woe to him that Covet^; and David
prays that God would incline his heart to his Testimonies, and not to
Covetousness; pointing at the irreconcile a bleness of the latter with the
former.

Fourthly, Detraction was made equally Vicious by the Mosaic, as by the
Christian Economy. For the Psalmist makes it the finishing stroke in the
Character of the Wicked, That he sits and speaks against his Brother, and
slanders his own Mother's Son. And lest it might be thought in this Case, that
the nearness of the Person against whom the Offense was committed; was the only
Reason which made it a Sin; Solomon imposes a general Restraint on all
Detraction, against whomsoever practiced: Put away far from Thee a froward
Mouth, and perverse Lips put far from Thee.

Lastly, That all Evil Inclinations, not only impure ones, but from whatsoever*
Cause they derived their Malignity, were forbidden by the Law, was before
shown. So that from this short View of the Divine Commands, and the Measure of
their Obligation, both before and under the Gospel, we may conclude, That our
Savior did not new extend the Old Commands; did not reach them out to fresh
Duties, which they did not enforce before* did not make any Novel Prohibition
(as is imagined) against Anger or Revenge, Impure Desires* Avarice, Detraction
or Evil Inclinations* but ^^f^ these Vices in the State in which he found them:
proved guilty indeed by the Verdict of Reason and Natural Conscience, but fully
condemned by the Sentence of God, pronounced by Moses and his Holy Prophets.

As our Savior did not new extend the Old Commands, so neither farther did He
impose any New ones o^ his own. But here our Catechist affirms, that our
Savior did enjoin several New Commands of his own: as the Command of Denying
our selves, or plu^king out our right Eye, and cutting off our right Hand, of
taking up the ^^o^^, and of following Christ. But these were Duties before the
Gospel, before the Day spring from on high had visited us, in the Substance,
though not in every Circumstance, Branch and Punctilio of them. For though it is
improper to say, That the following of our Savior was a Duty before this
Savior appeared on the Earth, ^^o should thus be followed; before He had led a
Life of complete Virtue and Innocence, which should be an Example to all his
Followers; yet that Resignation to the Will of God, that perfect Charity
toward Mankind, that Humility and Perseverance in Fasting and Prayer, which
our Adversaries make so peculiarly imitable in our Savior, were obligatory
before they were thus practiced and enforced by Him. And this will appear by a
brief, yet particular, Examination of each one of them.

And in the first place; Self-Denial, which is nothing else but that Virtue by
which we renounce our own Will, and all its carnal Desires, and conform them to
the Will of God; equally obliged under the Old Testament, as under the New. For
did not the former as well as the latter, exact a perfect Love of God? A Love
exerted with all our Heart* with all our Soul, with all our Might. A Love in
some proportion worthy that Divine Object to which it was addressed, and that
obliged Creature who paid it. But could so pure a Love as this be offered,
unless the Offerer renounced his own Will, and all its carnal Desires, and
wholly submitted them to the Will of God? since all Love of the World, and
whatsoever belongs to the carnal Mind, is Enmity to God: every sinful D^^^^e
entertained in an Heart consecrated to the Almighty, making the whole Sacrifice
an Abomination in his sight. So that since a perfect Love of God was commanded
by the Old Testament, and this could not be given without a complear
Self-denial* every Religious Votary under that Dispensation, as well as under
the Gospel, was obliged to deny himself, to renounce all his carnal Desires,
that he might love God with a more in^^am'd Affection, a more passionate
Devotion. So that the Command of Self-denial was ^o New Command of our
Savior's, but one of those which were delivered to the Israelites; and upon
the Observation of which, the God o^ them Fathers promised to Increase them
mightily in the Land, which flowed with Milk and Honey.

Secondly, The taking up the Cross, that is, a Preparedness to endure any
Misery for the Name of God, and Constancy in his Holy Religion^* ^ay, which is
the greatest Trial of an unshaken Courage, a Readiness to suffer even Death it
self; which though it is the finisher, yet is the most dismal of all Miseries: A
Disposition to undergo these, which is meant by taking up the Cross, was a Duty
which obliged under the Ritual Law, as well as since its Abrogation. It Is true
indeed, Christianity at its first rise seems to be a Religion purely made up of
Sufferings. The Prospect was wholly dark and melancholy. Its Professors, as
well as its Founder, poured out their Souls to Death, and were numbered with
Transgressors* shared with him in the Agonies of a violent, and the Shame of a
disgraceful Dissolution. Though the Duty if taking up the Cross, was thus
vigorously put in practice by the first Christians, yet did it not then* begin
to oblige, but was a Duty in fo^^e under the Law, and strictly kept by I its.
Religious Observers: Some of which (as the Apostl^ to the Hebrew^ tells us)
were Tortured, not* accepting Deliverance; others had Trials of cruel M^^kings*
and S^^^^^ings, of Bonds and Imprisonments; were Stoned, were Sawn asunder,
were Tempted, (or as others read it with perhaps an apter connection, with the
Context* (...), were Bur^^) were slain with the Sword.

Thirdly, The following of Christ that is, a conforming our Lives to the Life
of Christ* or a resembling him in those Virtues which are properly his; not
known, as our Oppos^^^ say, before He taught and practiced them* Such are a
Resignation to the Will of God perfect Charity, Humility and Pe^sevenance in
Fasting and Prayer. But these were Duties before they were: thus practiced o^
enforced by our Savior. For, what greater Obligation could there be to a
Resignation to the Will of God, than that Command of the Prophets* Trust in the
Lord for ever* for in the Lord Jehovah ^^ everlasting strength? What greater
Instance could be given of perfect Charity, than that passionate Expostulation
of Moses, upon God's being angry with the Israelites for ^he Molten Calf* Y^^
n^w (says he) if thou will, forgive their Sin: if not; blot me, I pray these,
out of the Book that thou have written. It seems to rise up to St. Paul's
pathetical Wish under the Gospel: I could wish that my self were accursed from
Christ for my Brethren, my Kinsmen according to the Flesh. As for Humility, it
was a Duty before the Gospel; for the Prophet Micah commands us to walk Humbly
with our God, as well as to do Justly, and love Mercy. Fasting and Prayer, and
Perseverance in them, were Duties antecedent to the Gospel* for we find that
our Savior does not so much settle any New Commands about them, as remove
those Mistakes which were risen concerning them. He supposes that to Pray was a
Duty; but his Direction is, Not to pray as the Hypocrites do. He supposes
Fasting to be a Duty; but his Injunction is, Not to disfigure the Face, that we
may appear to Men to Fast. So that He does not enjoin the Duties, which were
commanded before; only corrects the Errors, which are frequent in the Practice
of them. So that we may hence conclude, That our Savior has appointed no. Now
Commands of his own; only explained the Old ones of the Law, and pressed
Mankind to the practice of them, as of Truths in which, through his Merits,
Eternal Life is contained.

But before I proceed to the next Subject of our Enquiry, I shall make this
remark on what has been already offen'd: That it is far from the Design of this
Discourse, to depreciate the Moral Law of Christ. The whole aim of it is, to
set it in a just Light, to show that it is a necessary and eternal Law; such a
Law, as when God ever imposed any Law on his Cre(...)res, was the most suitable
for him to enact, and for them to obey. Such a Law, as I had almost said, the
Rectitude of his own Nature laid him under a necessity of establishing;
according to the Order in which He had formed the Reasonable World. And this
may obviate several of those ^^o^e Notions, which have been of late started by
Ingenious Persons? That (...) and V^^^, Good and Evil, are laid in the Opinions
and Idea's of Men, or settled by some positive Injunction of the Magistrate;
and therefore variable with the Clime, Nation, Season or ^^ace, rather (...)
arising from the Nature and Relation of Things.

And this Perfection of the Moral Law receives farther Advantage from the
following See the next Discourse on St. Matthew VI. ver. 10.
Discourse, where is proved, That the Moral Law obliges in Heaven: an
Hypothesis which has been little touched on, and which deserves to be
recommended to better Hands, to be managed up to its due Worth.

But to return* As our Savior did no^ thus impose more than what was commanded
by the Moral Law; so it was very far distant from the Design of the Gospel, to
exact less than what was written in the Law. He did not make void any of the
Commands of the Law, nor warrant any Action that was not authorized by it in
its most strict Circumstances; whatsoever the Antinomians and Libertines say For

Fourthly, There is no Privilege in the Gospel, which makes void any of the
Commands of God before given*

Because all Duties (notwithstanding the wild Fancies of the Antinomians) are
equally enjoined under the Gospel, as they were under the Law, and every
Conscience obliged to a Performance of them. By all Duties, I mean, (as in the
former part of the Discourse) things which the Holy Men of God performed in
order to the attaining of Eternal Life. Was Faith required under the Law, and
was Abraham Justified by that? So must we under the Gospel* for without Faith
it is impossible to please God. Were good Works required under the Law? So are
they under the Gospel too; for our Light must so shine before Men* that they
(...) see our good Works, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven* Were a
clean Heart, and pure Hands necessary under the Law, and are they not also
under the Gospel? For is there not a Blessing pronounced to the pure in Heart,
and are not they the Persons that shall see God? Are not the Impure and
Unclean* those Ac^urs'd Ones, who, without true Repentance^ must never see Him*
never inherit any Blessing with Him? And in order to qualify us for this
Beati^i^^ Vision, the Apostle is very urg^^^ ^lea^se your Hands ye Sinners, and
purify your Hearts ^^ Double-minded* And so concerning all other Duties and
substantial Requisites of the Law* which excepting the Ceremonies of i^, are
all still in force under the Gospel. And though we have no Burnt-Offerings upon
our Altars, as the Jews had under the Law* ^ yet have we not Souls and Bodies,
which must be offered up to God as a lively Sacrifice, holy and acceptable,
which is our reasonable Service? Instead of Heca^om^s, are we no^ to render up
the Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, the Calves of our Lips, not of our
Folds? and in lieu of a Propitiatory Oblation, are we not commanded to do good
and distribute, for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased? And assuredly we
have the greatest Encouragement to this Observance of the Divine Commands;
because,

Fifthly, This Observance shall be rewarded with Eternal Life, as it is styled
by our Savior.

This Reward surely surpasses all the Hardships of our Duty, in keeping the
Commands of God; as will fully appear, if we briefly reflect on what is meant
by Eternal Life. This Life shall cause the noblest Change in both the Parts of
the Saints. Their Bodies shall be transformed into spiritual and incorruptible
Bodies, fashioned like to the glorious Body of the Son of God. Their Souls
shall be highly exalted to the utmost Perfection, in all their Parts and
Faculties. Their Understandings shall be raised to the utmost Capacity, and
that Capacity completely filled: Now we see through a Glass darkly, but then Fate
to Face; now we know in part* then shall we know even as we are known* for when
God shall appear, we shall be like Him, for we shall see him as He is, in all
his Robes of Glory. In this Life, the Wills of the Blessed shall be perfected
with absolute and indefective Holiness, an exact conformity with the Will of
God, and a perfect li^e^ty from the S^avery of Sin. In this Life, their
Affections shall be set to an unalterable Regularity, and that Regularity shall
receive absolute Satisfaction. And as their inward Happiness shall be thus
great, so shall their outward Condition be answerable; freed from all Pain,
Misery, Labor and Want; blessed with an Impossibility of sinning and offending
God any more; full of Joy and Compla^^ncy in the Vision of God. This is that
Life. Thus shall it be done to the Men whom God delights to honor; to those
who have honored him on Earth, by keeping his Holy Laws, which are of Eternal
Obligation. But that which makes up the Perfection of their Happiness, is, That
this their Life shall be Eternal, and there shall be no fear nor suspicio^ that
it shall ever end; For whosoever lives and believes in Christ, shall never
dye; whosoever keeps his sayings, shall never see Death*

A DISCOURSE PROVING That the Celestial Law is the same with the Moral, or That
the Moral Law is a Rule for the Angels and Saints to act by in Heaven; being a
Sequel of the former Discourse.
St. MAT. VI. ver. 10. In Earth as it is in Heaven.
WHich Words, as they are a Part of our Savior's divine and matchless Prayer,
are a Parallel between the Performance of God's Will in Heaven, and the Manner
by which it ought to be complied with on Earth. The Will, the doing of which is
petitioned for, in the Will of God's Commands, and not (as some imagine) of his
Decrees or Providential Dispensations; only as far as that may be discovered to
be a part of the Will of his Commands. For the State of the Blessed, who are
here recommended as a Pattern to us, is too happy to leave place for afflictive
Providence* which are the only Try^^^ of any one's Compliance with the Will of
God's Decrees. The Performers of God's Will in Heaven, who are set forth as a
Model to us on Earth, are not the Persons of the Ever-blessed Trinity: for God
is not the Doer of that Will, the Doing whereof we are to pray that ours may
resemble; because however a Superior may lay his Injunctions upon another, yet
he cannot, because he is no other than the Person enjoining, lay any Injunction
upon himself* As God cannot be looked upon as the Doe^ of that Will* the Doing
whereof we are ^aught to pray that ours may be conform*d with; so neither can
we look upon the* Heavenly Bodies* the (...), the (...) and the S^^rs* as such;
which As Lightfoot in his Hor. Hebr. seems to affirm.
(...) (though unwarily enough) have fancied to be here intended* Because though
these Heavenly Bodies are subject to Hi^ Control, as all other Creatures of
God are, yet are they no^ in any capacity of paying Obedience to his Commands,
inasmuch as they neither have any Knowledge of God's Commands, nor any freedom
of Will to comply with them* though they had. From hence it follows, that we must
look out for other Agents, as the Doers of the Divine Will, here spoken of: so
that it is indispensably necessary to resolve the (...) Nyssen in Orat. Dom
Sermon. 50.
Holy Angels, and the Spirits of Just Men made perfect, to be they. Those who
ought to be Actors of God's Will in Earth, and ought to follow the Doing of it
in Heaven, are Men, who are the only Beings on Earth capable of a reasonable
Compliance with it: those who are strangers to that Will and Kingdom, as well
as those who are acquainted with it, and are Parts of it. So that the force of
the Words is this, That the Holy Angels, and Blessed Saints are a just Pattern,
and an adequate Model for Man to form his Obedience upon; insomuch that the
Perfection or Imp^^fection of Man's Obedience may be duly measured by its
approach to, o^ distance from that of the Saints and Angels. To clear which
A^^^^tion, I shall

First, Show ^ha^ the Obedience of the Blessed is a just Rule for our
Obedience, as to the Matter about which it is employed* because that their
Du^i^s one toward another, and their Religious Worship toward God as to the
main and substance of them, are the same with what we are ob^^g*d to.

Secondly, That their Obedience, a^ to the Manner, Method and Circ^mstances of
performing them, are the same with what we ought to do. So that the Divine Will
p^^^^ ^h'd in Heaven, is a just Standard for the performing it in Earth. And

First, That the Obedience of the Blessed is a just Rule for ou^ Obedience* as
to the Matter about which i^ is employed; because that th^^^ Duties ^n^ toward
another* and their Religious Worship toward God, as to the main and substance
of them* are the same with what we are obliged to.

And, First, I shall show that the Blessed in Heaven practice the same Graces,
the same Religious Acts of Worship toward God, and of Charit^^ one toward
another which we are obliged to on Earth.

Secondly, That they practice them by a Rule.

Thirdly, That this Rule is the same with that by which we ought to regulate
our Actions.

First, That the Blessed in Heaven perform the same Religious Acts of Worship
toward God, and of Charity one toward another, which we are obliged to on
Earth*

Though some have fa^cied that the Ever-blessed Saints and Angels employ their
happy Eternity only in Admiring the Divine Perfections, and in those Transports
which rise from the Contemplation of so glorious a Being as the Deity* Yet upon
a^just Enquiry, it will appear, that their endless Life is spent in Action, as
well as Contemplation; and that Heaven is a State of fulfilling God's Will, in
a vigorous Practice of those Graces which he has enjoined* as well as in
Adoring, his Divine Nature. For the Virtues and Graces which God has commanded
here, are not only Means to arrive at Happiness hereafter, but to retain it
also. In this present Life they are suited to God's Obedience, but in the next
to his Enjoyment: so that no Virtue is necessary to complete a Christian, which
is not equally required to perfect a Saint. And though the present Necessiries
and Imperfections of this Life demand the Exercise of some Actions which are
useless in the next; yet even those Actions shall not be so much abolished, as
changed into Graces of a nobler Extraction. (...) Oecumen. in 1 Cor. c. 13. v.
9.
They shall be refined and exalted, and applied to Objects of a purer Nature,
and shall shar^ in the happy Change of that Creature to whom they belong. Man
advanced into Heaven shall retain his Virtues, as well as his Nature; but they
too shall be made more pure, more spiritual, as well as that. It must be
confessed, that some of the v. Gr. d^ Valent ^om. 2. disp. 5. q. 7. puncto 4.
Schoolmen are of a different Opinion, particularly as to Faith and Hope. These
Virtues they banish from Heaven, and exclude from the Practice of the Blessed.
Their Reasons are, First; Because these are imperfect Virtues, and therefore
are not suitable to a perfect State; and when that which is perfect is come;
then that which is in part shall be done away. Secondly; Because St. Paul, when
he draws his Parallel between Faith, Hope and Charity, says that the Last shall
abide in a future State; which he does not affirm of the Two former. Thirdly;
Because these two Virtues are employed about Objects not yet seen, or obtained:
when therefore their Object shall be seen Face to Face, and when with these
Eyes, with which we now see through a glass darkly, we shall view God even as he
is, in all his Robes of Glory; then surely Hope and Faith must cease; for that
which a Man has, why does he yet hope for? And Faith, since it is an Evidence
of Things not seen, must certainly be done away, when the Vision of God is
immediately communica^^ditous.

But none of these Reasons are truly Conclusive. Not the First; for if the
Imperfection of a Virtue was a sufficient Ground to exclude it out of Heaven,
th^n even Charity it self would be exiled thence; for our present Charity is an
Imperfect one. The most spotless and pure of Human kind could never practice it
up to that Height, to which it obliges. Nor is there more strength in the
second Reason; for tho* the Apostle asserts, that Charity shall abide in
Heaven, yet he does not deny, but Faith and Hope may remain too ^ nor from his
Silence about them, ought we to conclude the contrary. As to the Third Reason:
Our Hope shall not be abolished in Heaven, though we enjoy that there, which we
hope for here nor our Faith, though our Eyes then behold that Glory, which is at
present only the Object of our Belief: for our Faith shall be exalted into
clear and distinct Vision, and our Hope into full and firm Comprehension* Nor
shall they lose their own Natures by this exaltation, any more than the first
strictures of the Morning are lost in full Day, or the light of a Man's own
Reason in that of Revelation. For Faith and Knowledge are the same kinds of
Acts in our Understandings. Hope and Love are the same Motions of our Wills;
for what we hope for absent, we love present. If therefore we shall know God,
and love him in a future State, our Hope and Faith, by our Translation into
Heaven, shall not perish, but be completed. For though the Gifts of Tongues and
Prophecy, those pompous Instruments of Religion, shall be useless in a future
State, where the^e shall be but one Tongue, tuned to the Eternal Praises of
God, and Vision shall disappoint Revelation; yet every Virtue essential to
Religion shall continue, and as it was our Employment in this World, so it
shall contribute to make up our Happiness in the next. Our Faith Sanctus Pa^lus
dixit c^teris evacuatis, manner Fidem, Spem, Dilectionem. Irenaeus, lib. 4. c.
25.
shall be Eternally exercised in adhering to God, in believing in Him* in
entertaining the noblest Apprehensions of His Goodness, Justice, Wisdom and
Mercy. Our Hope shall be employed in Desiring, Loving and Enjoying Him*

But to take a clear View of so nice a Subject, I shall First enquire, whether
any Acts of Virtue, which ought to be practiced on Earth, are useless and
unpractic'd by the Blessed in Heaven.

Secondly, I shall show what Virtues, which ought to be practiced here on
Earth, are practiced in Heaven, in their greatest latitude, in all their Acts
and most material Circumstances.

Thirdly, I shall give some Reasons why they a(...)

First, (...) sha^ll enquire wh(...) Acts of* (...) which (...) be practiced on
Ea^^h, are (...) practiced by the Bl^ssed (...)

It must be (...), that the Act^ of some instrumental and a^^^tic^ Vi(...) are
unnecessary in H(...), wh(...) Reason of their* Obligation shall (...) and the
they may (...) abide in Charity, (...) in the (...) co(...) Seminary(...) they
(...) are* here(...) in (...) to (...) in which (...) upon Earth; yet the
Paral(...) supposed (...) eve(...) and P(...) of (...) Virtu^^ are only (...)
to this (...) and therefore cease with our Relation to it. (...) Patience must
lose its Name in Heaven* where there shall be no Misery to be (...) no Wrong to
be endured. Sorrow for Sin shall be no more, w(...) all Pears shall be wip*d
away* or else changed into those, which rise from an Excess of Joy. That
Sagacity, which is only a Defense against the Wisdom of the Serpent, shall be
utterly disused, where nothing shall appear, but the Har^^lessness of the Do^e;
where all our Desires are squared by the Rule of Reason, and the most refined
Purity* Temperance, under its present limitation, will have no Place* nor
Chastity enter there. Where there is no Hungry to give Meat to ^^ Stranger to
be taken in, no ^aked to be clothed, no Si^k to be ^ifited, none in
Priso(...)* be relieved. Merry* and A(...) will want a Subject* and the they
bring us into Heaven, they themselves shall not pro(...)y only (...) they are
(...) into o^^ habitual Piety, and good (...)inations*

(...), Secondly* There are Virtues which ought to be practiced (...), which
are practiced in Heaven* in all their most (...) Circumstances, and so become
an exact Rule for our Complying with the Will of God. And these are those,
whose Act are agre^able to the State of the Blessed* and which bear a just
proportion with their glorious Condition; such as are not pressed with any
Grievance, nor have any ill or irregular Affection to restrain. Temperance it
self is even in some regard practiced by the Blessed: for ^ho in those
spotless Regions, it is not employed in conquering any impure Passion* yet it
is advanced into a Virtue, whose Nature consists in adhering* to God* ^s the
purest and most inco(...)up^ of Beings* the most unstained and immaculate of
Natures, by such a firm Union, as not to be parted from Him* by the Prospect of
the greatest sensual Pleasures, if they could possibly be offered to a
s^iritual Being* Their Prudence is exercised in making God their only Choice,
and in (...)triving the fittest Means to please and serve Him in a^ happy
Eternity. Their Fortitude in such a dependence on Him* as not to be shak(...)
by the greatest (...). Their Justice in a due Submission to Him, as the only
Lord to whom they owe their Homage. And thus all other Virtues, whether they
relate to God, to themselves, or to acts of Charity one toward another, are
practiced in compliance with the Exigencies of that Blis^^ul State* which I
shall*

Thirdly, Prove by some Reasons or Arguments drawn chiefly from the Holy
Scripture. And first, The Blessed possess Habits of Virtue; and secondly, They
discover them by outward Acts. The Fathers apply to the Saints all those Places
of Scripture, where the Queen is said to stand on God's right hand in Gold of
Ophir; where she is said to be all Glorious within, and her Clothing of right
Gold. These they understand of the Saints, and the Ornaments with which they
are Clothed, they apply to that habitual Virtue with which they are adorned.
^^. Chrysostom understands them not In his Homily on the Text, My Grace is
sufficient for thee.
(...); and Areta^ Casar^ensis says, that the Saints were not dressed, (...), but
(...). But granting that this Sense of Habitual Virtue may be only a flourish
of these Fathers, or (as some imagine) that these Places only imply the
glorious State of the Church Triumphant in general; yet it may be clearly made
out, secondly, That Acts of Virtue are performed by the Blessed: and since
these flow from Habits, and are not really distinct from them, we may suppose
that they are endued with Habits of Virtue too; since it is the most perfect
Act of Virtue, which flows from the most perfect Habit. The Saints practice the
Acts of the first Table; for they are before the Throne of God; and serve him
day and night. And secondly, Acts of Charity, which belong to the second Table,
in rejoicing in one another's Happiness, in their provoking one another to
praise and glorify God* The Angels, that higher Order of bless Spirits, perform
God's* will in the same Manner. For first* they act in conformity to the first
Table, in Adoring and singing (...). Atnanas. q. 30. ad Antiochum.
Praises to God, for all the Angels stand round about the Throne, and fall
before the Throne on their Faces, and worship God* to the second, by their Acts
of Charity toward Men, by their Guardianship over them* by ministering to their
Salvation, by transporting them from this Seen of Woe and Vanity to Mansions
of Bliss and Joy. Thus the Blessed practice the great Duties of Virtue and
Religion; act above as we ought to do below, in conformity to the Divine Will.

But, Secondly, As they practice these Virtues, so they practice them by a Rule.

Which is very evident: for every Agent, which is; whether it is the supreme
Agent, or an intermediate one; whether it moves by* pure Instinct* or Nature,
or whether it acts by Choice or Election, yet has some Rule of its Actions;
whether this Rule is planted in its Nature within, or delivered to it from
without. God Himself, the supreme Agent, who acts sometimes without
Instruments, without the Interposal of Time, without Matter or Principle, yet
never acts without Rule. Though his Actions are free and uncontrolled, yet are
they confined to a Standard, by His Wisdom and Justice, from which even His
Power* cannot make them swerve. For Justice and Judgment are the Habitation (or
as others, the Basis or Foundation) of his Throne. As his own connate, original
Wisdom, or the Rectitude of his own Nature, is the Rule and Measure of his own
Actions; so is the Transcript of it, if I may so speak, the Rule for all other
Agents to move by. He has given the Sea his decree, that the Waters should not
pass his Commandments; and if the proud tumultuous Waves move by his Divine
Rules, how much more has he settled a Rule for his Angels, that excel in
strength; for those his blessed Ministers, who do his Pleasure? The very Title
of Angel imports Duty and Obedience to that glorious Power from whence it
received its Commission; and Obedience implies some Rule by which it ought to
be proportioned. As the Angels, so the Saints, in do Subordination, are in
their several Stations ranged under Rules and Laws. For they are all Parts of
the great Celestial Polity, and all make up one Church Triumphant; therefore
must be subject to the same Heavenly Canons, Laws and Constitutions. For,

Thirdly, This Rule is the same with that by which we ought to regulate our
Actions, therefore they are very fi^ly set out in ^hi^ Prayer of our Lord's, as
a Pattern for our Obedience.

Now the Rule by which (...)ought to manage our Practice, is that which is
styled the Moral Law, or that Law which first being stamped on Man's Heart in
his Innocence, (notwithstanding what Mr. Hobbs, Human understanding, p. 366.
and passion.
Mr. Lock, and others have said to the contrary,) was after his Fall retrieved
by Moses and the Prophets, and lastly by Christ and his holy Apostles: that Law
which prescribes to us, to entertain noble Apprehensions of God, to worship and
serve him; which teaches us Moderation toward our selves, and Justice toward
our Neighbors; which is comprehended in that brief Summary, Thou shall love
the Lord thy God, and thy Neighbor as thy self. This is the Rule of our
Actions on Earth; ^and that it is the Rule of the Saints and Angels in Heaven,
may be thus proved:

1st. That it is the Rule of the Saints, or of the Spirits of Just Men made
perfect. That Law which recovens in the Saints that Image of God, which was
defaced by the Fall, is the Rule of their Actions; but the acting up to the
Moral Law, is a Recovery of this Image, and so must be that Rule. For Heaven is
properly nothing else but a Recovery of that State (with something more of
Perfection) from which Man by Transgression fell. If therefore acting in
conformity with the Moral Law, in all its Points, is a Recovery of that State,
and that Image; it is probable to suppose, that in Heaven this Law shall be the
Rule of the Actions of the Blessed Saints: but an acting up to the Moral Law,
in all its Points, is a Retrieval of the Divine Image; for the being made in
the Image of God, is nothing else but being made in conformity with the Moral
Law, and in a State of Legal Innocence* For the Apostle speaking of the Image
of God in Man, says, That it was nothing else but Man's being made in
Righteousness and true Holiness, which are the two great Points of the Moral
Law; the former denoting the Duties of the second Table, and the latter of the
first* As long therefore as Man lived up to the Moral Law, maintained
Rightcousness and true Holiness; so long was ^e to bear the Divine Image: but
Man being in Honor had no Understanding, but became like the Beasts that
perish. For when he once broke the Law of his Maker, (whatsoever the Nature of
his Sin was,) he lost, this Image and Likeness to God, and resembled rather
that Cursed Spirit, who had Betrayed him, than that Blessed God who had Created
him. And under this resemblance with the Apostate Angels had* he continued, had
not God (by an Effort of Goodness, which excelled even that by which he made
him) offered to retrieve him to his former Image and Likeness. And this was by
assisting him with his Grace, to live up to the Moral Law, which he had before
broken; to keep the Divine Commands, which would so purify his Nature, as to
renew the Divine Image, in some proportion, till he should be received into
Heaven, which his Savior had purchased for him; where the Image of God should
be renewed, with a Luster surpassing that in which Man was at first created.
But the reason why the Image of God should shine with a peculiar Splendor in
Heaven, seems to be, because Man is there put out of a possibility of sinning
any more, and of defacing this Divine Image. And this Heavenly State, being
only a renewing of that Image of God, which Man had shortly after his Creation
lost; if that Image did (as was before shown) at first consist in Man's living
up to the Rules of the Moral Law, of Righteousness and true Holiness; if this
Image was forfeited by Transgressing these Laws; if it is in some degree
renewed in this Life, by acting up to them; it seems to follow, that it shall
be totally renewed, and eternally preserved in Heaven, by an everlasting
Obedience of the Saints to these Laws of Morality, of Righteousness and true
Holiness. This Law therefore is the Rule for the Saints to act by in Heaven.

And, Secondly, It is the Rule for the Angels to act by also; which may be
shown from an Argument drawn from the Fall and Revolt of the Evil Angels, and
accuss'd Spirits. The Argument is this: If those Spirits which fell from before
the Throne of God, fell by their Disobeying that Law of God, which is styled
the Moral Law; it follows, that they were obliged to the Observance of this
Moral Law. For every criminal Disobedience supposes an antecedent Obligation.
But if these accursed Spirits were tied to the keeping of this Law; we must
conclude, that all the rest of the Angelick Hierarchy w^^ under the same
Allegiance. For (...)ly there was not one Rule of Obedience given to one part
of the Celestial Host, and another to the Remainders. So that the Point to be
proved is, That the Angels fell by Transgressing the Moral Law. The
Transgressing of the Moral Law was the Crime which banished them Heaven.
Whether their unpardonable Fault was Ingratitude toward God, as some suppose;
or Infidelity, as others; or Pride, and a Reflection on their own Perfections,
without considering God as the Author, as most; or Envy, as Chrysostom. in Genesis
Hom. 19.
St. Chrysostom and Civit. Dei, lib. 14. c. 11.
St. Austin; or whether it was (as is most likely) a Combination of all these,
some ^oul and dismal Sin formed out of the Malignity and Venom of each one of
them mixed together; yet was it a Violation of the Moral Law. It was an Injury
offered to that Light which God had put within them, as well as within Mankind.
They therefore who sinned against the Moral Law, who are Eternally punished for
this sinning were tied to the Observance of this Law. If they were obliged to
it once, so are the Angels which stand at present; for the blessed Angels are
just the same now, which they were once, Though now the Objects of God's Eternal
Vengeance, yet were they once his chief Ministers; as much his Favorites, as
the most spotless, most unstained of all the Angels; tied to no other Rules; no
other Terms of Obedience. The Blessed Angels are therefore at present ranged
under the Occonomy of the Moral Law, as well as the Cursed were immediately
after their Creation, and before their Fall: which may be farther proved, by
the Analogy that there is between the Moral Law, and the Celestial. There is
the nearest Resemblance and Analogy between the Moral Law, and the Celestial;
whether we consider the Moral Law, as it may be reduced to One Precept, to Two,
or to Ten. It may be reduced to One, to that of Love; for Love is the
fulfilling of the Law. But the most perfect Love is displayed in Heaven, in the
most perfect Charity: for though Prophecies shall fail, though Tongues shall cease,
though Knowledge shall vanish away; yet Charity never fails, but is completed in
Heaven. It Is the bond of Perfectness, and in it, as in a Center, all Duties
meet and are accorded. The Moral Law may be farther combined into Two Precepts:
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, and Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self; for on these Two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets. But the
Law remains in Heaven under this Character. For first, The Saints and Angels
love their Everblessed God with the purest Transports of Devotion; they adore
him with the most profound Veneration, and they serve him with the most
faithful Homage. Secondly, They pursue one another with the most sincere Love
and unfeigned Charity; they rejoice at one another's Happiness, and are as
unanimous in their Affections toward one another, as they are in their
Adoration of God.

But Lastly, The Moral Law is dilated into Ten Precepts, and under this
latitude they are practiced in Heaven with the utmost vigor. Eight of these
Precepts are Negative, and there is no doubt but that they are observed by the
Saints and Angels with the greatest accuracy. Far be it from those pure
Spirits, to lift up their Eyes to any God but the True One; to detract from, or
to envy one another; to desire what belongs to another, no not another's
Happiness.

As to the Affirmative Commands, though they do not abide literally, yet they
remain mysteriously; because they are changed into better. The Fourth, of the
Sabbath, or the Lord's Day, shall be altered into a more noble one: for in
Heaven there shall be no distinction of Days, but all the Rounds of an happy
Eternity shall make up one Day, which shall not know a second; and that wholly
appropriated to the Lord, one Everlasting Sabbath, one Eternal Rest. As to the
Affirmativorum [sc. Praeceptorum] erit in beatltudine summa observatio, nisi
forte illius de Honoratione parentum; quia non erit necessitas impendendi hunc
actum. Scot. l. 3. Sent. d. 38. q. 1.
Fifth, it shall not be abolished, but perfected: for though all Carnal Relations
shall cease, as only subservient to the Necessities of this Life; yet shall
that Honor, that Reverence, that Obedience, which are by the Fifth Commandment
peculiarly attributed to Parents, become due to all the Saints.

The force of all is, That the Obedience of the Blessed is a just Rule for our
Obedience, on account of the Matter of it; because they practice the same
Virtues, and practice them by the same Rule, which we are obliged to. God's
Will performed in Heaven, is therefore on this account a just Standard for our
accomplishing of it on Earth. So is it on account of the Manner of its
Performance, by the Blessed Saints and Angels, which was the Second General.

So that I shall very briefly show, that they perform God's Will after that
Manner, as to be just Patterns for us.

For, First, They perform it with all possible Cheerfulness and Alacrity. The
Word is no sooner out of God's Mouth, but it is also executed; and these
Ministers of his stay not so long, as even to promise Obedience. There is not
among them any demurring to the quality of the Command, or any delay put to the
Execution of it, by an over-modest representing their own unfitness for their
Task. They question not at all with God about the suitableness thereof, nor yet
debate with themselves, whether or no, or with what Vigor they shall apply
themselves to the Execution of it.

Secondly, They perform God's Will uniformly. For an imperfect Obedience is (in
strict speaking) no Obedience at all; for he who only obeys so far as himself
pleases, only does God's Will as far as it complies with his own. There is this
more extensive Proof of the Uniformity of the Angel's Obedience, That the
greatest part of it is employed in discharging such Commands, as subject them,
in some proportion, to those Creatures which are placed below them. Such are
those Commands, which demand their attendance upon us, who are by Creation made
somewhat lower than they; yet have made our selves much more so, by our Sins
and Frailties. So that it is easy to be imagined, That had not their Obedience
been truly uniform, it would not have carried them to a compliance with such
Branches of it, as seem not fully consistent with the Dignity and Grandeur of
their Order and Station.

Thirdly, Their Comportment with the Divine Will is constant and settled, and
they always discharge the Will of God, as well as cheerfully and uniformly.
That Establishment which is destined to their Piety, by the Election of God,
will most certainly produce this Constancy. Besides this, the Scripture
displays them as always looking on the Face of God, expecting (as it were) and
inviting his Commands, or traveling about his Messages; as continually
descending from Heaven about their Earthly Ministrations, or ascending up
thither after the Execution of them.

Fourthly, The Obedience of the Angels is as complete, as it is cheerful,
uniform and constant; and reaches to every Branch of their Injunction, as well
as to all God's Commands; because as there can be no doubt of their sufficiency
for such a Compliance, who are so near to the Divine Influences, and so
gloriously adorned by them; so the same Reason and Obedience, which move them
to have a respect to all God's Commands, will incite them to have a regard to
every the minutest Punctilio, as having the same Impress of the same Divine
Will stamped upon it.

A DISCOURSE Concerning The Qualifications of PRAYER, Or, A Method to Pray in
the Spirit. Against the Enthusiasts.
EPHESIANS. Chap. VI. ver. 18. Praying always with all Prayer and Supplication in
the Spirit.
AS Religion is the Life of the Soul, so is Prayer the vital Spirit of
Religion, without which it can neither live, nor move, nor have its Being. This
is the chief Branch of the Worship of God, required of all who acknowledge Him
to Be, and most reasonable for all who own the World to be governed by His
Providence, and themselves to stand in need either of His Grace or His Pardon,
or who hope for His Rewards, or fear His Punishments in a future State. And as
it is thus a very necessary Duty, so (if exactly practiced) is it a difficult
one too. For it is a Discoursing with God; and for Man, who is but of
yesterday, to correspond with the Almighty, who inhabits Eternity, must employ
the utmost force of all his Powers and Faculties. For if the Cherubim and
Seraphim, who were always without Spot or Blemish, and in whom was never found
any Guile, cover their Faces while they are Praising and Adoring the infinite
Perfections of God; what Gesture can be humble enough for Man, who composes
himself to Pray to Him laden with his Sins, and whose Iniquities have gone over
his Head? If those glorious Spirits are described in Scripture, as shifting
from place to place while they are worshipping their Creator, as conquered and
overpowered by the Purity of His Nature; with what Confusion must Man appear
before Him, who was conceived in Sin, and born in Iniquity? What attention and
application of Thought? What modesty of Expression? What submissiveness of
Behavior? What Love and Admiration? What warmth of Affection must be used to
make our Sacrifices acceptable to our Maker? And certainly, as it had been the
highest Presumption, to have offered to have entertained any Intercourse with
the Almighty, had not He Himself encouraged it; so since* He has vouchsafed to
do it, it is our most excellent Glory, that we can address our Supplications to
Him. But still the Obligation abides, to put them up with all the Devotion and
Fervency of Spirit, which our Imperfections are capable of; to prepare our
selves with the nicest diligence, that we may

Pray always with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit.

By Praying always, is not meant a constant or continued Exercise of the Act of
Prayer, so as to be always invoking the Name of God. For this would be
inconsistent with our other relative Duties: for there are Virtues to be
practiced, which more immediately regard our Neighbor and our selves, as well
as those which solely respect God; and we are obliged to Justice, Charity and
Humanity, as well as to Pray, Praise and Adore. But by Praying always, is to be
understood such a Godlike Frame and Temper of Spirit, accompanied with such an
Innocence of Life, and relish of Heavenly Things, that we may be ever disposed
for this Duty, when fit opportunities shall call for it. By Praying in the
Spirit (whatsoever the Enthusiasts pretend) seems to be only implied, that our
Prayers ought to have the Qualifications before mentioned; so that they ought
to be put up rather for things Spiritual, than Temporal; for God's assistance
to enable us to persevere in Goodness, for the removal or averting of
Temptations, for all Graces needful for us* and Means for the securing or
increasing of them; which are styled the Gifts, or Privileges of the Holy
Spirit. And this too falls under the former Head, and is a Qualification
necessary to make us Pray aright; since there can be no better Argument that we
are well qualified for Prayer, than that we pray for Blessings of the most
noble Importance, the most momentous Concern. So that in the Text are couched
the Qualifications required to make us successful Petitioners at the Throne of
Grace. For the reason why so many Prayers are not heard by Heaven, after those
Promises which are annexed to the Performance of this Duty, is, because we are
not duly accomplished to be Candidates for its Mercies. And it is easy for us
in this Case, to vindicate the Faithfulness of God, and to make an Apology for
our Maker, in our Maker's own Words, which are, that We ask and receive not,
because we ask amiss. In order therefore to make us fit Supplicants to the God
of Glory, and to put our Souls into such a Temper, that they may be constantly
and habitually fitted for the Discharge of this Duty, there are several
Qualifications needful. I shall therefore consider,

First, What Qualifications are necessary to prepare us for Prayer, or before
we Pray, and in order to it.

Secondly, What is required in the very time, or act of our Praying, when our
Devotions are on the Wing, and our Lips are touched with a Coal from the Altar.

Thirdly, What must be done after we have Prayed, to make our antecedent
Prayers duly effectual.

Fourthly, What Acts are to be continued and extended through each of these,
both before, in, and after our Prayers.

First therefore, What Qualifications are necessary to prepare us for Prayer,
or before we Pray, and in order to it.

Now the First Qualification necessary to prepare us for Prayer, is the Purity
of our (...) Menander.
Hearts, or the Direction of our Lives by the Commandments of God. For if our
Affections are impure, or our Ways unrighteous, it is in vain to make our
Applications to God: for we know that God hears not Sinners, but if any man
is a worshipper of God, and does his Will, him he hears. For, The Eyes of the
Lord are over the Righteous, and his Ears are open to their Prayers alone. For
without Godliness, (whatsoever Antinomian Schemes some Persons may draw,)
whether it consists in Innocence, or sincere Repentance, our Prayers can never
mount up to the presence of God; because the Burden of our Sins will certainly
keep them from ascending to that Holy Place, where nothing, but what is
completely so, can appear. And it would be Presumption, to hope that our
spotless Savior should present so unacceptable a Sacrifice to his Father, as
the Petitions of a Supplicant, who declares himself to be in a State of
Hostility against both of them, by an avowed complying with what they most
abhor. Nay, it is the most unwarrantable Insolence, for him who still retains a
Love for his Sins, and yields to them upon the general returns of Temptation,
to approach his Maker in any Holy Office. For it is only an honoring Him with
his Lips, while his Heart is far from Him; and seems to be what the Apostle
calls a Lying to God, a professing himself his most devoted, most obedient
Servant, while his own Conscience, by a reflection on his Actions, will tell
him that he is his open and inveterate Enemy. It Is a colluding with Him, who
tries the Heart and the Reins, and to whose Eyes all things are n^ked and open:
as if Omniscience could be imposed on by Pretenses, or a Religious Pageantry
was tantamount to Solid Virtue and Piety; or saying of, Lord, Lord, would
excuse for the not doing the Will of our Father which is in Heaven. So that
till we are free from all known and willful Sin, it is to no purpose to make any
Supplication to God. He will not hear, will not regard our Prayers. They are
like unballowed Fire offered to Him, and are an abomination in his sight; for
of him, who is not resolved to part with his Sins, the very Prayers are sinful.
That Duty which draws others nigher to God, casts him at a greater distance
from him. That Ordinance which sanctifies others, serves only to aggravate his
deplorable Stare, and to render his Condition more insufferable. But neither,
on the other hand, is he less criminal, if he does not Pray at all: for he is
not excused from this Duty, by being unqualify'd for it, but he becomes guilty,
not only of those Sins which are the hindrances of his Devotion, but of that
Inability to Devotion, which they have caused; and so hard are his
Circumstances, that he is likely to suffer, not only for making his Duty
impossible by sinning, but even for not discharging it, while it is thus
impossible. And this justly enough too, because this Impossibility was wilfully
superinduced; an Act of his own choice and free election, and for which he has
none to blame besides himself, and his own wild Passion^. So that while his
Case continues thus, he is on all accounts unqualify'd for Prayer, and yet is
guilty too if he does not Pray, till by hearty Repentance he has freed himself
from his Sins. So indispensibly necessary is Purity from Sin, to prepare us for
Prayer. But as there are different kinds of Sins, so is there the greatest
necessity that we should be innocent of those Sins, which are most opposed to
the Spirit of Prayer; for they are not all of them equally destructive of it.
But these are Malioe, Ill Will, or Hatred of our Brother. Now as these Vices
commence two manner of ways, either by Injuring our Brother, or by receiving an
Injury from him; so we may be supposed, in either Case, to be guilty of them,
and therefore on all regards unqualify'd for Prayer, if we do not contribute
our utmost toward the suppressing of them. As for Instance: If I have injured
my Brother, and given him any umbrage to hate me, I am in a great measure
guiley of the Sin, and therefore am unqualify'd for Prayer, if I do not
endeavor a speedy Reconcilement with him. For if my Gift is before the Altar,
and I there remember that my Brother has ought against me, (any just cause of
complaining that I have injured him,) I am obliged to leave my Gift before the
Altar, and go, and first be reconciled to my Brother. So on the other hand,
when we are injured by our Brother, we are guilty of the Malice, and the Sin
lies at our door, and so our Prayers become ineffectual, if we express an eager
Desire to revenge our selves; if we show an Aversion and Unwillingness to
forgive him; if we neglect his Proposals of Peace and Accommodation. For how
can we expect that God should pardon our Sins of the blackest Character, if we
will not forgive our Fellow Servants the least Offense? And has not our Blessed
Lord taught us, that we cannot Pray to God to forgive us our Trespasses, unless
we forgive them that trespass against us? And as often as we use this sacred
Prayer of our Savior's, if we do not forgive those who have offended us from
the bottom of our Hearts, we desire that God would not forgive us; that He
would remember and revenge ou^ Sin^ against Him, as we (...) to revenge those
which our Brother h^^ commi^^^^ against us. So that in effect we (...) the best
Prayer that ever was into S^^, and use the Words of ou^ Savior, who spoke as
never Man spoke, to our (...) Damnation.

So that Purity from Si^, especially from Malice, Hatred or (...)*will is (...)
First Qualification in ^^^er ^o prepare us for Prayer.

The Second* preparatory* Qualification for Prayer, is (...) the Nature of our
(...)s, and (...) the Manne^ by which (...) has pro(...) to supply them, that
we may (...) what to pray for, and (...) Method ^^ take to have our
Prayer(...)do And in taking an Est(...) Wants, we are to consider (...) a^
Creatures whose chief Interest (...) on a future St^^^, wh(...) Necessities a^^
those which (...) Soul. As to what concerns this Life, we are to resign that
over to ^^^ Heavenly Father's good Providence, with a Father, not my Will, but
thine be done. But as to spiritual Wants, concerning these we ar^ to s^e with
the greatest and most unconditionate Importunity* and a pious Violence is to be
done to Heav^^^^, till we (...) our sel^es suocessful in what we p^^y for. But
then, Secondly, we must reflect on the Terms on which God has undertaken to
assist these Wants, and to resolve to comply with them, are they never
so^^^neasy. Thus do we ask for Pardon for Sins* we know the terms on which this
^^ust be granted, are, provided we repent and forsake them. We are therefore to
resolve to set our selves about this Repentance and Amendment, before we pray
for the Pardon. Th^s because (...) and Virtue can(...) compast without the use
of good and wi^e Endeavors, we are to resolve o^ these* before we petition for
those. For the Promises of God* tho^ infallible in regard to any Grace, ought
nevertheless to encourage us to travel with more A^do^^ and Fidelity, to merit
the Effects of them. And if we ask after this manner, i^ shall be given us; for
every one who asks in this wise, receives.

The Third Qualification preparatory to Prayer, is Faith, or a Trust in God,
that He will gran(...) pray* for* according to our (...)): All things
whatsoever y^ shall ^^^ i^ Prayer, believing ^e shall receive. Now we may be
said to be qualified (...) this Grace, when sensible of our own Want^* we
commend our selves to God by Prayer, relying on his Divine* Goodness and Power,
that he will give ^^ what ^^ sue for* that is* (as (...) hinted) if we are
careful of performing the Condition^ on which ^e stipulated to give; if we ask
for Pardon for Sins, i^ reforming them; for vir(...) Endowments, in
industriously seeking after them; for the assistance of God's Spirit, in
concurring with it* and making good use of it; for Health, or (...) other
prosperous* Turns of Providence and outward things, with a due submission to
God's Will, joined with the use of lawful Means to attain them. For ^o trust
that God will hear us without these, is not Faith, but ^^ un warrantable
Considence; not Hope, but Presumption.

The Fourth Qualification preparatory for Prayer, is a good Intention to use
what God shall bless us with, to excellent Ends and Designs; to the Glory of
God, and the Advancement of our own, and Brother's Salvation. Otherwise, if we
only ask for God's Blessings, to consume them on our Lusts, we petition Heaven
to contribute to our Undoing, and beg of the Almighty Materials for our Sins,
and for Occasions to provoke Him. God is obliged to deny us out of (Love and
Compassion) ^i for^ should he hear us, it would be the greatest Indication that
he is displeased with us, and that he is about to ruin us by so cruel an
Indulgence.

So that Freedom from Sin, either by Innocence, or sincere Repentance,
especially from Malice or Ill Will; a Resolution to perform the Terms, on which
Success is promised to our Prayers; a Trust that God will grant us (...)hus ask
for; and a Good Intention to use what God blesses our Prayers with to (...)ry,
are Qualifications antecedent(...)essary to Prayer, and preparatory ^or^it.
Without these, an Address to the Throne of Grace, is to no purpose. The most
artful and elaborate Petition can meet with no welcome there; but like the
Dove, when she was at first sent out of the Ark, after it has in vain roam'd
about the Heavens, without finding any admission, must return to its
disappointed owner empty. And if these Qualifications are needful for us before
we apply our selves to God in Prayer, while we are yet at a distance from him;
what will be sufficient for us to do in the time and act of Praying, when we
are before the very Presence of the Living God, and the pure Eyes of the
Eternal are fixed upon us? How dreadful must that place be, which, by God's
being more immediately resident in it, is none other but the House of God, and
the Gate of Heaven? So that we shall enquire,

Secondly, What is required in the very time and act of our Praying, while our
Devotions are on the Wing, and our Lips are touched with a Coal from the Altar.

Now the First Qualification necessary for us in the time of Prayer, is
Humility; because Prayer is a Talking with God. And this Humility ought to be
formed in us, First, by the Consideration of the Majesty of that God, with whom
we have to do: That He is the Highest far above all, who has Heaven for his
Throne, and the Earth for his Footstool. Who measures she Sea in the palm of
His Hands. In whose Hand is the Soul of every living thing, and the Breath of
all Mankind. Hell is naked before Him, and Destruction has no covering. He
stretches out the North over the empty place, and hangs the Earth upon
nothing. And, Secondly, this Humility ought to be raised by the sense of our
own Vileness. First, as we are Men and the Creatures of God, over whom he has
an absolute Power and Authority. As we are nothing but a little breathing Dust
and Ashes, which after a short time, but very full of trouble, must return to
that out of which we were formed. If the most glorious of his Creatures are so
despicable before Him, that He puts no Trust in his Servants, and charges even
his Angels with Folly; how shall they come before Him, who dwell in Houses of
Clay, whose Fo^^dation is in the Dust? But, Secondly, much more ought we to be
humble in our Prayers, as we are Sinners, and worthy (if God should reward us
after our Sins) of Eternal Death. We have affronted Infinite Majesty, and
therefore deserve Infinite Punishment. And though through the Mercies of God, and
the Merits of our Blessed Savior, our severe Repentance may hinder the
execution of this Sentence; yet we must remember, that Humility is a part even
of Repentance it self. And the consideration that it is the Goodness of God
alone, which makes our Misery less, ought to make our Sin greater, and heighten
our Humility for having offonded so gracious a Creator, when we pray for
Remission for those Offenses.

The Second Qualification in the time of Praying, is a due fixedness: and
attention of Mind. For God is an Object so noble, that he demands the utmost
Intension of our Thoughts. They ought all to be collected, and fixed on him,
directed as the Fa^es of the Cheru^im in the Ark wholly toward the Mercy-seat.
And in order to this, our Minds ought to be disengaged from whatsoever may
occasion their straggling; as from an over-violent Love of the World, its
Pleasures and Interests, and to be possessed with whatsoever may raise a just
Attention; as with an awful sense of the Dignity and Excellence of this Duty,
the inestimable Worth of those Mercies for which we petition, the greatness of
our Wants and Necessities. Nor is it enough, (as the v. Aquin. 2da 2dae Qu. 84.
ad 13. Non ex necessitate requiritur quod attentio adfit Orationi per totum,
etc.
Schoolmen loosely determine in this Matter,) that this Attention is purposed
and intended, though it is not executed. Nor is it sufficient that we come with a
Resolution to be attentive, if we do not vigorously practice it. For is a
Resolution a competent Discharge of any other Duty? Or was the Son in the
Gospel justified for resolving to go and work in the Vineyard, and yet not
doing it? A Resolution to Pray in general, might as well absolve us from not
Praying at all, as a Resolution to be attentive, from not being so. No: though
God will make abatement for the Imperfection of our Attention, resulting from
the unavoidable weakness of our Natures, or our being disused to Think or
Reflect; yet will not he dispense with the total want of it. And if we are
sorry for this Imperfection of our Attention, and endeavor effectively to
correct it, God will concur with us, and by drawing nigher to us, and
discovering his Perfections with a greater Luster, will make our Attention not
only easy and natural, but even also pleasant and delightful.

The Third Qualification of Prayer, in the act of Praying, is a good measure of
Desire, and fervency of Affection. For a lukewarm* Petitioner bespeaks a
Denial, and he himself contributes to his own Repulse. He seems unconcerned in
making his Suit, and so may expect God to be less concerned to grant it. He
seems to slight the Mercy, while he asks it. Can it therefore be imagined, that
he should think himself much obliged by it, or be thankful for it? While a
fervent Prayer shows how ardently we desire a Mercy, and how thankfully we are
like to receive it. And this is a strong Inducement for God to bestow it on us;
for He is so tenden and indulgent, that He cannot deny us any thing which is
fit for us, when He sees us wrought up to a due valuation of it, and our Hearts
earnestly bent upon it. For it is the servent Prayer of the righteous man,
which prevails much.

The Fourth Qualification of Prayer, in the act of Praying, is a general Love
for Mankind, and a Concern for their Happiness. For the Compass of our Prayers
ought to be as large as that of our Charity, and with its open Arms embrace all
Mankind: extended even to those, who are perhaps contriving to lay our Honors
and Bodies in the dust, while we are mounting their Souls, in our Devotions, up
to the Heavens. For we are obliged by our Holy Religion, to bless them which
curse us, and to pray for them which despitefully use us. And in pursuit of
this universal Charity, our Savior, (according to De Orat.
St. Cyprian's pious Observation,) has taught us to say, Our, and not My
Father, only, which art in Heaven, that mindful of our divine and common
Original, and of that glorious dependence on which we stand related to God, we
might unite our Prayers for all those, who bear the same illustrious Character
of the Sons of God.

The Fifth Qualification of Prayer is, That our Prayers ought to be short, not
abounding with an excess of Words. For Prayer is the Language of the Heart,
rather than of the Tongue; of the Affections, more than of the Lips; and great
and raised Passions, such as make up the most perfect Devotion, are seldom
attended with a copious fluency of Words. For the Soul is too much employed
within, to love leisure to exercise it self about Flourish, or tedious
Harangue. Of this concise Nature are most of the sacred Hymns and Prayers which
are extant, suitable to the Majesty of God: for the most short, is also the
most solemn and stately Method of Address, and agreeable to Mankind's
Infirmities which hinder us from enlivening with a due Spirit a long and
tedious Prayer Of this Nature are our Savior's own Prayers* one of the last of
which in his Agony, is so short, and yet so pathetical* that it seems
(according to the History) to be accompanied with more drop^ of Blood than
Words.

The Last Qualification, in the act of Praying, is Perseverance. Persevereance,
not as the Messallians, from the Apostle's Command in the Words, of Praying
always thought, by an unbroken continuation of the acts of Prayer; but by a
constant Preparation for, and Exercise of them, as opportunities, and freedom
from other Duties demand. For this is the Perfection, not only of Prayer, but
of all Virtues. Without this they are only faint efforts, and attempts to
please God, which shall never be accepted of, nor rewarded by Him. But it has a
most especial force in Prayer ^ for if the Unjust Judge in the Gospel, who
neither feared God, nor regarded Man, yet granted the Widow's Petition, moved
purely by her resolute Perseverance; how much more shall God, who is the Just
Judge of all Mankind, and whose Goodness inclines Him to be kind and beneficent
to His Creatures, grant our Requests, if we cry day and night to Him? I tell
you, (as the Gospel has it) He will grant them speedily.

Humility therefore, Attention, Fervor, Charity, Brevity and Perseverance, are
Qualifications necessary in the time of Prayer. But there are,

Thirdly, Qualifications necessary after we have prayed, to make our antecedent
Prayers duly effectual.

As First, an observation of God's returns to our Prayers; an eyeing the
tendency of his Providence, whether he does grant our Petitions or not;
especially as to spititual Concerns. And there is an infallible Mar^^ to
measure our Success by: for we may assuredly conclude, That God has heard our
Prayers, as to Pardon of Sins, (for Instance,) if we find our solves free from
voluntary Transgressions. But if after our Prayers we are as much Sinners as
over, this is a sign that God has not heard our Petitions, and that our Sins
are not pardoned; and the fault must be our own, because we did not truly
repent of them, before we prayed for their Remission. So that we must renew our
Repentance, as well as our Prayers; and: if the former is sincere and the
latter duly qualified, we shall certainly be successful. Thus we may know that
God has granted our Prayers as to spiritual Graces, if we find our selves
improved in Virtue after our Prayers: otherwise the fault is our own; we have
not endeavored vigourously after Grace. So that we must reinforce ou^
Endeavors, as well as our Prayers; and if there is no deficiency on our part,
it is certain there will be none on God's: for He is always more ready to Give,
than we to Pray. He is prepared to prevent with his Blessings even our first
Wishes for them, and to reward our pious Desires, even before they have time to
cloth themselves with Words.

The Second Qualification after Prayer, is a returning God Thanks for His
Grants and Denials: that is, His Denials of temporal Advantages. For this is
often as great a Proof of His Fatherly Goodness and Concern for us, as any of
His most Merciful Indulgences. It Is a mysterious Method of Kindness, which
obliges us against our Wills, and makes us happy in contradiction to our most
passionate Desires; depriving us of what would prove to us only a more
agreeable Ruin, a more pleasant and beautiful Destruction. And how severe
soever Disappointments may appear to us at first, yet the event and close of
Things will show, that we had good reason to be thankful to God, for His
crossing us in our Wishes, and for visibly frustrating us in the success of our
Prayers; and we shall at last find the satisfaction of consigning our choice
over to Omniscience, and that God, (to use our Sauiour's familiar, but
expressive Words with some alteration,) when we prayed for a (...)* has given
us a Fish, and when we petitioned for Stone, has blessed us with Bread.

The Third Qualification after Prayer, is a due Value of our great Privilege,
That we may pray to God. For hole great is the Prerogative of a Christian, that
he ^ may* discourse and converse, and prevail with God? That there i^ no
difficulty of Access, no doubt of Acceptance* That there is no hinderance of
his Intercourse with the Almighty, but his own ^ins, which are no longes
Impediments but as far as they are persisted in, and not broken off by true
Repentance.

The Fourth Qualification is a learning by God's Denials, to make fitter
Addresses for the future. For if my Prayer's are not granted, there must be
some fault in me. Till that is amended, Heaven will be (...) to my Petitions,
and neglect my most solomn Addresses Either I do not pray for what I ought, or
not after that manner which I ought therefore, in the Language of the Psalmist,
my Words are only like the Chaff before the Wind, and the Angel of the Lord
will certainly scatter them.

The Fifth Qualification is Almsgiving. For it is ^wet that we should express
our Gratitude for God's Mercies, by our Bounty to our Brethren, which ask of
us, and need our relief. This is all the Return we can make to Providence, for
the innumerable Bounties which it shatters upon us with open hands. This is a
kind of relieving our Savior in his suffering Members; and he tells us, that
he will look on it, as if done to himself. And there can be no greater*
Inducement for God to bestow temporal good things on us, than if we consecrate
a part of them to him by our Alms. We render him, if I may so speak, our
Debtor, and (pardon the boldness of the Expression) we may in some measure,
according to the Promises made to this Duty, appeal to his Justice, as well as
to his Goodness, to make suitable Requitals; which he will most certainly
perform, though not in Kind, yet in what will be much more for our Advantage; and
will consult, though not our present Satisfaction, yet our lasting Benefit. An
Observation therefore of God's returns to our Prayers* Thanksgiving for his
Grants and Denials, a due Value of the Privilege of Prayer, a Correcting our
Prayers for the future by our past disappointments, and lastly Alm^giving, are
necessary after we have prayed, to make our antecedent Prayers duly effectual.
So that I shall proceed to enquire into,

Lastly, What Acts are to be continued and extended through each of these, both
before, in, and after our Prayers.

And, First, We ought to be possessed with a great sense of our imperfections, in
the discharge of this weighty Du^y* This must nun through all the parts of it;
but ought more particularly to be expressed both before, and after our Devotions.
At both these times we ought solemnly to entreat God's Pardon* son the Errors
that we have, or may commit; for the straggling of our Thoughts* which the best
of Men can more easily bewail, than prevent; since the most watchful and steady
Mind cannot hinder all the disorders of a roving Fancy, in the midst of our
most serious Devotions; for our over-earnest begging of Blessings of a trivial
Nature, or for our want of any of the former Qualifications, in that measure
which is expedient.

The next Qualification is a very comprehensive one, and which takes in all the
rest, yet withal a very necessary one too; and that is universal Holiness and
Sanctity. For our Praying in a short time will make us loave off our Sins, or
our Sins our Prayers. So that this will be an Effect, as well as a
Qualification of our Devotion. For though the former Qualifications, may be
sufficient for a new Convert, and for one who has but lately had the sense and
conviction of Religion upon his Mind; yet from a Proficient in this Duty,
nothing will be accepted less than a general, a complete and uniform Obedience
to all God's Commands. For though the Prayers of one who begins to leave his
Sins, and yet sometimes upon the prevalency of Custom, or the surprise of a
violent Temptation, relapses into 'em, may be heard upon his Repentance; yet
this state of Sinning and Repenting must not continue longin A^ general Piety
must be* super induced, o^ else i^ is a sign that his Prayers have not ^ad
their due efficacy: if they do not conquer all Sin, at least so that it may no^
reign in us: if they do (...) give us some sort of fore-tast of the Joys of
that Place, to which they are directed, and make (...) So^is Sympathize and
conform themselves with the Virtue and Innocence of its blessed Inhabitants.

So that the sum of ^ll is: ^ That Purity, a Consideration of ^ur Wants* a
Trust in God, a good Intention, are necestsary to prepare us for Prayer^*
Humility, Attention, Fervor, Charity, Brevity and Perseverance* in the time
of* Praying. An Observation of God's Providence, ^ Value of our Privilege to
Pray, a Reforming of our Prayers by our Disappointments, and Almsgiving, are
required after we have prayed. And a Sen^e of our Imperfections, and an
Universal Piety, are to run through all the Periods of this Duty.

A Prayer which is put up to Heaven after this Method, is surely more suitable
for a reasonable Creature to present before his Almighty Maker, than what is
utteb'd by, or rather impressed upon a Soul, cast into a purely passive State
or Posture; into a State of Expectations of the Divine Emanations to enlighten
the Mind, as that Duty has been modeled by some late foreign Mollnos. Madame de
Bourignon, etc.
Enthusiasts. Which is but what had been before advanced by Enthusiasts of our
own Nation: for thus an James Naylor's Love to the Lost, p. 13.
Author of great Character, amongst the most irregular Sect which ever opposed
this Church, allows of no use of our own Intellectual Powers, of our Passions,
Imaginations, or Wills, in the exercise of this Duty: Because (says he) God
will be ser^'d with his own alone, and not with any thing in Man, which is come
in since the Fall; so the Imaginations, Thinkings and Conceivings are shut out.
And these Qualifications before hinted at, seem much more intelligible, more
adapted to the Economy of our Devotion, than ^ Horris's Reste^^ions on the
Conduct of Humane Life, etc. Sect. 11.
The taking hold of essential Truth nakedly, as it is in it self; than the
applying the Mind to the intelligible World, the World of Truth; than the
addressing to the Ideal World; than Entretiens Christi^nnes, and de la
Recherche, de la Verite de P. Malebranche, l. 3. chapter 6.
the union with God, the seeing of all things in God: Terms in some measure
invented by two refined and curious Thinkers, the one of our own, the other of
a Neighboring Kingdom. And here I cannot but reflect on a dangerous Error of a
Mystic* Monsieur Francis de Salignac Fenelon Archeveque de Cambray Maxims de
Saints, ou, sur la vie interieure.
Writer of more, who seems to exclude Virtue from the Sta^e of transformed
Souls, (as he styles them) and those wrapped up in the highest transports of
Devotion. But that Virtue is not only a preparation for Devotion, but also a
completing of it, has been shown in this Discourse; and not only so, but that
it is practiced by the Blessed, by whom Devotion is exercised in its most
exalted flights, was made out (though far below the Majesty of the Subject,) in
the preceding Essay.

But to close all: Furnished with the former Qualifications, we may be justly
said to Pray always, and in the Spirit. Yet such Prayers as were before
described, will never fail* of Success, till God shall cease from being True,
and our Almighty's Strength from being Merciful. Such Prayers as these will be
acceptable Sacrifices to the Heavenly Altar, will procure Pardon for Sin, and
Increase of Grace, and ^t length Eternal Life, and will at last expire into
Everlasting Thanksgiving. When we shall need to Pray no more, but this Duty (as
some fancy of Faith and Hope) shall cease, and we shall have nothing to do for
ever, but to give Thanks, Adore and Praise.

AN ESSAY UPON MELCHIZEDEC: OR, A Parallel between the Priesthood of CHRIST and
Melchizedec.
THERE are scarcely any purely Historical Passages of Scripture, which carry
the appearance of greater Obscurity, or have had more various Senses put upon
them, than those which regard Melchizedec. Though who this Person was, has been a
Controverted Point, and perhaps ever will be so, (for Controversies do not end
with the first Authors of them;) yet that Christ is paralleled with him, in his
Priestly Office, is as evident as the other part is dark and intricate. I shall
therefore endeavor to give a view, both of the obscure and bright side of this
Subject, by making some transient Remarks, both on the Person and the Parallel;
by

First, Enquiring who Melchizedec is.

Secondly, Into the Nature of his Priesthood.

Thirdly, I shall parallel Christ with him in this Priesthood.

First, I shall enquire who Melchizedec is.

No mention is made of this holy Person, save in the 14th Chapter of Genesis,
and in the 110th Psalm, except what the Apostle to the Hebrews says of him,
which is wholly taken from thence. Thus little being spoken of him, has been
the foundation of so many Opinions. But all that has been rationally delivered
about him, may be reduced to Five Heads. The first Notion is that of the Jews,
who make Melchizedec the same with the Patriarch Sem: for they paying the
greatest Honor to Abraham, of whom they said that he was their Father,
resented it ill, that he should give Tithe to a Priest of an higher Order. To
wipe off which blemish, they first declare Melchizedec to be an Angel, and in
aftertimes the Patriarch Sem, and that he blessed Abraham as his great
Grandson; thus thinking to secure the repute of their Nation.

But that Melchizedec was not the Patriarch Sem, may be made plain. First,
Because the Apostle says that his Descent was not counted, being without
Descent; but the Pedigree: of Sem may be traced down from Adam, and stands upon
eternal Record. Secondly, Melchizedec is said to be without Father and without
Mother; but the Scripture gives us a large History of Noah the Father of Sem.
Thirdly, The Order of Melchizedec was different from the Levitical Order; but
the Priesthood of Sem must be the same with that of Levi, because Levi was
descended in a^ right Line from Sem. More than this, Fourthly, the Apostle
prefers the Order of Melchizedec to the Order of Aaron, or the Levitical Order;
because Levi paid tithes to him in Abraham. Which Argument would be null, if
Melchizedec and Sem were the same; for then would Levi, who was equally
descended from Sem and Abraham, pay Tithes in the latter, and receive them in
the former* so no Preference could be hence concluded, which I take to be a
strong Argument against this Opinion.

The second Opinion is that of Cun. de Repub. Hebraeor. lib. ^. c. 3.
Cun^us, who makes Melchizedec the same with Christ; or that it was our Savior
assuming a human Shape, who appeared to Abraham. But this is highly improbable:
for how can he be said to be without Father and without Mother, whose Father is
the Almighty, whose Mother the Blessed above all Women, the holy and immaculate
Virgin? This was far below the sublime and accurate style of the Apostle's
Rhetoric, Farther, If Melchizedec was Christ, it would follow that Christ was
Priest when he appeared to Abraham, long before the Law. But the Apostle says,
that he was made one after the Law, with an Oath. Nor can there be any rational
Account given of our Savior's appearing in a human Body, before his
Incarnation. For the v. the first Discourse.
Apostle St. Paul alluding to those places where God is said to appear, makes
mention only of Angels appearing, or that some had hospitably entertained them
unawares. But if these Angels had been Jesus Christ, or God Almighty, St. Paul
might have run his Argument higher, or have asserted in the honor of
Hospitality, that some had not only entertained Angels, but God Almighty
Himself unawares. So that Melchizedec could not be Jesus Christ.

The third Opinion is, That this Melchizedec was a Man of mortal Extraction,
and King of Salem at that time when Abraham came from his Victory. And this is
honored with no lesser Names, than those of Irenaus, Hippolytus, the two
Eusebii, Caesariensis, and Emissenus, Apollinarius, Eustathius, B^ of Antioch,
as they are quoted by Hieronym. Epist. ad Evagrium. Tom. ^ ^. 58. Edit. Basil.
1537.
St. Jerome, who all conspire in saying, that Melchizedec was an Inhabitant of
Canaan, and King of Jerusalem, which was first called Salem, then Jebus, lastly
Jerusalem. But notwithstanding these venerable Authors, (with whom yet St.
Jerome himself does not agree,) there is reason to believe that Melchizedec was
no^ King of Salem in Canaan; for the place where Abraham gained this celebrated
Victory, was not in Can^an, as appears from the whole Progress of his Motions,
compared with the exact Tables of Adricomius, as has been demonstrated by one
of the greatest Dr. Wallis in his Disc* concerning Melchizedec.
Persons in our Nation, as famous for his incomparable Treatises in Divinity,
as for those in ancient and modern Mathematics. Farther, If Melchizedec was
King of Salem in Canaan, how could Abraham be unknown to him, till this
Expedition of his? Or how came it that a Correspondence was not settled between
them before this, being both Worshippers and Priests of the True God, and
living among Idolatrous Nations, at a small distance from each other? Nor,
Fourthly, was Melchizedec the Holy Ghost, assuming an human Shape then, as he
did afterward those of a Dove, and fiery Tongues, as v. Hieron. ^^ supra.
some have extravagantly thought; since most of those Arguments which prove
that he was not the Second Person in the Trinity, make it as evident that he
was not the Third. But, Fifthly, it seems most probable, that he was some
Person of extraordinary Piety in these, or the Neighboring Countries, where
Abraham had been pursuing his Conquest; who had preserved true Notions of God
and Morality, and therefore was irradiated by Divine Emanations from above. To
strengthen which, I shall produce these two following Remarks*

First, That Piety and Goodness were never so much banish^ out of the World,
but there have flourished some Assertors and rigid Maintainers of them. The
Light of Nature has not been so far extinguished, but it has had the power to
conduct some by its brightness, and to teach them to act up to the highest
Rules of Justice, Candor and Humanity. Of this kind, among profane Nations,
were Toxaris, Anacharsis, Solon, Socrates, Aristides, and others; and l among
the Canaanites, Abraham and Lot; and among other Idolatrous Nations, Job and
our King of S^lem.

The second Remark to establish my Assertion, is, That the Royalty and
Priesthood were generally combined in most Nations, and the Crown and Mitre (if
I may so call it) both adorned the same Head* Thus the Heroes in Homer,
Apollonius in his Argonauts, and Virgil, are brought in Sacrifiding* And Hell.
Rerum Aethiopic. li^. ul^.
Heliodorus makes the Ethiopian Kings, Plutarc. Placit Philosophorum.
Plutarch the Egyptian, Herod. in Clio.
Herodotus the Spartan, Liby the Roman* to be Priests 100, and wear the
Pontical Dignity, as well as the Regal. The Emperors for four hundred Years
after Julius Caesar, had the Title of Pontifex Maximus, even under
Christianity. And the 6th General Council, when it drove the Laics from the
Altar* resenv'd a place for the Emperor. And as to Melchizedec's being without
Father and without Mother, it may be so understood* That he had no Father and
Mother, which stood in the Records, as the Patriarchs had; or perhaps, That his
Father and Mother were not of the Royal Race, so that he was the first King of
his Family; as Jeconias is said to be without Children, by the Prophet
Jeremiah, because he had none who succeeded him in his Throne, though he had a
Son Salathiel, whether a natural Son, or adopted; though there are some Assertors
of the first, as well as of the second. And indeed not withstanding what* the
matchless Grot. in v. Luc. 23. 3 p. 6^1.
Grotius has said on the other side, it seems probable that Salathiel was his
Son by Nature. Because first, this Curse of being Childless, might only be
Conditional, in case that he did not repent. But there was a Tradition among
the Jews, which v. R. D. Kimchi R^d* in v^c. (...)
Rabbi Kimchi mentions, that Jeconiah repented in Prison. Secondly, The Hebrew
word Childless, is rendered by Aquild, not prospering or increasing; by the
seventy-two Interpreters, (...) by Symmachus, empty. Thirdly, The very next
words of the Prophet Jeremy seem Jer. 22. 31.
to imply, that he had Seed: for no man of his seed shall prosper.

But to return: From what has been discoursed we may gather, that it was common
from the first Ages of the World, that the same Person should be both King and
Priest. I shall proceed to enquire,

Secondly, Into the Nature of Melchizedec's Priesthood.

And to understand this, we must examine the Nature of that Law which he
presided over by his Sacerdotal Function, and according to which he was a
Priest. Now this Law was the Law of Nature, improved by some Traditions, which
might be handed down from Adam to Noah, and from him to the Age of Abraham. For
this is all the Law that was given to Adam in Paradise, unless we make the Law
of restraining the eating of the forbidden Fruit a positive Law. If he had
observed this, he should have still maintained his Innocence, and thereby his
Happiness. Happy State of Innocence! which had not much more to distinguish it
from Heaven it self, but only that it wanted Continuance. At fuit ingens
gloria! for Adam forseiting his Integrity, had his clear Notions of this pure
Law in a great measure defaced. What he had left, or what was farther revealed
to him, was in some proportion brought down to the times of Melchizedec, and
according to this Law was he a Priest. By this Law he, and those under his
Jurisdiction, were instructed to worship one God, to swear by his holy Name, to
give him due Honor, to make Vows by him, to gather religious Assemblies, to
raise Altars, to build Temples, to do to others as they would desire others
should do to them. By this Rule lived Enoch, and so pleased God, that he was
translated into Heaven. By this acted Abraham, after he had forsaken his
Idolatry, after he had burnt his Father's Gods, and made them a pleasing
Sacrifice to the True One. And we cannot but receive high Idea's of this august
Priest, to whom the Son of God himself was made like. No question but the
innocence of his Life, and the fervor of his Devotion, far outvied the best
and most pious of his Age. There is indeed a seeming difficulty in those
Expressions, which affirm that he had neither beginning of days, nor end of
life, and that he abides a Priest continually: but if by a Metaschematism
natural enough, we translate what is here said of the Person or Priest, to the
Priesthood or Law themselves, all will appear very easy. For these Rules of
Natural Religion are eternal; had no beginning of Sanction, nor end of
Obligation; but being the everlasting dictates of Right Reason, are immortal
and never to be abrogated, as the Jewish Law and Priesthood were; but shall
remain even in Heaven it self, as was shown in a former Discourse. This Law is
ingeniously styled by Philo, the Law stamped on the immortal Mind of God. And
some of the Schoolmen are so extravagant as to assert, that it was before the
Will of God it self, before Eternity. Such was Melchizedec, such the Nature of
his Priesthood. But,

Thirdly, Christ was a Priest after his Order.

For Christ, as a divine Restorer of the eternal Law, recovered it to its
original Splendour, after it had been a long time obscured by Prejudice and
Vice. He formed a Religion, which was nothing else but a digest of the Rules of
Right Reason. For what is the Gospel, considered without the Commands of
Believing, and of the Sacraments, but the Law of Nature? Every thing practical
is enjoined by that Law. Those hard and severe Precepts, of returning good for
evil, of dying for what we think to be our Duty, have not only been commended,
but also practiced by noble Heathens, who only moved by the Law of Nature. What
is our Savior's excellent Sermon on the Mount, but a Scheme of natural
Principles? The whole design of it is, to recover Right Reason from those
foolish Traditions, by which the Pharisees had darkened it. The Virtues which
are there enjoined, Meekness, Humility, Justice, Purity of Spirit, Charity, so
extensive as even to love our Enemies, are all branches of the natural Law.
Moses and the Prophets of old among the Jews, and the Philosophers among the
Heathens, were propagators of this Law: but what was taught by the former, was
not so clear, though as perfect, as was before shown; what by the latter, neither
was so clear nor perfect, as what was performed by our Savior. The
Philosophers (if I may so speak) designed the first Sketches and Out-lines; but
he drew the Lineaments and true Symmetry of this majestical Piece. To evince
that our Savior's aim was to retrieve the Law of Nature, you may observe, that
when Christ endeavored to correct the Mistakes of the Jews about Divorce, he
refers them to the original Institution of Marriage, by the Law of Nature;
which Rule may also hold in the case of Polygamy, tho dispensed with in regard
to the Patriarchs. So that we may conclude, that our Savior's intention, as he
was a Melchizedecian Priest, was to reduce the Law of Nature to its original
purity, that it might nearly resemble what was enjoined Adam in his Innocence.
The whole World being divided into Jew and Gentile, though very unequally, both
of them had miserably tortured the Law of Nature; so that our Savior's
charitable Hand was necessary to assert it to its native Liberty. For the
Ritual Law of Moses was an heavy Yoke, and there could be no true Liberty, but
under the Law of Nature, (which is also the Law of God,) which only restrains
us from what is truly ill, or really hurtful. This therefore is a common
foundation of the Priesthood of Christ, and that of Melchizedec, That they both
of them eminently adorned the Law of Nature, though the former did it with a
distinguishing Glory. Christ indeed is a Priest for ever, after a way which
cannot be applied to Melchizedec; that is, by entering into Heaven, and
offering himself a Sacrifice devoted for our Sins; and by the Virtue of this
Sacrifice, presenting himself before God as our high Priest, he still pleads in
our behalf. Melchizedec did Sacrifice, and that not only with Bread and Wine,
as Mariana on Gen 14. and Maldonatu^.
some suppose, but also with bloody Victims, suitable to the practice of that
Age. But Christ only made one Sacrifice, that of himself, by which he put a
period to all Sacrifices, except the offering up our Bodies a living Sacrifice,
holy and acceptable, which is our reasonable service; alluding perhaps to what
the Jews said of Adam, that He was before sin all over a Sacrifice. To this
Parallel between the two Priesthoods it ought to be referred, That the
Christians, like Melchizedec who was both King and Priest, are styled a Royal
Priesthood. And the Author to the Revelations tells us, that Christ has made us
Kings and Priests, an holy Priesthood to offer a spiritual Sacrifice. Several
of the Fathers deny that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and others of the
Patriarchs, ever kept any Sabbath: and there is an ancient Maxim of the Jews,
that All the days of the Messiah shall be one Sabbath, to show the Piety of
that happy Age, that should consecrate every Day to the Almighty.

But to finish this Comparison: Melchizedec was Priest of the most high God,
for the Name Jehovah was not yet known. He banished all superstitious Worship
from his Kingdom, and instituted a pure Religion, agreeable to the Laws of
Nature. The Religion of Jesus Christ in like manner triumphed over Idolatry,
and wheresoever it appeared, gave a total stroke to Polytheism. So groundless
was that Calumny of the Jews, which makes Jesus descended not from Abraham, the
true worshipper of God; but from the idolatrous Thera, whose Practice they make
him to transcribe. Thus just is the Parallel between the two Priesthoods.

AN ESSAY Upon the General Resurrection.
TO make my Thoughts more regular on this noble, though common Subject, I shall
offer to prove,

First, That there shall be a Resurrection of the Body.

Secondly, That it shall be of the Body only.

Thirdly, That it shall be of the same Body from which the Soul was separated.

First then, There shall be a Resurrection of the Body. Where I shall prove,

First, That such a Resurrection has not any thing in it, which carries the
appearance of an Impossibility.

Secondly, That it is in it self very probable and suitable to the Rules of
true Reason. And

Thirdly, That upon the prospects of the divine Promises and Predictions, it is
certain and beyond all question firm.

First, The Resurrection of the Body has not any thing in it, which carries the
appearance of an Impossibility. For if the Resurrection is impossible, it is
because that either the Power which is to perform this miraculous Act, has not
force enough to accomplish it; or because the Subject about which it is
employed, is not capable to be raised after this wonderful manner. But neither
of these are true: for though neither Man nor Angel could raise a dead Body, yet
it is within the compass of the Divine Power. For,

First, The Deity knows where the Particles and Atoms of the Bodies of the Dead
are reposed, in what secret Cells they are lodged, and what Changes they have
run through since their separation from the Soul.

Secondly, He can assemble these scattered Parts, and unite them in their
former harmony and beauty.

Thirdly, He can command the Soul back to its ancient abode, call it from Bliss
or Woe, to resume its former Partner; so that these dry Bones shall live, and
become the same Man they were before their Dissolution.

And, First, the Deity knows where the Particles and Atoms of the Bodies of the
Dead are reposed, in what secret Cells they are lodged, and what Changes they
have run through since their separation from the Soul.

For God understands all the invisible Passages of Nature, and every small part
of a Body, and can trace it through all its turns and shapes, whatsoever outward
Frame it may assume. He knows where the remains of the first righteous
Sacrificer, the first Example of Mortality, (which all Mortals must
transcribe,) are disposed of, as well as those of the last Man, who shall be
obnoxious to the Curse, and shall be the last of those who shall return to
Dust. For whatsoever visible Figure our mortal Body may be invested with, to
Him it is undisguis'd and confesses it self. The sinest Glasses can only help
us to the sight of the Surface, and external Contexture of some Bodies, while
several others may be of so nice and accurate a Frame, as no more to be
discovered by them, than by the Eye without their assistance. But nothing can
be so minute, as to lie hid from the Understanding of God, no more than any
thing can be so glorious as to surpass it. As in his Book all our Members were
written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of
them; so every Atom which belongs to us is known to Him who made us. Though (in
the Prophet's Language) we go down to the bottoms of the Mountains, and the
Earth with her Bars is about us; or though we are cast into the deep, in the
midst of the Seas, and the Floods compass us about, and his Billows and Waves
pass over us; even this Darkness hides us not from Him, but every Particle lies
open to his view. As God knows where the Atoms of the Bodies of the Dead are
reposed, so

Secondly, He can assemble these scattered Parts, and unite them in their
former harmony and beauty.

He who could make Man out of the Dust, and employed such a Profusion of Wisdom
and Goodness on the liveless Clay, as to advance it into the Image of God, can
surely restore the dissolved Fabric, and in the noble Expression of Scripture,
make our Bones flourish like an Herb. He can summon and re-call Man's divided
Atoms from the Earth and from the Waves, and reconcile their long estranged
Parts to their ancient familiarity; where they shall fall into their primitive
Order and Situation, after the separation, in some, for thousands of Years.
Though some among several Nations, either out of a wild and salvage Barbarity, or
out of the most pressing necessity, (of which we have a mournful Instance in
the Siege of Samaria 2 King. 6. v. 26.
in Scripture,) seem, if it is possible, to disappoint a Resurrection of other
Men's Bodies, by making them the Nourishment of their own; yet God who knows
where all those Particles abide, which ever did belong to any Man's Body, can
call them from their secret Repositories, to complete the Body made imperfect
by this unnatural Cruelty, in order to be enlivened by the Soul.

Thirdly, God can command the Soul back to its ancient abode, call it from
Bliss or Woe, to resume its former Partner; so that these dry Bones shall live,
and become the same Man they were before their Dissolution. And this must
appear very easy: for the Soul loses nothing by the separation from the Body,
as the Body does by being parted from the Soul. This piece of Divinity within
us owes no homage to the Elements, nor is liable to be changed as they are. As
to the Souls of the Blessed, they pay a constant attendance before the Throne
of Grace, and are always expecting the joyful Command, by which they are
obliged to a reunion. And as to the Souls of the Unhappy, they shall be forced
unwillingly to re-inspire their unwelcome Mansions, to animate once more those
Parts, which, as in tortured Men, are only new set and compacted to be
tormented a new. As there is nothing in the Resurrection of the Body, which
carries the appearance of an Impossibility, so

Secondly, It is in it self very probable and suitable to the Rules of true
Reason. The ancient Apologists of Christianity defending it against the
Heathens, usually showed the probability of a Resurrection, from some Parallels
in the Works of Nature. Thus the Tertull. de Resu^t. etc.
Springs rising so gloriously from the Winter, and the Day from the Night, the
most beautiful Offsprings from the most deformed Parents, were by their pious
Rhetoric exalted into some kinds of Proofs, as well as Types of the
Resurrection. But these are not so much Evidences of, as handsome Allusions to
this great Truth, in order to take off that Contempt with which the Heathens
entertained this new and surprising Doctrine. Though the order of Effects and
Changes in Nature, furnish us not with any thing which may make the
Resurrection probable; yet the just view of the Wisdom and Goodness of God, as
it is discovered by the Light of Reason, will make it appear very suitable to
it. For though it is not agreeable to the Divine Wisdom, to raise up Mankind,
only to make them capable of acting over again all that scene of Folly,
Illnature, Vanity and Vice, which they live obnoxious to now; yet to command
them back to a Life which is truly heavenly, glorious and happy, in which they
are made fit for so glorious a Being as God Himself, to take delight in, is a
design worthy a wise and good Creator, who certainly made Man for some nobler
Ends, than what he can arrive to in this State of Mortality. The chief design
(as seems evident to the Light of Nature it self) for God to create Man, was to
communicate his own Goodness, and to presentiate an order of Objects to
himself, which bearing his own Image, and being endued with Reason, might still
glorify his Name, and yield him back some faint Reflection of Himself. If so,
since God Is to all Eternity, why should he not desire a Presentiation of these
Objects to all Eternity? Why should he not be willing to be glorified, and to
have this sort of Reflection of Himself made back to all Eternity? And since God
has laid the Laws of Morality and Religion on the Body, as well as on the Soul;
since that is obliged to Purity and an humble Adoration, as well as this to
Virtues peculiar to its Nature; why should God be fancied, to be so wholly
taken up with this, as not in the least to be concerned for that? Why should he
change the State of the Blessed, and divest them of that, which properly makes
up their Humanity, by refining them into a pure Spirit? As the Resurrection is
thus probable, so is it

Thirdly, Upon the prospects of the Divine Promises and Predictions certain,
and (beyond all question) firm. It was obscurely predicted ever since the very
Fall of Man, and darkly implied in the Promise of the Messiah, who was to be a
Redeemer of the Body, as well as of the Soul. As the first Man was made with
all the Perfections due to his Body as well as to his Soul; so he who should
repair what Man lost by his Fall, must restore him the Excellencies of that, as
well as of this. And though the Revelation of a Resurrection to the Jews, was not
so clear as to put it beyond all doubt, and to make it a strict Article of
Faith; yet are there several Texts in the Old Testament, which are manifest
Allusions to it, and tacit Proofs of it. Thus Moses introduces God speaking:
See now, that I, even I, am He; I kill and I make alive. And thus Isaiah with
his usual height of Language: Thy Dead shall live, together with my dead Body
shall they arise. Awake and sing ye that dwell in the Dust; for thy Dew is as
the Dew of Herbs, and the Earth shall cast out the Dead. To which may be
subjoined that remarkable place of Job: Though after my Skin Worms destroy this
Body, yet in my flesh shall I see God; whom I shall see for my self, and my
eyes shall behold, and not another. Though the excellent Grotius applies these
Words to his Temporal restitution, or at most to discover his Expectation of a
future State alone; yet they seem at least to allude to the Hopes which he had
of a Resurrection. As to that place which our Savior quotes from Exodus, I am
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; they appear only in
general to prove the Immortality of the Soul, and to show that these Patriarchs
were not in a State of Annihilation; though with particular regard to the
Sadducees, against whom they were urged, they are a just and matchless Argument
for a Resurrection. For they scrupled only the Immortality of the Soul; and if
they could conceive that the Soul could exist independent of the Body, they
could grant that it might be reunited to it. For they were of the same Opinion
in that Age, which the followers of Spinosa and Mr. Hobbes maintain in ours,
That what Is, is Material, excepting God alone: in which fundamental Point of
Natural Religion, of God's being a Spirit, those ancient Scepticks were much
more Orthodox than our modern ones. But how obscure soever the Doctrine of the
Resurrection might be under the Revelation of the Old Testament, yet under the
New this Article is delivered with all the light and demonstrative force
imaginable. The whole stress of the Gospel is, as it were, reposed upon it; and
because it looked strange and surprising to the unbelieving World, it is
enforced with greater Arguments, repeated with more frequency. To mention only
one remarkable place of our Savior's: Marvel not at this, for the hour is
coming in which all that are in their Graves shall hear his voice, and shall
come forth; they that have done Good unto the Resurrection of Life, and they
that have done Evil unto the Resurrection of Damnation. As this was a
considerable part of our Savior's Preaching, so he confirmed it by his own
Example, by rising from the Dead himself, and so by virtually raising those
which are his. For, If the Spirit of him which raised Christ from the Dead
dwell in us, he that raised Christ from the Dead, shall also quicken our mortal
Bodies by his Spirit that dwells in us. So that a Resurrection of the Body is
not only possible and highly probable, but upon the prospects of the Divine
Promises and Predictions certain. As there shall thus be a Resurrection of the
Body, so

Secondly, This Resurrection shall be of the Body only.

And this Restriction is necessary to the overthrowing of an Opinion, That the
Souls of Men perish with their Bodies, but yet so, that both should be raised
again at the last Day; That they should both sleep in Darkness, till the last
Alarm, and should both rise again at the finishing of all Things. This Opinion
was first started by some Arabian Bishops, (as we are informed by Eusebius, St.
Austin, and Nicephorus,) and has been more vigorously in later times defended
by great Pretenders to Reason. Thus Exam. 157 Err. p. 49. single ^dit.
Smalcius concludes, That the Souls of the Saints are in a state of Sleep, and
suffer a kind of Annihilation, and therefore are to be raised with the Body.
That Contra Frantzium, p. 409.
it is doubtful whether the Spirit, when it is parted from the Body, can
perceive any thing; and whether it is capable of Pleasure, till it is joined
with the glorified Body. And in another Contra Smiglec. de Err. Arian. c. 14.
p. 149.
place he expressly denies the Soul's resenting any Pleasure or Trouble without
the Body. Thus Crellius in his c. 19. p. 134.
Treatise concerning God and the Divine Attributes, defines Angels in
opposition to Men, to be Spirits so perfect, that they can subsist and act
without a Body; whereas an human Soul cannot. And it may perhaps be inquired,
Whether the ingenious Hypotheses of late, which have seemed to level the
distinction between different Species of Substance, and so to break down the
Boundaries between Spirit and Body, have not helped to abet this Opinion. But
to reply to this Fancy concerning the Sleep of the Soul:

In our Savior's account of the different Fates of Lazarus and the Rich Man,
we find that the former was immediately conveyed to Bliss, and the latter to
Misery. And granting that this is only a Parable, or general Resemblance, (yet
that it was an History of things truly transacted, is the Opinion of Ambros. in
Luc. Iertull. lib. 4. contra Marcion. Hilar. Enarrat. in Psalm.
several of extraordinary Note;) yet the main design of it must be founded upon
the Nature of Things, and must show that the distance is extremely small,
between the Soul's quitting the Body, and its being transported to its final
State. Thus the Penitent Thief, who was Crucified with our Savior, ascends
forthwith after his Death, from the Pains and Tortures of the Cross, to the
Joys of Paradise. This Sleep, or Rest of the Soul, is chiefly grounded upon
that usual Metaphor in Holy Writ, by which Death is resembled to Sleep. But the
Scripture does not apply it to the Soul, but the Body resting in the Grave,
that it may be awakened to a Resurrection. For this would be wholly
inconsistent with the Apostle's Assertion, where he says, that While we are at
home in the Body, we are absent from the Lord; and that so soon as we are
departed out of the Body, we shall be present with the Lord. For to be with the
Lord, must imply a state of Felicity, which Sleep is not, but only of
Inactivity; and the Apostle's Argument would lose its force, and would be no
encouragement against the Terrors of Death, if so soon as we are dead, we
should fall asleep, sink into a Condition of Insensibility, and till the
Resurrection Be, as if we were not at all. The Soul therefore is not raised
with the Body, but is called from a state of Bliss or Woe, to which it was
removed immediately upon its separation from it, to resume its ancient Mansion.
As this Resurrection is of the Body only, so

Thirdly, This Resurrection shall be of the same Body, from which the Soul was
separated.

Which Conclusion bears a direct opposition to the Socinian Doctrine, which
affirms, either that the Body some time before the Resurrection shall be Smalc.
Exam. 100. Err. p. 33. de Divinit. Christi, c. 13. p. 79.
annihilated by a Divine Power; or if it is not thus annihilated, yet that God
will only raise a Exam. 100. Err. p. 36.
certain quantity of Matter, sufficient to make up the Bodies of all Mankind,
and promiscuously infuse the Souls into it, after that he has Organized it fit
for their reception. But that the Bodies of the Dead shall be annihilated some
time before the Resurrection, is both against Revelation, and against (what
some of our Adversaries seem more to admire) Philosophy. It Is against
Philosophy, for the Divine Plato styles Death, (...), which only supposes a
separation of both parts, not an Annihilation of either. Thus in another place
he affirms, (...). Plato in Timaeo, tom. 3. p 72. ^. dit. Serrant.
That when Death arrives, the Fibers and Strings by which the Soul acted, break
and untwist, just like the Rudder-bands of a Ship, and she [that is, the Soul]
is left alone to roam at liberty and at random. Against Revelation; for the
Scripture calls Death, a returning to Dust, a seeing of Corruption, a sleeping.
Now that which returns to Dust, which is corrupted, which sleeps in the secret
Repositories of Nature, cannot be in a State of Nonexistence. It must have a
Being, how ignoble soever it is, and how much soever changed from what it was
in its State of Life. Nor, secondly, is any other Matter raised and united to
the Soul besides what fell. How hard soever it is to settle the bounds of
Identity; and granting those Instances of Self-consciousness being united to
all those different Subjects, to make the same Person, (which one of the
greatest Philosophers of our Age, in his ^. ^ock's ^ssay. Book 2. Chap. 27.
Essay concerning Human Understanding, hints at;) yet this does not affect the
Identity of the Rising Body. For the Enquiry is not, Whether the same
Self-consciousness, joined to different Matter, makes the same Person; but
Whether it is more suitable to the Doctrine of the Resurrection, that God will
raise the same, or another Matter, and unite it to the same self-conscious
Principle. That God will raise the same Body which fell, seems most agreeable
to Truth; for most of those Arguments, which prove that the Body shall rise at
all, seem to manifest also, That the same Body shall rise. For in the Identity
of the Rising Body is founded all the Right and Justice of Rewards and
Punishments, Happiness and Misery, which regard the Body. For why should Man be
blessed for those Virtues in one Body, which he practiced in another? Or why
should this Body be tortured for Crimes committed in that? Why should God raise
the Body from the same Grave in which it was at first reposed, unless it was
the same Body which was there at first reposed? Though the Body shall be
glorified and spiritualized, yet it shall be the same. For if the Bodies of our
first Parents could pass from Immortality to Mortality, and yet continue the
same, obnoxious to Punishment in this, for Sins committed in that; why may not
the Reverse of this be true, and Men from Mortal become Immortal, from
Corruptible become Incorruptible, and yet abide the same?

I shall close this Essay with making a short Reflection on a Passage in a late
Treatise written on this Subject, by the Learned Dr. Hody, to whose Merit I pay
an extraordinary Deference; though I cannot in all things in this Point pay an
Assent to his way of Reasoning. He seems, without sufficient Motive, to
endeavor to overthrow the Arguments of the Fathers, by which they prove the
Identity of the Rising Body. The Fathers reason in short, That since there is a
relative combination between Soul and Body, since the Merit or Demerit of any
Action is shared between them; that therefore they shall both appear the same,
to receive Rewards or Punishments for their good or ill Actions. This method of
Discourse seems just and true, notwithstanding that the Learned Doctor says,
that Dr. Hody concerning the Resurrection of the same Body p. 210
The Arm that stabs, sins no more than the Sword, and it is the Soul only that
is the Murderer. This is a fine, abstracted, Cartesian way of talking; but
would scarce be accepted in any Court of Justice, if a Murderer should plead it
to his Judge, to exempt his Body from satisfying the Law. And this Notion seems
to tend to confirm that, which some Enthusiasts not long since advanced; that
So long as we keep the Soul pure, we may do what we please with the Body. To
strengthen this the Doctor Ibid.
says, That the Body is not capable of any Rewards or Punishments. Why then,
from this Argument, should the same Body rise? But certainly, though the Body can
resent no Pleasure or Pain without the Soul, yet they in conjunction receive
several Impressions of both, which the Soul could not perceive alone: therefore
to make both perfectly happy or miserable, both must be raised, and both the
same. The Doctor's last Argument is, That if all the bulk of the same Matter
should rise, we should be Monsters of Men at the Resurrection. But the Effluvia
(to answer this Objection) which make up this vast Mass, flow from the Carneous
Parts, and from the Blood, which are not particularly concerned in Human
Actions: the former of which Plato (so much admired by the Doctor) calls only *
Wool or (...) Plato in Timaeo.
Down, to wrap the Body easily and softly round; the latter the Forage and
Pasturage of the Flesh. But from the Vessels, Parts and Organs peculiarly
serviceable to Life, Motion, Sense, Imagination, Understanding and Will, the
Effluvia are inconsiderable; nor would they much surpass their due Dimensions,
if all the Matter, which ever belonged to them, were raised.

AN ESSAY Against SKEPTICISM In Matters of Religion.
IN order to endeavor to give some Check to the prevailing Humor of
Skepticism, which is become so extremely Modish, that no Person can be that
self-admir'd thing, a Wit, without it; I shall,

First, (as is most natural,) propose a short view of some of those pretended
Reasons, which the Scepticks and Deists, and others of the same Order, usually
give for their Skepticism and Doubts about the Truths of Religion. To every one
of which I shall return a transient Reply.

Secondly, I shall take a short survey of the true Reasons and Motives, which
make Men Scepticks.

First, The pretended Reasons are such as these:

First, They believe Religion to be false, because many who make great shows of
being Christians, are only such out of Interest, and in all likelihood would
change the Christian Profession for another, which would be more serviceable
for their Designs.

Secondly, They have an ill Opinion of Religion, because many who are zealous
for its Truths, are yet negligent of the Morals of it, and live after such a
manner, as would make a sober Heathen blush.

Thirdly, They despise Religion, because several Professors of it, embrace it
not out of Reason or Conviction, but out of a supine Credulity, and walk
blindly on in the Christian Religion, only because it is the Worship of their
Country.

Fourthly, They entertain a low Idea of Christianity, because, though said to be
revealed for the good of all Mankind, yet God has only propagated it in a small
part of the World; and even where it has been promulg'd, it is found but an
indifferent Expedient to work any such extraordinary Effects on Men's Minds, as
might be expected from a Religion, which God Himself came down from Heaven to
preach, and to seal with his Blood.

Fifthly, That the Divisions amongst single Christians, and the Wars and
Discords between Christian Princes and Commonwealths, often heightened by
Religious Controversies, and inflamed by the violent Harangues of Ecclesiastic
Persons, are great Prejudices against the Christian Religion, and give a Moral
Deist great Advantage over a Zealot for Christianity.

These have been, and still are, some of the leading Forces in the Van of
Skepticism. There are indeed many particular Objections laid against peculiar
parts of Christianity, which cannot fall within the compass of this short
ESSAY. But to return a cursory Reply to each one of these Objections.

First, It Is no just Reflection upon the Religion, That many, who make great
shows of being Christians, are only such out of Interest, and in all
probability would change the Christian Profession for another, which would be
more serviceable for their designs. Though some may be Christians at present out
of Interest, yet if we enquire into the first Institution of our Religion, we
shall find, that it was its intrinsic Worth which first recommended it to the
World, when there was no outward Motive or Interest to make it taking. For did
the Apostles and first Disciples of our Savior, turn Christians upon any
temporal Prospect? Or what Advantage could those who succeeded them, for the
two first Centuries, propose? What could they gain by this new Profession, but
Disgrace, Imprisonment and Death? And can any one be a Platonic lover of Shame
and Pain, and court Misery for its own sake alone? Now these purer Times,
nighest to the origin of our Religion, are those which our Adversaries ought to
have inquired into, and levelled their Objections against; otherwise their
Arguments only wound the present Professors of Religion, many of which we own
to live below the dignity of it, but fall far short of doing any injury to
Religion it self.

Secondly, The Sceptick ought not to have an ill Opinion of Religion, because
many who are zealous for its Truths, are yet negligent of the Morals of it; and
live after such a manner, as would make a sober Heathen blush. First, because
the Christian Religion is only a Law for our Actions, which can invite and
persuade alone, but cannot force an Observance. And the ill Actions of
Christians ought no more to be imputed to Christianity it self, than the
Disorders of any Persons, who live under Civil or Municipal Laws, ought to be
charged upon those Laws. Secondly, Though these Persons Lives are an open
contradiction to Christianity, yet it does not follow, but that they may be
convinced of the Truth of it in their Minds and Understandings. For we may
easily see, that Men are not always determined by the dictates of their Reason,
but frequently by the biass and relish of their Senses and Passions. Nor can we
conclude, that because Persons live as if Christianity was an Imposture, that
therefore they are fully persuaded that it is so. Farther, we find that they
have often Remorses and sad Reflections on their Actions, which can only rise
in Minds satisfied of the Truth of that, against which they practice. For only
the fear of being called to Account hereafter, can make us sorrowful and amazed
for having done amiss here, under temporal Impunity. Thirdly, Morality,
Philosophy, and the noblest Institutions which ever were, lie under the same
blemish with Christianity. For the Lives of their Professors have seldom
answered their refined Rules. And it is scarce possible that they should do so,
till Man is subtiliz'd into a pure Spirit, and rescued from those Passions and
Inclinations, which at present checquer and discolor our Natures. As to the
Zeal of these Persons, it is false and counterfeited, if their Actions are not
conformed to their great Pretensions.

Thirdly, It Is no just Objection against Christianity, That several Professors
of it, embrace it not out of Reason or Conviction, but out of a supine
Credulity, and walk blindly on in the Christian Religion, only because it is
the Worship of their Country. For the Christian Religion does not demand any
such credulous Temper of Mind from its Professors. All that it requires is, an
Understanding free from Prejudice, and which is ready to pay attention to
Reason. Our Savior at the Establishment of this Religion, did not desire to be
believed on his own Testimony: If I bear witness of my self, says he, my
witness is not true. He appeals to his Miracles, as the most glorious
Credentials of his Celestial Mission; for the Works which the Father had given
him to finish, the same Works that he did bore witness of him, that the Father
had sent him. These Miracles he proposes to the Examination of the Spectators,
and if they could discover any Imposture in them, that they were performed by
the power of Nature, or of Magic, (as was Celsus apud Origin. p 340. (...) [
viz: Christum] (...) [ viz. ab Aegypto] (...).
afterward urged,) then he refused to be believed. He does not fix the guilt
of Unbelief purely in the Jews rejecting his Religion, but in refusing to pay
an Assent to it, after that it was made suitable to Reason, proved out of the
Prophecies of the Old Testament, supported by Miracles greater than every
thing, but their Infidelity. If I had not done among them Works which none
other man did, they had not had sin; but now have they both seen and hated me
and my Father. As our Savior, so his Apostles addressed to the Reasons of their
Followers, in order to excite their Faiths. Thus St. Paul: Prove all things;
hold fast that which is good. And that Apostle, which our Savior loved after a
most passionate manner, advises the Church, Not to believe every Spirit, but to
try the Spirits, whether they are of God. So that the Christian Faith does not
consist in an implicit Credulity, and blind Assent; but in a well-founded and
rational Belief, arising from just Information, and exact Reasoning on Things.
The saving Principles of Religion indeed are few, and lie in a small Compass,
though not within so little Bounds as the Author of The Reasonableness of
Christianity, and Hobbes de Civ. Relig p. 386. etc. par 6. etc. Dico autem,
alium Arti culum Fidei praeter hunc JESUM HSSH CHRISTUM hommi Christiano, ut
necessarium ad salutem, requiri nullum, etc.
Mr. Hobbes contend for. And though every one ought to give the true Reasons for
his Belief, yet the Saving Truths of Religion in many illiterate Persons, if
attended with a Moral Life, Humility of Spirit, and Fervency of Devotion, may
be as acceptable to God, as in the most eminent Critic in Theological Matters,
who can give the nicest Resolution for every thing relating to them. Yet
notwithstanding this, every one is obliged (as far as lies in his power) to
examine and try the Articles of his Religion; and to be a Christian, not by
Education, Custom or Example, but by Reason and Conviction. So far is Religion
(that is, the Reformed Religion, such as was taught by our Savior and his
Apostles) from encouraging a supine Credulity, or blind Belief.

Nor is the Sceptick's Fourth Objection valid, That Christianity has been
propagated by God only in a small part of the World; and even where it has been
promulg'd, it is found but an indifferent Expedient to work any such
extraordinary Effects on Men's Minds, as might be expected from a Religion,
which God himself came down from Heaven to preach, and to seal with his Blood.

As to the first part, That Christianity is only known to a small part of the
World; it may be replied: First, That though God has been graciously pleased to
promise, that he will by his good Providence so order things, that the sound of
the Gospel shall be heard in the uttermost parts of the Earth; yet has he not
limited the Time when it shall thus be universally promulg'd Secondly, That it
is the fault, in some measure, of Christians themselves, why their Religion is
not diffused among the unconverted Nations; because Voyages to these barbarous
Climes, are only undertaken upon Motives of Interest, or Prospects of Commerce,
without any design to promote the Truths of Religion. Thirdly, The Christian
Religion has been communicated to almost all the Civilized World. Most of the
Territories of the four famous Empires have had the Gospel preached amongst
them, besides other Parts more lately discovered. While good Morals and
Humanity, while Humility, Chastity, Honor and Probity flourished; so long the
Christian Religion continued: but when these were de^ac'd by Violence,
Ambition, Pride, Lust and Ill Nature, it was time for Religion to take her
flight up to Heaven, or to some more hospitable Regions upon Earth. For how
could she subsist, when her foundation (Morality) was removed? Fourthly, As to
those places where the Christian Religion has not been heard of, God will deal
with them as a God of Mercy. He who lives up to the Light of his own Reason, up
to a true Sense of the Dignity of his own Nature, and is a kind of a pure
Evangelick Deist, (if I may so call him) may have our Savior's Merits, which
he never heard of, so far imputed to him, as to free him from a state of
Misery. And how and by what Means God may make him happy, is an Enquiry
overcurious, and concerning which our present Condition will not allow us to
be satisfied. A future State is (in some proportion) to us, what America was to
our Forefathers. And I, with all possible submission, think that the
Hypothesis of an Dr. Scot^'s Christ. Life. Part 2. Chapter 4. S^ct. 1. p. 2^5.
admirable Person of our Church is too bold, where he seems more than to
intimate, that God may extend the Trial and Probation of these Heathens beyond
this Life, and discover in the other Life the Light of the Gospel, to so many
of them at least, as have made any tolerable Improvements under the Light of
Nature; and if they make good use of it, reward them accordingly. That God will
act, not only justly on their own accounts, but also (in some degree)
mercifully on our Savior's, by these Nations, seems an evident Truth. But how,
or by what way, is more than even this thoughtful Person ever knew.

As to the second part of the Objection, That even where Christianity has been
promulg'd, it is found but an indifferent Expedient, to work any extraordinary
Effect on Men's Minds; it may be answered, That it is purely Satyr and
Invective, and is plainly void of Truth. For though it must be with confusion
owned, that many Christians are guilty of Vices, which would make an ingenuous
Heathen blush; yet the Establishment of Christianity has given a total defeat
to many National and Public Crimes. Amongst many Civilized Nations (as is
plain from their own Poets and Historians,) Parents might expose their
Children, and Masters murder their Slaves, with Impunity, and without any dread
of being called in question. Those unnatural Sins condemned by the Apostle in
the first Chap. to the Romans, were parts of their Religious Worship; a fit
Service for such Gods. Men were condemned to massacre one another in their
Amphitheatres; were engaged against Beasts, or with Men as cruel. Altars were
stained with human Blood; a greater Villainy than any it was designed to
expiate. A Hero never died, but that he had pompous Trains of Slaves to attend
him to their fancied Elysium. But now all these barbarous Practices were as
much banished by Christianity, as the Idolatrous Rites of the Zabii, by the v.
Ma^mon^des Mor. Nev. p. 3. c. 29. And Dr. Spe^cer de Leg. Heb. p. 177. cap. 9.
^. 1. etc.
Jewish Ceremonies; a sufficient Indication, that Christianity has been highly
profitable to the World.

Fifthly, The Divisions among single Christians, and the Wars and Discords
between Christian Princes and Commonwealths, often heightened by Religious
Controversies, and inflamed by the violent Harangues of Ecclesiastic Persons,
and the Cause of Religion being defended by the Dint of Calumny, as a late ^
T^^ Amyntor, ^. 52.
Author phrases it, are no just Prejudices against Christianity; nor do they
give a Moral Deist an advantage over a Zealot for it.

We cannot deny, but Christianity ill understood, has been the innocent Author
of public Divisions, and private Discords; the most beautiful Parent of
ill-resembling Children. The Gospel has armed Nations to their own ruin, and
the Pulpit has given the signal for very unnatural Wars. Notwithstanding this,
Religion it self ought not to be blamed. For, first, The Founder of this
Religion predicted that such a dismal Event should attend his Institution.
Think not, that I am come to send Peace on Earth: I came not to send Peace, but
a Sword. Secondly, It was not the design of Christianity, to cherish Factions
and Discords amongst its Followers. Nothing could be a greater encourager of
Candor, Goodnature, Peace and Mutual Forbearance, than this Religion justly
practiced; and all the Calamities incident to human Life, are, in a great
measure, the Products of Irreligion and Skepticism. For if every Person lived
up to the height of his Religion, all Wars and Contests would quickly cease;
all Passions be composed, and the Seat of the ancient Paradise would not ne^d
to be farther inquired into, when all the World was One. These Objections,
which I have endeavored transiently to answer, are some of the pretended
Reasons for Skepticism, and Doubts about Religion. I shall proceed,

Secondly, To take a short Survey of the true Reasons and Motives which make
Men Scepticks.

And the first is Pride. For the Truths of Religion, as they are designed for
the Salvation of all Men, so are they in some sort, adapted to the
Apprehensions of all. But there are several of such sublime and exalted
Thoughts, that they can relish nothing, but what is placed out of the vulgar
method of Thinking. Thus the Emperor Julian, though adorned with Temperance,
Gravity, Chastity and Sobriety, as appears from his own (...). etc. v. Jullani
Miso^^g p. ^ 0* ^dit. Spanhem.
Writings, (nor do his Adversaries, Cyril or Nazianzen, deny it;) yet the
nicety and sublimity of his admired Philosophy, made him too proud to debase
his Understanding, as he fancied, to the Lowliness of the Christian Faith. Out
of this Principle a late To^and'* Christianity not Mysterious.
Writer has excluded all Mysteries out of Religion, and nothing now must be
believed, but what can be comprehended.

The second true Cause of Skepticism is Prejudice, or a rash Judgment made upon
Religion. For not only the Jews and Gentiles, but some who have been initiated
into Christianity, frame false Idea's of it. They are too much prejudiced to
believe, that God will punish Crimes of finite duration with infinite Pain.
They fancy that there is reason to hope, that he may release his Threats, and
some way mitigate the Penalty: that it is a servile and mercenary Motive to
engage us to Obedience, by addressing to our Fears, by proposing Prospects of
eternal Misery. But these Objections rising from Prejudice, would be easily
removed, if the Sceptick would consider, that God does not punish Men for Sins
which they could not avoid; not for single Acts, but inveterate Habits, and
final Obstinacy. That Repentance, if sincere, takes off the greatest Guilt.
That he gives us Grace to shun Sin, and Grace to repent of it. That Hope and
Fear are the fittest Passions, by which a reasonable Creature may be acted
upon. That every Sin is against infinite Majesty, an Act too of our own Choice.
That God would be wanting, in promoting the Observance of his Laws, if he did
not make the greatest Punishment due to the Violation of them. That he promises
eternal Happiness to Obedience, as well as threatens everlasting Misery upon
Disobedience.

The third true Cause of Skepticism, is a Disposition of Heart contrary to
Religion. For a Soul stained with Vice can never comply with the Truths of
Religion. The Will and Affections must first be purified, before the
Understanding can be enlightened. Hence our Savior endeavors to plant the
Innocence even of Children in the Minds of his Followers, before he proposes
the great Mysteries of Religion. Happy are they who have preserved their
Innocence unstained, and whose Soul has never lost its native Candor. The
first proposals of Religion will strike upon such Minds as these, with the most
vigorous Light, and will convince them, as soon as addressed to them. But to
Spirits sunk into a state of Sin, Religion appears upon a disadvantage, and
like an Object striking upon a disordered Organ, forms an irregular Impression.
Let the Wings of the Soul once be disengaged from the weight of Sin, as the
Pythagoreans (as well as Scripture) neatly style it, and it will fly up to
Truth and Goodness, as to its proper Center.

The fourth Cause of Skepticism, is the prevailing Humor of turning every
thing into Ridicule. Nor are sacred Things themselves exempted; which takes off
that Veneration which is due to them, and makes them look first contemptible,
and afterward false.

The fifth true Cause of Skepticism, (and the last which I shall mention,) is
want of Consideration or Attention. For if Men either think not at all, or not
regularly, or employ their Thoughts in other curious Speculations, they will of
necessity continue Scepticks. But the fault is in themselves, not in Religion:
they can no more complain of Obscurity in that, than those who have wilfully
closed their own Eyes, of want of Light in the Heavenly Luminaries.

Let the Sceptick take away these true Causes of Skepticism, and the pretended
ones will vanish of their own accord. But while these remain, they are like to
continue Scepticks, till the Punishments of a future State shall not only make
them understand, but even feel that Religion is True.

FINIS.

