AN EXHORTATION To TRUST in GOD, And not to Despair of his HELP And fall from
Him, in this dark Time of Popery that is coming upon the Church.

Written by Digby Bull M.A. and late Rector of Sheldon in Warwickshire.

LONDON, Printed for the Author; and are to be Sold by John Whitlock near
Stationers' Hall. 1695.

Isaiah XXVI.IV. Trust ye in the Lord for ever: For in the Lord JEHOVAH is
everlasting strength.


SUCH is the uncertainty and instability of this restless world at all times,
that we can place no Trust and Confidence therein, nor in any of our
Possessions and Enjoyments here below, having but an uncertain Tenure of them
at the best, and may be soon dispossessed and turned out of them. And so wavering
and unconstant is our Condition here, that we must confess with the Patriarchs
of old, that we are like strangers and pilgrims and wanderers here upon the
earth, and have no fixed and sure Abiding here, or any Rock wherein we may
securely repose our Hopes and Confidence. Nor does it seem to be the will of
God that we should be placed in such a sure and secure condition here, lest we
should be like the Jews, of whom it is said in that Song of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.18;
Of the Rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and have forgotten God that
formed thee: And too great a security here will be apt to make us like them,
and to do so too. For the greater exercise of our Faith and Trust-in Almighty
God do we seem to be placed here in a more unsettled and mutable condition,
wherein we are like some times to be exposed to great Straits and Dangers and
Necessities and Wants; and wherein we shall stand in great need of the Divine
Help and Assistance of Almighty God; and are in an especial manner then to call
upon him for it, and to trust in and rely upon him; and shall then be sure to
find him ready to succor and help us, so far as he sees it to be convenient for
us, and so far as shall be sufficient for us. And through the great wickedness
and corruption of Mankind and the sinful Children of this World, is our
Condition here like to be the worse, and we must expect some times to be
exposed to great distress and hazards, and to have our very Lives perhaps too
to lie at the Stake, and shall here find no help nor succor to deliver us from
our Fears and Dangers, but must have recourse to Almighty God alone for help
and deliverance from all our Distresses and Hazards whatsoever. And now have we
cause to expect great Trouble and Perplexity, and that we must undergo the
peril of losing our very Lives; and shall have more than ordinary cause to fly
to Almighty God for Refuge and Help and Protection: For I am confident that the
time is now nigh at hand wherein Popery will prevail over the Protestant Church
for a time; and we must expect very sharp threatenings from the Papists when
they have once gotten the upper hand. And therefore have I made choice of these
words of the Prophet for the Subject of my present discourse, wherein all the
true Servants of God are exhorted to put their Trust and Confidence in Almighty
God at all times; and are assured that they shall find him a never-failing
Refuge to all such as have recourse to him and rely upon him. Trust ye in the
Lord for ever: For in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.

In these words then we have these two parts;

I. An Exhortation or Command to trust in the Lord at all times. Trust ye in
the Lord for ever. And

II. The reason wherewith this Exhortation and Precept is backed, and why we
should do so; and that is because of his sure and certain Help and Assistance
at all times: For in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, or the Rock of
Ages, as it is in the margent, and in the Hebrew.

I. An Exhortation and Command to trust in the Lord at all times.

God requires this of us, both as a Duty toward him, that we should firmly
rely upon his word and prom ses, and place our whole Trust in him at all times;
And also for our own support and comfort, and to cheer our heavy hearts in all
times of Distress, (especially such as this which is now coming upon us;) That
we should then rest and depend upon him for his divine Help and Assistance, and
securely place our Confidence in him, with full assurance that he will not then
forsake and fail us. And

First, We are hereby taught to put our Trust and Confidence in no other, and
to rely upon and confide in nothing else. In being commanded to trust in the
Lord Jehovah, we are tacitly hereby forbidden to trust in any other God, or to
place our trust and confidence in any thing else besides him. And this is the
first Commandment of the Decalogue, that we should have no other Gods before
him. But in placing our chief trust in any thing else, we perform an high act
of religious duty thereto, and give God's honor and due to another, and do
hereby in a great measure make it a God. And we may see that we are forbidden
by positive commands to trust in any thing else besides Almighty God, and that
a Woe and Curse is pronounced against such, and that they are like to find no
good in so doing.

We are forbidden to trust in Riches, and to place our Confidence in our
worldly wealth and earthly treasures. Charge them that are rich in this world
(says St. Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.17.) that they be not high-minded, nor
trust in uncertain riches; but in the living God. This is but vain confidence
to place any trust in them, as the Apostle here shows. And says Solomon,
Pro. 23.5; Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? For riches
certainly make themselves wings; they fly away as an eagle toward heaven. It
is great folly, as well as sin, to rely upon them: For, as he says Prove.
11.28, He that trusts in his riches, shall fall. And in no stead in the
needful time of trouble will they stand him in, that relies upon them, as
Solomon also shows. Prove. 11.4. Riches profit not in the day of wrath. When
there is the most need af all, these will then signify nothing to a man's
safety and security. And in this dark time which is coming upon us, I conceive,
that they will rather add to the sorrow and misery, than to the comfort and
safety of such as are the great Masters of them. And to dissuade us the more
from trusting in them, and to show us the great mischief in so doing, we may
take notice of what our blessed Lord has said, viz, That such as do so shall
very hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and are in great danger of
perishing eternally. Mar. 10.23. And Jesus looked round about, and says unto
his disciples; How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the Kingdom of
God! And the disciples were astonished at his words. But Jesus answers again,
and says unto them; children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches, to
enter into the Kingdom of God! It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of
a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God. By trusting in
these, men are like to block up the path of Life against themselves. We are
strictly forbid, we see, to trust in riches, or in any worldly wealth and
earthly treasure.

And we are also forbid to trust in an Arm of Flesh, or to rely upon any humane
Power. We are not to place our Trust and Confidence in any Kings and Princes
and great Men of the earth; nor in any Armies and Naval Forces and Warlike
Preparations. The doing of this is sinful and evil, and these will prove but
weak and helpless Deities to such as rely upon them. Psalm. 146.3 --, says the
Psalmist there; Put not your trust in princes, nor in the the son of man, in
whom there is no help. His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth, in
that very day his thoughts perish. These are of a mortal and perishing nature
themselves, and cannot preserve themselves; and much less then are they able to
help and save others that rely upon them. And a woe is denounced against such as
trust in the help of man. Is. 30.1 --. Woe to the rebellious children, says the
Lord, that take counsel, but not of me, and that cover with a covering, but not
of my Spirit, that they may add sin to sin. That walk to go down into Egypt
(and have not asked at my mouth) to strengthen themselves in the strength of
Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of Egypt. And we may see in the verses
following what help and comfort they were like to find in so doing, ver. 3.
Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be your shame (says God by the
Prophet) and the trust in the shadow of Egypt your confusion. And ver. 5; They
were all ashamed of a people that could not profit them, nor be an help, nor
profit; but a shame and also a reproach. Here we see how we are like to speed,
if we trust in an Arm of Flesh, and place our confidence in humane Power; we
must then expect nothing but shame and reproach and confusion. And to this
purpose, Is. 31.1: Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help, and stay on
horses, and trust in chariots, because they are many; and in horsemen, because
they are very strong: But they look not unto the holy One of Israel, neither
seek the Lord. And what the issue of such trust and confidence is like to be,
we may also see here, ver. 3; Now the Egyptians are men, and not God; and their
horses flesh, and not spirit: when the Lord shall stretch out his hand, both he
that helps shall fall, and he that it helped shall fall down, and they shall
fail together. Such disappointment must men expect from their vain confidence
in all humane Force and Power. And such as trust in an Arm of Flesh are cursed,
as God declares by the Prophet Jeremiah, 17.5 --; Thus says the Lord, cursed
be the man that trusts in man, and makes Flesh his Arm, and whose heart
departs from the Lord. For he shall be like the heath in the desert, and
shall not see when good comes, but shall inhabit the parched places in the
wilderness, in a salt land, and not inhabited. Such as forsake God, and trust
not in his Help, but place their hopes and confidence in humane Power, must
expect no good, but sorrow and misery to attend them in so doing.

Nor are we to place our confidence in our wit and knowledge and strength of
body etc, and to idolize them, as the Prophet shows. Ier. 9.23 -- Thus says
the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom; neither let the mighty man
glory in his might; let not the rich man glory in his riches: But let him that
glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me, that I am the
Lord --. We are not to trust in these, nor in any other Idol that we may make
to our selves; but in the Lord Jehovah the living and true God. For to trust in
any thing else shows disrespect and infidelity toward him, and is a derogation
from his infinite Power and Goodness, and is sinful and evil; and in so doing
we shall be miserably deluded, and may expect to have our hopes and confidence
frustrated and disappointed. And such as shall now, in this dark Time which is
coming upon us, betake themselves to Arms on the one hand; or fall to Popery on
the other hand, to secure themselves; I fear that such will be in great danger
of perishing, and losing their Lives. But I hope that all those that put their
trust in Almighty God, and with faith and patience wait for his blessed Help
and Protection, will be preserved alive, notwithstanding their hazard and
danger is like to be very great. And the more to prevail with us to do so,

Secondly, We may see that we are often exhorted and enjoined in the sacred
Scriptures to put our Trust and Confidence in Almighty God at all times, and
upon all accounts, especially when we have the most need of Relief and
Protection; and that it is our duty to do so: The sacred Scriptures do
frequently exhort us to trust in and rely upon him, and to cast all our care
upon him, and not to doubt of his help and assistance when we shall stand in
great need of it. Psalm. 62.7, 8. says the Psalmist; In God is my Salvation and
my glory; the Rock of my strength and my refuge is in God. Trust in him at all
times, ye people; pour out your heart before him: God is a refuge for us. And
Psalm. 115.9 -- O Israel, trust thou in the Lord: he is their help and their
shield. O house of Aaron, trust in the Lord: he is their help and their shield.
Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord: he is their help and their shield.
And in many other places in the Psalms are we exhorted to this. And this is
Solomon's exhortation, Prove. 3.5; Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and
lean not unto thine own understanding. And says the Prophet Is. 50, 10; Who is
among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant, that
walks in darkness, and has no light? Let him trust in the Name of the Lord,
and stay upon his God. In all sad and comfortless conditions are his Servants
to have recourse to him, and there to rest themselves secure. And this we are
also exhorted to and enjoined by the Gospel, to cast all our care upon Almighty
God, and to trust securely in him. 2 Cor. 1.9. But we had the sentence of death
in our selves (says the Apostle) that we should not trust in our selves, but
in God which raises the dead. And says St. Peter, 1 Pet. 5.6, 7; Humble your
selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due
time, casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you. And upon all
accounts whatsoever are we to trust in and rely upon Almighty God; in all
wants, and in all dangers; both for the obtaining of all such things as are
necessary and needful for us, and for the avoiding of all such things as are
injurious and hurtful to us. And

1, We are to trust in and rely upon the Lord Jehovah, the living and true God,
for help and succor in all the wants and needs and necessities that we ly and
labor under at any time here in this World. We are to rely upon him for a
supply to all our temporal wants or food and raiment, and of all other
necessaries of this life; and not to vex and diquiet our selves with carking
care and despondent thoughts, nor to have recourse to any sinful and unlawful
means to furnish our selves with such things as we stand in need of. We are to
use our own honest endeavors, and to call upon him for relief; and then to
believe that he will supply us with such things as we want, so far as he sees
it to be needful and convenient for us. And this we are more particularly
exhorted to in the sacred Scriptures, and are therein assured that God will
supply us with all such things as we want and have great need of. This the
Psalmist shows, Psalm. 33.18, 19; Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that
fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy; To deliver their soul from death,
and to keep them alive in famine. And Psalm. 34.9, 10. O fear the Lord ye his
Saints; for there is no want to them that fear him. The young Lions do lack,
and suffer hunger; but they that fear the Lord, shall not want any good thing.
And again Psalm. 37.3, says the Psalmist; Trust in the Lord, and do good, so
shall thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shall be fed. Those that do this,
need not doubt of a supply herein. And says God by the Prophet Isaiah, 41.17,
18; When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue
fails for thirst; I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not
forsake them: I will open rivers in the high places, and fountains in the midst
of the valleys; I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry land
springs of water. And our blessed Lord does exhort us to rely upon God in this
respect, and dissuades us from all anxiety of mind, and carking care about the
things of this world, assuring us that God will not fail to provide these
things for us, if we serve him as we ought. Matt. 6.25 --; Therefore I say unto
you (says he) take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye
shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on: Is not the life more
than meat? and the body than raiment? Behold the fowls of the air; for they sow
not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father
feeds them. Are ye not much better than they? And ver. 28 --, And why take ye
thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow: they toil
not, neither do they spin: And yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his
glory was not arrayed like one of these. Wherefore if God so cloth the grass
of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven; shall he
not much more cloth you, O ye of little faith? Therefore take no thought,
saying, what shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or wherewithal shall we be
clothed? For your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all these
things. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all
these things shall be added unto you. Our blessed Lord here does let us know,
that God having given us life and a body, will give us also such things as are
necessary for the supporting of them; and that he well understands, and minds
what is needful for us: And by God's care of inferior creatures, he does assure
us, that he will have a greater care of us, and will be sure not to fail us
herein, if we seek his Kingdom and the Righteousness thereof. And to this
purpose, Lu. 12.22 --. And often are we exhorted by the Apostles to lay aside
all solicitous thoughts about these things, and to depend upon Almighty God for
them. It is our duty to trust in God in this respect; and if we should be
stripped of all, in this dark Time that is coming upon us, we are then especially
to put it in practice, and to rely upon the good Providence of God; and not to
doubt but that he will relieve and help us, so far as he shall see it to be
convenient for us.

And for a supply to all our spiritual wants and needs are we to rely and
depend upon Almighty God. We are to make our earnest prayers to him for the
assistance of his Grace and Spirit, to enable us to do our duty, and to
overcome all temptations that shall assault us; and for all such Graces and
Virtues and other spiritual succors that we have need of; and then to depend
upon him for relief herein. And our blessed Lord does assure us that we shall
be sufficiently furnished with divine Assistance, if we do so. Lu. 11.13, says
he; If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how
much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him?
And says St. James 1.5; If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that
gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. For
the blessed assistance of God's Spirit, and for all heavenly wisdom and
understanding and power to withstand temptations, and for all other spiritual
aid and help are we to seek to God, and to rely upon him for a supply herein;
and then we shall be sure to be furnished with a sufficiency of them, if we
seek them as we ought.

2. We are to trust in Almighty God in all the Dangers that we at any time
shall be exposed to, assuring our selves that he will not then be wanting to
us. And this is the thing which the Text seems chiefly to respect, as the
chapter shows. We are not rashly and wilfully to run into dangers, and so to
tempt the Lord; but in all the dangers and hazards that we are brought into by
the various Revolutions and Vicissitudes of this World, or that do any ways
casually befall us, are we to trust in and rely upon Almighty God for help and
deliverance. In all times of the Plague and Pestilence, and great Sickness and
Mortality; In all times of War and Bloodshed and great Persecution and
Tribulation (such as we are now to expect) and in all perilous and dangerous
conditions and circumstances whatsoever are we to trust in his good Providence
and Protection, and to expect help and relief from him. We are not to be afraid
for the terror by night, nor for the arrow that flies by day, nor for the
pestilence that walks in darkness, nor for the destruction that wastes at
noonday; Psalm. 91.5, 6. We are not so to be afraid of these, or the like, as
to despair of mercy and help from Almighty God; but at all times and in all
places where we are threatened with any dangers, we are to have recourse to him
in prayer, and then to rest securely upon his divine Help and Assistance, and
to know that he will be a very present help in all our trouble, as the Psalmist
says. Psalm. 46.1. And we are further assured of his blessed help at such times
in several other places of his sacred word. Psalm. 91.3, says the Psalmist;
Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome
pestilence. He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shall
thou trust. And God does give his People great assurance of his Help and
Protection when they have great need of them, by his Prophet Isaiah, 41.10 --.
Fear thou not (says he) for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God:
I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea I will uphold thee with the
right hand of my righteousness. Behold, all they that were incensed against
thee shall be ashamed and confounded; they shall be as nothing; and they that
strive with thee shall perish. Thou shall seek them, and shall not find them,
even them that contended witb thee: They that war against thee, shall be as
nothing, and as a thing of naught. For I the Lord thy God will hold thy right
hand, saying unto thee, fear not, I will help thee --. This large exhortation
and great encouragement does God give to his People, to rest themselves
securely upon him, and not to fear their enemies, which should thus vanish away
and come to naught. And if we firmly trust in God, we may expect that this
promise will be made good to us now, and that our enemies shall thus vanish and
come to naught. And he promises to be with his People in all the great dangers
that they are brought into. Is. 43.2. When thou passest through the waters
(says he) I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow
thee: When thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall
the flame kindle upon thee. And even at the Stake, (if it should please God to
suffer us to be brought thither) are we to confide and trust in the Lord
Jehovah, and to expect that even then he will be a Mighty God and Savior to
us, and furnish us with extraordinary help and strength fit for such a Fiery
Trial. He that has promised to be with his People and Servants when they pass
through the fire and water, will be sure to be so with them, when there shall be
this great occasion for his assistance. We are to trust in the Lord for ever,
and upon no account whatsoever to distrust him and despair of his mercy and
succor and help.

Thirdly, We may see that such are blessed and happy, that place their Trust
and confidence in Almighty God, and securely rely upon him; and that this will
engage him the more firmly to succor and protect them at all times, especielly
when they most of all want his help and assistance. This the Psalmist does
often assert, that such are blessed that put their Trust in him. Psalm. 2.12;
says he; Blessed are all they that put their trust in him. And Psalm. 34.8. O
taste and see that the Lord is good; blessed is the man that trusts in him.
And Psalm. 40.4. Blessed is the man, that makes the Lord his trust; and
respects not the proud, and such as go about with lies. In these places does
he show how blessed and happy such men are. And says Solomon, Prove. 16.20;
Whosoever trusts in the Lord, happy is he. And says the Prophet Jeremiah, 17.7
--; Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is.
For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and that spreads out her
roots by the river, and shall not see when heat comes; but her leaf shall be
green, and shall not be careful in the year of drought --. He is blessed
because he shall find comfort and refreshment when an evil Time comes, and
will not be so shaken and terrified with it as others are like to be. And in
several places do the sacred Scriptures show what great good shall be to such
as wait and rest upon God, and trust in him alone. Psalm. 31.19, says the
Psalmist; O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that
fear thee; which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the sons
of men! And Psalm. 32.10. Many sorrows shall be to the wicked (says he) but he
that trusts in the Lord; mercy shall compass him about. And Psalm. 34.22. The
Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants; and none of them that trust in him
shall be desolate. And Psalm. 125.1: They that trust in the Lord shall be as
mount Zion, which cannot he moved. The Psalms we see are very full to this
purpose, exhorting men to trust in Almighty God, and assuring them that they
shall find great benefit and advantage in so doing. And says God by the
Prophet, complaining of the infidelity of his People toward him, Is. 57.13;
When thou cryest let thy companies deliver thee: but the wind shall carry them
away; vanity shall take them: But he that puts his trust in me, shall
possess the land, and shall inherit my holy Mountain. To such does he promise
the inheritance of his land and holy Mountain, that make him their Rock and
Trust. And such as shall now trust in him in this great Day and dark Time that
is coming upon us, I hope will now be preserved to inherit his land here and
holy Mountain.

This trusting in God is that which alone must afford us comfort and
refreshment in the midst of all our sorrows and miseries that befall us here.
And this will be sure to do it, and will free us the most from all solicitous
care and anxious thoughts about the Concerns of this World; and set our hearts
the most at rest that can be here. Such is our condition here in this World,
that we shall always be liable to wants and dangers, and can have no other
security of freedom from them. The Revolutions of this World are so various and
frequent, and our condition here so uncertain, that we must of necessity be
often exposed to an indigent condition and great hazards; and there is no
securing our selves against them by all the humane Arts and subtilty that we
can use: For these are soon frustrated and shattered to pieces by the waves of
an adverse Fortune, and all'our hopes that depend upon them are then blasted
and come to naught. And we may see that no man has ever been placed in such a
secure state here, but even Kings and Emperors have often been reduced to great
necessities and wants, and have often had their Lives taken away. And this
shows that we can have security no where else but in Almighty God. In him we
shall be sure to find help in the needful time of trouble: And hereby shall we
be the most freed from all anxious and perplexing thoughts beforehand, and have
the most peace and satisfaction of mind that can be had at such a time. Jo.
16.33; says our Lord; These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might
have peace, in the world ye shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer, I
have overcome the world. By trusting in God we shall be sure of his blessed and
ready help, and shall have the peace and quiet of our minds the most of all
secured that can be, and shall find great benefit and comfort by so doing; but
yet we must not expect to be wholly freed from trouble when the evil Day
comes, nor think that the the Iniquity of the times will be any pleasant
spectacle to good men, but sorrow and grief to them.

To trust and rely upon Almighty God in all times of distress and tribulation
is a great act of faith toward him; and therefore will engage him the more to
help and succor us in all our needs and distressed conditions. By this do men
show to the World that they do highly honor and magnify him above all, and have
great and worthy thoughts of him. Hereby they make it plainly appear to all
men, that they do not take him to be a mean and despicable Being; that they
esteem him to be no weak and helpless Creature; that they look not upon him as
a fallacious and deceitful God: But that they are fully convinced that he is
an Omnipotent and all-wise God; that they are well assured of his great Love
and Goodness; that they doubt not of his Veracity and fidelity; that they dare
fully rely upon his Word and Promises, and dare trust him with their Lives and
Souls and all that is dear to them. By trusting in Almighty God men do highly
honor and magnify him, not only in their own hearts and breasts, but also in
the eyes of the World; And for such faith and trust in God is Abraham highly
commended in the Word of God; Romans 4. But on the other hand, he that trusts
not in him, does greatly debase and Vilify him; he shows that he is not a God
to be trusted in, and that he dares not rely upon his Word and Promises, and so
makes him an unfaithful or helpless God, if not both; and as the Scripture
shows, 1 Jo. 5.10, does make him a liar. This is a great act of says, to
trust in God in times of great distress and danger; and hereby (for our greater
encouragement) shall we engage him more firmly to be our Helper and Protector,
because we do rely upon him. Good men do look upon themselves to be more
obliged not to fail such as trust in them, and some way or other rely upon them
for help and assistance. And much more then, we may be sure, will Almighty God
look upon himself to be more obliged to help and succor such as firmly rely
upon him alone in all their straits and distressed conditions. And the Sacred
Scriptures do show that he will be sure to help such, for this very reason,
because they do faithfully rely upon his Divine Aid and assistance, and wait
upon him for it. This the Psalmist shows, Ps. 37.39, 40: But the Salvation of
the righteous is of the Lord; he is their strength in the time of trouble. And
the Lord shall help them, and deliver them; he shall deliver them from the
wicked, and save them, because they trust in him. And Ps. 91.9 --. Because thou
have made the Lord, which is my refuge, even the most High thy habitation;
There shall no evil befall thee; neither shall any Plague come nigh thy
Dwelling: For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all
thy ways. And this the Prophet shows here, Is. 26.3, the verse before the
Text; Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee,
because he trusts in thee. By trusting in Almighty God, we see, we shall
engage him more firmly to be a Rock of our salvation at all times; and he will
be sure to save and deliver us in his good time, because we trust in him, and
wait for his almighty Aid. And, as the Psalmist says, Ps. 146.5, Happy is he
that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God.

Fourthly, For an exhortation hereto and for our encouragement herein, we may
see that this has been the resolution and practice of all good men; to trust
in the Lord in all the dangers and distressed conditions that they have been
brought into. When Abraham was commanded to depart out of his own country, he
obeyed, and trusted to the good Providence of God for protection and relief in
all the hazardous and necessitous conditions that he should be brought into;
Genesis 12.1 --; And says the Apostle, Heb. 11.8. By faith Abraham, when he was
called to go out into a place which he should after receive for an inheritance,
obeyed; and he went out, not knowing whither he went. He trusted to the good
Providence of God in this Pilgrimage that he took in obedience to his command.
And he always took the Promises of God for truth, though he could not see how
they should be performed: And so must we now do, if we will be his faithful
and blessed Children. Moses put his trust in God, and at his command went to
redeem and deliver the Israelites out of the hand of a powerful King, the King
of Egypt, Ex. 3 --. And concerning him says the Apostle, Heb. 11.27; By faith
he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King: for he endured as seeing
him who is invisible. Such was his faith and trust in God, that he feared not
the wrath of the King, but was as courageous as if he had had God visibly by
him to help and succor him. And this is his encouraging Speech to the
Israelites, when they were sore afraid being enclosed with the Sea on the one
hand, and with their Enemies on the other: Ex. 14.13; Fear ye not, stand still,
and see the Salvation of the Lord, which he will show to you to day; for the
Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again no more for ever:
The Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace. And with Faith and
trust in God Almighty did he encounter all the oppositions and hazards that he
met with afterward. Joshua at God's command, and with trust and confidence in
his almighty Power and Divine Protection, went against all the Kings of Canaan,
and did not fear to encounter and set upon them, when they were many of them
confederated together and had united their Forces, as we may see Joshua 10 --.
Job expresses very great trust and confidence in almighty God. Job 13.14.
Wherefore (says he) do I take my flesh in my teeth, and put my life in mine
hand? Though he slay me, yet will I put my trust in him. He was resolved still to
trust in God, and to wait for his salvation, notwithstanding he was in such a
miserable condition that he seemed almost to be deserted and forsaken of him.
David also shows what great faith and confidence he put in Almighty God. When
his own Companions were ready to stone him, he strengthened himself herewith. 1 Samuel 30.6. And David was greatly distressed; for the People spoke of stoning
him, because the soul of all the people was grieved, every man for his Sons,
and for his Daughters: but David encouraged himself in the Lord his God. And
often in the Psalms does he declare his great confidence in Almighty God. And
says the Psalmist, Is. 46.1 --. God is our refuge and strength, a very present
help in trouble. Therefore will not we fear, though the Earth be moved, and though
the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea; Though the Waters thereof
roar and be troubled; though the Mountains shake with the swellings thereof. And
Ps. 118.6. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear: What can man do unto me?
And says the Prophet Isaiah, expressing his own confidence in God, as he was
taught, and teaching the People also to do the like; Is. 12.2; Behold, God is
my salvation; I will trust and not be afraid; for the Lord JEHOVAH is my
strength and my Song, he also is become my salvation. The Prophet Habakkuk also
is very full to this purpose, declaring how he would put his whole trust and
confidence in the Lord, and joy and rejoice in him when all earthly comforts
and supports were vanished and taken away. Hab. 3.17, 18. Although (says he) The
Figtree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines; the labor of
the Olive shall fail, and the field shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut
off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls: Yet I will rejoice
in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. The totally taking away of
all these should not make him to despair, but he would still trust in the
Living God, and expect succor and comfort from him. So great was the faith of
the three Children that they bid defiance to Nebuchadnezzar the great
Babylonian Monarch, and all that he could do; and slighted all his great
Threats of a Fiery Furnace, assuring themselves that the God of Heaven (in whom
they trusted) could deliver them even out of the very jaws of Death and out of
the Pit of destruction. Dan. 3.16 --. O Nebuchadnezzar (say they) we are not
careful to answer thee in this matter. If it be so (that is, that thou cast us
into the fiery furnace) Our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the
burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O King: But if
not, be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor
worship thy golden Image, which thou have set up. So little did they regard all
his terrible and frightfull Threats. And with trust and confidence in Almighty
God did the Apostles encounter all the Powers and Oppositions and Dangers and
Necessities that they met with. By these and such examples we may see, that
this has been the Resolution and Practice of all pious and religious men to
put their trust in Almighty God at all times of great Danger and Need, and to
rely upon him for this blessed Help and Assistance. And this shows that it is
our duty to do so, and is an encouragement to us to rely upon him for his
never-failing Help and Succor, when we have no means of helping our selves,
but are in a most helpless condition, as now we are like to be in.

II. We have here the reason wherewith this exhortation and precept is backed,
and why we should trust in the Lord for ever; and that is because of his sure
and certain Help and Assistance at all times: For in the Lord JEHOVAH is
everlasting strength, or the Rock of Ages.

This is an usual thing in the Word of God to call Almighty God a Rock, because
he is a most sure and firm Refuge to all such as fly to him for succor and
help upon all accounts. Moses does often call him a Rock. Deuteronomy. 32.15. But
Jesurun waxed fat, -- then he forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed
the Rock of his salvation. And verse. 31. For their Rock is not as our Rock,
even our enemies themselves being judges: Hereby meaning, that their God and
Protector was not like the God that protected and defended the Jews, even in
the judgment of their Enemies. And in several other places in the sacred
Scriptures is Almighty God called a Rock. And by God's being called the Rock of
Ages here, we are to know, that he will be a most sure and never failing
Protector Deliverer and Succourer to all such as have recourse to him at any
time for his divine Help and Assistance; and that there is no reason to doubt
and despair of it, if we truly serve him, and wait upon him for it as we ought.
And this I shall endeavor farther to show by several particulars, in showing
that there is in him all that is requisite to make him an Universal Almighty
and Eternal Protector and Helper to all such as trust and confide in him. And

First, We have the greater reason to trust in the Lord Jehovah the living and
true God, because he is Omniscient and knows every thing. He is not a God that
is short sighted and in a great measure ignorant of the Concerns of this World,
or of our particular State and Condition here; for this would render him unfit
for being so certain and sure a Rock of our trust and confidence in all our
exigencies and dangers. But he cannot be in the least thought deficient herein;
because he knows all things whatsoever, without all exception, that are
comprehended within the compass of the whole World. God (says St. John 1 Jo.
3.2.) is greater than our hearts, and knows all things. So universal is his
knowledge that nothing is excluded from it.

His knowledge is general and is extended to all places in the whole World. As
all the parts of the whole Universe are the work of his hands; so all ly naked
and open to his view. He that fills Heaven and Earth, is every where; and has
all the World plain and clear before his piercing eyes. And this is often
affirmed in the sacred Scriptures. Psalm. 139.8 --, says the Psalmist; If I
ascend up into Heaven, thou art there; If I make my bed in hell, behold thou
art there; If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts
of the sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold
me. And says the Prophet Hanani, 2 Chr. 16.9; For the eyes of the Lord run to
and fro thorowout the whole earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them
whose heart is perfect toward him. His eyes are employed every where, and no
place escapes them; and with this design too, to see what is needful and
wanting to all such as have a perfect heart toward him, that he may succor
and help them. And says Solomon, Prove. 15.3; The eyes of the Lord are in every
place, beholding the evil and the good. All places, though never so far distant
and remote from one another, ly plain and open before his all-seeing eyes and
are never absent from them. His eyes and knowledge penetrate through all dark and
hidden places, where secret works are often a hammering out, which are
concealed from the eyes of the World; but are there as visible to him as if
they were doing in the open light. Psalm. 139.11 --. If I say, surely the
darkness shall cover me (says the Psalmist) even the night shall be light
about me. Yea the darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines as the
day; the darkness and the light are both alike to thee. Darkness it self will
not secure any from his sight and knowledge. He by his unconceivable Deity and
Godhead fills all places, and is every where present, and there is no place
where any one can hide himself from his knowledge, as he himself affirms by the
Prophet, Jer. 23.24: Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not
see him, says the Lord? Do not I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord? There
is no place that can be excluded from his eye and knowledge, because there is no
place whatsoever but he is there.

And as God's knowledge is extended to all places, so is it also extended to all
Creatures, and to all their works and actions, and especially to all the works
of mankind. There is not one of all his Creatures, whereof there are numberless
Hosts and Armies, that is ever without the sight of his eyes; nor is there one
action, that is done by any of them all, that escapes his cognizance, but he
takes knowledge of it. Is. 40.25 --. To whom then will ye liken me, or shall I
be equal, says the holy One? Lift up your eyes on high, and behold, who has
created these things, that brings out their host by number, he calls them
all by names, by the greatness of his might, for that he is strong in power,
not one fails. This perfect knowledge has he of all the Armies of his
Creatures. And he is privy to all the actions that are done by them all, and to
all the secret transactions and contrivances that are done, or a doing any
where through-out the whole earth; and to all the secret counsels and retired
thoughts and imaginations of men's hearts. His eyes are upon the ways of man,
and he sees all his goings; as Elihu says, Job. 34.21. And says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 94.10; He that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know?
Hereby showing that it is impossible that he should be ignorant. And says
Solomon, Prove. 5.21; For the ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and
he pondereth all his goings. And what the son of Sirach says to this purpose
is very remarkable. Ecclus. 23.18 --; A man that breaks wedlock, saying thus
in his heart, who sees me? I am compassed about with darkness, the walls cover
me, and no body sees me, what need I to fear? The most High will not remember
my sins. Such a man only fears the eyes of man, and knows not that the eyes
of the Lord are ten thousand times brighter than the Sun, beholding all the
ways of men, and considering the most secret parts. So quick-sighted is he to
behold and observe whatsoever is done every where in the most secret and
retired corners, and all the hidden practices and machinations of men. And all
men's hearts and private thoughts are all plain and open to his All-seeing
eyes. It is his prerogative to be the searcher of all men's hearts, and to know
all that is therein. Deuteronomy. 31.21. says God concerning the Israelites; For I
know their imagination, which they go about even now, before I have brought
them into the land which I sw^re.

All things, whether past, present, or to come, are perfectly known to Almighty
God. He is an everliving and eternal God; and with his eternity does his
knowledge bear proportion. He who was, and is, and is to come, knows all things
that may be comprehended in these terms. There is no such thing as
forgetfulness with him; and the things that are past cannot be razed and
expunged out of his memory; but all things that have been done from the very
Creation of the World are as fresh and present with him, as they were in the
very day and moment when they were done. For a thousand years in thy sight are
but as yesterday, when it is past; and as a watch in the night; says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 90.4. And says St. Peter, 2 Pet. 3.8; But, beloved, be not
ignorant of this one thing, that one day with the Lord is as a thousand years,
and a thousand years as one day. And says St. James, Acts 15.18; Known unto
God are all his works from the beginning of the world. All that has been done
from the very Creation of the World remains clear and undefaced before him: And
all that is to come is clearly seen and known by him. Things future are unknown
to us, and we cannot tell what shall come to pass hereafter, except it be some
way revealed to us. But it is not so with God, for he has all things, that are
future and to come, plain before his eyes. This is his peculiar prerogative to
have a perfect knowledge of what is to come, as the Prophet shows; Is. 41.23.
Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods.
It is God, and God alone, that knows all things future; and all that shall be
done hereafter even to the end of the World is perfectly seen and known by him.
And the things too that men would do, but shall be prevented and stopped from the
doing of them, are all within the reach of his sight. He knows what they would
do, if he did not restrain them by his grace and power, or prevent them by
death. He knows all things that can be known, and his knowledge is perfect and
complete in every respect. And this, as it ought to make us the more careful
what we do, because it is done before the All-seeing eyes of God; so also will
it be a very great ground of our trust and confidence in him. For in trusting
in the Lord Jehovah, we do not trust in any blind Deity, nor in any senseless
Idol, that has eyes, but sees not; nor in a Creature that is ignorant of our
condition and of the concerns of this World: But in trusting in the Lord
Jehovah the living and true God, we trust in a God that is Omniscient and knows
every thing; That perfectly understands all the affairs of this World, and is
thoroughly acquainted with our State and Condition here; That sees and knows all
our needs and wants, and the sorrows and miseries that we ly and labor under,
and all the hazards and dangers that we at any time are in; And that hears our
addresses and prayers which we at all times make unto him. And therefore upon
this account we have the greater reason to place our trust and confidence in
him, and to account him the Rock of our Salvation.

Secondly, He is a God of infinite Wisdom, and prudent in all his actions and
enterprises, and therefore we have the greater reason to trust and confide in
him. All his actions and doings are weighed in the balance, and grounded upon
the highest reason of all, and are managed with wisdom and counsel. He is not
like the foolish Builder that laid his foundation upon the Sand, and to have
his work overturned with every blast of an adverse Fortune; nor so unwise and
imprudent as to be guilty of any such error, and to have any of his intentions
frustrated and blamed. He attempts nothing but what he will bring perfectly to
pass, and his counsel shall stand; and there is no overreaching and
out-witting of him, but he at his pleasure can overreach all others; and
therefore we have the greater cause to trust in him, and rely upon him as the
Rock of our confidence at all times. Ephesians. 3.10; To the intent (says the
Apostle) that now unto the Principalities and Powers in heavenly places might
be known by the Church, the manifold Wisdom of God. And this all the works of
God declare, viz, that he is a God of infinite Wisdom and understanding, so far
as we are able to judge of them. The stupendous Frame of this visible World,
with all the admirable works therein, will abundantly manifest to us the
wonderful Wisdom of him that Created and Formed it; and let us understand a
little, how unconceivable it is. If we behold the Heavens with all the Glorious
Bodies thereof, the Sun Moon and Stars, with that exact o^^er and the steady
courses and motions that they keep; with admiration and wonder may we say with
the Psalmist, Ps. 19.1 --; The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the
Firmament shows his hand-work: Day unto day utters Speech, and night unto
night shows knowledge. And the Earth with all the numberless Hosts and Armies
thereof does show the same. The curious Frame, and Order and Government of all
the Armies and Hosts of Creatures that are upon the face of the Earth do
manifestly show to us, that he that formed them, and disciplines and orders
them must be infinite, as well in Wisdom, as in Knowledge and Power. And says
the Psalmist, Ps. 104.24 --; O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in Wisdom have
thou made them all --. And says Solomon Pr. 3.19 --; The Lord by Wisdom has
founded the Earth, by understanding has he established the Heavens; By his
knowledge the Depths are broken up; and the Clouds drop down the dew. The
accurate works of God do abundantly manifest to us his exceeding great and
infinite Wisdom. He is infinitely Wise of himself, and needs no Counselor to
instruct and direct him, as the Prophet shows, Is. 40.13 --; Who (says he)
has directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his Counselor has taught him?
With whom took he Counsel? and who instructed him, and taught him in the path
of judgment? and taught him knowledge, and showed to him the way of
understanding? He is all-sufficient in this respect, and he alone is Wise, and
gives to all others Wisdom and understanding as he sees good. Job 35.10 --,
says Elihu there; But none says, Where is God my maker, who gives Songs in
the night? Who teaches us more than the beasts of the Earth, and makes us
wiser than the Fowls of Heaven. And says the Preacher, Ecc. 2.26; For God
gives to a man that is good in his sight, wisdom and knowledge and joy. He is
the original and fountain of all Wisdom, and there is no Wisdom nor Counsel can
prevail against him. There is no circumventing and overreaching and
out-witting of him: There is no craft nor policy that will signify any thing
against him. The foolishness of God is wiser than men, says the Apostle; 1
Cor. 1.25. And says Job 9.4; He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength; who
has hardened himself against him, and has prospered? And says Solomon, Pr.
21.30. There is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor Counsel against the Lord. All
the wisdom and Counsel that is set against God, is like to be blasted and to
come to naught; and they that travel with Plots and Designs against him will be
sure to bring forth their own woe and misery in the end. For he destroys the
wisdom of the wise, and overthrows their Counsels at his pleasure. He
confounds all the Wit and Cunning of the crafty, and turns it into stark folly
and sottishness as he sees good. He leads Counselors away spoiled (says
Job. 12.17 --) and makes judges fools. And ver. 20. He removes away the
Speech of the trusty, and takes away the understanding of the aged. And ver.
24, 25. He takes away the heart of the chief of the People of the Earth, and
causes them to wander in a Wilderness, where there is no way: They grope in
the dark without light, and he makes them to stagger like a drunken man. Thus
does he darken and confound their reason and understanding, and makes them to
become like fools and mad men at his own pleasure. And says God by the
Prophet, Is. 44.25. That frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and makes
Diviners mad; that turns wise men backward, and makes their knowledge
foolish. And says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.19.; For it is written, I will destroy
the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the
prudent. And again says he, 1 Cor. 3.19. For the wisdom of this World is
foolishness with God: for it is written, he takes the wise in their own
craftiness. Thus are they taken with their own Wit and Cunning, and their craft
and policy is all retorted and turned back upon themselves, and they do only
plot and consult for their own downfall and ruin that set themselves against
him. And now, seeing God is so unconceivably and infinitely Wise in all that he
takes in hand, and is guilty of no errors nor over-sights in what he does, but
acts always like himself, like an All-wise God, and is sure to bring his
purposes and designs to perfection; seeing he cannot be overreached and
outwitted by either men or Devils, and that there is no counsel will stand
good against him; seeing all the wisdom of others is but folly with him, and he
takes the wise in their own craftiness, and confounds the counsels and
policy of the Subtle, and returns them upon themselves at his own pleasure;
This will be a farther ground of our trust and confidence that we are to repose
and put in him. In trusting in him, we trust not in a foolish and unadvised
Person, that undertakes such a Charge that he does not well understand, and is
not wise enough to manage and protect: But in trusting in the Lord Jehovah, we
trust in a God that is infinitely wise in all respects, and knows how to manage
all the Charges and Cares of an universal Patron and Protector; and is such a
God for wisdom, to whom we may well commit the care of our Souls and Lives and
all that is precious and dear to us.

Thirdly, He is a God that is Omnipotent and Almighty and can do every thing,
and therefore we have the greater reason to trust and confide in him. He is no
weak and and impotent creature, but a God that is armed with all the Might and
Power that can be, and therefore we may well account him the Rock of our
Salvation. I am the Almighty God (says he to Abraham, Genesis 17.1.) walk before
me, and be thou perfect. And in these two respects especially may God be said
to be Almighty.

1, Because all Rule and all Dominion and Power of Governing all things does in
a most absolute manner belong to him. He is the great and only Monarch of all
the World, and all the Armies and Hosts of Heaven and Earth are under his
Authority and Power, and at his absolute command. He is the Supreme Lord of
all, and all the Angels above, and the Powers of Darkness, and all Earthly
Kings and Princes are but his Ministers and Servants, and must all observe his
Orders and obey his word and command. For the Lord your God (says Moses Deuteronomy.
10.17.) is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, a mighty and a
terrible, which regards not persons, nor takes reward. And says St. Paul, 1 Timothy 6.15; Who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords. He is the Supreme King over all the Kings and Emperors of the Earth;
and as he sees fit he exercises his Authority and Power in all the Kingdoms of
the Earth, and places and displaceth all Kings and Princes as he sees good.
This the Prophet Daniel shows, Dan. 4.17. To the intent (says he) that the
living may know, that the most High rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it
to whomsoever he will, and sets up over it the basest of men. And ver. 25,
says he to Nebuchadnezzar; They shall drive thee from men, and thy Dwelling
shall be with the Beasts of the Field till thou know that the most High rules
in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will. And says he, Dan.
2.20 --; Blessed be the Name of God for ever and ever; for wisdom and might are
his: And he changes the times and the Seasons; he removes Kings, and he
sets up Kings. And so says the Psalmist, Ps. 75.6 --; For promotion comes
neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South; But G d is the
Judge: he puts down one, and sets up another. He disposes of the
Kingdoms of the World, and orders whom he pleases to rule therein; and there
is no man can have any Power therein, except it be given, or some ways granted
and allowed him from above, as our blessed Lord told Pilate, Joh. 19.11; Jesus
answered, Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given
thee from above. No Man can have any Authority, except it be some way allowed
him by Almighty God, who is the Supreme King and Disposer of all Power and
Authority. And he is an everlasting King, and his Dominion is without end, and
endures to all Eternity. Jer. 10.10; says the Prophet there; But the Lord is
the true God, he is the living God, and an everlasting King; at his wrath the
earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall not be able to abide his
indignation. And says the Psalmist, Psalm. 145.13; Thy Kingdom is an
everlasting Kingdom, and thy Dominion endures throughout all generations.
There is no end of his Kingdom, and his supreme Power endures for ever.

2, God is Almighty in regard of his infinite Power, whereby he is able to
effect and bring all things to pass. He is Almighty in Operation, and there is
nothing too hard for him, which he cannot do; and therefore he may be said to
be Omnipotent. He has all power of doing whatsoever he pleases; and all the
Power and Strength that is in all Creatures is derived from him, and has
continual dependence upon him, and in this respect he may well be said to be
Almighty. It is in him that we all live, and move, and have our being, as the
Apostle affirms, Acts 17.28: And there is no resisting and withstanding of
his Power, and nothing can hinder him from doing any thing that he pleases to
do. For the Lord of Hosts has purposed (says the Prophet Isaiah 14.27.) and
who shall disanul it? and his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it
back? And says God by him, Is. 43.13; Before the day was, I am he, and there
is none that can deliver out of mine hand; I will work, and who shall let it?
There is no resisting and withstanding of him, but all must truckle and give
way to his Omnipotent Power. And says God to Abraham, Genesis 18.14; Is any thing
too hard for the Lord? hereby declaring that all things are possible and
feasible to him. And this does Job acknowledge, Job 42 2; I know that thou can
do every thing, and that no thought can be withholden from thee. And says the
Prophet Jeremiah 32.17; Ah Lord God, behold thou have made the Heaven and the
Earth by thy great Power, and stretched out Arm, and there is nothing too hard
for thee. And the Angel declared this to the blessed Virgin. Luc. 1.37; For
with God nothing shall be unpossible, says he. And this our Lord shows,
Matthew. 19.26; But Jesus beheld them, and said unto them, with men this is
unpossible, but with God all things are possible. He can turn and change every
thing at his own will and pleasure. He can create and form things that are not,
out of nothing; and annihilate those that be, and let them return to nothing
again. All things that thwart not his justice goodness and truth he can do. And
his power is an eternal power, and will never fail nor decay. He is an
everliving God, and his Arm and Power will never be shortened nor diminished.
Romans 1.20, says St. Paul; For the invisible things of him from the creation of
the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even
his eternal Power and Godhead.

But we shall the better understand this Almighty Power of God, if we consider
and call to mind the wonderful works that he has done. The stupendous Acts
that he has already done will let us understand that his Power is infinite,
and too great to be comprehended by our shallow capacities. His works of
Creation are most admirable and astonishing. That he should create and form the
Heaven and the Earth (which is so often celebrated of him, to his Honor and
Glory by such as have had a true veneration for him) and make all this visible
World of things that did not appear and had no being: That he should cause the
Light to shine out of darkness, and divide the day and night asunder: That he
should dispose the World into this beautiful order, and hang the Earth upon
nothing but airy Pillars: That he should form and make such an innumerable
number of glorious Lights above, and such a vast multitude of creatures here
upon Earth: These are wonderful things which we may well admire, and had hardly
known, had not God by his Spirit declared them to us. The Earth, though it be
so vast a body, and so many thousand miles about, yet is managed and ordered by
God's Almighty Power. The Sun, though a bigger body than the Earth; and all
other the celestial bodies, though innumerable, are all guided and ordered by
his Omnipotent Power. These are so wonderful that God might well demand, as he
does of Job, chap. 38.33; Know thou the ordinances of Heaven? Can thou set
the dominion thereof in the earth? He it is that has commanded the morning of
old, and caused the day spring to know his place. By his order and conduct the
Sun arises and goes down, and hastes to the place of his rising again. He
spreads out the heaven like a curtain, and makes the cloud a garment for the
waters. Out of whose womb, but his, came the ice? and the hoary frost of
heaven, who, but he, has gendered it? ver. 29. He causes the Clouds to ride
in the Air, and at his command they water the face of the Earth. The snow
comes out of his treasure, and he has made a way for the lightning and
thunder. The Earth is supported and upheld by his Almighty Power, and he
brings forth all trees and herbs for the service of Man and Beast.

And as God's Almighty Power is declared in the works of Creation and Nature
(which we the less admire, because they are common to us) so is it also showed
in his supernatural works, and the miracles that he has done. He can suspend
and stop the course of Nature, and change and alter it as he pleases; and
often has he done so. When God has some remarkable thing to do, the Sun and
Moon must wait the doing of it, and stay till it be done: And so we see that
God stopped them in Joshua's days. Josh. 10.12 --; Sun stand thou still upon
Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of Ajalon. And the Sun stood still, and the
Moon stayed until the people had avenged themselves upon their enemies --. So
the Sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down about a
whole day. And the Sun did not only stand still, but return back too when God
commanded it, as we see that it did for a sign to King Hezekiah; Is. 38.8: So
the sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees it was gone down. Nay farther,
when God the Son did suffer, to show the blackness of that Crime in putting of
him to death* the light thereof was wholly taken away. Lu. 23.44 --. And it was
about the sixth hour (says St. Luke) and there was darkness over all the Earth
until the ninth hour; and the sun was darkened --. The wonders that God wrought
in Egypt; the turning of their waters into blood, the hail mingled with fire,
and the darkness that might be felt, are so many proofs of his great Power and
Might. When his People wanted a light, he guided them by a pillar of fire; And
when they wanted a way, he divided the Rea-sea and made the waters to stand on
an heap, and made them a way that they might pass through; Ex. 13 and 14 chap.
By his great Power he clave the hard Rock, and caused waters to come forth to
quench the thirst of his People; and rained down Manna from Heaven for their
food in the Wilderness. He can restrain the rage and violence of fire, and keep
it from doing any harm; and he preserved the three Children from being so much
as scorched in the midst of a fiery furnace, Dan. 3. He is a God, which
removes the mountains, and they know not; which overturneth them in his anger:
which shakes the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof tremble; Job.
9.5, 6. He it is that kills, and makes alive; he brings down to the grave,
and raises up again, and there is none that can deliver out of his hand, as he
says, Deuteronomy. 32 39. See now that I, even I am he, and there is no God with me;
I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal; neither is there any that can
deliver out of mine hand. And says he by the Prophet Isaiah, 43.13: Yea before
the day was I am he, and there is none can deliver out of my hand. And this
Balaam the great Sooth-sayer was sensible of when he said to Balak King of Moab
that sent for him to curse Israel; Number 23.8; How shall I curse, whom God has
not cursed? Or how shall I defy, whom the Lord has not defied? He shows that
it was not in his power to curse or hurt, till God had given way for him to do
so. Those whom he blesses, must be blessed; and those whom he curses, must be
cursed, and all the power of Men and Devils cannot hinder what he will have
done. And Satan himself the grand Engineer of darkness could not touch Job, nor
his Substance till God gave him leave, for the exercise and trial of his
patience. Job 1 --. There is no protecting and saving of those, whom he will
destroy; and there is no killing, nor wounding and hurting of those that he is
minded to protect and save. There is no want of any power in him, but he is
armed with all the Power and Might that can be in all respects. And seeing God
has this universal Power over all Creatures, both Men and Angels and all other
Creatures; and is able to do such mighty works, and whatsoever he pleases, and
there is no resisting of his Power; And seeing this Omnipotent Power of his is
Eternal and will never decay nor be diminished, we may well then trust in him
at all times. In trusting in the Lord Jehovah we see that we do not vainly
place our confidence in an impotent and helpless Deity, that has no power at
all to help and succor us: But in trusting in him, we trust in the Rock of
Ages, in a God that is armed with all Power and Might, and to whom nothing is
impossible; and in one that is able to help and succor us in all our needs and
wants, and to save and defend us in all our straits and dangers whatsoever, and
to preserve and bring us to the enjoyment of his Eternal Kingdom in the World
to come; And therefore we may well trust and rely upon him at all times.

Fourthly, The Lord Jehovah is a God of love and goodness, and tender and
compassionate of us; and therefore we have the greater cause to trust and
confide in him at all times. His great love and goodness will be a farther
assurance to us that he will be a Rock of Salvation to us in all our straits
and dangers. He is a God of Love, and takes pleasure and delight in all the
works of goodness and mercy, and is kind and benign to all his Creatures, and
desires the good and prosperity of them all, especially of all Mankind. This
St. John affirms, that God is love. 1 Jo. 4.8. He that loves not, knows
not God (says he) for God is love. And so again ver. 16. And this shows how
full of love and goodness he is, as if this were all in all. And his love and
goodness is diffused abroad like the light of the Sun, and communicated to all
his Creatures. Psalm. 145.9. The Lord is good to all (says the Psalmist) and
his tender mercies are over all his works. And to this purpose, Wisd. 11.24;
For thou love all the things that are, and abhorrest nothing which thou have
made; for never would thou have made any thing, if thou had hated it. His
love is universal and extended to all his works; and there is none of his
numerous Offspring and Creatures but shall share therein, till they exclude
themselves from it by their wilful transgressions and provocations, and sin
against him with a high hand. And for all his Creatures does he provide and
take care, and feeds them all. This the Psalmist shows, Ps. 104.27 --; These
wait all upon thee, that thou may give them their meat in due season: That
thou give them, they gather: thou openest thy hand, they are filled with
good. And Psalm. 145.15 --; The eyes of all wait upon thee, (says he) and thou
give them their meat in due season. Thou openest thine hand, and satisfyest
the desire of every living thing. All his Creatures do experience his great
goodness; and more especially does Man do so. Our high Creation, and the rich
preparations that he has here made for us, do show how full of love and
goodness he is toward us. And upon this account does the Royal Psalmist cry
out with admiration, Psalm. 8.4 --; What is man, that thou art mindful of him?
and the son of man, that thou visitest him? For thou have made him a little
lower than the Angels, and have crowned him with glory and honor. Thou made
him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou have put all things
under his feet. And he proclaimed himself a gracious and merciful God to Moses;
Exodus 34.6; And the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, The Lord, the
Lord God merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and
truth --. And this the Psalmist does often declare. Psalm. 86.15. But thou, O
Lord, art a God full of compassion and gracious, long-suffering, and plenteous
in mercy and truth. And Psalm. 103.8. The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to
anger, and plenteous in mercy. And to this purpose in several other places. And
says God by the Prophet Jeremiah 9.24 --; I am the Lord, which exercise loving
kindness judgment and righteousness in the earth; for in these things I
delight, says the Lord. These are the things wherein he delights and takes
pleasure. And this was the Prophet Jonah's reply to God, when he spared
Niniveh, Jonah 4.2; For I knew that thou art a gracious God and merciful, slow
to Anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of the evil. And says St.
Paul, Ephesians. 2, 4.5; But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love, wherewith
he loved us; even when we were Dead in sins --. By these and many more places
are we taught how full of love, and all manner of goodness our God and great
Creator is. He is no cruel and merciless Being, that knows not what belongs to
love and goodness; but a God of infinite love and kindness, and is greatly
delighted in doing acts of mercy and beneficence to all mankind: For he does
not only show himself kind to the good, but also to the evil, as our Lord has
told us; Matt. 5.45.

And we may see that he is a God of great pity and mercy, and tender of his
People in all their sorrows and miseries. He takes no delight to see them
miserable, and to labor and groan under any Affliction and Calamity, but is
troubled for them, and is then forward to help them; and therefore we have the
greater cause to rely upon him. Like as a father pitieth his children (says
the Psalmist, 103.13 --.) so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. For he
knows our frame, he remembereth that we are dust. He considers our weak and
frail nature, and what need we have of succor and relief, and does pity us as
a Father does his tender and helpless child. His bowels will always yearn
toward his Servants, whenever they are in any afflicted and suffering
condition; and he will then pity and help them. Psalm. 12.5. For the oppression
of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise (says the Lord) I
will set him in safety from him that puffs at him. And says he to Moses, Ex.
3.7 --; I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt, and
I have heard their cry, by reason of their taskmasters, for I know their
sorrows; and I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians
--. Thus did God pity them, and was moved with their sorrow and misery, and
redeemed them with a mighty hand and outstretched arm. And says the Prophet
Zechariah 2.8; For he that touches you, touches the apple of his eye. So
tender is he of his People. And though the Children of Israel did often rebel
against him, yet so prone is he to mercy and pity, that he was ready to help
and succor them, whenever they returned* and cried to him for mercy and
help. This we may see, Judges 10.15 --; And the children of Israel said unto
the Lord, we have sinned, do thou unto us whatsoever seems good unto thee;
deliver us only, we pray thee, this day. And they put away the strange Gods
from among them, and served the Lord; and his soul was grieved for the misery
of Israel. And says the Psalmist, Psalm. 106.44 --; Nevertheless he regarded
their affliction, when he heard their cry. And he remembered for them his
covenant, and repented according to the multitude of his mercies. He made them
also to be pitied of all those that carried them captives. He cannot show
himself hard-hearted toward his People, when they repent and cry to him for
succor and help. He that is the Father of mercies, will not then stop his ears
at their cry, but will then hear and help them, and show them mercy and
kindness. By these and such places we see that he is full of pity and
compassion, and takes no delight to see his People miserable, but does greatly
commiserate them in their distress and sorrow, and is forward to help them; and
this will give us greater encouragement to trust and rely upon him as the Rock
of our Salvation.

Fifthly, For our greater assurance, we may see that he is not only a God of
love and goodness, but that he does undertake our protection, and is engaged by
promise to succor and help us in all our troubles and distressed conditions, if
we serve him and obey him as we ought; and therefore we have the greatest
reason of all to trust and confide in him at all times. He is a God of truth,
and faithful in all his promises; and he has promised that he will always
watch over us, and take great care to preserve, and keep us; and therefore we
have no reason to doubt of his protection and help, if we faithfully serve him
as we should. This Balaam declared, that God was true and faithful and would
make good what he had promised. Number. 23.19. God (says he) is not a man, that
he should ly; neither the son of man, that he should repent: has he said, and
shall he not do it? or has he spoken, and shall he not make it good? And St.
Paul declares the same to Titus; Tit. 1.2; In hope of eternal life, which God,
that cannot ly, promised before the world began, And says Moses, Deuteronomy. 7.9;
Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God, which
keeps covenant and mercy with them that love him, and keep his commandments,
to a thousand generations. He is a God of veracity and truth, and will not fail
to make good his promises; And he has promised that he will never fail nor
forsake all such as fear him, and keep his sacred Commandments. This Moses told
the Children of Israel when they were to encounter and engage with their
enemies. Deuteronomy. 31.6. Be strong and of a good courage (says he) fear not, nor
be afraid of them; for the Lord thy God he it is that does go with thee; he
will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. And says the Apostle, Heb. 13.5; For he
has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. And this is God's command
that we should call upon him in the time of trouble, and he does promise that
he will then deliver us, Psalm. 50.15. And call upon me in the day of trouble; I
will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. And God does give his People
great assurance of his Help and Protection in all times of need and danger by
the Prophet Isaiah. Is. 43.2 -- says he; When thou passest through the waters,
I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when
thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt; neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee: For I am the Lord thy God, the holy One of Israel. This great
and gracious promise does God make to his People of being their mighty
Protector and Savior in all great and eminent dangers. And says he again by
the Prophet, Is. 54.16 --; Behold, I have created the smith that blows the
coals in the fire, and that brings forth an instrument for his work; and I
have created the waster to destroy. No weapon that is formed against thee shall
prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment, thou shall
condemn. Both the weapons of War, and the waster that destroys are at God's
command; and shall not prevail farther than he gives them leave; And he does
promise that they shall not prosper so far as to destroy his Church and
Servants, though he may sometimes let wicked men put some of his Servants to
death for a testimony of the Truth; with whom he will then be in an
extraordinary manner by his Grace and Spirit, that they shall in a manner even
then triumph over them. And says our Savior, Matt. 28.20; And lo, I am with
you always, even unto the end of the world; Amen. And we may be sure that he
will be with us according to our needs, and in an extraordinary manner when
there is extraordinary occasion for it. By these and such places we see that
God does undertake our protection, and does promise to help and defend us in
all our straits and dangers. And a watchful care has he over us at all times,
as we have seen before. 2 Chr. 16.9. For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro
through out the whole earth (says Hanani the Seer) to show himself strong in
the behalf of them, whose heart is perfect toward him. And says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 121.3 --; He will not suffer thy foot to be moved; he that keeps thee
will not slumber; Behold, he that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor
sleep. The Lord is thy keeper; the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand. He
continually watches over such as fear him, and is never unmindful and
regardless of them. And how exceedingly his mind is bent toward them, and how
much his heart is set upon them, he shows by the Prophet Isaiah, 49.15: Can a
woman forget her sucking child (says he) that she should not have compassion
on the son of her womb? Yea they may forget; yet will I not forget thee. So
mindful and careful will he be of all his faithful Servants. And his Angels
shall watch about such, as the Psalmist affirms, Psalm. 34.7; The Angel of the
Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers them. With such a
watchful Guard are they always encompassed and protected. And to show the
exquisite care of God concerning all things and even the smallest matters that
belong to us, our Savior has told us that the very hairs of our heads are
numbered. Matt. 10.30. But even the very hairs of your head are all numbered:
Fear ye not therefore --. A due regard is had even to the smallest matters that
belong to us. And the Apostle does show that nothing can separate us from the
love of God, if we do it not by our own wickedness. Romans 8.38 --. For I am
persuaded (says he) that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. We are assured of God's truth and
faithfulness; and we see that he has engaged and promised to be our Protector
and Helper in all our necessities and dangers, and that he does continually
watch over us and mind us; and therefore there is no reason to doubt of his
Almighty aid and help in all our needs and dangers whatsoever, if we are
careful to serve and please him as we ought.

But so long as we go on in a sinful course, he is not obliged to be our
Protector and Defender. By going on in a wicked course of life without
repentance, we put our selves from under his protection, and cause him to cast
of his care of us: For he has engaged himself to be a Rock and Shield only to
such as fear him and keep his Commandments. This is manifest from several
places before mentioned. He shows himself strong, but it is in behalf of
those, whose heart is perfect toward him; 2 Chr. 16.9. And says St. Peter, 1
Pet. 3.12; For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are
open unto their prayers: but the face of the Lord is against them that do evil.
Such as do evil and go on in a wicked course, are not to expect his care and
watchful Providence to attend them for good, but have cause to expect the
contrary, and are to know that God will not then be their Protector and Helper,
but their Adversary. But if such repent and return unto the Lord, and resolve
for the future to keep his sacred Commandments, he is gracious and prone to
mercy, and will then pardon them, and receive them into his care and
protection. Isaiah 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous
man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon
him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. He will be reconciled to
sinners, if they will repent and return to him, and will then become their
mighty God and Protector, and will then save and help them, as we see he did
the Jews, when they returned and cried to him for help; Jud. 10.15 --. If men
do serve him as they ought, or will return and become obedient to him, he will
be a most sure Helper and eternal Protector to them, and there is no cause that
they should doubt of his help and succor at any time.

Sixthly, The extraordinary and miraculous deliverances that God has wrought
for his People and Servants in their straits and distressed conditions, when
they have had little or no means of helping themselves, will be a farther
encouragement to us to rely and depend upon him for help and succor at all
times, when we have no power to help and relieve our selves. Seeing God has
stretched out his Almighty Arm to defend and help his Servants in times past,
we may the more cheerfully hope that he will do the like for us now in our
great need and helpless condition, if we serve him as we ought, and rely upon
his mercy and goodness for protection and relief: For his Arm is not shortened
that it cannot save; nor will he now be more backward to do it than he has
been heretofore. And many and great deliverances and extraordinary Succors and
Supports has God vouchsafed to his People and Servants when there has been
occasion for such, some whereof I shall here mention.

1, God has often relieved his Servants and People in their wants and
necessities in a wonderful manner with food and such things as they stood in
need of. He gave the Children of Israel Manna and Quails in the wilderness when
they wanted food, and began to murmur against Moses and Aaron. Exodus 16.12. I
have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel (says God) speak unto them
saying; at even ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled with
bread, and ye shall know that I am the Lord your God. And for forty years
together did he feed them with Manna in the wilderness where they wanted food,
until they came into a land that had food sufficient for them. And he caused
their garments not to wax old in all this time, that they might not want
raiment, as Moses tells them; Deuteronomy. 8.4. Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee,
neither did thy foot swell these forty years. And when they wanted water, he
brought them water out of the rock. Numb. 20.8. Take the rod (says God to
Moses) and gather thou the assembly together, thou and Aaron thy brother, and
speak ye unto the rock before their eyes; and it shall give forth his water,
and thou shall bring forth to them water out of the rock; so thou shall give
the congregation and their beasts drink. And ver. 11. And Moses lift up his
hand, and with his rod he smote the rock twice; and the water came out
abundantly, and the congregation drank, and their beasts also. God gave Samson
water in his great thirst, Judge. 15.18 --. And he commanded the ravens to feed
the Prophet Elijah, and they did so: 1 Kings 17.2 --. And the word of the Lord
came unto him, saying, Get thee hence, and turn thee eastward, and hide thy
self by the brook Cherith, that is before Jordan. And it shall be, that thou
shall drink of the brook, and I have commanded the ravens to feed thee there.
So he went, and did according unto the word of the Lord: for he went and dwelt
by the brook Cherith, that is before Jordan. And the ravens brought him bread
and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening; and he drank of
the brook. And after this was he and the Widow Woman of Zarephath and her House
sustained many days with a handful of meal and a little oil, at God's command,
when the famine was great in the land. ver. 13 --. And Elijah said unto her,
fear not; go and do as thou have said; but make me thereof a little cake first,
and bring it unto me; and after make for thee, and for thy son. For thus says
the Lord God of Israel, The barrel of meal shall not wast, neither shall the
cruse of oil fail, until the day that the Lord sends rain upon the earth. And
she went, and did according to the saying of Elijah; and she and he and her
house did eat many days. And the barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the
cruse of oil fail --. And when he fled from Jezebel, and was in the Wilderness
beyond Beersheba in a destitute condition, the Angel of the Lord brought him a
cake and water to support and strengthen him. 1 Kings 19.5 --. And as he lay
and slept under a juniper-tree, behold then an Angel touched him, and said unto
him, Arise and eat. And he looked, and behold, there was a cake baken on the
coals, and a cruse of water at his head; and he did eat and drink, and laid him
down again. And when he had eaten again, he went in the strength of that meat
forty days and forty nights unto Horeb the mount of God. Such a blessing did
God give to it, that made it sufficient to sustain him for so long a time. When
the Hosts of the Kings of Israel and Judah were distressed for want of water,
they sought to God by the Prophet Elisha, and God gave them plenty of water in
their great necessity. 2 Kings 3.16 --. And he said, Thus says the Lord, make
this valley full of ditches. For thus says the Lord, ye shall not see wind,
neither shall ye see rain, yet that valley shall be filled with water, that ye
may drink, both ye, and your cattle, and your beasts. And ver. 20. And it came
to pass in the morning, when the meat-offring was offered, that behold, there
came water by the way of Edom, and the country was filled with water. And we
may see in the Gospels that our blessed Savior did often feed many thousands
with a few loaves and a little quantity of fish, when he saw it needful to work
such a miracle for them. By these and such Instances we see how God has in an
extraordinary manner relieved his People and Servants in their great
necessities, and supplied them with food and such things as they stood in great
need of.

2, We may see also that Almighty God has often delivered his People and
Servants in an extraordinary and miraculous manner from great and eminent
Dangers, and from such Judgments and Calamities as have befallen others. God
preserved Noah from that prodigious Flood that swept away the Inhabitants of
the old World in his time, and drowned all Mankind beside him and his Family.
Genesis 7.1 --. He protected Abraham in all his travels, and delivered him from
all his fears. He preserved him from being hurt by the Egytians, Genesis 12: And
from the hands of the four Kings that took Lot captive, against whom he warred,
Genesis 14: And out of all other straits that he came into, did he deliver him. He
preserved Lot from that dreadful judgment of fire, that destroyed the Cities of
Sodom and Gomorrah etc. Genesis 19. He kept Jacob from being hurt by his Brother
Esau, when he came out with an Host of 400 men against him, and turned his
heart so that he did him no harm, but embraced him in love; Genesis 33.4. He
protected Moses from being hurt by Pharaoh King of Egypt, when he came to
deliver the Israelites out of his hand; and armed him with such power of doing
wonders, that he made him like a God to Pharaoh, as he says, Exodus 7.1. And he
preserved him all along afterward in all those dangers that he underwent; and
from the hands of those Kings with whom he warred, over whom he gave him
victory: And preserved his People Israel from all the dangers that they met
with. He protected Joshua and his People afterward from all the Kings of
Canaan, and gave him victory over them and their Armies, as we may see in the
book of Joshua. The Lord preserved David from all the attempts of King Saul to
take away his life, and at the last set him upon the Throne of Israel. And
hereby we may see how vain a thing it is to seek to take away his life, whom
the God of Heaven will preserve; and how those that set upon such enterprises,
like Saul and Pharaoh, do most miserably fret and gall themselves; and that
disappointment and grief are the fruits of such sinful attempts. In a
miraculous manner did the Lord deliver the Prophet Elijah from the two Captains
and their men, that were sent from the King of Israel to take him; and sent
down fire from Heaven to consume them; 2 Kings 1.9 --: And from Jezebel, and
all dangers else did God deliver him. The Lord delivered the Prophet Elisha
from the Bands of the Syrians, and guarded him with Horses and Chariots of fire;
2 Kings 6.15 --: And from the King of Israel, when he sent to take away his
head; and from all dangers else did God deliver him. The Lord in a remarkable
manner delivered Samaria and the Israelites from the Host of Syria (2 Kings 7.6
--) and frighted the whole Host away, and made them to overrun their Tents and
Horses through fear. The Lord preserved and delivered King Hezekiah and
Jerusalem in a miraculous manner from Sennacherib the King of Assyria, and sent
his Angel to destroy his whole Army; 2 Kings 19.35. And it came to pass that
night, that the Angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the Camp of the
Assyrians an hundred and fourscore and five thousand, and when they arose early
in the morning, behold they were all dead corpses. In a wonderful manner were
the three Children preserved and kept from harm, even in the midst of the fiery
Furnace by the Omnipotent power of God: Dan. 3.26 --: Then Shadrach Meshach and
Abednego came forth of the midst of the fire. And the Princes, Governors and
Captains, and the King's Counselors, being gathered together, saw these men
upon whose bodies the fire had no power, nor was an hair of their head singed,
neither were their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them. In
this extreme danger, and hopeless condition to all humane appearance, were they
thus miraculously delivered, and had not the least degree of harm. The Prophet
Daniel was protected and defended by an Angel in the Lyon's den from being torn
in pieces, or hurt by them; Dan. 6.21 --; Then said Daniel unto the King, O
King, live for ever. My God has sent his Angel, and has shut the lions
mouths, that they have not hurt me; for as much as before him innocence was
found in me: and also before thee, O King, have I done no hurt. The Lord by an
Angel delivered St. Peter out of prison, and out of the hands of Herod, who was
minded to put him to death: Acts 12.7 --: And behold the Angel of the Lord came
upon him (says St. Luke) and a light shined in the prison, and he smote Peter
on the side, and raised him up, saying, Arise up quickly. And his chains fell
off from his hands. And the Angel said unto him, gird thy self, and bind on thy
sandals. And so he did. And he says unto him, cast thy garments about thee,
and follow me. And he went out, and followed him --. By these and such like
examples we may see, That God has delivered and protected his People and
Servants from very great and eminent dangers in a wonderful and miraculous
manner, when they have had no power and might to help and defend themselves.
And from hence we may be the more encouraged to put our trust and confidence in
him, and hope that he will have pity and mercy upon us, and send us help and
relief in all our straits and needs and helpless conditions, if we have
recourse to him, and depend upon him for help and protection and relief at all
times, as we ought. We have all the assurance that well can be that God will no
ways fail us in the day of trouble; And we have as great encouragement as we
can well desire, to trust in the Lord Jehovah at all times of the greatest
Dangers: And if we can but believe his sacred and sure Word, and rely upon his
faithful Promises, we need not much to fear in the darkest and blackest Times
that can come upon us, such as this is like to be. If we are not wanting to our
selves, but will repent and seek to God, and trust in him alone, he will never
be wanting to us, but will be sure to be with us at all times as need shall
require; And even at the Stake, if we should be brought thither, will he be
with us to support us, as he was with St. Stephen, Acts 7.55. And even now will
the Lord God Almighty assume and take to himself his great Power, and will
Reign, Rev. 11.17: that is, will Reign in a magnificent and glorious manner,
and make mortal men to know in the end, that it is He which rules in the
Kingdoms of men, and disposes of them as he sees good. Now will he exert and
put forth his Almighty Arm for the protection and defense of his Church and
Servants in their forlorn and helpless condition. And when we have seen this,
we are to imitate that Heavenly Assembly of Elders, and to sing Alleluja's to
him, and to return thanks to the Lord God Omnipotent, because he has so
visibly set up his Standard here among us, and has Reigned in such a glorious
and renowed manner for the preservation of his Church and Servants. Now in the
end of this dark Time that is coming upon us, will the Lord God Omnipotent
shake the Earth and the great City too ( Rev. 11.13.) and affright the
Inhabitants thereof, and make them to give glory to the God of Heaven. And then
are the Enemies of the Protestant Church to expect that the second dreadful Woe
will be executed upon them. And in the earthquake (says St. John) were slain
of men seven thousand. Which number seems to be put not strictly for just seven
thousand, but for an exceeding great number of men that shall be then slain.
[See the Letter of a Protestant Clergyman --.] And therefore we had need to
take great care that we do not fall to Popery, and so perish in this
Destruction. We ought to take great care that we fall not from God to any
sinful practices; for hereby we shall do our selves more harm than all our
Enemies can do to us. By Rev. 11, we may see that Popery shall prevail for
three years and an half, and that then after this time is exspired the
Protestant Church shall be as glorious as ever it was before. And from this XI
Chapter we have assurance of God's extraordinary help and protection even at
this very time, that he will in a wonderful manner defend his Church and
Servants, and fight for them against their Enemies; And after this short time
of Trial, will exalt them again. And this will be an exceeding great Support
and Comfort to us in our mournful and forlorn condition, to know this
beforehand, and to be assured of it by Divine Revelation. We may even look
upon the Divine Consolation that God gave to his People the Jews by the
Prophet, as spoken to us. Is. 26.20. Come, my People, enter thou into thy
chambers, and shut thy doors about thee; hide thy self as it were for a little
moment, until the Indignation be over-past. With Faith and Patience we may
well wait upon God for such a little time, when he, for wise and righteous ends
does permit such a Tragical Scene of affairs to be brought upon the Stage of
the world. And now to conclude,

Seeing our God is such a Rock of Salvation against all that can befall us;
seeing he knows and regards our conditions and all our Dangers and Needs and
Wants, and is both able and willing to help and succor us upon all accounts;
seeing he has given so great Assurance that he will never fail us and be
wanting to us, if we serve him and trust in him; Let us then not be Infidels
and Faithless in so clear a Light, but let us be prevailed upon to make him,
and him alone, our Rock and Confidence, and betake our selves to him at all
times of Danger and Distress for help and relief. Though we have sinned and
been great Transgressors, and so given him too great a cause to cast off his
protection and care of us; yet if we repent and return to him, he is prone to
mercy, and therefore we may cheerfully hope that he will yet be our Almighty
God and Protector. Let us all then bid adieu to all our sinful and evil ways,
and set our selves seriously and earnestly to seek the Lord of Hosts, and then
we shall be sure to find him, and to find him a Mighty God for us in the
needful time of trouble and distress. Let us address our selves to him in
earnest prayer and fasting, that he would be graciously pleased to pass by our
Transgressions, and to pity and help us in all the perilous conditions and
miseries that befall us. Let us call upon him with the man in the Gospel ( Mar.
9.24) to succor and help our unbelief, to increase and strengthen our Faith in
him, and to confirm our hopes and confidence in his great Mercy and Goodness,
that we may at all times cheerfully depend and rely upon him, and never doubt
and despair of his Almighty Help and Protection. I conclude all with that
Collect of our Church, ordered to be used upon the fourth Sunday after Epiphany.

O God, who know us to be set in the midst of so many and great dangers,
that by reason of the frailty of our nature we cannot always stand upright;
Grant to us such strength and protection as may support us in all dangers, and
carry us through all temptations, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ERRATA.
IN the Watchman's Voice. P. 19. L. 3. r. forbearance. l. 21. r. Romish. p. 20.
l. 25. r. sinners. p. 26. l. 4. r. Jailer. l. 15. r. at another. p. 43. l. 22.
r. we are not.

In the Letter. p. 1. l. 1. r. Laity. p. 14. l. 6. r. Angels. p. 15. l. 29. r.
Papists. p. 17. l. 5. r. the Saints. p. 22. l. 33. r. that. p, 23. l. 6. r.
Emperors. p. 29. l. 18. r. and an half. p. 47. l. 6. r. marginal. p. 57. l. 6.
r. Tranquillity. p. 58. l. 22. r. of time. p. 59. l. 5. r. Rome. p. 62. l. 22.
r. Providence.

In the contrariety of Popery, etc. p. 5. l. 23. r. yea Lord p. 16. l. 2. r.
directions. l. 26. r. Apostle. p. 24. l. 2. r. Not. p. 27. l. 11. r. effected.
p. 46. l. 16. r. (says he) p. 47. l. 5. r. not to marry. p. 53. l. 8. r. says
he.

In the Church's Request. p. 5. l. 10. r. Tranquillity. p. 31. l. 2. r. we were.
l. 33. r. truly. l. 37. r. fulfilled. p. 35. l. 5. r. or wise. l. 20. r. you.
p. 36. l. 11. r. confounded.

In the Exhortation to trust in God. p. 9. l. 28. r. thou. p. 11. l. 17. r.
possess. p. 15. l. 38. r. his. p. 20. l. 38. r. handiwork. p. 22. l. 29. r.
subtle.

P stands for page. L for line. R for read.


