Some Reasons Humbly offered against the Quakers unreasonable Request, touching
Elections of Members to serve in Parliament.
WHEREAS on February the 10th 1707/8, Leave was given to bring in a Bill for
the more easy Polling the Freeholders of Elections of Knights of the Shire,
for the County of Sussex and Yorkshire. And having understood that the Quakers
make Application to have their bare Declaration serve instead of a Legal Oath,
and that without the Words [As in the Presence of Almighty God], which as it
appears great Presumption in them to expect; So I Humbly beg Leave to offer
some Reasons against their Request. And

I. Because they are such Mortal Enemies to the Christian Religion, denying
Jesus of Nazareth to be Christ the Son of God; and by Villifying and Contemning
the Holy Scriptures, and Reproaching the Christian Ministers, chiefly, or in
the first place, because they Preach out of the Bible. All which, and much more
I have proved out of their Books, in my Book now published, Entitled, Goliah's
Head cut off with his own Sword, and the Quakers routed by their own Weapons,
etc. And Sold at the King's-Head, the Crown, and Green Dragon in St. Paul's
Churchyard; and at the Bible under the Piazza in Cornhill: And which I stand
ready to make good to their Faces, if desired.

II. And since they can take a Legal Oath to serve their private Interest, why
should they not do it to serve the Public? That many of them have, there are
many Instances in the Courts of Chancery; and in particular George Whitehead,
against whom Mr. Thomas Daniel and Elizabeth his Wife, Exhibited a Bill in my
Lord Mayor's Court; to which George Whitehead put in his Answer upon Oath,
April 9. 1695. as may be seen by the Records of that Court; out of which I took
a Copy of his said Oath, Attested by Mr. Gibson, Attorney in that Court. But

III. They by Principle are Enemies to the very Constitution of Parliaments,
declaring in their Books publicly, That a Partiament chosen by most Voices,
are not like to act for God, or the Good of the People. Again, That it was
through Ignorance that the People subjected themselves to Hereditary
Government, standing in a single Person successively; and that our Nation have
been under the Bonds of Slavery in this Respect. Moreover, That all Kings (and
consequently Queens) sprung up in the Night, since the Days of the Apostles,
among the Antichrists: And that such as dote upon Earthly Kings, are Traitors,
Apostates, Spiritual Egyptians, etc. These were their ancient Seditious and
Anti-Monarchical, as well as Anti-Parliamentary Principles. But were forgiven
by the Act of Oblivion: But since their Toleration, they have afresh reasserted
them; saying in Print, We are not sensible that we have altered any one
Principle of our Faith since we were a People; but are the same in every
respect that we were 50 Years ago; we know not one Article of the Christian
Faith in which we are altered since we were a People. Therefore blush not
publicly to declare, That we are not changed in our Principles. And if so, I
Humbly conceive it stands them upon, first to retract these and the like
Principles, before they presume to ask such Favors, as no Subjects besides
them dare to do.

IV. Their Presumption farther appears, by their Contempt of Authority; For let
the Queen's Majesty put forth Her Royal Proclamation for the strict Observation
of a General Fast, or Day of Thanksgiving, for some Signal Victory, or other
National Blessing, under Pain of Her High Displeasure; They take no notice
thereof, either in City or Country, but one goes to Plow, others to Cart,
others keep open their Shops, in Contempt of Her Royal Authority: How then do
they deserve the Favor of the Government, who will not Obey Her Majesty in one
of Her least, and most Christian Commands? But again,

V. Whereas the Laws of the Land not only injoin the Ministers of the
Establishment, but all Preachers and Teachers of separate Congregations, to
Abjure the Pretended Prince of Wales; which both Conformists and Dissenting
Protestants readily Obey. But as for the Quakers, they wholly refuse Subjection
to the Laws in that Case made and provided, to the ill Example of Her Majesty's
good Subjects. How then can they, without great Presumption, ask such singular
Favors of the Government, who thus trample under Foot their Authority? But,

VI. Besides all this, although they are become a considerable Body of People,
yet they will not personally assist Her Majesty, and the Kingdom, in this time
of War: And that their being thus passed by with Impunity, it is presumed that
many turn Quakers on that Account; so that for every Man that turns Quaker, the
Queen loses an assisting Subject, whereby the Strength of the Kingdom is
thereby weakened. And it is farther observable, that amongst the Quakers, there
are no Cripples on that account, no Wooden Legs, Broken Arms, or Lost Limbs:
But when there is any Advantage in Trade, procured by the War, no People upon
the Earth are so ready to run and go to reap the Benefit of it; who thereby
(like the Jews) enrich themselves. All which duly considered, what great
Presumption is it in them to beg such Favors, (and such singular Ones too, as
none but themselves have the Face to ask).

Lastly, But besides all this, they are so uncharitable, as that they account
all but themselves, from the Queen on the Throne, to the Beggar on the Dunghill,
such Infidels, that they will neither marry or bury with Us; yea, they account
that to be married with a Minister, is such an Abomination, that as their own
Words are (in one of their Orders by me) It is a Dishonor to their Holy
Profession: And that such of them as do, they deny them burial with them. How
then can they expect from such as they account Infidels such singular Favors,
without an unwarrantable Presumption? But for them to Request, as I am told
they do, to have the Words [As in the Presence of Almighty God] left out, is
such an unparalled piece of Presumption, that none but a Quaker can be guilty
of, especially considering that the most noted among them, George Whitehead for
one, stands charged with declaring for Truth, that which he knew to be False,
and that in a plain Matter of Fact, and that in more Instances than one.

To conclude these brief Remarks; I grant, that in their late Prints, they
sometimes will seem thankful to the Government for their Exemptions from those
Obligations, that all Christians, both Conformists and Non-Conformists, are
obliged to, under certain Penalties. But to their Friends, in order to keep up
their Pretenses to Infallibility, and Prophetical Inspirations, they attribute
these their Advances to the fulfilling of their own Prophecies, as I have
showed in my Book above-noted. For when their Solemn Affirmations was first
granted them, to be taken instead of a Formal Oath, and which was obtained by
the frequent Solicitations, and other secret Methods of their Grandees. Yet
this their Solemn Affirmation was by many of their Brethren, and still is (of
which I am an Ear-witness) accounted as bad as a Legal Oath, and that because
of these Words, viz. As in the Presence of Almighty God. And thereupon
complained, That their Friends George Whitehead, etc. had subjected their
Testimony to Man's Will, contrary to their ancient Testimony: Upon which George
Whitehead, etc. wrote an Epistle to satisfy their Scruples, (one of which I
have by me) in which are these Words, viz. Let all now be thankful, that the
Lord has so tendered the Hearts of many in Authority, as to subject their
Wills so far to Friends Entreaties. -- Let none therefore count, or call this a
subjecting our Testimony to the Will of Man, seeing God has so far subjected
Man's Will to our Christian Desire. And it is farther observable from this
Epistle, in which they labored to satisfy their Friends Scruples, touching
their said Affirmation, that they quote not one Verse of Scripture, but the
Books of Fox, Penn, and ten more of their Apostles; which is a Demonstration
that it is as George Whitehead teaches in his Book, Truth Defending, etc. p. 7.
That what is spoken by the Spirit of Truth in any, (meaning themselves) is of
greater Authority than the Scriptures, viz. That they account their own Books
of greater Authority than the Holy Bible. And since they have in Print denied
our whole Religion, and declare they differ in the Foundation from all
Christians in the World; it is Humbly hoped, that they shall not therefore be
Privileged with Favour's above all the Queen's Subjects. Signed on the behalf
of all Christian Churches, by

FRANCIS BVGG.

SOME REASONS Humbly Offered against the Quakers Request, Touching ELECTIONS.


