A TESTIMONY AGAINST The 66 Judges called Quakers, who writ an Epistle (as they
call it) against John Story and John Wilkinson, and those that joined with
them, subscribed by the said 66 Judges, which is here inserted; with an Answer
thereunto subscribed by 67 of the said People; published to this end, that all
may take notice how the Spirit of Antichrist has entered into the Quakers
Teachers in this our Age and Generation.
LET all People take notice to whom this Writing shall come, That there is a
Generation of Antichristian Preachers called Quakers, in this Land of England,
who make it their great business yearly to meet together at London; and when as
they are met together, for to call into question such things as they have
nothing to do withal, that is, such things as are of a Spiritual Concernment;
the which thing alone, belongs to the Light or Measure of the Spirit in every
ones own particular to judge of, and it does not belong to the Light in others,
for to judge others in matters of Conscience, Religion, and Worship, who owns
the same Light or Measure of Divine Life to be the only Rule for them to walk
by; but the place of all such Teachers is to judge themselves and not their
Brethren, as Christ said, Judge your selves and ye shall not be judged. But
now, if these men did but own themselves to be (...) Brethren, or in a Child's
State, or in a Servant's Place to God, as christ did, who took upon him the
form of a Servant, and also he learned Obedience to his Father as a Son; or if
these men did but consider how Christ behaved himself as a Servant among his
Disciples, although he was Lord of all, and also how he taught them, that those
among them that did desire to be greatest, should be willing to become least,
and so a Servant to others.

Then would they not have acted, as they have formerly done toward their
Brethren in the West and North of England, and elsewhere, in setting themselves
up as Judges over their Brethren in matters of Conscience, Religion, and
Worship toward God; but they would rather have recommended every one to abide
in their own measures, and so to have left all as had been convinced to God the
Judge of all, who at the first did convince them, and not to have set up
themselves as Judges over their Brothers Consciences, as the Sixty Six Judges
have lately done in the year one thousand six hundred seventy seven, in their
Paper sent to the Quakers in the West of England, the which Paper was written
against John Story and John Wilkinson, and those which did join with them;
wherein they did judge them to be of a rending, separating and dividing Spirit.
But one main thing that the 66 Judges have neglected in that Paper sent to the
Quakers, that is, they should have drawn up first a Bill of Indictment of the
particular Criminal Facts that these Quakers had been guilty of before that
they had passed or given forth such a sensorious general Judgment against them,
the which thing you Judges neglected. But so far as I can understand, that the
Criminal Facts, which these Quakers are charged to be guilty of, was, that
these Quakers in the West and North of England, they did not receive and
embrace the orders of George Fox, and also they refused to be tried by those
who did own the said Orders, Decrees and Impositions of George Fox, and the
rest of those Preachers who had formerly made it their business to meet
together in Council, and to send forth Orders and Decrees among the Quakers, as
Rules for them to observe and walk after; which thing was practiced above ten
years ago by those who were called the Eleven Elders: for They also sent forth
a Paper of Orders among the Quakers; but by many of the Quakers the said Paper
was disowned, although those which sent it forth among the Quakers, said, that
it was given forth in and from the Operation of the Spirit of God; but surely
those Quakers which did disown the said Paper, they did not believe what those
called the Eleven Elders had asserted: For had they believed that the said
Writing had been given forth in and from the Operation of (...) ^rue Spirit,
they dared not to have opposed it, nor yet to have disowned it; but their
disowning of it does give forth a certain Testimony, that those Quakers
believed that it came from a wrong Spirit; for the Eleven Elders they did not
stand to maintain it, nor yet to give forth a Testimony against those Quakers
which did disown the said Writing, which they ought to have done if it had been
given forth from a right Spirit.

And now here follows the Copy of the Writing sent by the 66 Judges, to the
Quakers in the West of England, and also their Names to it; and likewise the
Quakers Answer to it: and so let the Light, or true Spirit, or Gods Witness,
judge in all those who shall read the said Writing, whether that which was
given forth by the 66 Judges, did not come forth from the spirit of Antichrist,
or from Satan in them transformed into an Angel of Light. Let the Light in all
that shall read them judge.

Jeffery Bullock.

From a MEETING held at Ellis Hook's Chamber in London, the 12th. of the 4th.
Month, 77.
Our dear Friends and Brethren,
THE Lord who is the Ancient of Days, the Unchangeable, and the Holy One of
Israel, that was and is to come, our Rock and Strength for ever, has
graciously brought us together by his own Power, and is with us, and has
covered us with his Love and Spirit, and filled our Hearts with his
undeclarable Kindness; the sense of his Mercies has exceedingly overcome us,
and cemented us together; and blessed, sweet, and very precious to our Souls is
the Heavenly Unity of Life amongst us, wherein at this Meeting, the Lord our
God has crowned us with Glory, Dominion, and Peace; blessed for ever be his
pure Name.

Oh how good it is for all to keep in the Living sense of God and his Truth!
where plentious Redemption, and Preservation is known, where the Murmurer and
Repiner can never come; therefore all that are in the muttering, dissatisfied,
and jealous Nature, full of Doubts and Reasonings and Objections, go from their
pure Eye, and out of Truth's Habitation in themselves, and so come to suffer
loss.

O Dear Brethren at this time (as on like occasions has been frequent with us)
the care of the Peace, and the welfare of the Churches of Christ came upon us,
and blessed be the Lord, things are generally well and flourishing, and Truth
grows famous, though Sufferings abound in many places; yet it is well with
Friends, and the Lords power reigns, and great has been the Concern of Friends
about the Sufferings of our Brethren, and other things, and blessed Meetings
have we had, wherein things have been clearly opened, sweetly and tenderly
treated on in much love, and brotherly love concluded: For which, blessed be
the Name of the Lord, whose Loving, Ancient, and Fresh Power and presence was
with us.

But truly with bowed Spirits, and grieved Hearts, have we perceived the
obstinate and obdurateness of some that have gone into the Self-will, despising
Heavenly Dignities, and casting tender Love and Entreaties behind their backs,
setting up, and continuing in, and promoting false and pernicious Jealousies,
Mutterings, and secret Smitings, whereby they are darkened in their
Understandings, and so have, through the Power of the Enemy of the King of
Righteousneses and Peace, set up a kind of Standard of Separation from that
blessed Fellowship and Communion of the Churches of Christ sweetly possessed
together, to the Dishonor of God, his Truth and People. More especially John
Wilkinson and John Story, notwithstanding the many Visitations and Admonitions
of Love, and Life, even in the deepest Travails; and that from time to time,
and year to year; particularly the sense and admonition of the last yearly
Meeting, writ in great love that they might return, and be reconciled to their
Brethren, before they offer their Gifts, which they have rejected: And
forasmuch as it appears to us, that they will not come to us, nor near us in
the peaceable Truth, which we have frequently and truly desired for their good;
but that they go on in their opposition and evil smiting against the Faithful
Brethren, and Practice of the Church of Christ, refusing to dissolve their
separate Company in the North, or clear their Hands of them by a faithful
Testimony against them, or so much as blot their Names out of their Paper of
Separation.

And because we are sensible they have made an ill use of our Forbearance, even
to the strengthening themselves in their Separation, and cover their evil
Designs among some simple-hearted Friends, persevering therein by Word,
Writing, and Practice, we are constrained after this continual waiting and
exhortation (thus slighted by them for the Glory of the Name of the Lord, and
sake of the Peace of the Churches of Christ, that we may stand clear in the
Power of God, of the Blood of all in the great and notable day of Account) more
publicly to reprove and judge them: And we do hereby reprove and judge that
jealous, rending and separating Spirit, and them and their separate Company as
being in the Spirit of Separation; and that by the Spirit and Power of our God,
we warn all to whom this comes, to beware of the said John Wilkinson and John
Story, whose way at present is not the way of Peace and Christian Concord: For
if it were, they would not offer their Gift till reconciled to their Brethren.
And therefore Brethren stand up in the Power and Wisdom of God for the
Testimony of Truth against that wrong, murmuring, and dividing Spirit, and
where they come, warn them to go home in the name of the Lord, and be
reconciled to their Brethren, and not go thus up and down to offer their Gift,
which in this State is not a Peace, but a Division, offering contrary to the
Precept of Christ Jesus our Lord, first being reconciled, whatever their
pretenses be, and therein will you acquit your selves in Gods sight, and show
true Love and Friendship unto them, and those that may be hurt by them, which
our Souls most earnestly desire ye, that it may be truly well with them both
here and for ever: And from the Lord we say, had they loved the Prosperity of
Zion, and the Peace of Jerusalem, more than their own Self-will, and
Self-separation; and had they sought the Unity that is in the Truth and sweet
Communion of Brethren which stands in that Love that thinks no evil, and that
Wisdom that is gentle and very easy to be entreated with the Brethren, sweet
and precious had been our Fellowship to this day.

And it is our Godly Exhortation to you Friends and Brethren of Monthly and
quarterly Meetings, that you watch in the Light and Power of God against this
separating Spirit that smites at the blessed Fellowship of the Churches of
Christ, and where it enters any, in Gods love to admonish, exhort, and warn
such to take heed of that ravenous Spirit, and to keep the Unity of the Peace
of the Family of the Lord, the Household of Christ which we are; and if
notwithstanding your Christian Dealing and Forbearance, such persons persevere
and go on in their separate Spirit and Practice, let Gods Truth be clear of
them, and Truth set over their Heads, according to that blessed Order of the
Gospel of Christ settled amongst you. And dear Brethren, be careful not to
suffer your Meetings, which were gathered, not by the will of Man, but by the
Power and Wisdom of the Lord God, to be disturbed, overruled, and spoiled by
heady, obstinate, and contentious Persons, that disturb the Peace of the Church
of Christ; neither fear Man, but eye the Lord, and wait in his Wisdom and Power
to be guided and ordered; and so go on to your work in the name of the Lord:
For the Seed of Life, and not the Wisdom which is from below, must rule and
have the Dominion for ever.

But forasmuch as the way of the working of the subtle Enemy has been to
suggest, that it is the design of some to make themselves Lords over Gods
Heritage, and to set up an Arbitrary Power in the Churches of Christ, and then
to run out into severe Exclamations against Impositions, crying up Liberty of
Conscience, thereby casting a mist before the Eyes of the simple, and a
Stumbling Block in the way of the weak. Thus we feel our selves constrained in
the love of our Lord for the good of all to declare, and the Lord that gathered
us, and preserved us to this day is our Record, that we deny and abhor any such
thing; for we have one Lod, Judge and Lawgiver, and that is Christ Jesus, unto
whose Light, Power, and Spirit, we have been turned, and in that have
worshipped him, and had Fellowship together to this day, and are your Servants
for his sake; and we are assured in the Lord, that those that keep in the
Light, Life, and Power of Christ, will have Fellowship with us, and truly our
Fellowship is with the Father and the Son; and though it is far from us to
bruise or hurt the poorest or least member in the Church of Christ, who may not
have that clearness of sight, and strength of Faith, which the Lord has
brought us to, but that they may be cherished; yet by that Salt, that we have
in our selves from the Lord, we are enabled to savor between the
Transformations of the Enemy, and the scruples of the Innocent, and as to be
tender of the one, so to give Judgment against the other; and our day has
lamentably shown us the effect of that Spirit, that under a pretense of crying
down Impositions, and pleading for Liberty, and doing nothing but what it is
free to, endeavoring to lay waste the blessed Unity of the Brethren, and so
overrun the blessed Heritage of the Lord, that lived together in an orderly
Family under the law of life, and living order of the Gospel, with a loose and
unsubjected Conversation, which would bring confusion to the Church, and make
us a Derision to the Heathen.

And to the end that these very persons concerned in this separation, may
appear to be no lovers of Christian liberty, and Gospel Privileges, as they
pretend, let their own Paper, which is a Declaration of the Reasons of their so
separating, be read and weighed in the Universal love and life of Christ Jesus,
and therein we well suppose, will be found the true Nature of Imposition, in
that none of their own County are allowed to be of their monthly and quarterly
Meetings, but such as are appointed and chosen by the particular Meetings;
next, that none of other Counties, though public laborers of the Gospel, are
to be admitted to be at their Meetings, unless it be to tell their Message, and
immediately to depart; and these, with such like things, 87 subscribed, as the
reasons of their separation, and Foundation of a new Government amongst
themselves, which is a plain Independancy from the Practice of the Church of
Christ throughout the World. O Friends, watch in the Power of God against this
Spirit, that would make them twain, that God has made one, and separate that
which God has joined together; and you that have an Interest in them, and to
whom their regard is. Oh have a care that you give them no strength in their
manifest separation, but stand upon your Watchtower. Dear Friends, in Gods
love, touch not with that Spirit, the Enemy of Zions Glory, and their Peace;
give not your strength to them, but deal faithfully with them, and seek them in
Gods Way and Wisdom, that whatsoever becomes of them in the end, you may be
clear of their Blood in the sight of the Lord; and that they may not say, but
that they have had a day of love and visitation: and truly that which has
encouraged us in this Epistle, is, that good success God has blessed our like
Endeavors in his Power with: For many deceived by them, having seen their
snare in tenderness of Spirit, have honestly confessed their Fault, and are
come from them, and have testified both against the separate company, and
themselves for being of it; and now live in Unity with their Brethren, and feel
the Joy and quiet Habitation, that in the Communion of Saints, and Fellowship
of Jesus is enjoyed, Praises to the Lord for ever; and as we desire, so we hope
more will be brought to the same blessed sense: so be zealous for the Lord dear
Brethren, and stand up in his spirit and power, for the Peace of his Church; in
his Precious peaceable life dwell, that keeps in soundness of mind, then will
you show mercy to that to which mercy is due, and Judgment to whom Judgment is
due, without respect of Persons; and herein our pure true love is cleared to
them and all mankind; and the God of Heavenly love, pure and precious, continue
our Fellowship, and be with us all, and bless us to the Glory of his Eternal
love, who over all Spirits, Angels, and Men, Thrones, Dignities, and Dominions,
Reigns, and is worthy and blessed for ever. We are universally,

Your Dear and Faithful Brethren in the Labor, Travail, Tribulation, Patience,
Hope, and Rejoicing of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. Thomas Tailor.
Tho. Briggs. W. Fdmonson. Amb. Rigg. Joseph Batt. Jam. Harrison. Cut. Hayhurst.
Jo. Burngeat. Bra. Dayley. Ste. Smith. Tho. Holmes. Ja. Halladay. Tho.
Robeison. W. Gosnel. Ben. Antrobus. Sam. Jennings. Rich. Pindle. Francis Bell.
Ja. Fletcher. Tho. Sacre. Tho. Bracy. Jo. Ticer. Tho. Burr. W. Fallowfield. Jo.
Johnson. Hen. Jackson. Gy. Bernardiston. Tho. Atkins. Mor. Watkins. W. Gibson.
Ric. Longworth. Jo. Bowrem. Chr. Bacon. Ri. Vickris. Ja. Claypoole. Ol.
Sampson. Luke Howard. Rich. Smead. Jo. Wilford. Jo. Elson. Sam. Cater. Jo.
Vaughton. Jo. Watson. Fr. Fincher. Jo. Kilborne. W. Whaley. Tho. Ellwood. Sam.
Hulbooke. Chris. Tailor. Rich. Davis. Jo. Whitehead. Nic. Gates. Len. Fell. Jo.
Moon. Jo. Abraham. Jo. Higgons. Tho. Latemore. Jo. Hill. Ant. Tomkins. Jo.
Boy. Chr. Marshall. Jo. Blackley. W. Penn. Fran. Moore. Jo. Swinten, Jun. Eze.
Wolley.

ANd there were several Brethren that had left this City before this Meeting,
wherein this Epistle was subscribed, who at other Meetings had testified
against this separate Spirit in the Power of the Lord, and so are one with us
herein; and some there were, who have already cleared their Consciences at
their last years Meeting; and since at other Meetings, both by Epistles and
other Manuscripts, in a full and faithful Testimony against this Spirit of
Separation and opposition, and those that remain in it, and stands witnesses
against it and them for the Lord and his Heavenly Truth.



Let this be read in Monthly, Quarterly, and other men's Meetings, as in God's
Wisdom and Counsel may be seen meet, and a Service for the same.
We whose Names are hereunto subscribed, being a part of the Lords People; a
few lines from some of us called Quakers in the County Of Wilts, and is in
answer to a Paper bearing date from Ellis Hook's Chamber in London, the 12. day
of the 4. Month, 1677. subscribed by 66 Persons, whose language seem to us, as
though they did not write only on their own behalf, but as persons assuming
Authority over the People of the Lord called Quakers.

And therefore are we now concerned in Conscience to give this Testimony, viz.
that it becomes not them, nor yet any person upon Earth, to assume a Power, and
thereby to appear as Lords and Masters over any one member of Christ's Body; and
in as much as we have such a sense that there is such a Spirit this day at
work, we cannot but say, that (through the serious considertion of these
things) the spirit of the Lord God is grieved in us, and though the Foundation
of God stands sure unto us, who have not only believed, but also kept our
integrity unto the Lord, even unto this present day, of which we have an
absolute certainty confirmed unto us, by the evidence of Gods Spirit witnessing
with our spirits herein; yet the extent of such proceedings may be of such an
ill tendency, as some thereby may be weakened, and others possibly turned out of
the way: Moreover when we consider what unchristian-like Carriages, and
unbrother-like proceedings has been exercised against our ancient Friends and
Elders in the Truth, those faithful and innocent servants of the Living God Jo.
Wilkinson and Jo. Story, we cannot but even lament, because the testimony of
God on their behalf lives with us, and remains as an obligation upon our
spirits thus to say, that though the principle of Truth in our Hearts, leads us
not to place our Faith in them, or any other man or men whatsoever; because
ever since the beginning of our Convincement of the truth to this day, we had a
certain sense that all are liable to err, if they watch not; yet we have, and
still do firmly believe, that it has pleased our Heavenly Father to commit
unto them a dispensation of the Gospel of Life and Salvation, with which they
were by him two or three and twenty years since sent amongst us, who in that,
with many of their dear Brethren now deceased, bore the Burden in the heat of
the Day, and as we firmly believe, have continued faithful Laborers in their
Masters work and service to this very day, and through the Wisdom of God
committed unto them; we well remember a word of reproof and instruction from
them has been a word of comfort, it being given in great care and tenderness
for the preservation of that part of the Flock of God now accompanied with many
exercises, who were gathered by them as Instruments in the hand of the Lord;
and now through the length of time, our experimental knowledge concerning them,
and their righteous walking before us from time to time, has so confirmed us,
that we freely give it as our belief and judgment, that they have not hitherto
changed their way.

Therefore, you who have concerned your selves to write against them, to give
over such work for time to come, and mind that which belongs to you, and let
them alone to their Lord and Master, the true and living God, whose true
Messengers they have been, and now are; For be it known unto you all, that you
shall never be able to destroy that Interest God has given these his Servants
in the hearts of his people, while they keep the station where they now stand;
for being wise in the wisdom that is from above, they have been Instruments in
the Lords Hands to turn many to Righteousness, who with them, if they continue
therein, shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars for
ever and ever.

We confess your Paper is filled with many high expressions, viz. of Heavenly
Unity, and crowned with Glory and Dominion, using the word Dignity, etc. which
puts us in mind thus to query of you (since you, as we take it, so boast) what
is the honor and advancement that you are lately arrived at? Have you any
thing but what you have received? How can you expect we can believe such things
are truly found amongst you, as in words you do so largely make a profession
of, while we see and behold the spirit of prejudice flow from you, even in the
very same Paper, against faithful Brethren who harms you not, neither have, or
do we understand, that they seek Revenge, or render evil for evil, but leaves
their Cause unto the Lord recommending the same unto the faithful and true
witness of God in all Consciences, knowing that all Gods people are to act and
speak as God thereby shall open their Understandings.

We cannot positively charge every one of you, that you have acted on the
credit of others, but yet we are in our very Consciences satisfied, that
several of you have so done, and so understand not what you have done; but yet
remember this from your Friends, that whosoever has so done to the wrong of
the Lords Servants, it will redound to their own shame, and no imaginary power
or authority whatsoever will be able to uphold the betrayed or betrayers from
the just Judgment in the day of the Lord. We take notice you thus say,
notwithstanding the many Visitations and Admonitions, and that from time to
time, and from year to year, etc. we desire that every one of you will now look
back and behold your work, and consider whether great part of you, did ever in
all your lives, either visit or admonish the said Jo. Wilkinson, and Jo. Story
upon that account. We also find in the said Paper these expressions, Whereas,
they meaning J. S. and. J. W. concerning their evil Designs amongst the simple,
persevering therein, many being deceived by them, setting up, and continuing
in, and promoting false and pernicious Jealousies, a ravenous Spirit, and such
like; and we do hereby reprove and judge (say you) that rending Spirit, and
them and their separate company: here you have not only charged in general
terms, but also past Judgment upon your general Charge, notwithstanding which,
the particular matter of Fact as evidence of the charge lies yet behind, which
we in regard to the Law of Love and Christian Charity, do on the behalf of our
suffering and innocent Brethren, expect that you make good, and in order to our
satisfaction, whose Consciences are concerned (on the behalf of the truth) do
query of you, what is the evil designed by them? And where has it been made
appear? And how do they persevere therein? Who are the many deceived by them?
And what have they deceived them of? What has been set up by them, and what do
they continue in and promote that is false? What ravenous actions have been
committed by them? As to your general Charge, we cannot but turn them upon your
own heads as false, there to remain, until you prove them by particular matter
of Fact.

We know it is become a custom with some to revile innocent men, but yet we
also know it is an ill way to exalt one Brother by the defamation of another
that is innocent: Our desires are, that this sin may not be laid to any of your
charges, but rather, if you are conscious to your selves of guilt herein, you
may speedily repent. You also thus say, we warn all to whom this comes, to
beware of the said J. S. and J. W. and not only so, but seems to prescribe a
form of words, viz. where they come, warn them to go home, and by their so
doing, they will acquit themselves in Gods sight; (mark) an easy way to be
acquitted: We demand from whom have you power to give forth such a large
Commission, since we certainly know, that a man may speak your prescribed Form
of words, like a Child that learns a Lesson by roat, and yet be far from
standing acquitted in Gods sight. Alas Friends! we have a godly Jealousy, that
some imaginary whimsie has led you to appear so confident, as to warn them to
go home, because we believe the word of the Lord dwells richly in them; but
perhaps you may think the stress of all lies in silencing them, or sending them
home; if you so think, you deceive your selves, for we testify, that the same
word of life which dwells in them, (and that cannot assent that the Servants of
Isreal's God should bow to any Image, or Image-maker) dwells in many Brethren,
Praises to the Lord for ever.

It appears by your words, you are afraid of being a derision to the Heathen,
do you not take the ready way, and walk directly in the path that leads
thither? And can you think otherwise? but if the Heathen knew but your
unchristian-like carriages and proceedings against the Brethren, they would
certainly have you in derision.

Now as touching the separate Meeting in the North, unto whose Paper (which is
a Declaration of the reasons of their so seperating) you refer us, desiring us
both to read it, and to weigh it, and then, say you, you, we well suppose then
will be found the true nature of Imposition: We tell you, we have both read it,
and weighed it, and do not only well suppose, but also certainly find a great
deal more in it than we find from you: For though some passages therein might
have been worded to answer the intent of the subscribers better than the words
laid down does; yet Charity would so construe of the Reason, Equity, Truth and
Justice offered by them therein, as not to put such constructions thereon, as
never was their meaning. But what if we in this County, or any Friends
elsewhere, should say to any of you at London or other Cities or Counties, as
to the public concern in the management of our affairs, meddle not with us
unless concerned; but if the word of the Lord is really with any of you, we are
ready to hear it: If we should so say unto you, we cannot think barely of this
saying of yours, you may well suppose this to be the true nature of Imposition,
neither do we understand theirs to be any otherwise, and no part of the nature
of Imposition in it, having no penalty annexed thereunto.

And now we might by way of question, ask when and from whom you received cower
over them, or any other, and over what part your power does extend? Seeing we
certainly know Conscience ought to be free, with which you are not to
intermeddle, and as for our outward Property, it belongs not to you, neither in
it are we by you defended, and as to matter of Fact, you prove nothing against
them. These things considered, we cannot understand, why or wherefore you
should use such language as we find in your Paper: To us it seems rather to
spring from the spirit of Lordship exercised amongst the Gentiles, then from
that Spirit that delights to be Servant to the Brethren for Christ's sake; and
whereas you say, because we are sensible they have made an ill use of our
forbearance to the strengthening, themselves, and so forth, we do hereby
reprove and judge them and others* etc. If you pretend not to a power over
them, what need the word Forbearance? And if you pretend not to be their
Judges, why do you undertake to pass judgment? But forasmuch as we certainly
know you have no power over them, neither spiritual nor temporal; we therefore
tell you, you are Intruders, and your Paper of false judgment, on this account
we do undervalue as too mean and too light, either to affright or take place
with us, that are established in the Truth, and the weightiest expression
therein contained, is no more to us, than the flying of Thunder over our Heads;
for in it we feel no weight at all, and the Lord assisting of us, do resolve
not to walk by the light of your sparks, nor see with your Eyes, neither favor
with your Salt in these your proceedings, but to our Lord and Master will we
either stand or fall.

And we further declare unto you, and give it as our belief and judgment
(whatever you think, or however you may create a peace unto your selves in
these things) that the more you stir, and the more you strive after this
manner, the more will be the increase of your weight and burden.

Therefore our Advice and Counsel to you is, that you labor to be still and
quiet, and pursue peace as much as in you lies, and lay not that upon others
which properly belongs unto your selves; but that which is your portion be
content to take home to your selves: For you are the people you speak of, that
occasions the mist to be cast before the eyes of the simple, and a Stumbling
block in the way of the weak, and you are the Troublers of Israel this day; and
although we truly desire peace, and a cessation to these things, and could be
heartily glad if you would insist on them no farther, yet forasmuch as it
appears to us, that this is the way or path, you, or at least some of you
intend to walk, and delight to trade in: we do therefore advise you to look to
your selves, and mark well your steps; for although we have hitherto for the
most part born many things not pleasant to us, and that many times for the sake
of others; yet having had continual provocations, and now you thus publicly
appearing through the Nation, as by the directions of your Paper does appear;
we are in the Spirit and Power of our God stirred up to appear, as becomes
Christians, in defense of the cause of Truth, wherein we look only and alone
unto the Lord, and not unto man, with that eye that is open in us, that sees
and beholds your outgoings in those things that tend to strife and debate
contrary to the truth which we have received, and the Lord enabling, shall
therein well observe you, and as occasion offers, our Faith is, that we shall
always be ready (according as the Spirit of Truth shall lead us) to detest
fictions proceedings, as you have been exercised in, and therefore for time to
come to be more careful of what you undertake, and see that according to the
Truth, Right, Reason, Equity and Justice, you are able both to stand by and
defend it, otherwise it will return back upon your own Heads with shame as this
has done, and no doubt 'twill yet farther do.

And we have yet farther to declare unto you concerning our selves, such is our
present state and condition, that notwithstanding these things, we can this day
to our comfort boldly say, we are what we are by the grace of God, and in that
Grace we are daily waiting to be made more in his time, and in his time to be
content, desiring nothing more than the increase of that Grace and that therein
we may continue to the end, walking before the Lord in all honest and godly
Conversation, according to the present manifestation of his good Spirit given
to us, and our Faith and Trust in the Lord is, that through his strength and
power we shall be preserved thus to continue to the end of our days, and not to
take up, or enter into the practice of any thing, though under never so fair
nor high pretense; but as by faith in this power, we come to feel the Lord
leading us thereinto, and expecting it at our hands as a duty incumbent upon
us, enjoined by God alone, in which as we feel our Service, our Faith is, that
as we have been, so we shall be ready to every good work, and act a deed of
Charity amongst us, either to our Friends, or any other whom Christian Charity
obliges us to serve, wherein we may be serviceable, and for the keeping all in
good order amongst those who profess the Truth; and here is neither Paul nor
yet Apollo, but that Christ that was Crucified, comes here to be both Lord and
King, Judge and Lawgiver; and another Governor than this inwardly received by
us, and ought to be received by all, in order to the great Salvation, our Faith
is, that the Lord will never lead his people into: And if you, or any of you
would know what we are, (or are dissatisfied concerning us) be it known unto
you all, this is the Government which we only and alone stand for, and stand
to, and although we do confess, that some practices used amongst us, as outward
Discipline in the Church of Christ, for the keeping things in good order, may
be of Service being used in their places, as Gods people in Wisdom see meet,
and occasion thereof, and not otherwise; yet if any Member or Members of the
Church of Christ, have, or shall give any Paper of Instructions or Advice
relating to outward forms of Discipline in the Church to the rest of their
Fellow Members, we testify that the same ought to be recommended to the
Conscience, that so when God's witness therein does answer, that might be the
only bond to put such advice and instructions in practice.

But if instead of this, any one or more, who have been Members of the Church
of Christ have, or shall assume such a power to themselves, as to judge other
members of the said Church to be departed from the truth, because they practice
not such Council or Instructions, though they see it not from the evidence of
God's Spirit in themselves to be their Duty, this we say is not according to
the Truth, as practiced, received and owned amongst us, even from the beginning
to this day; and therefore whosoever have or shall be guilty of passing
judgment, and giving forth Censures under the notion of Church Censures,
against Persons conscientiously refusing to put such Advice and Instructions.
in practice, or otherwise endeavor to wound such in their reputations, as men
as well as Christians; this we testify is not, neither can be any otherwise
than the Fruit of a persecuting, imposing, self-seeking Spirit wherever it has
or shall appear; and therefore even from the Head to the Tail, we do abhor, and
utterly deny it, as that from which the Lord has set us free: And now
forasmuch as the Lord according to measure, has made us a free People, through
the attaining of which in days past, we have neither feared the Threats nor
Flatteries of Man, but have some time stood in the gap with a Testimony for the
Liberty we have received in Christ* Jesus: We therefore tell you, wherever you
find any thing that has a contrary tendency, and would usurp a power over
Conscience, which is Christ's Prerogative, and who alone has a peculiar
authority over Conscience; our Souls do in the highest degree abominate it, and
do surge against it; that at this time we could no no less for the clearing of
our selves, and in the behalf of our Brethren, but signify thus unto you, and
deal thus plainly with you: For this was the testimony that remained as an
obligation upon our Spirits to give in amongst you in answer to part of your
Paper, and that false judgment therein contained, not having in our Eye to
boast above our line of another man's enjoynment, but according to the
understanding given us of God, have we cleared our selves, still having as
great regard to love our Neighbors, and to do unto others as we would be done
by; and that Truth and Righteousness may be promoted and exalted by us both in
our Towns, Countries and Families, which we are assured God requires at our
hand; and unto him, even the Judge of Judges, both* you and we must give
account, in which day of Account no false pretense nor fair show will serve
turn, neither will building the Tombs of the Prophets, and garnishing the
Sepulchers of the Righteous, and making a great noise through the Nation in a
self exalted Spirit about Government, under the notion of Church Government,
Orders, and such like, (the Rock, on which many of the professors of
Christianity have split) stand many stead, but every man and every woman that
truly fear God, and works Righteousness, shall be accepted of him.

We do desire no worse for you, nor concerning you, but that you might be
brought out of all unchristian-like practices, and every thing that is the
Fruit of Turbulent Minds and Spirits into the peaceable. Truth, there to sit
down with us, wherein we know true rest, and in which we remain your Friends,
Nathaniel Coleman Arthur Esmead. Francis Brown. Richard Wear. John Matravers.
John Jennings.


Forasmuch as it is in our Hearts to give in our testimony against the Paper
given forth aganst J. S. and J. W. we do by these few lines signify unto
those, who gave forth the said Paper, and others who own the same; that we
disown the same, and a Testimony lives in our Hearts for our Brethren J. W. and
J. S. yet as they have labored amongst us in the Gospel of Christ in
Faithfulness to our refreshment, so do we believe they have not changed their
way, but do continue faithful in their Labor and Travel of the Gospel, to the
refreshing the hearts of many who retain their first Love to the truth; we also
desire that above written Paper given forth by some of our Friends, on whose
Spirits it was to write more largely than we have done, may in the Spirit of
Truth, which is void of prejudice, be read; and we doubt not, but that it will
then have an Answer in the Hearts of such, even as it has in ours.

Rob. Marshaman. Tho. Hulbert. John Gibbons. Ed. Pyat. J. Hand. Tho. Curtice.
W. Dyer, Sen. Tho. Crab, Sen. J. Jones. Nich. Edwards. Mart. Derrington. R.
Palmer Sen. W. Jones, Sen. J. Starr. H. Rennols. W. Arch. Jos. Jones. J. Neat.
Rob. Starr. Edw. Starr. W. Woolley. John Sealey. Hen. Rogers. John Rogers. Ben.
Lawrence. W. Chandler. J. Gawen, Sen. J. Fry. Sen. W. Jones, Jun. Tho. Sleade.
Ja. Neat. W. Dier, Jun. Rob. Arch. W. Hulbert. R. Palmer, Jun. Hen. Ferris.
Rich. Puckeridge. John Swain. Tho. Coleman. John Wheeler. John Stoakes. Jasp.
Wheeler. Ben. Power. Tho. Crab. Jun. Eze. Wallis. John Fry, Jun. Tho. Frowde.
Rich. Fox. James Care. John Foot. John Wiltshire. Jos. Sergeant. Fran. Royley.
Ed. Star, Jun. W. Barnes. Ja. Matravers. Jeffery Gawen. W. Bishop. Jos. Gawen.
John Gawen, Jun. Daniel Sealy.


FINIS.

