William Penn, THE Pretended QUAKER, DISCOVERED To hold a Correspondence WITH
THE JESUITE's at ROME. To which is Added, A Winding Sheet FOR Ann Dockwra: By
Francis Bugg.
ON the 2d. of July, in this present year 1700. Having occasion to be in
Company with Mr. Batle, Sub-Dean of the Royal Chapel at White Hall, I enquired
of him the Truth of the Story of that I had heard from others, that he should
report of William Penn; who freely told me as follows.

That he being at Rome in the year 1677. Having gone thither from England,
Tutor to Mr. Hales; and having stayed there for some certain time, had one
Father James, a Scots Jesuit at Rome to teach him Italian, which was all the
occasion he had of Converse with him. And as he was making ready with his Pupil
Mr. Hales to return for England, supposing he might have some occasion, to send
to Rome for some strings to some Musical Instruments, he asked Father James,
how he might send a Letter to him that might come safe to his hands to Rome,
who answered, That if he would put his Letter in Mr. Penn's Packet, it would
come safe to him, for Mr. Penn's Packet comes frequently to Rome from London.
What, said Mr. Batle, William Penn the Quaker, said Father James, The very same.

This Story, the Quakers Report thus, as I heard it from one of them, which I
then told to Mr. Batle, that after William Penn had heard that Mr. Batle had so
Reported of him at Hartford, he went thither to call him to an Account for it;
and at Meeting, Mr. Batle did own his mistake, that on a better Recollection of
his Memory, it was not Mr. Penn, but one Pennynton, a Glover, who was no
Quaker, who frequently used to send Gloves to Rome: Mr. Batle replied, I heard
the Quakers so report, but it is utterly false, I said no such thing, there is
no mistake in the Name, it was no Mr. Pennynton a Glover, but Mr. Penn, that
is, William Penn the Quaker, as Father James told me. Mr. Batle also told me,
That after he had reported this at Hartford, Henry Stout, a Quaker at Hartford,
came to him and said, Neighbor Batle, Thou have done thy self a great
diskindness by reporting this Story of William Penn, and to be plain with thee,
I do not believe it. Mr. Batle, answered him, Tell Mr. Penn, If he will come to
me, I will Treat him as a Gentleman, but I will say it to his Face, that what I
Reported of him is true; that is, that Father James a Jesuit at Rome told me,
If I put my Letter in Mr. Penn's Packet, it would come safe to him, for he sent
a Packet frequently from London to Rome.

The same Day abovementioned, Mr. Batle, told me, that Mr. Hockley, Jailer at
Hartford, lately Deceased, told him, and diverse others at Hartford, that Father
Gifford (then Prisoner at Hartford, who was taken up at the Revolution, being
designed by K. James to be made President of St. Magdalen's College in Oxford)
told him, the said Hockley, that he had heard Father Penn say Mass several
times: What Father Penn, said Hockley? William Penn the Quaker? Yes, said Mr.
Gifford, William Penn the Quaker. And Mr. Hockley, has told it to diverse
Persons of Repute at Hartford, who if asked, will affirm it.

All this, Mr. Batle allowed me to put in Print, to Inform the Nation and the
Quakers.

A Winding Sheet for Ann Dockwra: Being an Answer to her Scurrilous Pamphlet,
Entitled, The Second Part of an Apost. Cons. etc.
Friendly Reader,
I Am not unsensible, that Negative Evidence, in many Cases, will not Determine
the Point in hand; and therefore it is both Reasonable and Judicious for me,
the Accused, to demand Proof, as herein I have done: And then, if this
Slanderous Woman cannot produce Proof, I am Acquitted of her groundless Charge.
For suppose this Envious Old Woman, in favor of Quakerism, should Publish in
Print, that Fran. Bugg, twenty years since Murdered a Man, Fired a House, and
Robbed by the Highway, (as that she may with as much Truth and Justice, as what
in her two Books she has done) how can I help it? I only can call upon her to
produce her Evidences; if she do this, I may be thought Guilty; but if not, I
am by the Rules of Justice Discharged; and she remains Culpable, and ought to
make me Satisfaction.

But that a Negative Evidence is good, and Vallid in some Cases, I shall
Demonstrate; for Example, suppose this Slanderous Woman shall Charge me with
Robbing a House in York City, on the 15th of May last; if then I can prove by
Credible Witnesses, that I was in London the same Day, this will hold, and I
should be Acquitted. And to show that this Simily is not Foreign to our Case in
Hand, I shall produce two Instances (to Name no more) out of this Book of hers,
p. 13.25

The first is this, viz. Fran. Bugg the Elder conveyed his Estate to his Son,
Francis Bugg the Younger, who had 700 Pound with his Wife; and her Friends and
Relations, upon Inquiry, do affirm that it was Settled upon Marriage, etc.

Now what is this? But to suggest, first, That my Son had 700 Pound with his
Wife. 2dly. And that I took the Money of him, and in Consideration thereof,
Conveyed my Estate to him; and all this to make good her former lying Story,
viz. That I Sold my Estate to my Son, and thereby made him able to Settle a
Jointure upon his Wife; and consequently both Father and Son Knaves; for I
could not be Guilty of this Fraudulent Act, but my Son must Consent to it. And
3dly, That upon the strict Inquiry of her Relations, this Cheat was found out;
and by them affirmed to be so. The last of which I do believe to be a Grand
Lie; and that until she produce the Names of those Relations that so sought, so
found out, and so affirm, I shall take it to be so, for no one of them speaks
one Word to me of any such thing, nor had they any ground so to do; the two
first I shall disprove by good Evidence, and thereby leave this old Woman in
such a Dilemma, out of which she shall never be able to deliver her self, but
by Repentance, and Retraction, which is wholly Inconsistent with Quakerism; for
they can neither make Confession of Sins or Trespasses, to God or Man, as their
Books do abundantly manifest.

First, His ( Fran. Bugg's) Son had 700 Pound with his Wife. This is false, and
a Lie spoken in Hypocrisy, with a design to Deceive; for it is plain she would
have it believed that my Son had 700 l. in Current English Money with his Wife,
which was not so: and thereby was enabled to Purchase my Estate, to Settle a
Jointure upon her: And if so, it would help her out in her former Lie, viz.
That I Sold my Estate to my Son. That this is her design, it is plain; for it is
no Crime that Francis Bugg's Son got a Wife with 700 l. nor no Sin against his
Wife, or her Relations, that I gave my Son such a part of my Estate as I then
thought, and did believe, I could Spare; and consequently no need of such
Inquiry, nor of so affirming, etc. Not that hereby I design to Lesson my
Daughter-In-Law's Portion, but do grant that she was worth 700 l. and a better
Penny when he Married her; and to this day I never understood any
Dissatisfaction, either in my Son, or my self, about her Portion; nor yet in my
Daughter-in-Law; or in any of her Relations, about what I gave my Son upon
Marriage, which was every way Answerable to her Portion. But still, I say, he
had not 700 l. No, he had but 300 l. in Money, and 400 l. in House and Land,
which had she Dyed without Issue; that Estate of hers had devolved back; and
now, Blessed be God, she has Issue, which I dearly Love, even as if begot by
my own Body; and wish them all the Blessings of this and the other Life; yet if
they Dye, and their Mother, Then my Son is but a Termer for Life, to that part
of it which is Freehoold; and that too by the Courtesy of England; for unless
a man have the Inheritance of an Estate in fee Simple, it cannot be said to be
his own, otherwise then as before described; for he can neither Sell, Mortgage,
nor give it. Thus have I gone further then I needed, or indeed, was willing,
did I not believe it necessary to Remove those Evil and Pernicious suggestions,
which this dark Spirit of Quakerism would raise against me, for the sake of the
Discovery I have made of its Inconsistency with Christianity.

But, says this old Woman, Fran. Bugg has Conveyed his Estate to his Son. In
her first Book it was, Fran. Bugg Sold his Estate to his Son. So Jezebel
withstood etc. p. 2. from p. 55. of her Apost. etc. So that it is plain, that
by conveyance here, she means and would have it believed, that this conveyance
was by Deed of Sale, when it was no such thing; but by Deed of Gift; not in
Consideration of any part of his Wives Portion, to me, or for my use; But in
Consideration of the Natural Love and Affection I had to my only Son, who has
been a Dutiful Child from his Cradle. And to this Day never was Blemish in his
Reputation, until this Infamous Woman has attacked him. But may I not think
that this Woman has still a further design then to render both Father and Son
Knaves?

First, In setting my Daughter-in-Law (whom I Love and Respect as my own Child)
and her Kindred against me; and not only so; but if my Son remain Dutiful, as
that I have no cause yet to fear; then to set them and me against each other;
and for this G. Whitehead has set her a Copy, not only in the case of my self
and Wife; but in the Case of Mr. Crisp, Mr. Mucklow, Mr. Bridgman, and their
Wives, and Relations. But to pursue this, and to Illustrate the Jesuitical
Practice of her Gentleman Quaker, I have not Room in this Winding Sheet. Let it
suffice then, that I am well satisfied in my Son and Daughter; and they both
are as kind to me as I can desire; I never yet desired any Kindness of my
Daughter-in-Law but she as readily granted it; and I pray God to Bless them
both, and their Offspring, and to give 'em a sight of the Errors of the
Quakers; in which I shall endeavor to be as Instrumental as I can.

Again, Secondly, p. 25 Ibid. He Francis Bugg) suffered the least of any I
know, that had Estates to lose; the Fines were Two, one was 15 l. for an
unknown Preacher; the other was 10 l. for the Poverty of the Man that kept the
Meeting at his House: Of this 25 l. he got 15 l. of a near Relation of his by
Fraud; and the Justice that Prosecuted him, gave him 5 l. of the Money again,
so that his whole Loss was but five Pounds.

Reader, I am Astonished, when I consider the vain Boasts, and high Pretenses
of this People to Justice, Truth, Equity, Righteousness, Purity, Self denial,
Meekness, yea, to do as they would be done by; when they so Generally Act the
Contrary. You see she says I suffered but two Fines; that I was the least
Sufferer that she knew of, that had Estates to Lose; that my whole Loss by
Fines was but 5 l. And yet says that Sam. Cater suffered 6 years imprisonment
together; and this but one of the 7 or 8 times of his Imprisonement, which I
deny. Let her produce Proof if she can. As also that he lost 20 l. and 40 l. or
the like. I do still aver, That the Goods Distrain'd for his 20 l. Fine for
Phakenham Meeting, was returned; and that he had 10 l. sent him from their
Fund: And that Papers, or Petitions were sent up and down to assist him, and
others; to support them in their Preaching and Writing against the Christian
Religion; and that these Papers did fly like Briefs, Money, Money, for the
Ministry, etc. as in my Pilgrims Progress p. 125. I have made to appear, from
W. Rogers; and Confessed too, by Thomas Elwood; and Confirmed, by this old
Woman's own Letters still by me: And why may not the Bishops of the Church give
me Recommendations to Support me, to Write in Defense of the Church, as
Warrantably as their Teachers gave me Papers formerly, to Collect Money to
support them? which I did. Neither does the Bishop of Norwich want the
Dark-Lanthorn Light of this Crazy Woman, to give him Knowledge how to Act.
Well, but to the Matter, Namely, To discover the horrible Lies of this
Crack-brain'd Woman. He (F. Bugg) Suffered (said she) the Least of any I knew,
etc. But Two Fines: His whole Loss by Fines was but 5l. We have an old Proverb,
A Liar had need to have a good Memory: She should have considered this.

First, Then I demand of her, in her next, to show any one Man in the County
where I dwelt, that Suffered longer Imprisonment than I did; that suffered more
Fines, for the Poverty of others, and for themselves, than I did; that gave
more to the building a Meeting House than I did; that Entertained their
Teachers more than I did; or that Spent his Estate for the propagation of
Quakerism, more then I did; and of this Service to their cause, there are yet
amongst them many Witnesses.

First, Then at Ely, I suffered three Ten Pound Fines for the Poverty of G.
Thorrowgood, at whose House the Meeting was kept; beside as many small Fines
for my self: And for which I was distrained by Nicholas Rush, Robert Rainer,
and others; in Cloths, Stuffs, Yarn, and Wool, and others Goods above the
value of 50 l. without one Penny or Pennyworth Returned. Ann Rogers, my then
Maid, and Thomas Bird, my then Journey-man, and now a Quaker of good Repute
amongst them, knew this: Again I was Fined Twenty Pounds for a meeting at my
House in Milden-Hall; which Will. Bennet Preached at, when for refusing to tell
his Name and Habitation, the Poor Quakers were Fined for him; and their Cows
driven away and Sold; so that John Mason, and my self were Constrained to lend
them Money, to help to get more, whilst this Infallible Preacher Lost nothing.
I also was Fined Ten Pound for another Meeting, for the Poverty of Ja. Webb, at
whose House the Meeting was. And besides all these Ten, and Twenty Pound Fines;
four of them for the Poverty of the Dwellers in our Meeting Houses; and one
Twenty Pound Fine for a Meeting at my own House, I also was Fined Seven or
Eight small Fines, insomuch, that I was Distrained at Milden-Hall, (besides
those mentioned at Ely) in Wool, Yarn, Stuff, Cloth, and Household Goods, to
the Value of above 50 l more; which in all, makes more then 100 l. Loss by
Fines, for Meetings.

Now, Reader, Had not this Woman a -- Forehead well Enlaid with Impudence, how
dare she appear in Print with such bare Faced Lies? As that I suffered the
least of any she knew that had Estates to Lose: That I suffered but two Fines:
That my whole Loss by Fines was hut 5 l. As for the Fine of 15 l. she mentions,
for an unknown Preacher, my Book, Reason against Railing, etc. did so
effectually Confute all their false Accusations, as that to this Day they never
Replied to it, though Writ near 20 years since, to which I Refer my Reader.

Oh, Cousin Dockwra, for Shame Cover thy Face; wear a Vail, and sit down and
mourn for thy Sins. Till then never pretend more to Religion: Remember
Cherry-Hynton, thy former place of Abode.

Reader, these two Books of Ann Dockwra's, viz, An Apostate Conscience, etc.
and, The Second part of an Apostate Conscience, were both Wrote by the Quakers
Spirit of Truth, that cannot Err, being Infallible: Yea, and also approved by
the Quaker-Church, i. e. their Second-Day Meeting; that Infallible Club of
Inspired Doctors, with whom she has been in the Unity this 36 years, as she
says herself, p. 35. These Books are also Sold by Tacy Soul, the Quakers
Bookseller, as a Sign both of their Approbation, and Unity. The first stands
Convicted of 18 Lies, and in her Second she has not cleared herself of any one
of them. And I do now recharge them upon her; and as many fresh Lies in this
Last; let her come forth if she thinks she can clear herself, and I am willing
also that she take her Gentleman Quaker, G. Whitehead, to her Assistance.

Again, I find, in p. 12. Ibid, That rather then she will want Authors for her
Villainy, she will Father her Lies upon me, viz. He (Fran. Bugg) told me so
himself. Again, He (Fran. Bugg) told me many years ago, that when he bought his
House, that his Wives Father helped to buy it. And made his (Fran. Bugg's)
Wives Portion better then a 100 l. This he told me: All which I Positively Deny.

Indeed my Father-In-Law was very desirous that I should buy the said House;
for I Rode on purpose to Wellingborrow to Consult him; and thus far he was
Assistant, Namely, to hire me ^0 l. of Mr. Thomas Bruce, a Tobacconist, his
Neighbor, and was bound with me for it; and I was in some hopes he would have
given it me, but as soon as he had got what some Aimed at, and what pleased
him, he so ordered the matter, that Mr. Bruce in little more then a years time,
called in his 60 l. which I paid to a Penny. And more of this Nature I could
mention, but shall forbear; nor had I done this, but in Vindication of my own
Reputation, avouching still for a Truth what I have said in Jezebel Withstood,
etc. p. 2. And which my Brother John, then Living, might have gainsaid if he
could: All which shows this Treacherous Woman's design, which was to set my
Wives Relations and me at Variance: Unless she took me to be such a Tame Fool,
as by my silence to say Amen to all her Lies and Forgeries.

But her inveterate Malice ends not here, Quakerisme must show its self exact
New Rome, and in this instance exceed her Elder Sister; for as the Papists took
up the Bones of Wickliff, many years after he was laid into his Grave; and
burnt them as a Sacrifice to their Infallible Malice, no more can the Quakers
let my Honored Father alone in his Grave; But near 40 years after his Death,
they must rake in his Ashes, and lay false Imputations to his Charge: And that
which Aggravates the Malignity of their Implacable Malice is, he never gave
them Cause, he never was concerned in this Controversy: Whereas, in excuse of
the Papists Fury, they have this to say, That Wickliff was a Vigorous Warrier
against Romish Idolatry; and had wrote more than two hundred Volumes against
their Errors and Superstition. This indeed did Anger the Romish Church, as my
self and others have angered her Younger Sister; yet I never read that the
Papists meddled with Wickliff's Father, Grandfather, Yea and Great
Grandfather, as the Quakers have done with my Dear Father, Grandfather, and
Great Grandfather.

For in her first Book, An Apost. Cons. etc. p. 26. She thus says, Robert Bugg
his Father, dwelt with him (Fran. Bugg) some years after he Married, he rose
from Dinner one Day, and went out, and was found Drowned in Water, where he had
no occasion to go; As Fran. Bugg and his Wife relates.

To this, I replied in my Book Jezebel Withstood, etc. p. 2. saying, Here is
Lie upon Lie, four Story high: First, my Father never dwelt with me a week
since I Married, much less some years. 2. He never rose so from Dinner. 3. Nor
was so found Drowned: Nor did I or my Wife so relate.

Now instead of clearing herself of these Notorious Lies, she being Foolhardy,
and, filled Brimful with Prejudice against our whole Family for my Sake; she in
her Second Part etc. p. 13. thus enlarges, I heard my Brother Barnadiston speak
of it some years after; That Francis Bugg's Father Drowned himself, as most
People believed, etc. Yet this Wicked Woman, in the very next Page Acknowledges
to her own Confusion, viz. But the Coroner and Jury did not find it wilful
Murder, etc.

Now let the World Judge whether this be not mere Malice, in the superlative
degree, in this Incendiary. That because her Brother Barnardiston living near
20 Miles distance from my Fathers Dwelling, that upon his telling her (she knew
not when, nay I question whether at all) that most People talked so; That
therefore she should have the Impudence, near 40 years after this Accident, to
take upon her to Try this Tried Cause de novo; And by her Infallible
Super-abounding Confidence, to Confront both Coroner and Jury, Render them
Perjured, who then had the opportunity to hear Witnesses, to examine all
Circumstances, and when they found it casual and Accidental, they brought their
Verdict in Accordingly: And this she says herself, p. 14. But the Coroner and
Jury did not find it Wilful-Murder. And I do now Challenge A^n Docwra to say it
was self-Murder, for I deny it, and will to her Face, and to the Faces of all
her Approvers and Abbettors; otherwise to what end have we Courts of
Judicature, Judges, Juries and Witnesses? If every Proud Varlet, and Envious
Man, may stir up Strife in Towns and Cities, and charge Persons with Crimes
after they are acquitted by Legal Trials. Neither is it agreeable to the Rules
of Law or Justice, to Impeach men afresh, or recharge them after they are
cleared, etc. I do acknowledge the Accident was sorrowful enough to my self,
and my Fathers Relations and Loving Neighbors. But if my Grandfather who was
born Anno 1579, which was about 50 years before this Crazy Woman was Born; No,
nor yet my Great Grandfather, who was Born many years before him, no Marvel
that she now falls upon my Deceased Father, and Reflects upon my Son also; for
Malice is like Quakerisme, it has no Botom; nor no Banks can keep it in due
bounds; its like the Raging Sea, Foaming, out its own Shame; casting forth Mire
and Dirt; for suppose it had been as she falsely relates, how could I have
helped it, or wherein does the Misfortune of any of my Relations affect the
controversy now on Foot.

But that I may draw the exact Picture of this old Dissembling Hypocrite Ann
Dockwra, as Completely, as Father Penn's is drawn in the Quakers Synod; and set
her forth in her proper Dress, with all her Features, see p. 14. ibid, where
she thus says, as if she were an Excellent Friend of mine, viz. I Write not
this to Vpbraid Fran. Bugg, but to warn those that have Encouraged him in
Scribbling his Estate away, to be Bountiful to him, etc.

Here the Cloven Foot appears, though Disguised; for Malice and Hypocrisy, walk
Hand in Hand, under a Quaker-Bonnet, for says she, in her Preface; It is matter
of Admiration (says she) to me, that they (i. e. the Clergy) should Entertain
Fran. Buggs Books, and give Credit to them; a Man of a Seared Conscience, of
Desperate Fortunes, of a Shattered Head, his Seared Conscience Imboldens him to
Write all manner of Lies and Forgeries [whilst she proves not one] to get Money
like Highway Men; a Beggar, etc.

I think, I need not Comment upon this her Inconsistency. First, In saying, she
does not Write to Upbraid me; whilst she Upbraids me in the Highest Nature the
Devil and Malice can Invent. And this I can say, that as no Man ever Encouraged
me to Scrible away my Estate: But that from First to Last, I have seen a
Necessity to Unmask this Painted Harlot; so thanks be to God, I can say with a
good Conscience, I never Wrote for Money, nor was I ever a Beggar, nor have I
wanted a sufficient support to this Day; but have Lived well in Meat, Drink,
and Apparel, and Maintained my Family with all Necessaries; I never wanted a
good House to Live in, nor a good Horse to Ride on, and Money in my Pocket; and
if I have Applyld my self to the Clergy, that thereby, I might be Enabled to
Desend my Christian Profession, against the Powerful Fund of the Quakers; it is
no more then Fox, Whitehead, and other of the Quakers have done, who at first
were not able to Print a Book at their own Charge, [which I did fifteen years
together] without Assistance from their hearers, to whom they applied
themselves by Papers which did fly like briefs FOR MONEY, MONEY FOR THE
MINITSRY.

Wherefore Cousin Dockwra, for the Dicision of this Controversy, which on your
part is chiefly Personal, and founded upon Charges without Proof, against which
in many Cases a Negative Evidence cannot take place, and I being the Party
Accused, am willing to put my self upon Trial. If you will join Issue, giving
you all the Advantage you can reasonably expect or desire, as also the
Assistance of your Gentleman Quaker, viz. Appoint your self any Day or Days,
from the first day of October next, to the fifth day of November following, at
any convenient Place in Cambridge; and choose you six Men where you Please, and
upon timely Notice of your Accepting this my Proposition, I will choose me six
Men, and let us both subscribe an Instrument to stand to, and abide by the
award of these twelve Men, under what Penalties you Please. And if they cannot
agree, then let us both be Obliged to stand to the Award of the Right
Worshipful, the Vice Chancellor, and the Right Worshipful the Mayor of the
University and Town of Cambridge, for the time being, o^ to two Delegates by
them two respectively Chosen; and if you prove the several Charges exhibited
against me, in your two Books, I shall freely submit to any Penalty which shall
be awarded against me; but if you fail of Proof, and be found a false Witness,
and guilty of a Lying-Tongue, I shall ^xpect your Submission accordingly; and
if I do not prove the Letters mentioned to be yours in my several Book^, to be
of your own Hand Writing, as fully, and satisfactory, as any thing of that
Nature can be Proved, I shall likewise submit to any Penalty assigned by them.
To this, I subscribe my Name,

June 29. 1700. Francis Bugg.

POSTSCRIPT.
REader the Account touching William Penn's having held Correspondence with the
Jesuits, in the height of his Quakerism, I Received from a Minister of the
Church of England, who is ready to attest it, whereby I find the Truth, of what
a Worthy Member of the Honorable House of Commons, said to me the last Session
of Parliament, upon my Presenting my Book, A Modest Defense, (...) (i. e.) The
Devil and Jesuitism is at the Bottom of Quakerism, a Fruit in their Doctrine,
in A. Dockwra, I have herein briefly Discovered.

F. B.

FINIS.

